ACT Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
Building a resilient, empowered, connected, 
and supported rural community.

2   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Acknowledgement of Country
Dhawura nguna ngurumbangu gunanggu Ngunnawal.
Nginggada dindi dhawura Ngunnawalbun
yindjumaralidjinyin.
Mura bidji mulanggaridjindjula.
Naraganawaliyiri yarabindjula.
This country is Ngunnawal (ancestral/spiritual) homeland.
We all always respect Elders, male and female, as well as
Ngunnawal country itself.
They always keep the pathways of their ancestors alive.
They walk together as one.
The ACT Government acknowledges the Ngunnawal 
people as traditional custodians of the ACT and 
recognises any other people or families with connection 
to the lands of the ACT and region. We acknowledge and 
respect their continuing culture and the contribution 
they make to the life of this city and this region.
© Australian Capital Territory, Canberra 2023.
by any process without written  
permission from:
Director-General, Environment, Planning and Sustainable 
Development Directorate, ACT Government, GPO Box 
158, Canberra ACT 2601.
Telephone: 02 6207 1923 
Website: www.planning.act.gov.au
Produced by the Environment, Planning and Sustainable 
Development Directorate
The ACT Government is committed to making its 
information, services, events and venues as accessible as 
possible.
If you have difficulty reading a standard printed 
document and would like to receive this publication in 
an alternative format, such as large print, please phone 
Access Canberra on 13 22 81 or email the Environment, 
Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate at 
EPSDDComms@act.gov.au
If English is not your first language and you require 
a translating and interpreting service, please phone 
13 14 50.
If you are deaf, or have a speech or hearing impairment, 
and need the teletypewriter service, please phone 13 36 
77 and ask for Access Canberra on 13 22 81.
For speak and listen users, please phone 1300 555 727 
and ask for Canberra Connect on 13 22 81.
For more information on these services visit  
http://www.relayservice.com.au
only for the purpose to illustrate design intent and context.

1
Introduction	
3
The Future Drought Fund	
4
Development of the ACT RDRP	
5
Community benefit and value	
5
Executive summary	
6
01: Vision, goals and outcomes	
12
ACT RDRP Vision	
14
Resilience Thinking	
15
Strategic Priorities	
16	
Defining Drought	
17
Assessing drought vulnerability and resilience	
17
Stakeholder engagement	
18
Key Stakeholders	
18
Governance in implementation of ACT RDRP	
19
Complementing the Canberra Region Local  
Food Strategy	
20
Goals and outcomes	
20
02: Region, community and  
natural capital	
22
Our Region	
24
Ngunnawal Country	
24
Overview of agriculture in the ACT	
25
Pasture and landscape management in the ACT	
27
Vegetation management in the ACT	
27
Soil management in the ACT	
27
Soil constraints and projected climate  
change impacts	
27
Animal health and heat stress during drought	
28
What's working in the ACT to prepare for drought	
28
03: Climate and future drought risk	
30
Defining drought	
32
ACT past droughts	
32
Future climate and drought scenarios	
34
Climate projections for the ACT	
35
Climate analogues	
35
04: Impacts of drought on the ACT  
rural community	
36
Priority Impacts of drought	
38
Other environmental, social and  
economic impacts of drought	
45
Economic impacts	
47
Social impacts	
48
Governance	
48
05: Adaptation actions to build  
drought resilience in the ACT	
50
Overview	
52
Adaptation	
52
Summary of adaptation actions	
53
Environmental adaptation actions	
54
Other environmental actions	
61
Economic adaptation actions	
64
Other economic actions	
65
Social adaptation actions	
66
Governance adaptation actions	
68
Case studies	
70
Callum Brae	
72
Tidbinbilla Station	
74
Mount Majura Vineyard	
76
06: Further issues for consideration	
78
07: Theory of change	
84
Theory of change	
86
08: Monitoring and evaluation  
plan for ACT Rural Drought  
Resilience Plan (RDRP)	
88
Monitoring and evaluation framework	
91
Monitoring indicators	
91
Strategic Priority: Environmental Resilience	
91
Strategic Priority: Economic Resilience	
91
Strategic Priority: Social Resilience	
92
Strategic Priority: Governance	
92
Contents

2   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Glossary
Key Term
Definition 
Active learning
The process of reflecting and adapting behaviour in response to what is learned. 
ACT
Australian Capital Territory 
AECOM
Infrastructure consulting firm. 
Natural Resource Management 
(NRM)
The Australian Capital Territory Natural Resource Management (ACT NRM) is 
one of 56 regional NRM organisations across Australia under the Australian 
Government’s regional stream of the National Landcare Program 2018-2023 
(NLP2) – Regional Land Partnerships (RLP). 
Triple bottom line resilience
The ability of social, environment, and economic components to effectively 
adapt to change. 
Theory of change
A method of explaining how certain actions and activities will lead to the  
desired outcomes. 
Future Drought Fund (FDF)
The Future Drought Fund is a long-term investment fund that provides a 
sustainable source of funding to help Australian farmers and communities 
become more prepared for, and resilient to, the impacts of drought. Established 
under the Future Drought Fund Act 2019 (the Act) in September 2019, the Fund 
began with a $3.9 billion investment, with earnings to be reinvested by the Future 
Fund Board until the balance reaches $5 billion. The Fund is part of the Australian 
Government’s Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan. 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan Under the Future Drought Fund, regional areas in Australia have received funding 
and support to develop a Regional Drought Resilience Plan to identify and guide 
actions to build regional resilience to future droughts. 
NARCLIM
NSW and Australian Regional Climate Modelling - a NSW Government-led 
initiative that generates detailed climate projections, for NSW, ACT and other 
parts of Australia.

3
Introduction
The ACT has faced significant drought 
conditions in recent history, most 
recently during 2017–2019 and the 
Millennium drought in the early 2000s. 
Droughts have social, economic and 
environmental impacts on the ACT’s 
rural community, and these impacts 
are predicted to worsen as climate 
change intensifies.

4   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The ACT has faced significant drought conditions in 
recent history, most recently during 2017 and 2019 and 
the Millenium drought in the early 2000’s.
Droughts pose a significant threat to the social, 
economic, and environmental wellbeing of the ACT's 
rural communities. Climate change is expected to worsen 
these challenges.
To address this, the ACT Government, funded by the 
developed the ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
(ACT RDRP). This plan recognises the vital role of the 
ACT's rural community, who oversee the ACT's rural and 
non-urban lands. While their contribution to national 
primary production might be modest, their sustainable 
agricultural practices are essential for effective natural 
resource and biosecurity management, offering 
significant environmental benefits for the entire Territory.
Developed in partnership with the ACT's rural 
community, the ACT RDRP incorporates best-practice 
resilience planning principles to build the drought 
resilience of the ACT's rural community across 
environmental, economic, social, and governance (EESG) 
aspects. It also harnesses the valuable region-specific 
knowledge and skills of these residents.
The ACT RDRP leverages the community's past 
experiences with droughts and examines future climate 
change scenarios. It empowers rural stakeholders to 
share ideas, plan for drought resilience, and identify 
priorities. This approach aims to equip rural landholders 
and farmers with the knowledge and resources necessary 
to improve their response to future droughts.
The ACT RDRP is coordinated and complementary 
to many other ACT Government strategies, plans, 
and approaches that address our local environment, 
community, and economy. This plan will help guide 
future investments and actions to build a resilient, 
empowered, connected, and supported rural community 
in the face of drought.
The purpose of the ACT RDRP is to:
Prepare the ACT rural community for future 
climate impacts
Build environmental, economic and social 
resilience to droughts
Identify innovative and transformative 
drought projects to guide future investments
Improve natural resource management
The Future Drought Fund
build drought resilience in Australia’s agriculture sector, 
the agricultural landscape, and within communities. 
The FDF provides $100 million each year for drought 
resilience initiatives that help farmers and rural 
communities prepare for the impacts of drought.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program is 
one of the foundational programs under the FDF  which 
provides funding and support to local governments and 
community to partner together to develop Regional 
Drought Resilience Plans. 
Regional Drought Resilience Plans are community  
led plans that build capability and empower regional 
communities to come together to share ideas, discuss 
the best ways to build resilience to drought in their 
region and identify their priorities for action. 
The plans will ensure regional communities are well 
placed to take advantage of future funding opportunities 
under the FDF.
Future Drought Fund (FDF) 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
(RDRP) program
Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
(community led)

5
Development of the ACT RDRP
To develop the ACT RDR plan, consultancy firm AECOM 
was engaged to deliver a study on climate and drought 
resilience risks and planning in the ACT. This study was 
conducted in 2022 in partnership with the ACT rural 
community. The study aims to better understand how the 
ACT the rural community has prepared for and managed 
previous droughts, and how they intend to plan for and 
managing future droughts. 
The study included: 
→The collation of existing climatology (historic and 
current climate for the Territory). 
→Collation of future climate projections for the Territory. 
→Stakeholder engagement via one-on-one interviews, 
a workshop with ACT rural landholders, and an online 
survey to develop an understanding of landholders 
current consideration of droughts and future  
climate change. 
→A desktop review of current and future droughts on 
ACT rural landholdings and ACT rural households and 
adaptation actions they have underway or planned.
→Reporting and follow-up desktop research  
to consolidate findings. 
The ACT RDRP includes a high-level overview of the 
AECOM study: Climate and Drought Resilience Risks  
and Planning (2022) (Appendix 1). 
 A second study, Drought mitigation through farm 
diversification in the ACT 20221 (Appendix 2), was 
undertaken by the Australian Farm Institute (AFI) for the 
ACT Government to identify opportunities for ACT and 
region farmers to diversify their on-farm income, to help 
maintain farm viability during drought and downturns in 
commodity prices. The AFI study specifically addresses 
opportunities for increased income from existing farm 
practices improved farm diversification in the ACT and 
barriers and opportunities to farm diversification in the 
ACT to support drought mitigation for farming enterprises. 
Plan Sequence: 
→The draft ACT RDRP submitted for independent 
assessment by CSIRO February 2023 and feedback has 
been considered in the finalised draft (May- July 2023).
→The draft ACT RDRP submitted to ACT Cabinet for 
consideration (August to December 2023) before being 
released for public consultation. 
→Targeted consultation with key stakeholders on 
the draft ACT RDRP from December 2023 and wider 
community consultation February- March 2024. 
→Listening report published in April 2024.
→Final plan endorsed by ACT Government August 2024.
→The ACT RDRP submitted to the Australian 
Government for approval September 2024. 
→Once approved by both the ACT and Australian 
Government, the ACT RDRP will be published on 
the ACT Government and FDF websites and an 
implementation plan will be developed which will 
outline steps for delivering the Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan extension program 2024-2025. 
Community benefit and value 
Guiding best practice design can lead to social, 
environmental and economic benefits to the community, 
government and private business. Social benefits include 
supporting people’s quality of life and overall health 
and wellbeing. Environmental benefits encompass the 
protection and enhancement of environmental assets 
and the inclusion of sustainable design features and 
travel. Economic benefits include reduced infrastructure 
and delivery costs as a result of efficient land-use 
patterns through greater density near activity centres, 
employment areas and active travel.
1 Thomas, S & McRobert, K (2022), Drought mitigation through farm diversification in the ACT, Research Report, Australian Farm Institute.

6   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
6   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

7
Executive 
summary

8   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“The ACT rural community 
is empowered, connected, 
and supported in drought 
and climate change 
planning, preparedness, 
adaptation, and response, 
and can adapt to and 
absorb the impacts of 
future droughts.”

9
In 2019, the Australia Government established the 
Future Drought Fund under the Future Drought Fund Act 
2019 (the Act). The Future Drought Fund is a long-term 
investment fund that provides a sustainable source of 
funding to help Australian farmers and communities 
become more prepared for, and resilient to, the impacts 
of drought.
Under the Future Drought Fund, regional areas in 
Australia have received funding and support to develop a 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan. The ACT Government 
has received funding under this fund to prepare a 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan for the ACT Region.
The purpose of the ACT Regional Drought  
Resilience Plan is to:
Prepare the ACT rural community for future 
climate impacts
Build environmental, economic and social 
resilience to droughts
Identify innovative and transformative 
drought projects to guide future investments
Improve natural resource management
As our climate changes the impact of future droughts will 
be more keenly felt in our community and our economy. 
The ACT has experienced several periods of serious and 
severe drought. three recent examples include 1982, 
2001-2009 and 2017-2020.
During the 2017-2020 drought, the ACT experienced: 
44%  
decrease in 
average rainfall
91%  
decrease in  
soil moisture 
80%  
increase in 
extreme heat 
days

10   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
10   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
To understand possible future drought-related impacts 
facing the ACT rural community, AECOM projected three 
future drought scenarios based on the latest NSW and 
ACT climate projections. Under all three scenarios, the 
ACT’s climate is projected to become warmer and drier, 
and experience more extreme weather events. Periods  
of drought will increase in both frequency and intensity.
The five priority impacts identified for the ACT are:
01 
Reduced water availability. 
02 
Increased weeds and pests.
03 
Reduced carrying capacity of land.
04 
Reduced on-farm biodiversity.
05 
Reduced wellbeing of farming community. 
The ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a targeted 
response to the conditions, experiences and future of 
ACT farmers and communities. A suite of adaptive actions 
have been identified to improve resilience to future 
drought. These adaptation actions have been grouped 
under the strategic priorities of environment, economic, 
social and governance. 
The ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan has been 
developed, and prioritised, through stakeholder 
engagement to ensure it is targeted at rural landholders, 
the ACT Government and other parties.
Drought will continue to be a challenge for rural 
landholders and farmers in the ACT. Investment in 
adaptation measures to build resilience to drought will 
be essential to preserve rural land and farming activities 
within the ACT.
The delivery of this plan is not solely the responsibility 
of the ACT Government but guides rural landholders, 
government and other parties on activities to improve 
preparedness and response to drought.

11
11

12   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
12   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

13
01
13
Vision, goals and 
outcomes

14   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
14   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
ACT RDRP Vision
Our vision for the ACT is as follows:
“The ACT rural community  
is empowered, connected, 
and supported in drought 
and climate change planning, 
preparedness, adaptation,  
and response, and can  
adapt to and absorb the 
impacts of future droughts.”

15
Resilience thinking
The ACT RDRP is being developed using the Resilience 
Thinking framework. This framework provides an 
approach to addressing problems and challenges and 
adapting to change. While resilience can be defined as 
“The capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and 
reorganise so as to retain essentially the same function, 
structure and feedbacks”2, in this context we are more 
focused on adapting or transforming as needed in 
response to change. 
Why is resilience thinking important?
With environmental conditions changing rapidly, building 
drought resilience is more crucial than ever. This means 
addressing the environmental, social, economic, and 
governance (EESG) impacts of droughts, along with the 
responses needed to support rural landholders and 
governments in tackling future challenges3. 
How resilience thinking can be implemented  
in a drought plan
Experience in other parts of Australia has found that 
when key parts of resilience thinking, such as adaptive, 
local, and collaborative approaches to strategic planning, 
are applied to natural resource management decision-
making, communities are better equipped to cope with 
stressors and change4. 
Active learning and adaptive governance
Active learning is an important aspect of implementing 
the RDRP. Active learning involves taking time to reflect 
and learn from experience. The ACT RDRP aims to improve 
government and agricultural practices by analysing what 
is currently working effectively, and what should be 
improved. Through monitoring and evaluation, the actions 
and recommendations set out will be regularly assessed 
to support active learning. The ACT RDRP is committed to 
framing setbacks as opportunities to improve. 
The following Resilience approaches underpinned the 
development of the ACT’s RDRP: 
→Definitions, vision, goals and outcomes. Key terms 
used in the plan are defined; the desired outcomes 
and goals of the plan are clearly explained and set out. 
→Stakeholder engagement, participation, and 
partnerships. Broad participation and partnership 
are encouraged at all stages of resilience planning/
thinking. 
→Active learning and adaptive governance.  
Active learning involves learning from experience, 
undertaking structured reflection, and implementing 
that learning. Adaptive governance utilises flexibility 
to respond to change, whilst remaining accountable 
for goals and visions. 
→Evidence base, a stocktake of past and current work 
and alignment. It is crucial to have a well-informed 
evidence base to make decisions. 
→System description and resilience assessment. The 
region in question should be described in terms of a 
system with key components and connections. This 
system should then be analysed to see how it has 
historically been responding to droughts and how it is 
likely to respond in the future. 
→Future scenarios. Using megatrends and drivers of 
change, future scenarios can be formulated. These  
can be useful in stakeholder discussions to explore  
the challenges and opportunities which may be on  
the horizon. 
→Intervention options and pathways for building 
regional resilience. This involves developing options 
for action plans. 
→Assessment of pathways and theory of change 
for recommended actions. This involves assessing 
whether the proposed pathways are likely to be 
effective in building specified or general resilience  
to drought. 
→Monitoring, evaluation and learning. This will  
support accountability and will ensure that 
appropriate adjustments are made to actions where 
necessary. It also supports active learning and 
adaptive governance. 
2 Walker, B., & Salt, D. (2012). Resilience practice: building capacity to absorb disturbance and maintain function. Island press.
3 Victorian State Government (2020) Goulburn Murray Resilience Strategy
4 Sellberg, M. M., Ryan, P., Borgström, S. T., Norström, A. V., & Peterson, G. D. (2018). From resilience thinking to Resilience Planning: Lessons from practice. 
Journal of environmental management, 217, 906-918.

ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE FOR SUSTAINABLE AND IMPROVED FUNCTIONING OF FARMING LANDSCAPES
Environmental and biophysical impacts of drought and actions relating to soils, plant and animal 
growth, management of invasive species, animal welfare, conservation, and regeneration.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE FOR AN INNOVATIVE AND PROFITABLE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
Impacts of drought relating to farm revenues, costs, subsidies, and grants; and actions relating to 
financial management.
SOCIAL RESILIENCE FOR RESOURCEFUL AND ADAPTABLE COMMUNITIES
Drought impacts and responses relating to people and social networks, including their skills, 
knowledge, human health* (physical and mental) and culture. 
EFFECTIVE GOVERNANCE
Relationship and process of interaction and decision making in and between government and the 
community. This theme is distinct from others because impacts and actions are indirect and cut 
across all the domains, and emerge from other domain risks.
Environmental 
Economic
Social
Governance
16   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Strategic priorities
To align with the Future Drought Fund’s Drought 
Resilience Funding Plan, the ACT RDRP is aiming  
to build the drought resilience of the ACT’s rural 
community guided by four strategic headline priorities:
→Environmental 
→Economic 
→Social and 
→Governance
These priorities are interconnected with and align with 
the ACT’s Whole of Government Climate Change Risk 
Assessment, the ACT’s Territory Wide Risk Assessment, 
and the ACT Wellbeing Framework.
Table 1: ACT RDRP Strategic Priorities and their descriptions
5 BoM. (2022). Understanding Drought. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml#:~:text=Drought%20is%20a%20
prolonged%2C%20abnormally,be%20in%20almost%20perpetual%20drought.

17
→Rainfall volume & 
timing
→Soil moisture
→Min & max temperature
→Ability to absorb, respond, and 
recover from drought
→Technology
→Management practices
→Farm fixed inputs (e.g. land, 
livestock, equipment)
→Farm & farmer characteristics
Drought exposure
Drought vulnerability & resilience
Drought sensitivity
→Change in farm 
outcomes (e.g. 
profit, household 
income)
→Physical capital
→Natural capital
→Financial capital
→Human capital
→Social capital
Drought impact 
(risk)
Adaptive capacity
Defining drought 
The Bureau of Meteorology defines drought as “a prolonged, abnormally dry period 
when the amount of available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.”5 
There is no universal definition of drought, and it is 
difficult to compare one drought to another, since 
each drought differs in the seasonality, location, 
geographic extent, and duration of the associated rainfall 
deficiencies. Additionally, each drought is accompanied 
by varying temperatures, soil moisture and water 
availability. Droughts typically have a slow-onset with 
recognisable impacts to agriculture including reduced 
soil moisture, reduced carrying capacity of land, and 
reduced on-farm biodiversity. The following factors are 
used to measure and track drought conditions:
→Meteorological data (e.g. reductions in  
average rainfall)
→Agricultural data (e.g. soil moisture)
→Hydrological data (e.g. reductions in surface stream 
flow and deep drainage; water storage levels
More information on drought in the ACT – historic and 
projected, is provided in Chapter 3.
Assessing drought vulnerability  
and resilience 
The ACT’s RDR Plan conceptualises drought risk in line 
with existing risk and vulnerability frameworks (Hughes 
et al., 2020) outlined in Figure 1. This framework 
conceptualises drought risk as a function of exposure and 
sensitivity, whereby farm drought risk depends both on a 
farm’s exposure to climate variability and the sensitivity 
of its production systems to that variability. 
Figure 1: Framework for assessing drought vulnerability and resilience6
5 BoM. (2022). Understanding Drought. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml#:~:text=Drought%20is%20a%20
prolonged%2C%20abnormally,be%20in%20almost%20perpetual%20drought.
6 Hughes, N., Burns, K., Soh, W., & Lawson, K. (2022). Measuring drought risk | The exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to drought. https://www.
agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/climate/measuring-drought-risk#:~:text=This%20study%20presents%20estimates%20of,to%20display%20
greater%20drought%20risk.

18   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Stakeholder Engagement
A stakeholder engagement plan 
was developed and implemented 
by AECOM with guidance and 
assistance from the ACT Government. 
Stakeholder engagement activities 
included face-to-face interviews 
with ACT rural landholders and other 
stakeholders, a confidential online 
survey of ACT rural landholders, and a 
workshop with ACT rural landholders. 
Stakeholder engagement identified:
ACT rural landholders’ previous 
experience of droughts and how 
they responded,
What actions they have taken 
to improve their resilience to 
drought,
Future projections of climate 
change, and
How they may need to change 
their enterprise to prepare for 
future projected droughts and 
climate change impacts. 
Other stakeholders consulted by 
AECOM included representatives 
from ACT Government agencies 
and a rural advisor. A description of 
each stakeholder group is provided 
below. Outcomes from stakeholder 
engagement shaped the information, 
data and recommendations in the 
AECOM study. (Appendix 1)
Key Stakeholders
ACT rural landholders 
The Territory has 159 farming families who collectively 
manage 180 rural leases covering 40,000ha (15%) of the 
ACT. Through consultation with rural landholders, this plan 
reflects the support the ACT rural community believes it will 
need to cope with future droughts. More information on the 
ACT rural community is provided in Chapter 2.
ACT Rural Landholders Association 
The ACT Rural Landholders’ Association is the peak 
representative body for farmers in the ACT and engages 
extensively with the ACT Government on matters such as 
land use and planning, weed and pest animal control, fire 
management, lease terms and conditions, land tenure, 
land acquisitions, boundary issues, public and third-
party access to rural properties, environmental plantings, 
environmental regulations and soil conservation. 
ACT NRM
The Australian Capital Territory Natural Resource 
Management (ACT NRM) is one of 54 regional NRM 
organisations across Australia under the Australian 
Government’s regional stream of the National Landcare 
Program 2018-2023 (NLP2) – Regional Land Partnerships 
(RLP). ACT NRM is hosted in the ACT Government’s, 
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development 
Directorate (EPSDD). ACT NRM is responsible for managing 
another tranche of work under the Future Drought Fund, 
the Farm Business Resilience Program. ACT NRM works 
closely with the ACT and region community to support 
biodiversity conservation, sustainable agriculture and 
Aboriginal NRM. 
The Suburban Land Agency
The ACT Suburban Land Agency (SLA) is a statutory 
authority within the Environment, Planning and 
Sustainable Development Directorate (EPSDD) portfolio, 
and is the largest leaseholder of rural land in the ACT. 
Icon Water
Icon Water is an unlisted public company wholly owned 
by the ACT Government. Icon Water owns, manages and 
operates all water and sewerage services for the ACT, 
including the following dams:
→Corin Dam (70.79 GL capacity)
→Bendora Dam (11.45 GL capacity)
→Cotter Dam (76.2 GL capacity)
→Googong Dam (110.41 GL capacity) 
Drought and climate change impacts on quantity, quality 
and availability of water is a significant concern to ICON 
water as the population of the ACT grows and droughts 
become more frequent and severe. 
Office of Water
The Office of Water sits within the Environment, Heritage 
and Water Division of the ACT Government’s Environment, 
Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate. The 
Office was established by the ACT Government to facilitate 
holistic and coordinated policy, planning and program 
delivery for water resource management within the Territory. 
For this purpose, the Office is responsible for facilitating 
cross-directorate collaboration on water management 
issues, leading on policy and planning for the water sector, 
undertaking monitoring and reporting to government on 
the implementation of water plans, policies, and strategies, 
providing the primary point of engagement with the 
ACT community on water sector issues, and conducting 
assurance reviews as requested by the Minister for Water. 
The Office of Water will support Canberra becoming a more 
climate-resilient and water-secure city.

19
C
O
M
M
U
N
IT
Y
STEERING  
GROUP
CHAIR –ACT NRM
BIOSECURITY RURAL  
SERVICES, BIOSECURITY 
AGRICULTURE POLICY
R
U
R
A
L
 L
A
N
D
H
O
L
D
E
R
S 
A
S
S
O
C
I
A
T
I
O
N
Farming  
community
Conservation 
council
Landcare  
representatives
Community  
councils
ACT NRM Advisory 
committee
Ngunnawal  
representatives
Governance in implementation  
of ACT RDRP  
The implementation of the ACT RDRP will be overseen 
under the RDRP Program Extension by:
→An internal ACT Government steering group which 
will meet regularly and coordinate and monitor the 
progress of the RDRP’s implementation. The steering 
group will engage with the farming community on 
decisions relating to implementation.
→The ACT NRM Advisory Committee which will be 
consulted less frequently for broader decision 
on the direction and priorities of the RDR Plan’s 
implementation. This will aide in ensuring the 
direction of the ACT RDRP’s implementation is 
supported by the community. Figure 2 demonstrates 
the governance structure. 
Figure 2: ACT’s RDRP Nested Governance Structure

20   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
GOALS
STRATEGIC 
PRIORITY
OUTCOMES
Enhanced  
water security
Rural communities have access to alternative water sources to  
improve water security.
Rural community is considered in future water use plans.
Access to and 
engagement  
with data
Improved landholder engagement with projections of climate to enhance 
planning and demonstrate what sufficient preparedness looks like. 
Continued investment in making climate data accessible and available. 
Improved representation of ACT data within national data sets, enabling 
comparison with other regions.
Improved resilience to wider climate-related shocks and stresses.
Improved land 
use planning
Recognition of farmers’ land stewardship.
Farmers are enabled to adaptively manage their land and enterprises.
Land management agreements are an enabler to climate adaptation.
Improved landholder ability to undertake long-term planning and 
investment.
Landholders can adaptively manage their land and enterprises.
Supporting 
education
Improved landholder drought preparedness. 
Improved rural community engagement with climate change projections.
Building 
collaboration  
and awareness
Increased recognition of the ACT as a producing region.
Further support and data for ACT’s farmers.
Table 2: Goals, Strategic Priorities and Outcomes for the ACT to build drought resilience.
Complementing the Canberra  
Region Local Food Strategy
To date, the ACT has not had an established policy 
or strategy that details its vision for the agriculture 
sector in the region. Population growth in the ACT and 
surrounding region has led to an increased interest in 
local and regional produce. The Canberra Region Local 
Food Strategy aims to prioritise local food production, 
encourage economic and social prosperity through robust 
food systems and increase affordable and equitable 
access to fresh and nutritious food.
Key to the success of the Strategy will be to support 
sustainable urban and rural farming practises. Sustainable 
farming practices at all scales are part of the solution to 
the climate change emergency and biodiversity loss. 
The ACT RDRP will be used to guide strategic decision 
making and build drought, and broader climate change 
resilience for the region’s agricultural producers. By 
supporting farmers and food enterprises to adopt 
sustainable practices, the local food system can help 
make sure the ACT and its region build stronger climate 
resilience and protect its biodiversity. 
Goals and outcomes
To meet our vision, the following key goals have emerged 
through the stakeholder consultation, literature review 
and the AECOM study. 
Table 2 outlines how the goals relate to the strategic 
priorities and describes key outcomes for each goal.

21
21

22   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
22   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

23
02
23
Region, community 
and natural capital

24   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Our Region
The ACT Region is defined by the Territory border and area of 2,358km2 with a 
population of more than 460,000 people in 2023 that is projected to increase to 
700,000 by 2058. It is a service centre for the ACT and southern NSW and the ACT 
Government delivers both Local and State government functions. Approximately 
68% of the ACT is nature reserve, national park or government-owned commercial 
forestry. Approximately 17% is urban land, and 15% is rural land. 
Figure 3: The ACT region
AREA
2,358km2
POPULATION
460,000
in 2023
700,000
15%
Rural land
17%
Urban land
68%
Nature reserve, national 
park or government-owned 
commercial forestry
projected increase by 2058
Ngunnawal Country 
The ACT is located on Ngunnawal Country. As the first 
inhabitants of the Canberra region, the Ngunnawal 
people have extensive knowledge of Ngunnawal Country, 
and this knowledge has been passed down through 
the generations. Therefore, it is important to consider 
the role of Ngunnawal knowledge and cultural land 
management practices to support drought resilience. 
The ACT RDRPis being drafted concurrently to the 
ACT Government progressing the Caring for Dhawura 
Ngunnawal - A natural resource plan for the ACT  
2022-2042. This plan acknowledges that for thousands  
of years, the Ngunnawal people have cared for the 
natural landscape in and around Canberra, and actively 
manage the land to maintain and influence local 
ecosystems. Through undertaking cool or cultural 
burning, risk from fire associated with drought can  
be reduced.7

25
There are a range of important groups, services and 
programs established by the ACT Government to support 
Indigenous Australians to care for Country including: 
→The Dhawura Ngunnawal Caring for Country Committee
→The Murumbung Yurung Murra Network (a network  
of Indigenous staff employed by EPSDD) 
→The EPSDD Reconciliation Action Plan 
→Aboriginal NRM program
→King Brown Caring for Country Program
→The Namadgi Rock Art Conservation Program 
These programs are important in supporting the 
relationship between the ACT Government and the 
Ngunnawal community. Further exploration on the 
impacts of drought on traditional Ngunnawal land 
management and cultural activities is necessary to 
ensure these practices can remain resilient to a  
changing climate.
Further exploration on the impacts of drought on 
traditional Ngunnawal land management and cultural 
activities is necessary to ensure these practices can 
remain resilient to a changing climate.
The ACT does not have a Land Rights Act, Indigenous 
Protected Areas or a successful Native Title claim.
Overview of agriculture in the ACT
The Territory’s 159 farming families collectively manage 
180 leases covering approximately 40,000ha (15%) of 
the ACT. The Territory supports a range of agricultural 
enterprises, in 2020/2021, the Territory’s total value of 
agricultural commodities produced was $9 million of 
Australia’s total value of $70.8 billion (0.013%). Grazing 
(cattle and sheep) is the most common form of agricultural 
production followed by eggs, poultry, and others.8 
Cattle and sheep production (including wool) contribute 
approximately 60% to the total $9 million value of the 
Australian Capital Territory’s agricultural sector.9 The 
approximate number of resident cattle and sheep in the 
ACT is 4,639 and 39,331 respectively. Collectively they 
make up around 0.04% of the combined national sheep 
and cattle population.10
Egg production contributed $335,000 to the $9 million 
value of the ACT’s agricultural sector in 2021 (ABARE). 
There are three free-range egg producers in the ACT, with 
an average flock size of around 2,450 birds which together 
produce a total of around 1,940,000 eggs annually.
Neither intensive cropping activities nor horticulture 
has a high prevalence in terms of the number of farms 
in the ACT, with these categories represented by a small 
number of orchards and turf production. Production data 
is not well represented in national agriculture statistics, 
likely due to the low number of farms. ABARES’ latest 
figures (2020/2021)4, for example, identify a total of 34 
farms that are recognised as farm businesses, which is 
not representative of known families and businesses 
in the region. However, the spread of those businesses 
identified within national datasets is in line with general 
numbers represented by the full cohort of landowners. 
Other agricultural enterprises include egg and chicken 
production; horse agistment and equestrian enterprises; 
alpacas and llamas; fruit orchards and vegetable market 
gardens; nurseries; fodder cropping including lucerne, 
oats and other fodder crops (primarily for on-farm use); 
wine; olives and truffles.
This agricultural production profile is generally consistent 
with that of surrounding NSW regions, which also have 
grazing (cattle and sheep) as key agricultural activities 
(Figure 4). Broadacre cropping is more significant in the 
central western part of NSW, while dairy and nursery 
industries are more prevalent in the eastern regions. 
7 Caring for Dhawura Ngunnawal: A natural resource plan for the ACT 2022-2042 https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0019/2270710/2022-NRM-Draft-Plan-Caring-for-Dhuwura-Ngunnawal.pdf
8 ABARES (2022). About my region dashboard. https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/australian.bureau.of.agricultural.and.resource.economics.and.sci/viz/
AMR_v9_A3L/Dashboard1
 9 ABARES Regional data ‘About My Region’ (2020/2021) https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/australian.bureau.of.agricultural.and.resource.economics.
and.sci/viz/AMR_v9_A3L/Dashboard1 Agricultural commodities (2020/2021) https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/aclump/land-use/agriculture-census-
dashboards-sa2
10 ABARES Regional data ‘About My Region’ (2020/2021) https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/australian.bureau.of.agricultural.and.resource.economics.and.
sci/viz/AMR_v9_A3L/Dashboard1 
10 ABARES Regional data ‘About My Region’ (2020/2021) https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/australian.bureau.of.agricultural.and.resource.economics.and.
sci/viz/AMR_v9_A3L/Dashboard1

26   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Beef Cattle  
Farming  
(Specialised)
Horse  
Farming 
Sheep 
Farming  
(Specialised)
Grape 
Growing
Sheep/Beef 
Cattle  
Farming  
Poultry  
Farming  
(Eggs)
Apple  
and Pear  
Growing
Nursery 
Production 
(Outdoors)
13
6
3
1
3
1
3
1
NUZ2 Non Urban - Rural
NUZ1 Non Urban - Broadacre
Territory Plan Land Use Zones
Queanbeyan
Queanbeyan
Coree
Belconnen
Canberra
Central
Majura
Kowen
Woden
Valley
Jerrabomberra
Tuggeranong
Paddys
River
Tennent
Molonglo
Valley
Stromlo
Figure 4: Number and type of farms in the ACT represented within 2020/21 ABARES data.
Agricultural production occurs primarily within areas 
identified as non-urban zones under the Territory Plan 
(Figure 5). Within this, agricultural production is only a 
specific objective on land zoned NUZ2 (rural) or more 
generally NUZ1 (broadacre). Permitted activities on rural 
and broadacre lands can be further restricted by purpose 
clauses in crown leases. General planning rules may 
allow for grazing in some regions, but purpose clauses 
in crown leases often specify cattle or sheep grazing and 
that other grazing animals (e.g., goats) or agricultural 
uses more generally would require a change to the lease 
agreement. The lease also specifies requirements for 
appropriate environmental management and monitoring 
of conservation assets including identification of pest 
animal and invasive plant management programs. As 
a total proportion of land within the ACT, these rural 
zonings comprise 15%.
Figure 5: Agricultural land use zoning within the Territory Plan11 
11 ACT Government. (2022). Territory Plan. https://app2.actmapi.act.gov.au/actmapi/index.html?viewer=territoryplan

27
Pasture and landscape management  
in the ACT
Most grazing land in the ACT is comprised of one or more 
of the following rain-fed pastures, including:
→Native grasslands (comprised of less productive 
grasses such as Kangaroo Grass and Poa Tussocks)
→Modified native pastures (with remnants of clovers, 
and perennial pastures sown some time over the 
last 50-100 years, and native grasses such Red Grass, 
Spear Grass, Wallaby Grass)
→Highly productive native pastures (such as Microlaena) 
sometimes also sown with clovers.
→Introduced perennial and annual pastures such as 
Phalaris, Cocksfoot and Tall Fescue and introduced 
clovers such as Subterranean Clover
→Forage crops such as oats, winter wheat, brassica  
and other crops.
Most ACT rural land is used for the grazing of sheep and 
cattle and horse agistment. Land use is a key driver of 
environmental change and many environmental issues 
in the ACT, such as loss of biodiversity, soil acidification, 
loss of groundcover and erosion, result from current 
and historic land management practices, including 
land clearing, urban development, past agricultural 
activities, forestry operations and a high concentration of 
recreational activities in some areas. 
Vegetation management in the ACT
Remnant native vegetation is a form of natural capital that 
provides numerous ecosystem services across a farming 
landscape. Within the ACT, these remnants include examples 
of endangered ecological communities in good condition, 
namely, Natural Temperate Grassland (NTG) and White 
Box-Yellow Box-Blakely’s Red Gum Grassy Woodland and 
Derived Native Grassland (BBGWL). Both these ecological 
communities are listed under the federal Environment 
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999.
Across the ACT region, declining condition of native 
vegetation is having a negative impact on persistence of 
native flora, waterway and landscape health and farm 
productivity. All these impacts will be exacerbated under 
expected changes in climate, especially during drought.
Investment in good vegetation management will assist 
farmers to adapt to changing climatic conditions and 
coping with and recovering from drought. It will also help 
to protect valuable threated ecosystems, while maintaining 
biodiversity and landscape health.
Soil management in the ACT
Distinctive features of ACT soils, irrespective of geology, are 
that they have inherently acid topsoil; they have shallow 
(<20cm, many <10cm) topsoils; sodic (erodible) subsoils 
occur in drainage lines and contribute gully erosion; they 
have hard setting bleached A2 horizons; shallow, often 
stony topsoils; are organic matter deficient and generally 
infertile. The granitic soils tend to have deeper and 
sandier topsoils. The soils on metasediments are usually 
less fertile, saltier and stonier. ACT soils are inherently 
acidic, which has been compounded by some acidifying 
agricultural practices.
Soil constraints and projected climate 
change impacts
Drought and climate change are expected to impact on 
agricultural soils in the ACT following ways:
	→Reduced rainfall and increased temperatures will lead 
to drier topsoil, reduced soil structure and soil porosity 
leading to more compacted soils, reduced soil water 
holding capacity, increased soil erosion and reduced 
plant growth and reduced soil organic carbon. 
	→Paradoxically – NSW and the ACT may experience an 
increase in macro-nutrients (the sum of calcium (Ca), 
magnesium (Mg), potassium (K) and sodium (Na) due to 
drying and warming conditions on clay-rich soils.
	→Changes in soil nutrients and soil pH could impact on 
crop and pasture species that have specific narrow 
nutrient and pH tolerances, as well as the viability of new 
weed species.
	→Increased wind erosion, loss of topsoil.
	→Reduced rainfall but more frequent extreme rainfall 
events, particularly following droughts and drought-
driven bushfires leading to increased soil erosion, loss 
of topsoil and loss of soil nutrients, sedimentation of 
waterways, loss of aquatic habitat and species.
	→Reduced soil health contributing to reduced pasture/
crop production and increased costs to farmers in 
replacing nutrients lost to erosion and supplementing 
lost production with purchased feed or reduced  
stocking rates.

28   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Animal health and heat stress  
during drought
As the ACT’s climate becomes hotter and heatwaves last 
longer, effectively managing the impact of these heat 
events on our production animals will be essential for the 
sustainability of our livestock industries. Planning for heat 
stress events will help reduce potential welfare issues, 
production losses, mortalities, and the accompanying 
financial and emotional impact associated with such an 
event. Predictive tools are available to help producers 
prepare for hot weather events. 
Ready access to ample, good quality, cool water, which 
ideally is shaded during the hottest part of the day, is 
critical in assisting ruminants to cope with heat stress. 
The provision of shelter/shade with appropriate air flow 
can make a significant difference to the ability of livestock 
to cope with a heat event and help reduce potential 
production losses and mortalities. Where practical, dietary 
modifications, supplements and additives can be employed 
as part of a heat mitigation strategy. Where possible, 
husbandry activities should be planned to avoid the hottest 
time of the year, and the hottest time of the day. Livestock 
should always be managed to minimise stress and tight 
packing of animals in yards should be avoided. An animal 
showing open mouth panting with their tongue extended is 
severely heat affected and needs immediate attention.
What’s working in the ACT to prepare  
for drought
ACT NRM and the Biosecurity and Rural Services Unit in 
the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development 
Directorate provide a range of support, training, capacity 
building activities as well as rebates, grants and incentives 
to encourage participation in projects that improve farm 
biodiversity on farms and improve stock water infrastructure 
for landholders, to assist with drought preparedness and 
improved NRM outcomes.
Improvements in stock water and  
fodder storage
Growing numbers of ACT rural landholders are increasing 
their access to water for stock and domestic purposes 
through installation of bores, tanks, pipes, pumps and 
accessing stream water and potable town water (if 
economic). Improved stock water access allows landholders 
to open up more of their property to grazing during drought 
or establish sacrifice paddocks or drought lot feeding 
facilities. Much of this work has been assisted through 
farm Emergency Stock Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme. 
ACT landholders are also increasing fodder storage (hay 
sheds, silos, silage) in order to store either farmed or 
purchased fodder for using during droughts. Some of this 
work has been supported by the ACT Rural Resilience Grants 
funded by the ACT Government. A number of landholders 
have also installed drought lot feeding facilities and sacrifice 
paddocks to contain stock and hand feed them fodder 
during drought to protect their pastures, maintain ground 
cover, and ensure quick recovery, diversity and reduced 
weed burden in recovering pastures, post drought. 
Training in pasture management
ACT rural landholders are also accessing training either on 
their own initiative or with support from ACT NRM to increase 
their skills in pasture management under changing seasonal 
conditions, through courses such as Prograze offered by 
South East Local Land Services and Grazing Management 
training through regenerative agriculture organisations such 
as RCS and Holistic Management International. This training 
is helping them further their skills in how to measure pasture 
biomass and project future seasonal pasture growth based 
on standing biomass to inform improved farm, pasture 
and stock management and prepare for drought. They are 
also getting exposure to a range of tools that can assist in 
planning grazing, stock and pasture management, such as 
MaiaGrazing – Online Grazing Management; paper-based 
stock and feed budgets provided by RCS, MLA and other 
organisations; and the Farming Forecaster soil moisture 
probe which provides locally relevant data, based on 
local data collected at the ACT’s soil moisture probe near 
Tidbinbilla and accessible through the Farming Forecaster 
website: Home page - PastureForecasting  
(farmingforecaster.com.au)
Farm business planning
ACT farmers have also embraced Future Drought Fund 
Farm Business Resilience programs offered by ACT NRM 
including Business Edge Training through Agrista /MLA; 
workshops and training in succession planning, Agri-tourism, 
farm diversification and other farm business activities; 
participated in farm business coaching and more. In 
addition, a core of 10-15 ACT farmers are coming together 
quarterly as the ACT Grazing Group, under the auspices 
of the ACT Regional Agricultural Landcare Facilitator 
and supported by grazier and chair of Upper Lachlan 
Landcare, to share knowledge on farm, stock and pasture 
management. This peer learning provides support and a 
forum for sharing knowledge and experiences, particularly 
leading into, during, and coming out of drought.

29
29

30   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
30   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

31
03
31
Climate and future 
drought risk

32   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
1995
1990
1985
1980
2000
2005
2010
2015
2025
2020
Defining drought
Drought is typically a slow-onset 
phenomenon that is driven by climate 
variables such as lower-than-average 
precipitation (including rain, sleet, snow, 
hail, or drizzle), often higher average 
temperatures, and increased evaporation. 
It is frequently more recognisable through its associated 
impacts including reduced water availability, reduced soil 
moisture, reduced plant growth and reduced carrying 
capacity of the land, reduced on-farm biodiversity and 
more.12 The Bureau of Meteorology defines drought as a 
prolonged abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.  
More information on defining and causes of drought is 
provided in Chapter 3 of the AECOM study.
ACT past droughts
Droughts are a recurring hazard in the ACT that are 
likely to increase in frequency, duration and intensity 
driven by climate change. Like much of NSW, the ACT 
experiences variability in its average climate conditions 
both over time (e.g. high temperatures in summer, low 
temperatures in winter) and spatially (the North-Eastern 
region of the ACT is warmer and drier than the alpine 
areas to the south-west). Large-scale weather patterns 
including El Niño Southern Annular Mode (ENSO), the 
Southern Annular Mode (SAM), and the Indian Ocean 
Dipole (IOD) also affect the region and the likelihood of 
drought. More recently, extreme climate events have 
increased in intensity, frequency, and duration. 13,14 
The ACT has experienced several periods of serious and severe drought, three recent examples include:
1982: Periods of rainfall deficiency 
which had a major impact on 
Canberra include the severe 
drought beginning in April 1982, 
which saw only 141.7 mm of rainfall 
over 9 months. Significant relief 
for Canberra came in the form of 
increased rainfall during the period 
of March-May of the following year. 
2001 to 2009: Known as 
the Millennium drought, 
this period experienced 
drought episodes and a 
long-term decline in rainfall. 
For example, in February 
of 2004, Canberra received 
79.8 mm of rainfall over a 
6-month period. 
2017 to 2020: Drought conditions 
were experienced in the ACT from 
2018 to 2020. For example, in two 
separate 6-month periods during 
the two years, Canberra received 
less than 150 mm of rainfall. 
Section 3.2.2, “Drought in Focus 
– 2017 to 2019”, explores this in 
greater detail.
Figure 6: Periods of serious and severe drought
12 BoM. (2022). Understanding Drought. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml#:~:text=Drought%20is%20a%20
prolonged%2C%20abnormally,be%20in%20almost%20perpetual%20drought.
13 CSIRO. (2015). Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s NRM Regions. https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_
media/168/CCIA_2015_NRM_TechnicalReport_WEB.pdf 

33
AECOM has compared a range of climate variables 
averaged over a 1910-to-1990-time frame with the 
same variables averaged across the 1990-to-2021-
time frame, to compare recent climate trends with the 
longer-term historic record. This comparison shows the 
growing warming of the ACT climate in the 1990-2021 
period, compared to the 1910 to 1990 period. This data 
was derived from the Bureau of Meteorology’s (BOM) 
Australian Gridded Climate Data Set, regionalised for 
the study areas in the ACT. The seven climate variables 
compared included rainfall, Mean Maximum Temperature, 
Soil Moisture (root zone), and Extreme heat days (>35°C). 
This comparison between the two periods established  
the following:
→Since 2008, there have been 13 periods of heatwaves
→The hottest temperature on record in Canberra was 
44°C in 2019 
→The four hottest summers and three hottest springs 
have occurred in the last 20 years 
→2019 saw the hottest January with a monthly average 
minimum temperature of 17.62°C recorded across the 
month, compared to 12.6°C baseline average from 
1910-1990.
→On average the 1910-1990 period experienced 2.3 
extreme heat days annually with the hottest year 
(1983) experiencing 8.71 extreme heat days
→In contrast on average the 1990-2021 period 
experienced 5.7 extreme heat days annually, with  
the hottest year, 2019, experiencing 23.34 extreme 
heat days.
Key climate variables that distinguished the 2017-2020 drought are captured in Figure 7 below.
The 2017 – 2020 drought saw the lowest rainfall on record in the ACT. In two separate 6-month periods 
across these years, Canberra received less than 150 mm of rainfall.
The observed climate during this period included: 
44%
Decrease in average rainfall 
(385mm in 2019 compared 
to the 1990-2021 baseline 
average of 690mm).
91%
Decrease in soil moisture during 
Dec 2019 – Jan 2020 (compared 
to 1990-2021 December months 
baseline average).
DRIEST CONDITIONS
Standard Precipitation Index (SPI _3-month) during Dec 2019 – Jan 
2020 was classified as extremely dry, with the driest conditions 
recorded since 1982.
ZERO
Soil moisture was zero  
in the summer of 2020.
80%
Increase in extreme heat days 
(>35°C) with 15.3 days recorded.
Figure 7: Drought in Focus – 2017 to 2020
Since AECOM finalised its work for the ACT, Canberra, national and global climate temperature records have been 
broken. 6 July, 2023 was the hottest day on record globally at 17.08°C; and June 2023, the hottest June on record 
globally (includes both northern and southern hemisphere temperature data); while Antarctica, a huge driver of global 
climate, experienced record low sea ice over winter. The Australian Capital Territory’s mean maximum temperature in 
July 2023 came in around 2 degrees Celsius higher than the average.

34   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Future climate and drought scenarios
Increasingly, the frequency, intensity and duration of 
droughts, will be influenced by climate change, which in 
turn will be influenced by global greenhouse gas emissions 
(emissions from burning fossil fuels and other activities 
that emit greenhouse gases to the atmosphere). This 
is because carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases 
emitted into the atmosphere warm the planet, causing 
climate change. 
To understand possible future drought-related impacts 
facing the ACT rural community, three future drought 
scenarios were developed by AECOM based on NSW 
and ACT’s latest climate projections , derived from data 
provided from NARCLIM (NSW and Australian Regional 
Climate Modelling (NARCliM), a NSW Government-led 
initiative that generates detailed climate projections15,  
for NSW, ACT and other parts of Australia.
These scenarios outline future climate change projections 
assuming a range of global greenhouse gas emission 
scenarios – ranging from an accelerated transition to a 
low carbon economy (whereby the world rapidly reduces 
green-house gas emissions and hence slows climate 
change); to a scenario whereby the world continues to emit 
high rates of green-house gases (hence doesn’t address the 
causes of climate change, contributing to increased climate 
change). These scenarios are best read in the context of the 
AECOM study which can be found in Appendix 1. 
Scenario analysis is an important tool for understanding 
and exploring the strategic implications of climate-related 
physical risks and opportunities. A scenario describes a 
path of development leading to a particular outcome. It 
provides an understanding of how resilient organisations 
are to a range of plausible climate-related scenarios, and 
how sensitive an organisations assets and operations are 
to the differences between these scenarios. Scenarios are 
not intended to represent a full description of the future, 
but rather highlight central elements of a possible future 
to draw attention to the key factors that will drive future 
developments. Scenarios are hypothetical constructs; they 
are not forecasts or predictions.
The three drought scenarios developed by AECOM 
are underpinned by what are called Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) which describe two 
potential scenarios of global climate emissions (Table 3).
Table 3: Description of Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)
SCENARIO
DESCRIPTION OF SCENARIO16
RCP 4.5 (Low-medium 
emissions scenario – 
climate scenario derived 
from the average of the 
models)	
Assumes a high level of mitigation (where the world reduces greenhouse gas emissions) 
with no active removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Emissions are anticipated to peak 
around 2070 and then remain consistent until 2100. This scenario assumes full uptake of 
renewable energy however no carbon capture to help reduce the levels of carbon dioxide. 
As a result, it is anticipated that temperature increases can be limited to 1.8°C by the end 
of the century (based on a 1985 – 2005 baseline) and while there will be some increase to 
extreme weather events due to historical climate change, these will result in medium level 
adaptation costs to mitigate risk (actions to manage the impacts of climate change).
RCP 8.5 (High emissions 
scenario – climate 
scenario derived from the 
average of the models)	
Assumes minimal effort to reduce emissions. Emissions will continue to grow unchecked, 
marked by the continued use of conventional fossil fuel energy to power cities homes and 
businesses. Without sizeable intervention this scenario assumes an average temperature 
increase of up to 4°C by the end of the century (based on a 1986 – 2005 baseline). It will 
require costly adaptation to minimise the impact of extreme weather events which have 
continued to increase dramatically over the past century.
RCP 8.5 (High emissions 
scenario – climate 
scenario derived from the 
hottest/ driest model)
Same as above however when using this scenario, the the hottest and driest model is 
taken to assume worst case scenario, hence “hotter/ drier” climate scenario.
15 In 2021, the NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling project (NARCliM 1.5) released a suite of improved climate change projections downscaled for NSW and the 
ACT. Compared to NARCliM 1.0 these models better capture the seasonal patterns and magnitudes of precipitation as well as the potential hotter and drier futures 
that are being experienced within these regions. NARCliM 1.5 also provides the added benefit of future projections for two AR5 scenarios to allow for a greater 
interrogation and understanding of future changes in climate in line with other modelling datasets compared to NARCliM 1.0. NARCliM 1.5 has been used to inform 
the climate projections for this study. Please see AECOM’s study at Appendix 1 for a detailed overview of the climate data used to inform this modelling.
16 Australian Govt. Department of the Environment and Energy, (n.d.). What are the RCPs?. https://coastadapt.com.au/sites/default/files/infographics/15-117-
NCCARFINFOGRAPHICS-01-UPLOADED-WEB%2827Feb%29.pdf

35
Climate projections for the ACT 
Under all three scenarios, the ACT’s climate is projected to 
become warmer and drier, and experience more extreme 
weather events. These trends are more severe under 
scenarios with higher emissions. Projected higher average 
temperatures and reductions in average annual rainfall are 
likely to see periods of drought increase in both frequency 
and intensity. A summary of climate change projections 
under the ‘middle’ scenario RCP 8.5 (High emissions 
scenario) is outlined in Table 4.
Climate analogues
Changes to the ACT’s climate now and into the future, mean 
it is more likely to resemble the climate of other warmer, 
drier regions in Australia. AECOM matched the projected 
future climates of Canberra with a similar climate currently 
experienced in another location, using annual average 
rainfall and maximum temperature as a basis for identifying 
Canberra’s climate analogue locations. This allows Canberra 
to picture what the future climate of Canberra is under 
different emissions scenarios. Under the RCP 8.5 hottest 
and driest scenario analogue towns whose current climate 
represents what the ACT will look like in 2030 include 
Bairnsdale, Bathurst, Benalla, Albury,-Wodonga, Sale 
Bendigo, Young and Melbourne. Under the same scenario, 
in 2050 Canberra’s climate will be similar to Ravensthorpe, 
Corowa, Echuca, Shepperton, Wagga and Kyabram. 
More information on Canberra’s analogue locations can  
be found in Chapter 3 of Appendix 1.
Table 4: Climate change projections under the ‘middle’ scenario for ACT in 1990-2009, 2030, 2045, 2070, 2090
Higher average temperatures
with an increase of about 1.8°C in 
both the average minimum and 
maximum daily temperatures by 
2045 compared to the 2000 baseline, 
increasing to about 3.3°C By 2070.
A shift towards extreme heat 
days with, on average, at least 11 
more days above 35°C each year 
by 2045, increasing to 18 more 
days by 2070.
A shift away from cold days with, 
on average, more than 55 fewer 
days below 2°C each year by 2045, 
increasing up to 36 fewer days by 2070.
A reduction in total soil moisture 
content with an 11% decrease 
annually by end of the century and 
an 18% decrease in December by the 
end of the century.
Likely decrease in annual rainfall
by 2045 by 3.1%, further 
decreasing by 9% and 9.3% in 
2070 and 2090 respectively.
Consecutive dry days (days 
without rainfall) are projected  
to increase to 29 days in 2045,  
32 days in 2070 and 36 days in 2090 
compared to the 2000 baseline  
of 27 days.
Significant changes to seasonal 
rainfall distributions. Summer 
rainfall is projected to increase and 
winter rainfall is projected  
to decrease.
Despite the likely decrease in average 
rainfall, there is expected to be an 
increase in extreme rainfall events, 
which will also account for a great 
portion of all rainfall (i.e., on those 
days when it does rain, it is likely to be 
more intense, even if there are fewer 
days when it rains). Rainfall will likely 
decrease in winter and spring but 
increase in summer. 
More detailed climate change/drought scenarios for the ACT can be found in Chapter 3 of the AECOM study.

36   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
36   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

37
Impacts of drought 
on the ACT rural 
community
04
37

38   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
→Rainfall volume & 
timing
→Soil moisture
→Min & max temperature
→Ability to absorb, respond, and 
recover from drought
→Technology
→Management practices
→Farm fixed inputs (e.g. land, 
livestock, equipment)
→Farm & farmer characteristics
Drought exposure
Drought vulnerability & resilience
Drought sensitivity
→Change in farm 
outcomes (e.g. 
profit, household 
income)
→Physical capital
→Natural capital
→Financial capital
→Human capital
→Social capital
Drought impact 
(risk)
Adaptive capacity
The following section identifies the impacts of drought 
on ACT farms and the ACT farming community identified 
by both stakeholder engagement (workshops, interviews, 
and the survey) and the desktop literature review, based 
on future drought scenarios and climate observations.
The AECOM study uses a vulnerability framework as a 
lens to assist impact prioritisation by qualitatively rating 
exposure (i.e. to what extent does each impact affect 
multiple agricultural enterprise types) and sensitivity (i.e. 
to what extent are affected agricultural types likely to be 
impacted by the given impact). 
Figure 8: Framework for assessing drought vulnerability and resilience17
Priority impacts of drought
The Exposure and Sensitivity legend Table 5 below, with AECOM’s Impact Summary Study available at Appendix 1. 
Table 5: Exposure and Sensitivity legend 
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
High
High degree of exposure e.g. impact 
will affect a very large proportion of 
enterprises and communities and have  
a significant impact on most impacted 
farm households.
High
High degree of sensitivity e.g. high financial 
and productivity impacts (for example if the 
farming practice has high reliance on what  
is being impacted). 
Medium
Medium degree of exposure e.g. impact 
will affect multiple (and different) farming 
systems and communities, and the impact 
will be moderately significant.
Medium
Medium degree of sensitivity e.g. medium 
financial and productivity impacts (for 
example if the farming practice has moderate 
reliance on what is being impacted).
Low
Low degree of exposure e.g. impact will 
affect only a few farming systems and 
communities and the impact won’t  
be significant.
Low
Low degree of sensitivity e.g. low financial 
and productivity impacts (for example if the 
farming practice has low reliance on what  
is being impacted).
17 Hughes, N., Burns, K., Soh, W., & Lawson, K. (2022). Measuring drought risk | The exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to drought. https://www.
agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/climate/measuring-drought-risk#:~:text=This%20study%20presents%20estimates%20of,to%20display%20
greater%20drought%20risk.

39
01
02
03
04
05
The AECOM study identified five priority drought impacts to which the ACT farming community and farming enterprises 
were generally all found to have high exposure. 
The five priority impacts identified for the ACT are:
Reduced water 
availability. 
Increased weeds 
and pests.
Reduced carrying 
capacity of land.
Reduced on-farm 
biodiversity.
Reduced wellbeing of 
farming community. 
Other identified impacts are:
→Loss and damage due to increased occurrence of 
natural disasters
→Shifts in timing of farm activities/operations
→Damage to assets and infrastructure
→Increased crop/pasture sensitivity
→Heat stress on livestock
→Erosion of soil and crop damage
→Land becomes unsuitable for agricultural enterprises
→Increased need to import feed
→Increased financial vulnerability
→Safety and reduced employment
These impacts often affect communities across multiple 
strategic priorities used in this study (environmental, 
economic, social and governance), as impacts do not 
happen in a vacuum, often happen concurrently, and 
often have flow on effects to other areas. Despite this, 
this study categorises them to group specific identified 
impacts and actions together to assist in readability, 
monitoring and evaluation and to align with the FDF 
Strategic Priorities for drought as per Table 6 below.
IMPACT
STRATEGIC PRIORITY
ENVIRONMENTAL
ECONOMIC
SOCIAL
GOVERNANCE
PRIORITY IMPACT
Reduced water availability
Increased weeds and pests
Reduced carrying capacity of land
Reduced on-farm biodiversity
Loss and damage due to increased occurrence  
of natural disasters
Reduced wellbeing of farming community
OTHER IMPACTS
Shifts in timing of farm activities/operations
Damage to assets and infrastructure
Increased crop/pasture sensitivity
Heat stress on livestock
Erosion of soil and crop/pasture damage
Land becomes unsuitable for agricultural enterprises
Increased need to import feed
Increased Financial vulnerability
Safety and reduced employment
Table 6: Impact and Strategic Priority

40   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The following sections describe 
the priority impacts in detail.18
“We were fortunate to access ground[water] 
allocation which meant we were able to 
provide clean and secure water for livestock.”
Impact 1. Reduced water availability
PRIORITY IMPACT: REDUCED WATER AVAILABILITY
CONTEXT
Agricultural practices are highly dependent on the availability of water. The future drought scenarios project less 
water availability manifested as reduced surface water, groundwater, and soil moisture, as well as reduced water for 
irrigation and other uses. This is due to a combination of lower rainfall (particularly in winter and spring) and higher 
temperatures and hence higher evaporation reducing inflows to rivers and dams and reduced recharge rates for 
underground water. D, 19 Despite increases in extreme rainfall events, soil may remain dry during these events due  
to increased runoff and increased soil water repellence reducing the soils capacity to soak up as much water. D  
Increases in extreme rainfall events lead to soil erosion and damage to crops and pastures. 
IMPACTS
A direct impact of drought is reduced water availability and 
reduced soil moisture. ACT rural landholders noted reduced 
rainfall-derived farm surface water quantity and quality, and 
increased reliance on off-farm and non-surface water sources.
ACT rural landholders noted that dams and on-farm 
water storage dried up in droughts. A, B, D This reduced 
water availability for farms which relied on surface water. 
Some landholders used town water to continue to service 
paddocks and house water demands B, whilst others noted a 
reliance on bore water to water livestock C. Some landholders 
noted they made use of natural springs to water stock. This 
allowed them to keep stock out of riparian corridors and 
protect these areas of native biodiversity.
Cropping enterprises are more sensitive to drought 
than livestock farms. Low water availability has a close 
relationship with yield for irrigated crops D, and reduced 
water quality can also affect the quality of food crops. D
In addition to reduced water quantity, landholders noted 
that it was a challenge to maintain dam water quality in 
drought, with water quality in dams degrading and  
requiring treatment.
Flow on impacts of reduced water quantity and quality in 
drought include reduced production, and reduced stock 
health and growth, particularly for irrigated crops. D 
PRIORITISATION
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Reduced water availability because of a changing climate 
will have far-reaching impacts across both primary 
production and other agricultural enterprises in the ACT. 
A decrease in available water can cause production and 
yield to decrease impacting high value farms. Given that 
all farms are likely to be affected by this impact (high 
exposure) and all farms are sensitive to this impact (high 
sensitivity), this is categorised as a priority impact.
High exposure due to 
all farms likely to be 
affected by reduced water 
availability.
High sensitivity due to 
heavy reliance on water 
availability.
Legend: *priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
18 Given grazing systems (including both cattle and sheep) are the dominant agricultural enterprise in the ACT, there is a significant focus within the discussion 
on these systems. Other agricultural types (such as viticulture) are separately discussed where appropriate in AECOM’s study at Appendix 1. Additional priorities 
have been identified by the ACT Government based on extensive engagement and first-hand experience of drought impacts on the ACT’s rural community and 
include Heat stress on poultry, heat stress on livestock and damage to pastures and grazing operations.
19 AdaptNSW. (2022). Climate projections used on AdaptNSW. https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/climate-projections-used-adaptnsw

41
“Lots of weeds getting blown in  
- if our neighbours have it, we'll have it.”
Impact 2. Increased weeds and pests
PRIORITY IMPACT: INCREASED WEEDS, PEST ANIMALS AND DISEASES
CONTEXT
Climate change will affect the spread and competitiveness of weeds, pest animals and diseases of livestock in the 
ACT, impacting on crops, pastures and livestock health and productivity
IMPACTS
It was noted that periods of drought and elevated grazing 
pressure resulted in weeds gaining a foothold. A, D This led to 
a proliferation of weeds following drought, of which African 
lovegrass was of particular concern to landholders. A This 
can have a significant impact on farm businesses recovering 
from periods of drought.
With minimum temperatures increasing, landholders 
noted that more weeds were blowing in from neighbouring 
properties/public land and that poor management 
of weeds on neighbouring properties nullified good 
management on their property. A 
Weed spreading events will increase with increased 
incidence of flooding, bushfires, and winds D and transport 
by native and pest animal species. The costs of weed 
management are also likely to increase. D This is significant, 
as weeds are one of the costliest agricultural pests.20
Wild and feral animals may carry diseases that can infect 
livestock, including Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), Johne’s 
disease, sheep measles, Newcastle disease, leptospirosis, 
and anthrax.21 Drought conditions can amplify the effects 
of parasites and infectious diseases through increased 
transmission in crowded conditions such as around water 
and feed sources and lowered immunity associated with 
poor nutrition. 22
These impacts ultimately result in a reduction in 
agricultural productivity and damage to the environment 
and natural resources. D In the case of serious and highly 
contagious diseases such as FMD, if they were to occur 
in Australia, would cause severe economic losses and 
restrictions to Australian livestock industries and domestic 
and international markets for live animals, meat and 
animal products.
PRIORITISATION
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Grazing industries and other agricultural enterprises are subject 
to these infestations and with greater climatic variations, pest 
plant and animal and stock disease management will become 
more important. Development and continual updating of farm 
and ACT farming community biosecurity plans addressing key 
threats is essential along with increased pest plant and animal 
and disease surveillance, especially as pest life cycles change in 
response to climate change. The exposure and sensitivity are high 
due to the significant financial impact pest plants and animals 
and disease have, both in terms of control and lost productivity, 
and in the case of diseases of stock, loss of farm income. 
High exposure due 
to all farms having 
the potential to be 
impacted by weed, 
pest animal and stock 
diseases infestations.
High sensitivity due to 
lack of control once a 
weed infestation occurs 
and the financial 
and lost productivity 
impacts that result.
Legend: *priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
20 Schonbeck, M., & Tillage, B. (2011). Principles of sustainable weed management in organic cropping systems. In Workshop for Farmers and Agricultural 
Professionals on Sustainable Weed Management (Vol. 3, pp. 1-24). Clemson, SC, USA: Clemson University.
21 Department of Primary Industries. (2022). Biosecurity, wildlife and feral animals. https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/biosecurity/animal/wildlife-and-feral-animals. 
22 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Animal health in a drought. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/livestock-and-animals/livestock-health-and-welfare/animal-health-in-a-
drought.

42   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Learned to de-stock early before 
you graze too hard.”
Impact 3. Reduced carrying capacity of land
PRIORITY IMPACT: REDUCED CARRYING CAPACITY
CONTEXT
Carrying capacity is the average number of animals that a grazing area can be expected to support over a set period.23 
During times of drought, the carrying capacity of the land is reduced. During periods of drought, many farmers 
destock to sustain the remaining livestock. Strategies to minimise the economic impacts of reducing stock numbers 
include selling feeder animals early, reducing breeding animal numbers, and selling the entire herd.
IMPACTS
Drought results in increased costs and decreased 
production and income.24 Landholders were unable to 
maintain pre-drought stocking levels and needed to 
destock during and in the lead-up to drought periods. 
Selling livestock enabled landholders to reduce the 
financial and environmental costs of keeping animals 
on the land in dry periods by avoiding the need to buy 
supplementary feed and reducing the impact of livestock 
traffic on bare soil A. Landholders used drought plans and 
weather predictions to decide when to destock.B They also 
noted a need to sell earlier going into a drought A, and that 
it took a long time to build stock numbers back up, and 
recover economically from destocking.A, B Landholders 
also noted that buying-in feed was expensive and the 
embodied energy used to transport the feed (‘food miles’) 
was considered high. 
Landholders had to factor kangaroo grazing pressure 
into grazing calculations and decisions around stock 
management. A kangaroos contribute significantly to 
grazing pressure.
To ameliorate some of these impacts, landholders 
allowed their cattle to graze in roadside vegetation,  
or ‘bush paddocks’ during drought to supplement feed 
and reduce the fire risk of biodiversity corridors, which 
could otherwise facilitate the movement of fire across  
the landscape. However, this can have a negative impact 
on on-farm biodiversity.
PRIORITISATION
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Grazing enterprises in the ACT have both high exposure and 
high sensitivity to managing appropriate stock levels due to the 
impacts of drought making it challenging to recover from times of 
destocking and the increasing costs to buy-in feed.
High exposure due 
to the current lack of 
stock management 
techniques currently 
practised across farms.
High sensitivity due to 
the productivity and 
profitability loss from 
de-stocking as well as 
the long recovery times.
Legend: *priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
23 Queensland Government (2016) Understanding carrying capacity and stocking rates in grazing systems. Queensland Government. Accessed on 
18 October 2022, https://www.business.qld.gov.au/industries/farms-fishing-forestry/agriculture/grazing-pasture/improved-production/carrying-
capacity#:~:text=Long%2Dterm%20carrying%20capacity%20is,(e.g.%2010%2B%20years). 
24 MLA (2021) Drought feeding. Meat and Livestock Australia. Accessed 18 October 2022, mla.com.au/research-and-development/livestock-production/livestock-
nutrition/drought-feeding/

43
“Following the 2003 bushfires, it took 
12 years to see a possum again.”
Impact 4. Reduced on-farm biodiversity
PRIORITY IMPACT: REDUCED ON-FARM BIODIVERSITY
CONTEXT
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services (such as pest regulation, water purification, and pollination) leaves 
agricultural systems more vulnerable to threats such as pests, pathogens, and continued impacts from climate 
change. The loss of biodiversity observed by ACT landholders in drought is consistent with scientific literature. 
IMPACTS
Impacts to on-farm biodiversity and impacts on the farm 
enterprise from on-farm biodiversity were noted by ACT 
rural landholders. 
The grazing pressures from kangaroos during drought 
were considered a significant impact, with one landholder 
quoting that each kangaroo was equivalent to three-
quarters of the same number of sheep. That is, having 
100 kangaroos grazing on the property was equivalent 
to carrying an additional 75 sheep. A The significance 
of kangaroo grazing impacts, which are exacerbated by 
drought is echoed in other jurisdictions and presents a 
complex environmental, social, and economic problem  
for management. 25
Additionally, ACT landholders observed the impacts of 
the drought on on-farm biodiversity. Landholders noted 
that during heatwaves, small birds in enclosed nests were 
observed dead in their nests due to the extreme heat. 
One landholder noted that after the 2003 bushfires it took 
twelve years to see a possum on the property again. B 
Another noted that in their bush paddock, a quarter of the 
trees died out during drought. B Landholders generally felt 
a responsibility to support native wildlife during drought. A
Damage to biodiversity and ecosystem functioning can 
have flow-on effects on farm health and productivity. 
Healthy ecosystems benefit farms by providing services, 
such as pollination, controlling soil erosion and 
maintaining water quality for farm use.26 B
PRIORITISATION
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Exposure and sensitivity are high due to biodiversity 
loss reducing ecosystem functioning, resulting in less 
productive farms, and added pressure for farmers  
to support native wildlife.
High exposure due to all 
farms likely to be affected 
by reduced biodiversity.
High sensitivity due to the 
dependence agriculture 
has on health ecosystems.
Legend: *priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
25 Hacker R. B., Sinclair K., Pahl L. (2020) Prospects for ecologically and socially sustainable management of total grazing pressure in the southern rangelands of 
Australia. The Rangeland Journal 41, 581-586. https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/rj20006 
26 Power, A. (2010). Ecosystem services and agriculture: tradeoffs and synergies. https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2010.0143

44   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Increased worry about bushfires.”
Impact 5. Reduced wellbeing
PRIORITY IMPACT: REDUCTION IN WELLBEING
CONTEXT
The most significant social impacts of drought include erosion of income resulting in rural poverty, increased workloads, 
physical and mental health and welfare issues, problematic access to services and overload on service providers, 
declining access to education, and isolation.27 Some of these impacts are less applicable to the ACT context and were not 
raised by landholders. This could be due to the proximity to Canberra as a major source of services and employment, 
and the prevalence of off-farm income among the ACT rural landholder community. This means that access to services 
including education and health and mental health services is less affected by drought, and therefore isolation is reduced. 
Other disasters such as bushfires have physical and mental health impacts on rural communities. A significant cost of the 
2019-2020 bushfires was the physical health impacts from smoke inhalation by farmers and others who work outdoors, as 
well as the broader ACT and region community.34
It is well established that bushfires and other natural disasters have long-term effects on the mental health of affected 
individuals and communities.28 The effects of these events can last for years.29 The 2019 - 2020 bushfires in Australia were 
catastrophic and unprecedented.30 
Studies have found that in addition to immediate distress related to financial and workload problems, people reported 
experiencing significant distress from the emotional impact of environmental degradation, from loss of hope for the future 
of their community, and from feelings of being misunderstood by the wider Australian community.31 The stressors affecting 
farming communities during times of drought are likely to be associated with increased risk of mental health problems.
IMPACTS
Wellbeing impacts include:
→Reduced health and mental wellbeing from recent 
pressures including climate change, drought, pest 
plant and animal and disease outbreaks D
→Reduced wellbeing due to working long hours, having 
physically demanding work, and often being isolated 
socially and geographically from services D
→Increased concerns about bushfires, and concerns 
related to evacuations A
→Increased exposure to challenging working conditions 
(e.g. days with temperatures exceeding 35°C)
→Financial management pressures during periods of 
lower revenues and/or increased capital expenditure 
and operational expenditure.
PRIORITISATION
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Climate change may increase the risk of mental health impacts 
among farmers as they face the hardships of practising agriculture 
under a changing and highly variable climate. The sensitivity and 
exposure are high as these impacts are making farmers and their 
agricultural systems more vulnerable.
High exposure due to 
increasing frequency 
of climate events 
(droughts, bushfires, 
flooding etc) without 
sufficient recovery 
periods in between.
High sensitivity due 
to range of impacts 
faced including 
health , mental 
wellbeing, and 
financial pressures. 
Legend: *priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
27 Alston, Margaret, and Jenny Kent. 2004. Social Impacts of Drought : A report to NSW agriculture. Wagga wagga, NSW: Centre for Rural Social Research, Charles 
Sturt University.
28 Black Dog Institute. 2020. Mental Health Interventions Following Disasters. Randwick, NSW, Australia: Black Dog Institute. 
29 Gibbs, L., Waters, E., Bryant, R. A. et al. 2013. “Beyond Bushfires: Community, Resilience and Recovery - a longitudinal mixed method study of the medium to 
long term impacts of bushfires on mental health and social connectedness.” BMC Public Health.
30 Morton, A. 2020. “Yes, Australia has always had bushfires: but 2019 is like nothing we’ve seen before.” The Guardian, 25 December.
31 Sartore, G., Kelly, B., Stain, H., Albrecht, G., & Higginbotham, N. (2008). Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: A qualitative study of the impact 
of drought on a rural Australian community. https://search.informit.org/doi/abs/10.3316/INFORMIT.471246494717588

45
Other environmental, social, 
economic and governance  
impacts of drought 
Impacts from increased occurrence  
of natural disasters 
Extreme events, especially floods and droughts, can harm 
crops and pastures and reduce yields. D Bushfire risk is 
also exacerbated by drought conditions due to very dry 
vegetation and soils and record-breaking heat.32 Drought 
and heatwaves intensify the drying of dead bushfire fuel 
and can even lead to megafires which are defined by their 
enormous size and the number of resources required to 
bring them under control. In addition, floods can follow 
bushfires, compounding the effects of natural disasters. A 
There is projected to be higher occurrences of fluctuating 
extremes. D Extreme high rainfall events can also lead to 
erosion of soil and damage to crops, particularly where 
soil infiltration is reduced.
Damage to assets and infrastructure
Damage to assets and infrastructure on farms in the ACT 
can be caused by natural disasters including bushfires. 
Costs include damage to farm fencing, buildings and 
equipment, and a reduction in farmland values, loss of 
crops and pastures and livestock deaths.34 
Bushfires resulted in long-term impacts on soil health. 
Fire can damage soil microbial communities, as well as 
many nutrient and organic matter cycling functions.35 A 
landholder reported that after the 2003 bushfire the soils on 
their property became hydrophobic (repelled water). The 
recovery from this took 6 – 7 years following the bushfire.
Unsuitable land for agricultural enterprises
Land for agriculture may become less suitable for certain 
enterprises due to longer droughts and harsher fire 
weather causing crop and pasture stress and attracting 
new pests that thrive in warmer temperatures.36 As a 
result of more extreme temperatures, a landholder 
with a horticulture enterprise noted that they could no 
longer grow crops on the same side of the hill that they 
had previously, and had to adapt their management 
accordingly to find more suitable locations.A
Shifts in the timing of farm activities and 
operations
The seasonal timing of farm management actions is 
changing, this is particularly prevalent in the viticulture 
industry (more information on viticulture is available in 
AECOM’s Study Appendix 1, Section 6.6). While livestock-
rearing stakeholders didn’t raise this as a key impact at 
this stage, there is evidence this will be a rising issue into 
the future.37 38 Research into climate change adaptations 
in Australian grazing systems synthesised research on key 
adaptation responses to climate change. This included 
changing timing of calving and lambing to fit in with 
changed seasonal patterns of pasture growth; and adjusting 
stocking rates according to seasonal conditions. ACT 
farmers are already using seasonal forecasting tools to make 
decisions around stocking rates and purchasing fodder. 
In addition, many important animal diseases are affected 
directly or indirectly by weather and climate. These links 
may be spatial (with changes in climate affecting disease 
distribution) or temporal (with weather affecting the 
timing of an outbreak) or may relate to the intensity of  
an outbreak.
32 Climate Council, 2019, Dangerous Summer: Escalating bushfire, heat and drought risk, https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/
report-dangerous-summer_V5.pdf 
33 UNSW Sydney, 2021, How heatwaves and drought combine to produce the perfect firestorm, https://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/science-tech/how-
heatwaves-and-drought-combine-produce-perfect-firestorm 
34 Strom, M (2021) Black Summer bushfire season cost farmers up to $5 billion. University of Sydney. Accessed on 18 October 2022, https://www.sydney.edu.au/
news-opinion/news/2021/12/13/black-summer-2019-20-bushfires-cost-farmers-5-billion-australia.html
35 Farrell, M. (2020). Recovery of Australia’s soils following bushfires - ECOS. https://ecos.csiro.au/soil-fire-recovery/ 
36 AdaptNSW (2022) Climate change impacts on drought. https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/drought#:~:text=Drought%20has%20huge%20
impacts%20on%20Australia’s%20agriculture%20industry%2C%20causing%3A,leading%20to%20shortages%20in%20supply
37 Henry, B.K. & Charmley, E. & Eckard, Richard & Gaughan, J. & Hegarty, Roger. (2012). Livestock production in a changing climate: Adaptation and mitigation 
research in Australia. Crop and Pasture Science. 63. 191-202. 10.1071/CP11169.
38 Cullen, Brendan & Harrison, Matthew & Mayberry, Dianne & Cobon, David & Davison, Tom & Eckard, Richard. (2021). Climate change impacts and adaptation 
strategies for pasture-based industries: Australian perspective. NZGA: Research and Practice Series. 17. 10.33584/rps.17.2021.3476.

46   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Heat stress on livestock
Livestock experience heat stress resulting in reduced 
appetites, less desire to breed, increased animal stress 
and significant productivity loss for the livestock industry. 
“Heat stress” has been attributed to significant economic 
losses in production animals both overseas and in 
Australia. As far back as 20 years ago, annual losses due 
to heat stress in the USA livestock and poultry industries 
were calculated to be between $1.69 and $2.36 billion, 
with the cost to the beef industry alone being around 
$370 million.39, 40
In Eastern Australia in 1991 four thousand cattle deaths 
were attributed to heat stress, and in 2000 1255 cattle 
deaths were attribute to heat stress. In 2006, it was 
estimated that heat stress resulted in a $16.5 million loss 
to the Australian feedlot industry. 
While there has been a focus on tropical, sub-tropical and 
arid climates, the increasing risk of the negative impacts 
of heat stress on the efficiency of production of grazing 
ruminants in temperate regions has been recognised.  
A significant challenge for ACT producers going forward 
will be preparing for and managing heat related injury  
in cattle and sheep.
High ambient temperature is recognised as a current 
and future critical problem for livestock. Increasingly, 
attention is being directed to find ways to mitigate 
financial losses and welfare concerns resulting from the 
impacts of heat-stress on health, growth, reproduction, 
and production. These impacts include:
→Reduced growth and development
→Compromised immunity predisposing to an increased 
incidence of disease
→Nutritional deficiencies
→Lower fertility, conception rates and birth rates, 
increased foetal abnormalities and death, lower birth 
weights
→Reduced quality of colostrum, decreased milk 
production
→Adverse impacts on meat and wool quality41 42
Heat stress in free-range poultry
Heat stress is one of the most important environmental 
stressors challenging poultry production world-wide 
and is considered by some to be the most debilitating 
stressor. Extreme heatwaves have already caused 
devastating losses for the poultry industry. In 2006, a 
major heat wave in the United States resulted in the 
sudden death of more than 700,000 poultry in California.
In a survey undertaken of Australian free- range egg 
producers, flock losses due to heat stress were ranked 
second only to predation. However, this is reflecting only 
a part of the total losses to an enterprise when the impact 
of heat stress on bird performance and production are 
also considered.
A major concern for ACT free-range egg producers  
will be managing flocks, both now and into the future,  
to minimise the impact of hot weather events and  
heat related injury on animal health/welfare and  
farm profitability.
Erosion of soil and crop damage
Extreme rainfall events lead to erosion of soil and damage 
to crops. Despite rain events, the soil may remain dry 
due to its inability to soak up as much water during 
an extreme rainfall event. This can increase flood and 
erosion risk and can be exacerbated by other extreme 
events. Erosion and crop damage was not raised by ACT 
landholders as a significant concern. 
However, the ACT Government has identified the 
following impacts of future drought on soil:
→Reduced rainfall and increased temperatures will  
lead to:
- drier topsoil, reduced soil structure and soil porosity  
	 leading to more compacted soils, reduced soil water  
	 holding capacity, increased soil erosion and reduced  
	 plant growth
-	 reduced soil organic carbon 
-	 changes in soil nutrients and soil pH could impact on  
	 crop and pasture species
-	 increased wind erosion
39 St-Pierre, N.R.; Cobanov, B.; Schnitkey, G. Economic losses from heat stress by US livestock industries. J. Dairy Sci. 2003
40 Thornton, P., Nelson, G., Mayberry, D., Herrero, M. (2021) Increases in extreme heat stress in domesticated livestock species during the twenty-first century. 
Glob Change Biol. 27:5762–5772
41 Lees, A. M., Sejian, V., Wallage, A. L., Steel, C. C., Mader, T. L., Lees, J. C., & Gaughan, J. B. (2019). The impact of heat load on cattle. Animals, 9(6), 322
42 Idris M., Uddin J., Sullivan M., McNeill D.M., Phillips C.J.C. Non-Invasive Physiological Indicators of Heat Stress in Cattle. Animals. 2021; 11(1):71

47
-	 reduced rainfall but more frequent extreme 
	 rainfall events 
-	 increased soil erosion, loss of topsoil and loss of  
	 soil nutrients 
-	 loss of soil into waterways
- reduced soil health
Catastrophic fires, as seen in 2019-2020 fires, including 
the ACT’s Orroral Fire caused catastrophic soil erosion 
turned soils hydrophobic (soils repel water and can’t 
absorb rainfall or runoff); and reduced the seed store 
in the soil (pastures, native vegetation), constraining 
recovery of soils and vegetation crop losses due to 
the bushfire smoke were also a significant impact, 
particularly for the viticulture industry (refer to AECOM 
Study, Appendix 1, Section 6.6 for more detail on these 
impacts on viticulture).
Economic impacts
Economic impacts identified through stakeholder 
engagement and the literature review included:
→Increased need to import feed
→Financial vulnerability
These impacts are expanded on below
Increased need to import feed
When there is less pasture available for stock to eat due to 
drought, buying in feed to supplement rain-fed pastures 
is costly and compounded by increased costs of off-farm 
fodder purchased during drought periods.B Increased 
demand for feed during the most recent drought meant 
landholders had to source feed from further away, 
including Western Australia and Tasmania. Feed prices 
were therefore higher due to the additional transport 
costs A as well as the scarcity of feed. Higher feed costs 
contribute to the general trend of higher input costs 
experienced by farms in drought.
Financial vulnerability 
Farm drought risk varies significantly across industries, 
with cropping enterprises more sensitive to drought than 
livestock enterprises. Crop yields are directly linked to 
weather conditions, leading to large, immediate declines 
in revenue during drought years. In contrast, livestock 
producers can smooth climate impacts over multiple 
years by selling livestock in drought years, which helps 
maintain revenues in the short-term and offset lower 
prices received and higher costs.43
The least profitable years for farmers tend to be drought 
years with unfavourable prices. Costs are increased for 
feed, fuel and fertilisers and other farm inputs such as 
herbicides. Nationally, average farm returns decreased 
in 2018-19 in drought-affected regions.44 There is 
subsequently a greater need for financial assistance 
during drought leading to an increased need to access 
grants and/or to rely on off-farm income. A key factor 
identified by stakeholders that mitigated the impacts 
of the 2017 – 2020 drought was the high demand for 
Australian sheep and cattle which pushed prices to, in 
some cases, historic highs. In times of future drought, 
global and local political, economic, and social trends 
may not provide the same protections. 
Impacts on pastures and grazing enterprises.
Increasing temperatures, reduced rainfall in winter and 
spring, and in the main pasture growing season from 
April to October are impacting ACT grazing enterprises. 
Average changes in climate parameters can mask the 
impacts of specific extreme events, such as consecutive 
days of maximum temperatures over 35°C or periods of 
intense rainfall, and which are outside the envelope of 
projected average changes to climate.
Changes in rainfall and climate are impacting pasture 
species by changing the persistence of temperate, cool 
climate, high rainfall species, such as perennial ryegrass 
and white clover. 
43 Hughes, N, Burns, K, Soh, WY & Lawson, K 2020, Measuring drought risk: the exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to drought, ABARES report to client, 
44 ABARES Insight, 2019, Analysis of the effects of drought and climate variability on Australian farm
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.

48   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Climate change and drought conditions are currently 
and will continue to have detrimental effects on pastures 
through extreme events and cascading disasters, e.g. 
flood, fire, heatwaves and drought. These impacts lead to 
greater reliance on the purchase of supplementary feed/
fodder, particularly when there is high demand and prices 
are very high and supplies limited due to drought.45 
Social impacts
Safety and reduced employment
Social impacts identified through stakeholder 
engagement and the literature review included safety 
concerns and reduced employment.
Physical health and welfare impacts were identified to 
be a concern of ACT landholders including occupational 
health and safety risks to farm workers with increasing 
temperatures. Landholders expressed heat-related safety 
concerns for their staff. Heat stress can also reduce labour 
capacity in agriculture. There were concerns that during 
drought and times of financial stress there is less work 
available for people who rely on the agricultural sector 
for employment. 
Governance
Governance impacts were less frequently raised during 
engagement activities however the following impacts 
have been identified:
→Managing more frequent droughts places stress on 
governance systems.
- Government resources are diverted to drought  
   response activities, redirecting staff from other  
   strategic workstreams.
- Introduces greater reliance on financial assistance. 
- Financial implications for the government providing  
   grants are significant and as drought events occur  
   more frequently and/or for longer periods they will  
   increase in cost with time. 
- Perceptions by the greater community present  
   reputational risks for the government if drought  
   response is not seen as reasonable.
→Timing of when drought is declared. 
- Concerns raised about the lack of clear direction from 
   government authorities regarding the declaration of  
   drought drove some challenges in farmers accessing  
   federal financial relief. This also contributed to  
   perceptions within the farming community they were 
   not a priority for the government. 
→Availability of drought assistance 
- Challenges were noted by farmers regarding access to 
   financial aid because of strict eligibility criteria. 
→Different approaches between NSW and ACT 
impacting competitiveness. 
- Pricing of water extraction, for example, was raised  
   as an inconsistency for farmers competing with peers 
   over the border. 
→Simultaneous, widespread, and long duration 
droughts impacting ability for farmers to leverage 
support from other regions who were also 
experiencing drought conditions. 
45 Cullen, Brendan & Harrison, Matthew & Mayberry, Dianne & Cobon, David & Davison, Tom & Eckard, Richard. (2021). Climate change impacts and adaptation 
strategies for pasture-based industries: Australian perspective. NZGA: Research and Practice Series. 17. 10.33584/rps.17.2021.3476.

49
49

50   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
50   |   ACT REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN

51
05
51
Adaptation actions 
to build drought 
resilience in the ACT

52   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Overview 
Farming in the ACT will continue to be affected by 
drought into the future. Future projections for drought 
mean the identification, analysis/assessment and 
implementation of adaptation measures is increasingly 
vital to protect the contribution rural landholders make 
towards the ACT’s environment, economy,  
and community. 
Climate adaptation on Australian farms is impeded by 
barriers including financial and resource limitations; 
behavioural barriers that limit implementation capacity 
by individual farmers; and unclear benefits that 
spread widely across society and are not appropriately 
captured.46 To overcome these barriers, public-sector 
intervention and government support are needed to 
support adaptation by farmers. 
Adaptation 
Adaptation refers to adjustments in environmental, social 
or economic systems, and governance in response to 
actual or expected climatic changes and their effects or 
impacts. It refers to changes in processes, practices, and 
structures to moderate potential damages or to benefit 
from opportunities associated with climate change.47 
The vulnerability of agriculture towards climate change 
warrants a strong adaptation response to limit the 
impacts felt. Agricultural communities are adjusting to 
climate change. However, continual focus on adaptation 
is needed. Adaptations at an individual level include 
changes to on-farm practices and processes to respond 
to the physical risks of climate change. Adaptations at a 
government level include changes in decision-making to 
foster the implementation of these actions.
ABARES has reported evidence of strong adaptation 
responses from farms to climate change. In addition, 
improvement in management practices is helping to 
increase farm productivity.48 Despite this adaptation and 
improvement in productivity, climate change events 
are becoming more frequent and severe and the time 
intervals between recovery periods are shortening. 
As a result, farm profits are becoming more sensitive 
to drought impacts. Further adaptation is needed 
to maintain resilience as well as competitiveness in 
international markets. 
ABARES notes the following key themes in adaptation 
which could help offset future climate impacts:
→Improvements in technology. 
→Farm structural change (such as changes to sizes of 
farms and degree of specialisation vs diversification).
→‘Transformational change’ on farms and in the  
farming sector.
Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan in 
2019 which focuses on 3 key areas of action for drought 
resilience which are captured in Table 7.49  These are 
suggested actions and are currently being explored,  
not finalised.
46 Arunanondchai, P., Fei, C., & McCarl, B. (2017). Adaptation in Agriculture. https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/58043 
47 United Nations, n.d. What do adaptation to climate change and climate resilience mean? https://unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-and-resilience/the-big-picture/
what-do-adaptation-to-climate-change-and-climate-resilience-mean
48 Hughes, N., & Gooday, P. (2022). Climate change impacts and adaptation on Australian farms. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/insights/
climate-change-impacts-and-adaptation 
agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/aust-govt-drought-response-plan_0.pdf

53
IMMEDIATE ACTION FOR THOSE IN 
DROUGHT - MEASURES TO SUPPORT 
FARMERS AND COMMUNITIES FACING 
PROLONGED DROUGHT CONDITIONS
SUPPORT FOR WIDER COMMUNITIES 
AFFECTED BY DROUGHT
LONG-TERM RESILIENCE AND 
PREPAREDNESS - ACCEPTING THAT 
THE NEXT DROUGHT IS INEVITABLE 
AND THE IMPORTANCE OF BUILDING 
CAPACITY TO WITHSTAND DROUGHT 
PERIODS IN THE LONG-TERM. 
→Farm Household Allowance, 
an income support payment 
for farmers and their partners 
experiencing financial hardship.
→Access to rural financial counselling 
services.
→Access to concessional loans.
→Better on-farm water management.
→Providing better information.
	→Making up to 100GL of water available 
at $100 per megalitre in the southern 
connected Murray–Darling Basin 
(MDB) to increase the production of 
fodder, silage and pasture.
→Dealing with the stress of drought 
through investment in mental 
health services.
→Battling pests and weeds.
→Keeping drought-affected regional 
communities open for business.
→Financial counselling for small 
businesses.
→Keeping kids in schools.
→Future Drought Fund.
→Water security initiatives.
→Investment into research and 
development to build drought 
resilience.
→Effective and strategic 
management of Australia’s soil, 
vegetation, and water resources.
Summary of adaptation actions
Adaptation actions have been identified through 
stakeholder engagement activities and a desktop literature 
review. Focus actions have been identified through 
consideration of the impacts of drought in the ACT, relevance 
in the context of future drought scenarios, literature review, 
and stakeholder engagement feedback. Prioritisation of 
these focus actions has been informed by the frequency at 
which actions were raised by stakeholders (as an indicator 
of broad applicability across ACT’s community) and 
through mapping to identify the potential application for 
actions to address impacts – prioritising those actions that 
address multiple impacts. This document explores a range 
of potential adaptive actions for consideration by rural 
landholders, the ACT Government, and other stakeholders. 
Adaptation actions have been grouped under the strategic 
priorities of environment, economic, social and governance 
and categorised into themes including land management, 
enterprise section, water management, stock management, 
infrastructure, planning and regulations, knowledge 
sharing and information provision, well-being, monitoring, 
fire management, management timing, weed and pest 
management, land management tools, marketing, and 
pasture/crop management. 
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently 
mentioned environmental adaptation category was land 
management, followed by enterprise selection, water 
management, stock management and then infrastructure. 
These categories and their respective actions are explored 
in the following chapter. Fundamental to all of these is 
drought planning at a farm-level to enable farmers to 
undertake a SWOT analysis and identify gaps, opportunities, 
risks and how they plan to improve all dimensions of farm 
management under future drought conditions and where 
Government and community play a role.

54   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Our farm manages high-risk fire areas 
through grazing management”.
Environmental adaptation actions
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently 
mentioned category of environmental adaptation 
actions was land management, followed by enterprise 
selection, water management, stock management, 
and then infrastructure. Collectively actions related to 
these themes comprise three-quarters of environmental 
categories measures identified by ACT landholders.
CATEGORY: LAND MANAGEMENT
CONTEXT
Landholders can prepare for and minimise the impacts of drought, by developing resilient land management 
practices. Land management covers practices which cultivate certain aspects or arrangements of the agricultural 
system, and which are centred on managing the land, and its capability.
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
Land management strategies identified by landholders to 
foster resilience in drought included: 
→Improve farm business management planning in 
preparation for drought and other extreme events.
→Planting trees for shade, shelter and heat protection 
and biodiversity. A,B,C
→Carrying less stock.
-	 Having clear trigger points to de-stock which are 
decided on before drought. A
-	 Having early trigger points to de-stock. A
→Monitoring pastures and pasture biomass and ground 
cover, creating feed budgets to make informed 
decisions around when to buy feed and sell stock B 
Rotational grazing: grazing stock in smaller paddocks, 
at a higher intensity for shorter periods. A, B, C   Time 
control, herd, cell, crash, and management-intensive 
grazing are different systems of rotational grazing. 
While they all have slightly different philosophies and 
methods, they share the central principles of high 
stocking rates in confined areas, limiting the amount 
of time that animals are grazing an area. Initial costs 
to install adequate fencing and stock water for 
effective rotational grazing systems can be high. ACT 
landholders who have implemented this approach 
noted that having small paddock sizes aided in 
maintaining ground cover and addressing weeds. B
→Undertake regular soil testing to monitor soil fertility 
and pH and consider soil ameliorants  
where advantageous. 
→To maximise groundcover, landholders can use the 
following strategies. B
- Groundcover is maintained at 80% or better in rural  
   landscapes regardless of the season.50  
- Use of diverse exotic and native species which  
   tolerate a range of climate conditions. B
- Pasture topping (cutting off the top of a pasture to  
   encourage growth and nutritional quality).B
- Use of deep-rooted heat tolerant perennial species  
   which can offer better pasture cover during drought  
   by accessing moisture from deeper in the soil than  
   annual species.51
50 EPSDD, Sustainable Agriculture Investment Plan Improving the grazing resource base - Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate - 
Environment (act.gov.au)
51 WaterNSW. (2022). Groundcover. https://www.waternsw.com.au/water-quality/catchment/living/managing-land/groundcover

55
CATEGORY: LAND MANAGEMENT
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
→Managing high-risk fire areas on farms through grazing 
management. B
- Implementing measures to improve and/or maintain  
   soil health such as using conservation tillage/direct  
   drilling to establish crops or pastures  to maintain  
   soil moisture through practices such as  
   conservation tillage.52  
- Establishing permanent stock containment areas for  
   lot feeding during drought. When used strategically,  
   containment areas take the pressure off land and  
   soils during dry periods.53   
- Raising soil pH on acidic soil (for example by  
   applying lime). B
- Adding organic fertiliser additions which preserve  
  fungal networks (e.g. turkey poo). B
- Using biochar. A, 54
- Introducing dung beetles. B 
→Storing silage underground to use as drought feed. B
→Managing pastures for rapid regeneration following 
drought 53 by:
- Not overgrazing native and exotic perennial grass  
   stubs as this will significantly slow regeneration.
- Sowing quick-growing crops or annual pastures to  
   provide soil cover and act as a break crop to reduce  
   the risk where pasture needs re-establishment.
- Reducing erosion risk by establishing quick-growing  
   cover crops or annual pastures where cover is  
   required to stabilise eroding paddocks.
- Keep stock off paddocks until ground cover is at  
   adequate levels for maximum growth. This level  
   will vary with location and pasture type.
- Use rotational grazing techniques for even  
   grazing pressure.
- Ensure there are enough, suitably placed watering  
   points to reduce the distance that animals must walk, 
   and the energy required to get there, and to reduce  
   the risk of bare soil from excessive traffic.
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced carrying capacity of land.
→Increased weed and pest infestations.
→Heat stress on livestock.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
52 Hughes, N., Galeano, D., & Hatfield-Dodds, S. (2021). The effects of drought and climate variability on Australian farms. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/
products/insights/effects-of-drought-and-climate-variability-on-Australian-farms 
53  Young, M. (2022). Managing Soils During and After Drought in Grazing Systems. https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/Soil-CRC-Managing-
soils-during-and-after-drought-grazing-2021.pdf 
54 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Feed budgeting takes out the guesswork | Agriculture Victoria. https://feedinglivestock.vic.gov.au/2022/03/22/feed-budgeting-
takes-out-the-guesswork/#:~:text=Feed%20budgeting%20allows%20for%20better,for%20different%20classes%20of%20stock

56   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“We have too many endangered species. 
We want our farm to protect endangered 
grasslands and woodland.”
Vegetation Management
CATEGORY: VEGETATION MANAGEMENT
CONTEXT
Native vegetation is well adapted to the harsh Australian environment and provides essential ecosystem services 
such as integrated pest management, microclimate cooling, water retention, healthy soils, and landscapes. Striving 
towards ecologically healthy and diverse farming systems provides more resilience to climate change and can 
improve both farm profitability and on-farm biodiversity values.
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
→Increasing the ground cover and abundance of native 
perennial grasses and forbs (herbaceous flowering 
plants that are not a grass, sedge, or rush) using 
rotational grazing can allow natural regeneration 
of shrubs and trees for shelter. Native pasture and 
species regeneration benefits the soil food web and 
nutrient cycling process by enhancing the abundance 
of beneficial fungi and bacteria. These benefits are 
the result of the increased availability of suitable 
habitat structure and niches for native fauna and flora 
species in which they find shelter from competition, 
protection from predators and increased availability 
of food and nutrients.
→Exclusion fencing around areas of natural remnant 
vegetation and riparian areas promotes natural 
regrowth, establishes shade trees, protects stream 
banks and rehydrates soils.
→Enhancing farm dams can lead to improvements in 
water quality and provide habitat for a wide variety 
of native wildlife. Enhanced dams can be fenced to 
manage the impact of stock on the dam and have 
native vegetation in and around the dam. As a result 
of stock exclusion and vegetation, the water is cleaner. 
An enhanced dam may also have other features such 
as a hardened access point for stock, variable depths, 
islands, or snags. Enhanced dams can provide better 
quality drinking water, retain water for longer, support 
native plants and animals, and provide ecosystem 
services to the surrounding landscape.
→Design and implement information and training 
programs to improve on farm vegetation 
management.
→Design and implement programs to assist landholders 
to restore and manage native vegetation on their 
properties.
→Kangaroo densities are above pre-European levels in 
many areas, despite most Australian states (except 
Tasmania and the ACT) having a commercial harvest  
of kangaroos, all states and territories allowing 
licensed shooters to cull kangaroos on their 
properties to reduce total grazing pressure, and some 
jurisdictions allowing conservation culls.79 The ACT 
Government undertakes an annual ‘conservation cull’ 
of kangaroos within the urban reserves comprising 
Canberra Nature Park . However, the management of 
kangaroo grazing pressure in agricultural settings is a 
contentious matter.
→Revegetate with native drought resistant species to 
provide shade and reduce evaporative losses from 
sun/wind.
→Undertake Traditional Custodian cultural burning of 
landscapes to promote native pasture restoration and 
reduce abundance of annual exotic species.
→Installation of alternate livestock water sources or 
restricted access points to take pressure off stream 
vegetation in riparian areas and farm dam margins.
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Vegetation loss.
→Reduced carrying capacity of land.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.

57
“Our farm is considering changing towards 
an enterprise that relies on less rainfall”.
Enterprise selection
CATEGORY: ENTERPRISE SELECTION
CONTEXT
Climate analogues which project what the climate of the ACT might look like under different drought scenarios 
and identify regions of Australia currently experiencing this climate, could point to drought-tolerant species and 
enterprises which could be appropriate for future ACT climates. Diversification of enterprises is known to improve the 
resilience of food systems and farm enterprises.55
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
Enterprise selection should consider physical factors such 
as land, climate, rainfall and soil moisture and surface and 
groundwater availability, farm structures and machinery  
as well as financial and management factors D.  
Examples include:
→Selecting and diversifying toward enterprises which 
rely on less rainfall. A B, C
- Chickens and pastured eggs. A 
- Enterprises with more controlled environments such     
   as hydroponics or microgreens. A
- Farm tourism and accommodation (e.g. Airbnb). A
- Leasing land for other uses (e.g. solar farms). A
- Bush tucker. B
- Flower foraging. B
- Sustainable forestry. B
- Marketing and producing insects.
- Switching from breeding to trading stock (to reduce  
   the need to feed breeding stock through drought).
- Having a sub-brand to buy fruit and sell wine, in  
   addition to growing own fruit.
→Select species and breeds which are more drought 
tolerant. A
- Use deep-rooted perennial drought-tolerant  
   grasses. A,B,D
- Use summer active pasture species.57 
- Use more endemic species that are tolerant of  
   extremes in rainfall (both drought and flooding) A  
   (e.g. kangaroo and wallaby grasses).B
- Selection of more resilient sheep or cattle breeds  
   (e.g. switching from merino sheep to Dorper sheep). A
→Technology-based enterprise management including: 
- Using knowledge gained from genomics and  
   biotechnology tools, such as gene editing, to  
   select crop varieties and livestock that are more  
   climate resilient. 
- Using sensors (i.e. drones, soil monitoring probes)  
   to measure and only provide water and nutrients  
   (i.e. cattle licks) when and where they are needed.
- Investigating traditional food production systems in    
   Australia to adopt new Indigenous crops and grasses  
   that may be better climate-adapted. 
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced carrying capacity of land.
→Reduced water availability.
→Reduced farm income.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
55 Hertel, T., Elouafi, I., Tanticharoen, M. et al., (2021). Diversification for enhanced food systems resilience. Nature Food 2, 832–834 https://doi.org/10.1038/
s43016-021-00403-9 
56 Herrera de Leon, H. J., & Kopainsky, B. (2019). Do you bend or break? System dynamics in resilience planning for food security. System Dynamics Review, 35(4), 
287-309.
Agriculture Victoria (2021) Managing for biodiversity. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/land-and-pasture-management/native-pasture-
management/managing-for-biodiversity 
Sustainable Farms (2022) Ways to improve natural assets on a farm: Enhance farm dams https://www.sustainablefarms.org.au/on-the-farm/farm-dams/
takes-out-the-guesswork/#:~:text=Feed%20budgeting%20allows%20for%20better,for%20different%20classes%20of%20stock 
57 Cullen, B., Harrison, M., Mayberry, D., Cobon, D., Davison, T., & Eckard, R. (2021). Climate change impacts and adaption strategies for pasture-based industries: 
Australian perspective. NZGA: Research and Practice Series, 17, 139-148.

58   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Pest proof fencing, enhancing natural resources 
and improving storage capabilities”.
Water Management
CATEGORY: WATER MANAGEMENT
CONTEXT
Soil and water conservation methods and new systems become even more important as climates fluctuate and 
extreme events become more frequent. D Water management strategies can be achieved by identifying less water 
intensive production options, developing better water delivery technologies, and by implementing water markets 
and water-sharing arrangements (currently under investigation).
Optimal dam design and maintenance can reduce water loss through seepage and evaporation.58 Water tanks can 
also provide additional water storage for stock watering, irrigation, household needs, and fire sprinklers. Landholders 
with access to bore water also reported they had a reliance on bores to supplement water supply in drought A.  
A fit-for-purpose approach to water reuse and water management can result in more efficient water use. 59
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
Agriculture and farming are highly dependent on water 
however are becoming increasingly subject to water  
risks from climate change. D Water management  
examples include:
→Use fit for purpose water sources.
- Flocculating (removing sediment from) dams and  
   on-farm water sources to improve water quality for  
   stock and irrigation. A
- Reuse of wastewater .
→Exploiting on-farm water sources.
- Covering dams to reduce evaporation. A
- Dam enhancement A (e.g. deepening dams). C 
- Restoring the environment around dams to improve  
   water capture. A 
- Increasing investment in water infrastructure systems 
  (installing water tanks or bores). A
- Moving away from dams toward troughs. C
- Acquiring water licenses to use groundwater and  
   alternative water sources C.
→Improving water use efficiency by creating humid 
microclimates around crops (and grasses). 60
→Water conservation strategies for viticulture include 
opening and closing vine canopies to manage 
humidity and create a beneficial microclimate  
for a vine. B
→Identifying less water intensive production options, 
developing better water delivery technologies and 
implementing water markets and water-sharing 
arrangements.
→Investigate groundwater as a potential emergency 
source of water for agriculture including an increase  
in the groundwater monitoring program.
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced water availability.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
58 Agriculture Victoria. (2020). Efficient use of farm water. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/water/farm-water-solutions/efficient-use-
of-farm-water 
59 Radcliffe, J., & Page, D. (2020). Water reuse and recycling in Australia — history, current situation and future perspectives. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666445320300064 
60 Hatfield, J., & Dold, C. (2019). Water-Use Efficiency: Advances and Challenges in a Changing Climate. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpls.2019.00103/full

59
“Our farm practice is not to be overstocked, and only hold 
young breeding stock in drought conditions, and endeavour 
to have minimal supplementary feeding.” C
Stock management
CATEGORY: STOCK MANAGEMENT
CONTEXT
Stock management and land management are inherently interrelated. Good stock management can minimise the 
impacts of drought on the land and confer resilience.
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
During periods of drought, many farmers are forced to 
destock to sustain remaining livestock. Strategies to  
manage stock include: 
	→Carrying less stock.
- Having clear trigger points to de-stock which are  
   decided on before drought. A
- Having early trigger points to de-stock. A
- Monitoring pastures to develop feed budgets which  
   project pasture availability to determine when to  
   destock and buy in feed.61 
- Limit stock to ensure groundcover of at least 70%  
   at all times.
	→Developing drought lot feeding facilities, sacrifice 
paddocks/stock containment areas to concentrate stock 
in small areas and feed them fodder to protect most of the 
farm from damage by stock trampling and overgrazing 
during drought. This can also minimise energy usage by 
stock who would otherwise be moving around looking for 
sparse feed. 
- Construct feed storage facilities such as sheds, silos,   
   and silage pits.
- Growing and/or buying-in stock feed when fodder  
   prices are lower and storing this feed during good  
   seasons in preparation for droughts.
- Selling feeder animals early (e.g. selling wethers first  
   then ewes).
- Reducing breeding animal numbers. A, D
- Selling the (in some cases entire) herd. A,B,D
	→Rotational grazing: grazing stock in smaller paddocks, at a 
higher intensity for shorter periods. A, B, C
	→During the recovery phase, post drought, agisting sheep 
(or different grazing animals) when possible, to manage  
a surge in pasture growth and to reduce bushfire risk. B
	→Reducing heat stress and ensuring stock welfare.62 
	→Ensuring a plentiful water supply.
	→Ensuring shade and shelter – including artificial shade.
	→Avoiding handling and transportation of animals in 
extreme heat.
	→Adding cooling misting sprays or fans for livestock 
(under certain conditions and ensuring the prevention of 
increased humidity which can cause stock mortality). D
	→Use of stock containment areas or sacrificial paddocks 
to defer grazing on pastures until they have recovered. 
This can also minimise energy usage by stock who would 
otherwise be moving around looking for sparse feed. 
	→Breed selection towards more drought tolerant species.
	→Maintain a watching brief on emergent techniques to 
mitigate agricultural contribution to climate change, for 
example adjusting feed (such as certain algae/seaweeds) 
to reduce methane production. 
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced carrying capacity of land.
→Heat stress on livestock.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
61 Agriculture Victoria. (2018). Stock Containment Areas | Case Study - Lachlan Ralton, Woodstock West. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0003/563556/Case-study-stock-containment-areas-a-flexible-management-tool.pdf 
62 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Caring for animals during extreme heat. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/livestock-and-animals/livestock-health-and-
welfare/caring-for-animals-during-extreme-heat

60   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Pest proof fencing, enhancing natural resources 
and improving storage capabilities”.
Infrastructure
CATEGORY: INFRASTRUCTURE
CONTEXT
Infrastructure can improve drought preparedness by increasing farmers capacity to store water and feed. This can 
reduce the need to buy resources during drought when availability is low, and prices are high.
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
Upgrading or adding on-farm infrastructure can include:
→Increasing on farm storage for water, fuel, feed, grain, 
sileage and hay. A, B
- More, and well-maintained dams. A
- Rainwater storage tanks. A 
- Improved reticulation of clean stock water. A
- Feed, grain, silage and hay storage sheds and silos. A
- Underground silage storage to protect from fires. B
→Improving fencing infrastructure to reduce paddock 
sizes to better manage grazing and stock density.C
→Improve and modernise water delivery systems to 
reduce water losses.
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced water availability.
→Heat stress on livestock.
→Bushfire damage.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.

61
Other environmental actions
Improvements to on-farm monitoring of 
weather and longer-term climate trends
Drought monitoring and use of drought early warning 
systems is a key tool in timely risk management and drought 
planning.64 Advances in technology, particularly remote 
sensing, soil moisture monitoring and other tools, enable 
landholders to make more informed decisions, which can in 
turn lead to more targeted management.
Drought adaptation actions relevant to monitoring include:
	→Using information from the series of soil moisture probes 
installed across southeast NSW (including Tidbinbilla  
Soil Moisture Probe in the ACT) to inform decision  
making by helping producers assess current seasonal 
conditions and the likely range in pasture availability  
and livestock performance during the next 3-4 months. 
More information can be found at:  
https://farmingforecaster.com.au/
	→Using soil moisture sensors which allow more efficient 
irrigation where relevant.B
- 	 Assessing pastures using satellite imagery and 	
	 observations to calculate total standing dry matter 	
	 (TSDM) . PastureKey by cibolabs 66 is a satellite  
	 assisted forage budgeting tool which, using time- 
	 series satellite imagery, scouts maps to optimise  
	 field pasture assessments. 
-	 Remote monitoring of voltage levels of electric  
	 fences on-farm. 65 
-	 Tools to assist condition assessments of cattle. For  
	 example, CattleAssess3D provide assessments of  
	 body condition of live cattle in real time to enable  
	 producers and feedlots to make informed decisions  
	 to optimise carcase performance and proﬁtability. 65 
	→Keep records of significant climate factors related to 
temperature (e.g., number of days over 35 degrees Celsius), 
precipitation (e.g., average precipitation) and combined 
climate variables (e.g., total soil moisture content). C
-	 Be aware of and plan for shifts in disease and  
	 pest ranges. D
Planning and regulations
Planning and regulations in agriculture should aim to provide 
opportunities to support farming enterprises to continue to 
operate, diversify or expand in the future. The agricultural 
land planning and regulatory system in the ACT provides 
barriers and enablers for landholders to navigate in order to 
take actions to adapt to drought (refer to Section 11). 
Examples of planning and regulatory adaptations adopted or 
suggested by ACT landholders include:
	→Obtaining approval to install a bore to access 
groundwater when surface water is scarce, where 
possible (this may not be possible in all areas of the ACT, 
due to sustainable limits on groundwater extraction). A
	→Developing a regional drought plan to guide agricultural 
adaptation to drought in the ACT. A
	→Planning and regulatory factors which influence 
landholders’ resilience and capacity to adapt are 
presented in further detail in AECOM’s study  
(Appendix 1. Section 11). 
Knowledge sharing and information provision
Social networks and knowledge exchange is a key factor in the 
spread of successful drought adaptation. Studies on successful 
NSW farmers found they employ a range of strategies in 
adopting innovative management practices. These included 
observing signals from the landscape, independent testing 
and trialling, use of agronomists, and participation in farmer 
groups and in farmer-driven research programmes. 67 
CSIRO notes that a contributor to successful adaptation  
to drought is wide communication and demonstration 
of the benefits of new climate adaptations. 68
There are numerous successful drought adaptation strategies 
and decision-making tools available. However, some 
ACT farmers are seeking understanding around climate 
predictions and adaptations, including:
	→More information on climate tools and farm decision 
support tools (for example grazing, and pasture 
management).
	→Evidence-based fire management, including the 
exploration of Indigenous Australian fire strategies 
such as cool mosaic burning. These strategies have 
had promising outcomes for fire management in other 
areas of Australia, and it is broadly considered that the 
application of these practices is likely to be beneficial. 69 
64 Tranka, M., & et al. (2018). Priority questions in multidisciplinary drought research. https://www.int-res.com/articles/cr_oa/c075p241.pdf 
65 Crowley, M. (2021). Four tools to tap into on‑farm resilience | Meat & Livestock Australia. https://www.mla.com.au/news-and-events/industry-news/four-tools-to-
tap-into-onfarm-resilience/ 
 66 Cibolabs, 2022, PastureKey, https://www.cibolabs.com.au/pasturekey
 67 McKenzie, F. (2013). Farmer-driven Innovation in New South Wales, Australia. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00049182.2013.765349 
68 Stokes, C., & Howden, M. (2011). Adapting agriculture to climate change. https://www.publish.csiro.au/ebook/chapter/CSIRO_CC_Chapter%207
69 Fletcher, M. (2021). Catastrophic Bushfires, Indigenous Fire Knowledge and Reframing Science in Southeast Australia. https://www.mdpi.com/2571-6255/4/3/61

62   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Fire management
Rural landholders in the ACT, like urban residents, have a 
duty to take reasonable care to prevent the spread of a fire 
from their property. Most rural landholders have a high 
level of awareness of the risks of ignition associated with 
machinery, equipment, and infrastructure, particularly 
during elevated fire danger conditions. Managing fire fuel 
load is a key component of bushfire management. 70
Rural landholders are required to have a Bushfire 
Operational Plan (BOP) through the Farm Firewise 
program. The ACT Emergency Services Agency (ESA) 
supports rural landholders to prepare their Farm Firewise 
plans, which must be reviewed every five years and 
approved by the ESA Commissioner. The requirement to 
identify reasonable measures for managing bushfire risk 
and any fire management requirement is also established 
under Land Management Agreements (LMAs).
Drought adaptation actions relevant to fire  
management include:
→The use of targeted grazing to reduce biomass. 70
→Installing additional water storage tanks and sprinkler 
systems to protect key farm assets. A
→Minimising fire risk at a landscape scale. 
→Use of informal fire truck network among rural 
landholders. Some landholders have fire trucks and 
help each other out when needed. 
Management timing
Adaptations to manage the direct impacts of climate 
changes on management timing include:
→Changing breeding cycles to adapt to changing 
climate conditions (e.g., elect not to breed, avoid 
having lambs in frosts, match calving/lambing to fit 
with changed seasonal pattern of pasture growth). B, 57
These management decisions can be made in response 
to forecasts and climate indicators to ameliorate the 
impacts of drought. 
Additionally, actions are required to manage the indirect 
impacts of climate change on management timing. Weed, 
pest animal, and disease management must adapt to 
shifting ranges and times of year.
Weed and pest management
Climate change will impact the timing and distribution 
of pests, weeds, and diseases. The effectiveness of 
natural enemies in controlling pests will decrease with 
pest distributions shifting into regions outside the 
distribution of their natural predators. However, new 
communities may provide some level of control. 70 The 
effectiveness of natural enemies is altered through 
management strategies adopted by farmers to cope with 
climate change. Management strategies to discourage or 
encourage natural enemies (e.g. small bird species)  
of new pest species can impact pest reduction. 
Because of the diverse and often indirect effects of 
climate change on natural enemies, predictions will be 
difficult. Drought adaptation actions relevant to weed 
and pest management include:
→Leasing land and agisting animals for weed control to 
buffer weedy areas. B
→Continuing to manage weeds and being aware of, and 
planning for shifts in disease and pest ranges. D
Common ways that weeds can be introduced are by 
supplementary feed, through livestock movements  
(i.e. when returning from agistment or restocking), 
through contaminated seed during sowing, or 
contaminated machinery, and though transmission by 
native and pest animals. Actions that can be taken to 
mitigate these include:71
→Restricting areas where grain and fodder are to be 
fed, and carefully monitoring these areas, particularly 
after rains, for up to two years after a drought. 
→Restricting/excluding livestock movement within 
catchment areas of farm dams, as manure and weed 
seeds can contaminate water storage systems.
→Monitoring riparian areas and water points, as these 
are often accessed by native and feral animals which 
can vector seeds and pests.
→Control weeds quickly after germination, and well 
before they set seed.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
70 ACT Government. (2019). Strategic bushfire Plan 2019 – 2024. https://esa.act.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-09/ESA%20Strategic%20Bushfire%20
Management%20Plan2019-2024_ACCESSIBLE.pdf 
71 Tounce, B., & et al. Weeds and drought. https://www.lls.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/803294/A3-weeds-and-drought-factsheetfinal.pdf

63
In addition to reducing stocking rates, actions to manage 
the increased risk of infectious diseases to drought-
affected stock can include:
→Ensuring ready access to sufficient supplies of  
suitable water. 
→Checking stock regularly to minimise stock injuries  
and death.72
→Carefully considering using commercial lick blocks – 
these can be a costly form of supplementation and can 
be toxic to hungry stock if they contain grain or urea. 72
→Segregating animals based on size and strength to 
minimise competition for supplements73 
→Minimise handling, and the distances stock need 
to walk for food and water to limit the loss of body 
condition.72
→Getting advice and be careful when feeding novel 
feedstuffs. Chemical residues may be present which 
may cause poisoning or contaminate meat.72
→Making dietary changes slowly. Feedstuffs such as fruit, 
bread, urea mixes, fat, milk products and grain can 
cause illness in stock if fed too much too quickly. 72
→Never releasing hungry stock onto green pasture  
or crops. 72
→Creating stock containment areas (also known as 
drought lot feeding facilities or sacrifice paddocks) for 
feeding, watering, and monitoring stock. Containment 
areas protect paddocks from erosion, minimise walking 
for stock and can save labour.72
Land management tools
Online media and web-based tools can be used to drive 
informed decision-making and the adoption of new 
practices. Studies into knowledge-sharing around soil 
management noted that a multidimensional approach to 
education and outreach is needed that balances familiar 
models with new online tools and forums, to create an 
active learning environment that facilitates change. 
They noted that information provision, especially via 
online portals, will not necessarily result in knowledge 
acquisition, nor provide a dynamic learning environment 
that builds trust in the information and increases social 
capital to effect change.
There are many land-management tools to provide 
data and assist rural landholders in decision-making. 
Tools which were used and recommended by ACT  
rural landholders included: A
→Farming forecaster
→Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) feed demand 
calculator
→Weatherzone and BOM apps
→RCS, MAIA and other regenerative farming pasture 
assessment and management tools
Social media and web-based tools can start 
conversations, in many cases. However, these should be 
followed by the face-to-face conversations, training, field 
tours, and hands-on demonstrations.74 
Marketing and consumer-producer 
engagement
In Australia, there is increased focus on food experiences 
and festivals, with State and Territory Governments 
developing strategies based on food tourism and 
artisan agriculture. Sustainable tourism experiences or 
events are increasingly playing an important role in the 
business models of artisan producers, allowing them to 
sell directly to consumers and often add value through 
tourism experiences.75 
From an economic welfare perspective, mechanisms 
that directly link consumers and producers are likely 
to improve consumer knowledge and satisfaction 
with foods and encourage higher-quality production 
techniques.75 However, this can also play a role in 
fostering drought-resilient food systems.
Drought adaptation actions relevant to marketing include 
promoting sustainable local food to local consumers. 
Farmers noted that they are subject to consumer demand 
for certain breeds or enterprises which often do not 
match the breeds and enterprises that are most suited to 
the landscapeA. As a result, there is a perceived pressure 
on farmers to conduct agricultural enterprises to fit 
consumer demand rather than selecting enterprises and 
breeds which are resilient on the ACT landscape, in the 
face of a changing climate. Educating consumers and 
promoting local, drought resilient food can assist farmers 
in economically benefiting from drought resilience.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
72 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Animal health in a drought. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/livestock-and-animals/livestock-health-and-welfare/animal-health-
in-a-drought 
73 Business Queensland. (2022). Protecting your livestock in drought | Business Queensland. https://www.business.qld.gov.au/industries/farms-fishing-
forestry/agriculture/disaster/drought/during/animal-welfare/protect
74 Lobry de Bruyn, L., Jenkins, A., & Samson-Liebig, S. (2017). Lessons learnt: Sharing soil knowledge to improve land management and sustainable soil use. 
Soil Science Society of America Journal, 81(3), 427-438.
75 Star, M., Rolfe, J., & Brown, J. (2020). From farm to fork: Is food tourism a sustainable form of economic development?. Economic Analysis and Policy, 66, 
325-334.

64   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Our farm is considering changing towards 
an enterprise that relies on less rainfall”.
Economic adaptation actions
Focus actions
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned category of economic adaptation actions was enterprise 
selection, followed by planning and regulations, and infrastructure. Collectively, actions related to these categories 
comprise over three-quarters of economic adaptation measures identified by ACT landholders.
Enterprise selection
CATEGORY: ENTERPRISE SELECTION
CONTEXT
Farming enterprises remain exposed to significant climate and price risk. 
Drawing on extensive meteorological data collected and analysed by government agencies, and based on on-farm experiences 
and observation, farmers adjust their longer-term choices of farming enterprise, modifying choice of species/breed based on 
the local climate, stocking rates, fodder storage, tillage methods, and so forth for the purpose of income smoothing.52 Australian 
farmers have altered their mix of enterprises, adopted lower-cost methods (i.e. practices with reduced inputs, such as organic 
agricultural systems), and where possible, purchased or leased additional land to increase farm size in response to drought.52
Two key economic ways farmers manage climate and price risk are by keeping debt low and maintaining sources of off-farm 
income. For many farms, these strategies are vital both to ensure the long-term survival of the farm business and to minimise 
variation in household income. 44 Diversification of enterprises is known to improve the resilience of food systems and farm 
enterprises.52 Economic diversification options can include both agricultural and non-agricultural enterprises. Farmers also use 
income smoothing strategies such as the farm management deposit scheme offered by the Australian Taxation Office.
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
→Enterprise selection should consider physical factors 
such as land, climate, irrigation water, farm structures 
and machinery as well as financial and management 
factors.D Examples include:
→Diversifying farm income to buffer against climate and 
market fluctuation.
→Selecting and diversifying toward enterprises which 
rely on less rainfall. A B, C These can include agricultural 
(i.e. varieties of food production and methods of 
production) and non-agricultural (i.e. farm tourism) 
based production.
→Agricultural-based diversification options:
Greenhouse/glasshouse production (utilising 
wastewater and circular bioeconomy – such as in 
composting food waste to use the nutrients to grow 
more food crops).
- Emerging crops, produce and practices (e.g. saffron,  
   aquaculture, tree crops, mushrooms).
- Value adding products (e.g. supplying locally sourced  
   meat to consumers).
→Other diversification options:
- Farm tourism and accommodation (e.g. Airbnb). A
- Leasing land for other uses (e.g. solar farms,  
   agistment). A
- Having a sub-brand to buy in fruit and sell wine,  
   in addition to growing own fruit. B
- Selling credits and offsets for ecosystem services 
   (through market based and/or government-based  
   mechanisms). 
→Enterprise management strategies which use weather 
and commodity price forecasts which predict when 
drought conditions or poor output prices are likely. 
Management can then be adapted to minimise losses, 
for example to reduce crop area planted and inputs 
applied (such as fertiliser).D
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced carrying capacity of land.
→Reduced water availability.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
52 Hughes, N., Galeano, D., & Hatfield-Dodds, S. (2021). The effects of drought and climate variability on Australian farms. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/
products/insights/effects-of-drought-and-climate-variability-on-Australian-farms 
44 Hughes, N, Burns, K, Soh, WY & Lawson, K 2020, Measuring drought risk: the exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to drought, ABARES rport to client, 

65
“We use grants available to use to 
upgrade existing infrastructure”.
Infrastructure
CATEGORY: INFRASTRUCTURE
CONTEXT
Infrastructure can improve drought preparedness by increasing farmers’ capacity to store water and feed. This can 
reduce the need to buy resources during drought when availability is low, and prices are high. 
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
Management of on-farm infrastructure can include:
→Use of contractors instead of buying machinery 
to minimise machinery costs and get high-quality 
machinery that is well-suited to tasks B This can reduce 
debt and ameliorate the economic stress of drought. 
However, such strategies should be assessed on an 
individual farm level.
→Using financial assistance (loans and grants) to 
upgrade existing infrastructure. A
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced water availability.
→Heat stress on livestock.
→Bushfire damage.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
Other economic actions
Sale of stock
Drought adaptation actions relevant to the sale of stock include selling stock direct and avoiding feedlots and 
saleyards. When destocking going into a drought, weaners can be sold to feedlots. Adaptation actions around 
destocking to manage drought are explored further in the category Stock Management on page 61.

66   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“ACT farmers need a regular get-together to 
share info and experiences.”
Social adaptation actions
Focus actions
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned category of social adaptation actions was well-being, 
and knowledge sharing and information provision. Collectively actions related to these categories comprise over three-
quarters of adaptation categories within the social domain identified by ACT landholders. 
Wellbeing
CATEGORY: WELLBEING
CONTEXT
Natural disasters, including drought, have long-term effects on the mental health of affected individuals and 
communities. 76
Community-led solutions that promote stress reduction, physical protection, and community cohesion can bolster 
resilience in crisis. 77 
Educational programs including mental health-related events (for example mental health first aid training targeted 
at Aboriginal communities, teachers, general practice staff, youth workers, rural service providers, BBQ breakfasts 
at mental health service provider locations, activities, and mental health information days for young people to talk 
about mental health issues in a youth-focused format) and telephone crisis support have been implemented in NSW. 
This was considered effective in helping communities build capacity and resilience in the face of chronic drought-
related hardship.78 
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
There is evidence that the well-being of many farmers 
and farming families across Australia has decreased 
because of drought, fire and most recently floods as well 
as broader concerns about climate change. However, 
there are lots of different strategies that can support 
improved well-being in farming communities, including:
→Creation of opportunities (formal and informal) 
to bring the farming community together to share 
experiences and knowledge. A
→Building and supporting more formalised networks 
such as the ACT Rural Landholders Association and 
the ACT Grazing Group.
→Providing support and training in succession planning 
and other key farm decision-making processes.
→Sharing information about a range of new 
opportunities including carbon farming and 
alternative markets for biodiversity conservation. A
→Provision and promotion of mental health support 
services such as telephone counselling, financial 
counselling information and other services.
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced wellbeing.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
76 Black Dog Institute. (2020). Mental Health Interventions Following Disasters. Randwick, NSW, Australia: Black Dog Institute.
77 Humphreys, A., Walker, E., Bratman, G., & Errett, N. (2022). What can we do when the smoke rolls in? An exploratory qualitative analysis of the impacts of rural 
wildfire smoke on mental health and wellbeing, and opportunities for adaptation. https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12889-021-
12411-2
78 Hart, C. R., Berry, H. L., & Tonna, A. M. (2011). Improving the mental health of rural New South Wales communities facing drought and other adversities.  
The Australian journal of rural health, 19(5), 231–238. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1584.2011.01225.x

67
“Information, if inaccurate or insufficient, means farming 
is high risk and can end badly for people and places.”
Knowledge sharing and information provision
CATEGORY: KNOWLEDGE SHARING AND INFORMATION PROVISION
CONTEXT
Effective individual farms’ responses to climate change require farmers to have information about the different 
dimensions of climate change that affect them at the individual farm level, the broader industry level and nationally 
and internationally.
State/Territory governments, industry bodies, businesses, science organisations, community-based organisations, 
the mass media, and social media can all play an important role in connecting key sectors of the community and 
sharing knowledge.79 It was noted by ACT landholders that this function is performed to some extent by ACT NRM. A
Farmers find community groups such as the RLA great ways to actively learn and share. There is a sense that more 
informal groups/ mentoring programs could exist. Although some landholders identified that this role was fulfilled for 
them by specific community groups relevant to their enterprise. A
Complementary support by the government to provide information and facilitate knowledge sharing can include the 
provision of climate change and weather forecast information, help to evaluate the pros and cons of choices, and 
provision of a social safety net for those unable to adapt.80 
ADAPTATION ACTIONS
Knowledge sharing and information provision is a key 
social component to adaptive, sustainable agricultural 
systems. Knowledge sharing and information provision 
actions include:
→Ongoing farmer training and capacity building (field 
days, workshops, farm walks, newsletters, web-based 
information and more). 
→Support for different types of farming and farm 
diversification.
→Facilitating communication between farmers to share 
knowledge and experiences and support improved 
mental health and well-being.
→Developing community leadership and supporting 
groups to build supportive social networks and 
resilience (such as the ACT Grazing Group, which 
provides a forum to share problems solutions and 
experience).
→Farm preparedness can be improved by providing 
weather and climate projections which inform on-
farm management and provide climate information 
at scales relevant to the decisions being made and 
combining information on both climate variability 
and trends in seasonal and medium-term (decadal) 
forecasts.81 
→Increased investment in research, management 
and recovery of areas of agriculture and nature 
conservation post drought, fire and other natural 
disasters.
IMPACTS ADDRESSED
→Reduced wellbeing.
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A 
identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review.
79 Harman, B.P, Cunningham, R., Jacobs B., Measham, T. and Cvitanovic, C. (2015), Engaging local communities in climate adaptation: a social network 
perspective from Bega Valley, New South Wales, Australia, CSIRO, Australia.
80 Freebairn, J. (2021). Adaptation to Climate Change by Australian Farmers. https://www.mdpi.com/2225-1154/9/9/141 
81 CSIRO, (2011) Adapting agriculture to climate change https://www.publish.csiro.au/ebook/chapter/CSIRO_CC_Chapter%207

68   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Governance adaptation actions
Common themes that came out of the rural landholders’ 
workshop, the one-on-one meetings and the survey 
include the ‘place’ of rural land within the ACT as a 
region; the need to recognise the important role rural 
land plays in providing food and fibre, supporting 
biodiversity and providing a buffer zone for managing 
bushfire risk; and the need for a clear agriculture policy 
that articulates these themes and acknowledges the 
importance of rural land. 
It was noted that the ACT Government has a key role 
regarding planning and land use, and that identifying, 
valuing, and protecting rural land within the ACT has 
implications for the capacity of rural landholders to 
prepare for drought and invest in drought preparedness. 
Considerations raised by rural landholders included:
→Having an appreciation for:
- Support provided by the government to farming  
   groups in the ACT such as the Rural Lands Association 
→Opportunities to review conditions on rural leases and 
the types of rural land uses permitted in association 
with these leases. 
→Maintaining strong relationships with key agricultural 
extension and research organisations and consultants 
in the region.
→Having a desire for:
- Greater acknowledgement of the social, economic,  
   and environmental benefits provided to the ACT 
associated with current rural land use. 
→Stronger alignment with NSW drought measures (incl. 
drought declarations, financial assistance) to aid 
planning.
→Investigation of opportunities to increase investment 
in resilience measures like NSW Government’s 
Farm Innovation Fund, the Regional Investment 
Corporation’s low interest loans.
→Opening permits and approvals for certain types of 
rural land uses and providing support for farmers 
seeking to transition enterprises.
→Reviewing water and irrigation permits for rural 
land with consideration which end uses provide the 
greatest benefits and outcomes. 
→Providing support for the establishment of a new 
farming systems group for graziers in the ACT and 
border regions, and to continue sharing information.

69
69

70   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
70   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

71
71
Case studies
Throughout stakeholder engagement activities farmers shared 
innovative farming techniques, financial barriers to adaptation, 
and the multitude of responses that they are undertaking to 
build resilience to drought. The following section presents three 
case studies including:
→
Data to support rotational regenerative agriculture. 
→
Drought preparedness for graziers 
→
Adaptation in viticulture
→
Government support.

72   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Callum Brae 
Data to support rotational regenerative agriculture
Callum Brae is a 150ha sheep farm (running a self-replacing 
fine wool Merino flock typically 350-400 head) in Symonston 
which has seen continuous management by the same 
farming family for multiple generations. The entire property 
comprises a mix of native grassland and native lowland 
woodland of high environmental value and containing a 
range of endangered native flora and fauna. Over this time, 
droughts have been a recurring challenge and, at times, have 
had a significant impact on pasture and livestock production, 
leading to reduced income and increased costs for the family. 
Over the last 40 years, the family have experienced first-hand 
the challenges that drought can bring. 
Sustainability is a key ambition driving their farm 
management techniques, with a strong desire to enhance 
the endangered grasslands and woodlands and the many 
endangered species that are present. Rotational regenerative 
processes are the centrepiece to achieving these ambitions 
and have been in place for several decades and over that 
period paddock sizes have reduced, and the number of 
paddocks doubled. There has also been considerable 
investment in water storage infrastructure to mitigate the 
risk of lower availability of livestock water during extended 
dry seasons. 
Rotational regenerative agriculture is a holistic approach 
that considers the interconnections between soil, plants, 
animals, and the environment, and seeks to create a 
sustainable and regenerative farming system. The focus at 
Callum Brae is on enhancing the health of the soil, improving 
biodiversity and habitat for endangered species through 
regular rotation of livestock through the paddock structure. 
This approach encourages native grass health and growth, 
maximising ground cover, increasing soil organic matter and 
soil water retention. 
One of the main benefits of rotational regenerative 
agriculture is that it helps to improve the fertility and 
structure of the soil over time. By rotating the grazing, 
Callum Brae has been able to add nutrients back into the 
soil and reduce compaction, which can improve water 
retention and increase the soil’s ability to support healthy 
pasture growth during periods of low rainfall. In addition to 
improving soil health, rotational regenerative agriculture has 
also led to other benefits for Callum Brae, including:
	→Increasing the efficiency and sustainability of  
farming operations
	→Synthetic fertilisers are not used at any time.
	→Enhancing the health, productivity, and quality  
of animals raised on the farm.
	→Providing habitat and food for beneficial insects and 
other wildlife.
Developing a detailed understanding of the carrying capacity 
of the land and pastures has been key in implementing and 
maintaining this approach. 
Rotational regenerative agriculture can be supported by 
collecting data and using software in several ways. Here are  
a few examples:
	→Tracking and analysing pasture performance: By 
collecting data on the performance and attributes of 
different native grasses, the farm has been successful in 
identifying which ones are most successful for their soil 
and climatic condition. This has helped to optimise native 
pasture yields and improve the efficiency of the farm.
	→Monitoring soil health: By collecting data on soil health 
indicators such as pH, nutrient levels, and moisture 
content, farmers can get a better understanding of 
the health of their soil and identify any areas that may 
need improvement. This can help to optimise the use of 
natural amendments and reduce the need for synthetic 
inputs.
	→Analysing weather patterns and forecasting: By collecting 
data on weather patterns and using software to forecast 
future conditions, farmers can make more informed 
decisions about optimising pasture and how to allocate 
resources. 
	→Managing and optimising irrigation systems: By collecting 
data on soil moisture levels and weather patterns, 
farmers can use software to optimise water supply and 
reduce water waste. This can help to conserve water 
resources and improve the efficiency of the farm.

73
There is a growing availability of climate-related data Callum Brae has been reviewing and using, adopting software 
to inform their decision-making to support these efforts. Below is a collection of tools cited as useful in their strategic 
planning and monitoring of conditions for better drought preparation and management outcomes. 
PURPOSE
TOOL
Drought 
resilience 
planning
Monitoring 
climate 
conditions
→Davis weather station providing detailed farm weather data.
→The Commonwealth Government’s CliMate tool which collates historical climate analyses relating 
to water variables.
climate projections and historical data.
Bushfire 
monitoring
→Bushfire.io and Hazards/Fires Near Me to set alerts for fires within designated perimeters, data on 
weather and fire activity.
Soil 
moisture 
monitoring
→SoilWater app models plant available water using the app and farmers’ own rainfall data.
→Farming Forecaster also models plant available water analysed from multiple grassland sites in 
nearby regions from soil probes.
→APSoil/Soil Mapp provides analysis of soil water content and other items for designated soil type, 
provides base data.
→BOM Australian Water Outlook provides local historical, seasonal forecast and projections for 
rainfall, soil moisture, evapotranspiration, and runoff.
→IrriSat provides an ability to monitor local soil moisture levels. 
Pasture 
monitoring
→Farm Carbon Calculator; FarmGas; Cool Farm Tool – detailed emission data (Scope 1, 2 and 3), 
validation for enteric fermentation output, carbon sequestration.
→Sequestration tools including FullCam; LOOC-C (calculate sequestration potential).
→Farming Forecaster to calculate projected green herbage, daily growth rates, ground cover, 
condition scores.
→OneSoil; Data Farming; Biomass MDA for pasture monitoring, reviewing Normalized Difference 
Vegetation Index. 
→CSIRO’s SoilMapp and NSW Department of Primary Industry’s eSpade for soil profile data
→DataFarming to identify vegetation index across properties.
→CSIRO’s AusFarm, GrazFeed, and GrassGro. 
→NSW Department of Primary Industry’s Drought and Supplementary Feed Calculator to help 
develop rations in dry periods as well periods leading into and out of drought.
→Meat and Livestock Australia’s Feed Demand Calculator to understand feed requirements and 
biomass growth over a 12-month period.
→AWI Feed on Offer library for nutritional data on specific native species.
→Cibo Labs, Australian Feedbase Monitor provides satellite based online feed management data.
On farm data 
collection 
and 
database 
recording
→Soil compaction measurements using a cone penetrometer (Agreto), recording pressure at 10cm 
intervals and relationship to bulk data.
→Time domain reflectometer to measure volumetric water content, surface temperature and 
salinity index of soil. Probes to measure soil temperature and pH at various depths.
→Soil health testing – assisted using Rapid Assessment of Soil Health (RASH) tool to develop a 
database aiding analysis. 
→Documenting all native and exotic species on-farm to monitor for changes to biodiversity, species 
dominance, etc over time.
→GloSIS, ANSIS, SoilGrids and Harmonised World Soil Database to identify extensive details of soil 
type, content, carbon, density, and a range of soil parameters.
Table 8: Better drought preparation and management outcomes

74   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Tidbinbilla Station 
Drought preparedness for graziers 
Introduction
Drought and climate change are significant challenges facing 
many farmers in Australia, particularly in arid and semi-arid 
regions. These challenges can have a significant impact 
on livestock production, leading to reduced income and 
increased costs for farmers. This case study explores how one 
sheep and beef farmer in the ACT is adapting his farm to the 
impacts of drought and climate change.
Background
Michael Shanahan has held his property, Tidbinbilla Station, 
for 33 years and has seen firsthand the impacts that drought 
and climate change can have on his operations. In the past, 
he has struggled to keep his livestock healthy and well-fed 
during dry periods, leading to reduced income and increased 
costs for supplementary feeding. Typically during good 
climatic conditions, the farm will have up to 25,000 sheep 
and 1,000 cattle, whereas during drought periods this has 
dropped to 7,000 sheep and 150 cattle. 
For his farm, the drought of 2017 to 2020 was the longest 
that’s been experienced, and the most difficult to manage in 
terms of water availability despite applying learnings from 
previous drought events (notably 2006). There is a history of 
improvement still, with the millennium drought seeing better 
outcomes following further lessons learned during the 1982 
drought event. 
Current solutions
To address these challenges, Michael has continued to 
implement strategies on his farm to adapt to the impacts 
of drought and climate change. Strategies that Michael has 
implemented include:
→The use of native grasses (which typically perform the 
best in average conditions), using fertilisers to manage 
the composition across species, manipulating native 
grasses to achieve desired outcomes at the time. 
However, there has been a need to introduce different, 
non-native drought tolerant species during droughts 
which are more resilient to dry conditions.
→Implementation of rotational grazing practices, which 
involve moving cattle to different paddocks regularly 
to allow the grasses to regenerate and improve the 
health of the soil. 
→Reviewing 3-month outlooks from BOM – particularly 
ENSO indicators. This enables medium-term planning 
of stock numbers, whereby stock are sold down ahead 
of drought conditions which reduces future feed costs 
and provides capital to aid operations. 
→Adoption of government support through freight 
subsidies when importing feed, water rebates to 
improve on-farm water infrastructure, and grants to 
help build drought lots. 
→In addition to improving his pasture management 
practices, Michael has also implemented an irrigation 
system that uses weather data and soil moisture 
sensors to optimise water use and minimise waste. 
The system has helped him to better manage his 
water resources and ensure that his cattle have access 
to enough water to stay healthy and hydrated during 
dry periods.
→The scale of Michael’s farming activities still means 
that during drought all feed is purchased for sheep. 
Cattle, however, are generally able to be spread across 
paddocks and remain pasture-fed. 
Future actions
In the coming years, Michael intends to further invest in 
improving the farm’s drought resilience. High priority  
actions include:
→Improving water infrastructure: investigating the 
installation of a water bore, and if unavailable will 
build a new dam, to improve water security.
→Planting shelter belts of trees and increasing paddock 
trees to increase shading for stock and reduce 
erosion/impacts of wind. 
→Improving feed storage: looking at underground 
storage of silage and building grain storage facilities.

75
→Improving capital stores: saving more cash in the 
bank would aid farm operations during drought and 
improve opportunities to invest in rebuilding stock 
levels following drought. 
	→Investigating management tools: for example, Michael is 
seeking cost/benefit analysis tools to understand what 
the cost of 100% destocking and restocking is, compared 
to reducing stock numbers and purchasing feed.
Conclusion
Drought and climate change are significant challenges facing 
many farmers, but with the right strategies and technologies, 
it is possible to adapt and mitigate their impacts. Key 
outcomes include:
→The broader implications of Michael’s strategies: The 
strategies that Michael has implemented on his farm 
not only benefit his operation but also have broader 
implications for the environment and the community. 
For example, the use of drought-tolerant grasses 
and rotational grazing practices can help to improve 
the health of the soil and reduce erosion, which can 
benefit the local ecosystem and water quality. 
→The importance of adapting to drought and climate 
change: The challenges of drought and climate change 
are likely to become more severe in the future, making 
it increasingly important for farmers to adapt and find 
ways to mitigate their impacts. Michael’s farm serves 
as a model for other farmers looking to adapt to 
these challenges and find ways to build resilience and 
sustainability into their operations.
	→The role of technology and innovation: Technology and 
innovation can play a critical role in helping farmers to 
adapt to drought and climate change. The improvements 
in data interrogation and the adoption of further financial 
modelling software help farmers to be more efficient and 
sustainable in their practices.

76   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Mount Majura Vineyard 
Adaptation in viticulture
The Canberra District is home to a small but vibrant 
viticulture community, with several wineries and 
vineyards located in the region. They are typically small 
to medium-sized operations, with many family-owned 
and operated. The region has a long history of viticulture, 
with the first grapevines planted in the region in the late 
19th century. Today, the region is known for producing 
high-quality wines, particularly varieties such as Riesling 
and Shiraz.
The Canberra District’s viticulture industry is supported 
by several organisations, including the Canberra 
District Wine Industry Association and the Viticultural 
Society of the Canberra District, which represent the 
interests of winemakers and grape growers in the 
region. The associations work to promote the region’s 
wines and support the development of the industry. 
The industry is supported by several research and 
education organisations, including the National Wine 
and Grape Industry Centre (Wagga Wagga), the Australian 
National University’s Research School of Biology and the 
University of Canberra’s School of Science, Health, and 
Engineering. These institutions research topics such as 
grape and wine production, viticulture practices, and the 
impacts of climate change on the industry.
In addition to its wineries and vineyards, the region is also 
home to some winery restaurants and tasting rooms, which 
provide visitors with an opportunity to sample the region’s 
wines and learn about the local viticulture industry.
Mount Majura Vineyard
Mount Majura Vineyard is at the top of the Majura Valley, 
just outside the city of Canberra. All wines are sourced 
from the single vineyard site, which also features a 
restaurant, cellar door, and vineyard tours. Water is noted 
as the single most significant resource for the vineyard, 
and concerns about the impacts of climate change are 
driving many changes on the property. The vineyard’s 
water supply consists of a water bore licence which is 
utilised to its full capacity, an on-farm dam two to three 
megalitres in size (not being used as there is no surface 
water licence), and rainwater tanks for the winery (there 
is no town water supply).
Impacts of climate change
The vineyard and winery are already experiencing several 
impacts associated with climate change:
→Vintage advancement describes the shift in the timing 
of grape harvests because of climate change. In many 
regions, grape harvests are occurring earlier than 
they did in the past due to warmer temperatures and 
changing weather patterns. For example, Mount Majura 
Vineyard has observed that on average, chardonnay 
grapes advance 1.5 days each year. That is, in the 30 
years since the inception of the vineyard, Chardonnay 
now ripens 45 days earlier than it once did. 
→Similarly, vintage compression is the term used 
to describe the shortening of the grape-growing 
season due to warmer temperatures. Later-ripening 
varieties are ripening earlier due to warmer autumn 
temperatures, whereas earlier-ripening varieties 
were already ripening at their maximum rate in late 
summer. The impact of this compression at Mount 
Majura Vineyard has been limited by the fact that 
the climate is warming from a cooler base, but 
adaptations are being made to limit the potential for 
compression (see below)
→Season-season variability has increased and is 
unpredictable, with large swings from cool wet 
seasons to hot dry ones, e.g., 2012-2013 and the  
other way in 2020-2021.
This has had several implications for the organisation, 
including:
-	 Changes in grape quality: Shorter growing seasons  
	 can lead to grapes that are less ripe and have a  
	 different balance of flavours compared to grapes  
	 grown in a longer season. This can affect the quality  
	 and flavour of the final wine.
-	 More challenges in grapevine management, such as  
	 needing to have more open canopies in cool seasons 
	 to combat disease, but more shaded canopies in hot  
	 seasons to prevent sunburn.

77
-	 Changes in the timing of winemaking: The  
	 shorter growing season can also affect the timing of  
	 winemaking and has required Mount Majura  
	 Vineyard to adjust their schedules to accommodate  
	 the earlier or later arrival of grapes. This can be  
	 particularly challenging for the winery which does  
	 not have the capacity to process the grapes within  
	 shorter or overlapping timeframes. This has flow  
	 on impacts to the availability of staff who work  
	 across multiple vineyards in the region – “we have  
	 contract pickers and it’s already tough to get staff.”
-	 Changes in the economic viability of certain grape  
	 varieties: Some grape varieties may become less  
	 economically viable because of vintage  
	 advancement/compression, as they may not be  
	 well-suited to the changing growing season. This  
	 can lead to a shift in the types of grapes that are  
	 planted in a region and adds additional challenges  
	 around the marketing of new grape varieties – “there 
	 is conservatism in the market. A new grape variety is  
	 hard to sell if people do not recognise it.”
→Scale insects are a type of pest that can be a problem 
for vineyards, as they feed on the sap of grapevines 
and can damage the plants. Mount Majura is 
concerned that climate change is likely to exacerbate 
the problem of scale insects in vineyards, with studies 
showing they become survive better under warmer 
winter conditions. Climate change can also lead to 
changes in the prevalence of other pests and diseases, 
which can affect the overall health of grapevines and 
make them more susceptible to scale insects. For 
example, if Mount Majura Vineyard is dealing with a 
disease outbreak, the vines may be weaker and more 
prone to damage from scale insects. 
→Bushfire smoke has been a genuine problem, as 
it can affect the quality and flavour of grapes and 
wine. In 2020 Mount Majura Vineyard lost the entire 
crop because of bushfire smoke damage. While 
this instance was manageable as a once-off event, 
consecutive events would be catastrophic for the 
business. Controlled burns can potentially cause the 
same damage, and the seasonal window for controlled 
burns may be shortening, making it more challenging 
for the authorities to conduct burns outside the time 
that grapes are ripening.
Adaptation activities
Mount Majura Vineyard is taking a variety of actions to 
adapt to climate change. Some of these actions include:
→Changing grape varieties to counter winery and 
staff capacity concerns associated with vintage 
advancement/compression: for example, replacing 
Pinot that is picked in March with a new variety, 
Graciano, that is instead picked in late April.
→Planting grape varieties that are more resistant to 
extreme weather conditions: Some grape varieties are 
more resistant to heat and drought than others, so 
Mount Majura are investigating alternative varieties.
	→Modernising irrigation systems: installation of temperature 
and soil moisture sensors to provide a quantitative basis 
for irrigation scheduling, potentially optimising irrigation 
and maximising water use efficiency.
→Implementing cover cropping: for Mount Majura, cover 
cropping means allowing grass to grow between and 
under rows of grapevines to help improve soil health 
and reduce erosion – although this does require 
additional maintenance to ensure this does not 
interfere with grape growing it has been beneficial in 
the long term. 
→Using weather forecasting and monitoring systems: 
Using wine-making specific resources such as Wine 
Australia’s Climate Atlas, as well as near and medium-
term forecasting and monitoring systems to better 
understand and predict the impacts of climate change 
on their crops, and to make more informed decisions 
about irrigation, pest management, and other aspects 
of vineyard management.
→Data collection and analysis: there has been a strong 
culture of keeping weather records on the property to 
understand longer-term trends. Key indicators include 
growing degree days; winter rainfall; Brandis Index.
→Collaborating with researchers and industry groups: 
working with researchers and industry groups 
to develop and assess innovative approaches to 
adapting to climate change. 
→Managing wine inventories: to cater for years 
that see significant drop loss (e.g., following 2020 
bushfires), there is a concerted effort to build up stock 
inventories during good years – “we want to have a 
year’s worth of stock in the cellar to get us through”. 
This has most recently resulted in departure from 
long-term practice by purchasing grapes from other 
regions, for use in a sub-brand.
→Diversifying land use: a portion of land is leased to a 
solar PV farm, helping create climate-independent 
income streams for the business from what was 
previously unused land unsuitable for grape growing.

78   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
78   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

79
06
79
Further issues for 
consideration

80   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Drought will continue to be a challenge for rural landholders and farmers in the 
ACT. Investment in adaptation measures to build resilience to drought will be 
essential to preserve rural land and farming activities within the ACT. 
Chapter 5 explores a range of potential actions that 
could contribute to improved drought preparedness 
and response. These actions are intended to serve 
as a guide for various stakeholders, including rural 
landholders, government agencies, and other relevant 
parties and does not assume exclusive responsibility for 
implementation by the ACT Government.
Based on the observed climate, future drought scenarios, 
stakeholder engagement, review of climate change 
impacts and identifying adaptation actions, the following 
issues are worth considering regarding resilience to 
drought in ACT.
→Diversity of agricultural enterprises within the ACT. 
While sheep and cattle farming represent a large 
proportion of ACT’s agricultural enterprises, there is a 
long ‘tail’ of diverse agricultural products produced at 
a smaller scale. 
-	 Many federal government programs which focus on  
	 improving drought resilience are targeted at either  
	 larger-scale operations, generally larger than those  
	 of the ACT farming community; or industries that  
	 have only a small representation in the ACT such as  
	 cropping and horticulture. 
-	 Farming practices across the ACT generally require  
	 less water (i.e., few enterprises exist that require  
	 irrigation). Cropping, for example, which is subject  
	 to relatively higher drought risk due to the high need  
	 for irrigation is not prevalent in the ACT. This has  
	 likely shielded ACT farmers from some of the more  
	 severe financial impacts seen in other regions,  
	 as well as the tendency for farm profits to become  
	 more sensitive to drought impacts over the years.  
	 At the same time maintaining stock water, stock  
	 feed and animal health during drought has incurred  
	 considerable expenditure.
-	 Other enterprises, such as vineyards, need longer  
	 lead times to adapt due to the high costs in switching 
	 grape varieties and the lengthy transition times from  
	 plant/grafting new varieties and harvesting grapes  
	 from the new varieties. For example, growing and  
	 marketing new grape varieties (that may perform  
	 better under different future climate conditions)  
	 takes more time and financial investment. These  
	 expenses are also incurred by grazing enterprises  
	 that shift cattle or sheep breeds and can take years  
	 for a transition to fully occur.
→Lack of government progress in planning for 
droughts. Stakeholder feedback indicated that 
participants felt that the policy context to support 
planning for, managing, and recovering from droughts 
has been limited, with limited representation for the 
farming community within the ACT Government. 
This plan and other activities funded through the 
address this.
→There is broader exposure to multiple climate 
hazards. Whilst this study focusses on the impacts 
of drought, the ACT’s exposure to bushfire risk was 
highlighted throughout stakeholder engagement. There 
may be a need to do additional work to support farmer 
preparedness for bushfires in the future, given the 
growing frequency and intensity of bushfires in the ACT. 
Experience in other jurisdictions have found that the 
compounding impacts of multiple sequential natural 
disasters can quickly erode community resilience.
→Adoption of farm management software and the 
availability of farm-relevant data is increasing.
-	 Farm sizes are typically small and as such have  
	 smaller revenues and expenditure budgets. As such,  
	 small farms are less likely to have digestible climate  
	 data available to them (e.g., destocking triggers),  
	 nor access to farm management software which  
	 is generally considered cost prohibitive. However,  
	 investment in new data provision and training  
	 is increasing farmers’ engagement with new  
	 data sources.
-	 Studies of national scope reviewed in the context of  
	 this study often entirely omit discussion of ACT as  
	 a farming region.82

81
-	 The lack of accurate production and consumption  
	 data is a significant impediment to the development  
	 of sustainable food production strategies by  
	 the government and the private sector to assess  
	 diversification options that generate increased  
	 availability of locally sourced food in the ACT.  
	 This will be addressed through the Canberra Region  
   Local Food Strategy, with a focus area identified to  
   increase baseline data related to the food system for  
   the region.  
-	 Existing and emerging free tools such as Farming  
	 Forecaster appear to have good uptake,  
	 demonstrating an appetite for receiving and utilising  
	 more information to assist planning. 
→Strong ability to adapt to climate change. Rural 
landholders in the ACT are generally well positioned 
to prepare for future drought, reasons that support 
this include:
-	 It was identified that some rural landholders  
	 expressed that they felt confident that they would  
	 be able to introduce adaptation measures sufficient  
	 to manage the scale of changes expected.  
	 Adaptation measures such as changing stocking  
	 rates, changing breeds or species selection and  
	 diversification of farm income were identified as  
	 key measures to support adaptation and  
	 drought preparation.
-	 Despite this confidence, climate change projections  
	 and scenarios indicate that future drought  
	 conditions will increase in severity and frequency  
	 which may overwhelm the levels of drought  
	 preparedness able to be achieved by individual  
	 farmers. A key factor identified by stakeholders that  
	 mitigated the impacts of the 2017 – 2020 drought  
	 was beef and lamb prices and demand remaining  
	 high. In times of future drought, global and local  
	 political, economic, and social trends may not  
	 provide the same protections. 
→Access to alternative water supplies. Landholders 
have cited reliance on a range of water sources 
including farm collection (e.g., tanks and dams), 
extraction of surface water, extraction of 
groundwater, and use of mains water.
-	 The relatively short distance between rural  
	 properties and urban areas means many farms have  
	 access to mains-supplied water. While there is a  
	 higher cost associated with its use, it has meant  
	 these farmers have had security to water their core  
	 stock in times of drought. 
-	 Several landowners interviewed have invested in  
	 bore water extraction infrastructure; however, this  
	 is not an option for all properties. Key barriers to  
	 their use include high administration fees for bores  
	 that are not in use, difficulty in getting approved  
	 where catchment allocations have been exhausted,  
	 or unsuitable geology. Existing bore water users  
	 noted that there are inefficiencies in the way water  
	 allocations are distributed, with those establishing  
	 a bore first receiving first rights to water. Where users 
	 do not use their full allocation, it means other users  
	 within the catchment lose out.
-	 The current use of wastewater recycling for  
	 agricultural production and other purposes in the  
	 ACT is minimal, though some farms benefit from  
	 releases by the Lower Molonglo Water Quality  
	 Control Centre.
→ACT rural areas often have high quality remanent 
vegetation.
- This will enable potential farmer access to future  
   natural areas stewardship payments if they are  
   established and the areas within the ACT meet  
   eligibility criteria. 
→A lack of local agricultural infrastructure and skills. 
-	 The small agricultural market means there is  
	 limited access to key supporting infrastructure  
	 such as abattoirs and veterinary services. This raises  
	 costs associated with transport, raises food miles,  
	 and contributes to the financial viability concerns  
	 of smaller farms.
-	 Access to skilled agriculture labour is likely to be  
	 more constrained, with the small size of the ACT  
	 farming sector unlikely to attract career agricultural  
	 managers in the long term. Casual labour is  
	 particularly important in the context of  
	 diversification where out-sourcing of relatively  
	 unskilled activities allows landholders to devote  
	 more time and focus on diversification efforts.
82 https://daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/search/asset/1030903/0

82   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
→Government engagement with adaptation activities 
in the ACT has the potential to deliver effective 
action, compared to other jurisdictions in Australia. 
With its single level of government structure, relatively 
small geographical area and small rural population, 
opportunities to invoke transformational change  
are numerous. 
-	 Single-level government means decision-making is  
	 simplified and the community has direct access to  
	 key decision-makers. 
-	 The government has the opportunity to gather good  
	 on-ground information given the small size of  
	 the community.
→Other triggers for reviewing farm practices may also 
enable the consideration of climate change planning 
e.g., review of farm practices or other reasons such as 
the potential to work towards biodiversity credits.
→The ACT Government’s management of pests and 
weeds on crown lands is important in alleviating 
their spread into agricultural land, easing the 
pressure of invasive species on farm boundaries. 
Continued investment in providing guidance to 
landholders around drought recovery actions such as 
managing fodder, weeds etc. is appreciated.
→A high proportion of farms receive off-farm income. 
This typically implies that these landholders are 
more financially resilient compared to others that are 
entirely reliant on their farm outputs.
-	 A 2020 survey by ACT NRM indicated that almost 80% 
	 of landholders surveyed (approximately 48  
	 responses) derived at least 50% of their income  
	 from activities not related to their rural holdings.  
	 These properties most likely have a higher degree  
	 of economic security and consequently have an  
	 increased capacity to trial and adopt new systems,  
	 technologies, and other diversification opportunities.
-	 Growers with part-time or full-time employment  
	 off-farm may therefore find it difficult to allocate  
	 sufficient time-resources to maximise the probability 
	 of successful diversification. A balance of capital  
	 generation and time commitment is needed.
-	 Household income amongst the broader ACT  
	 community is high in comparison to the Australian  
	 average – for example, in 2021, 38.3% of households  
	 in the ACT had an income of more than $3,000  
	 per week83 (the Australian average was 24.3% of  
	 households). There is a sense among stakeholders  
	 that ACT residents have a higher propensity to  
	 support the purchase of premium sustainable  
	 products such as those grown in the ACT region.
→Improvements to farm management practices that 
are not specifically associated with drought are 
ongoing. Technology already being adopted includes 
minimal tillage principles, water infrastructure 
improvements, and investment in more advanced 
machinery and equipment lead to multiple improved 
farm outcomes, but also tend to improve the ability of 
farms to manage droughts when they do occur.
→Further exploration on the impacts of drought 
on traditional Ngunnawal land management and 
cultural activities is necessary. This knowledge  
can inform the development of drought  
preparedness and response strategies that are 
culturally sensitive and support the long-term 
resilience of Ngunnawal country.
83  https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/8

83
83

84   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
84   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

85
07
85
Theory of change

86   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
By working together, this plan empowers rural landholders, government, and 
other stakeholders to identify and implement strategies that strengthen drought 
preparedness and response.
Theory of change
A theory of change explains how undertaking actions and activities will lead to the desired outcomes of the RDRP. 
This is important as it sets out why certain actions are essential, and the steps necessary to realise the goals of the 
RDRP. This is applied through careful explanation of recommendations and commitments, sequenced over time. This 
will be an important aspect of the RDRP’s monitoring and evaluation component and will be developed as part of the 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting Plan (MERP) and the process can be seen in Figure 9 below.
Figure 9: Theory of change diagram. 
Explanation of 
drought scenarios 
and future effects 
of drought.
Guidance 
and advice to 
landholders on how 
to best mitigate 
and adapt to future 
effects of drought.
ACT Government 
to provide support 
to landholders to 
adapt and manage 
drought.
Greater drought 
resilience in the 
ACT.
Initiatives that were highlighted by farms to be  
successful included:
→Transport subsidy where farmers bought fodder and/
or water to a property, stock to/from agistment, stock 
to sale or slaughter, chemicals, fertiliser, and seed to 
farms and government covered up to 50% of the total 
freight cost. 
→National On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure 
Rebate where a 25% rebate was offered for the costs 
associated with the purchase and installation of on-
farm stock water infrastructure and infrastructure 
for permanent horticultural crops (grapes, olives, 
orchards) to improve farm resilience to drought.
→Rural Resilience Grants have been provided for 2018-
2019, 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 to support landholders 
to build farm resilience. During conversations with 
landholders, it was noted that these grants were used 
to build drought lots, install siloes, construct fodder 
storage sheds and install a range of farm stock water 
infrastructure, as well as undertake post-drought 
weed and pest animal control. 
→The Future Drought Fund Farm Business Resilience 
program which is offering training to farmers 
in financial management and natural resource 
management in preparation for drought. Under the 
pilot year of the program, 10 ACT farmers undertook 
Meat and Livestock Australia’s Business Edge Training; 
14 landholders have been part-sponsored to attend 
a range of different natural resource management 
training courses; 4 farm families are receiving farm 
business coaching; and ACT NRM has offered 3 farm 
business webinars.
→ACT Environment Grants are offered every year and 
provide farmers with the opportunity to seek support 
to protect environmental assets on their farms.
Other support offered included relief grazing, 
requirements for fodder purchased from interstate  
and financial and mental health services.

87
assistance measures including84 :
→Farm household allowance to provide assistance  
to farming families experiencing financial hardship.
→Rural financial counselling service help farmers find 
and apply for funds.
→Drought Communities Programme to support local 
infrastructure projects, to create new opportunities  
in drought-affected communities.
Barriers to receiving government support
Despite federal government support being available, 
several farmers in the ACT were not able to qualify for 
some of the rebates due to receiving off farm income or 
due to their agricultural practise not being eligible to 
apply. Criteria that excluded several farmers from being 
eligible included:
→“You are a sole trader, partnership, trust or private 
company and trade agricultural products” (Transport 
subsidy85)
→“As owners and operators of the business you earn 
more than 50% of your gross income from the 
primary production enterprise under normal seasonal 
circumstances” (Transport subsidy86)
→“As owners and operators of the business you do not 
have gross off-farm assets exceeding $5,000,000” 
(Transport subsidy86)
Overall, the main limitation for eligibility was due to 
the Farm Household Allowance to lift the off-farm income 
threshold to $100,000 and allow anyone running at a loss 
to access the offset.86
Through conversations with farmers it was also noted 
that there was opportunity to streamline and simplify 
the grant systems, access, and applications. E.g. Farmers 
indicated that it can take two weeks to put together a 
$5,000 grant.
land/farm-food-drought/drought/assistance 
85 ACT Government, Transport Subsidy Application Guideline (Round Two) 
(agriculture.gov.au)

88   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan
88   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

89
08
89
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Plan for ACT Rural Drought 
Resilience Plan (RDRP)

Vision
The ACT rural community is 
empowered, connected and 
supported in drought and climate 
change planning, preparedness, 
adaptation, and response, and  
can adapt to absorb the impacts 
of future droughts.
90   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

91
Overall Goal
Build the drought resilience of the ACT's rural community across environmental, 
economic, social, and governance aspects.
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Framework
This framework will guide the assessment of the ACT 
RDRP's effectiveness in achieving its vision and goals. 
It will use a mixed-method approach, combining 
quantitative and qualitative data collection methods.
Monitoring Indicators
Each strategic priority will have a set of monitoring 
indicators to track progress towards achieving  
its outcomes. 
Strategic Priority: Environmental 
Resilience
Outcome 1: Rural communities have access  
to alternative water sources
→Short term indicator: Number of rebates awarded  
for rainwater tanks or alternative water  
infrastructure projects.
→Long term indicator: Number of rural properties with 
access to reliable alternative water sources  
(e.g., rainwater tanks, bores).
→Data collection: Grant program data analysis,  
ACT Government data.
Outcome 2: Improved resilience to wider 
climate-related shocks and stresses 
→Short term indicator: Number of workshops or 
training sessions offered to landholders on climate 
projections and sustainable land management 
practices. Participation rate in these workshops. 
→Long term indicator: Increased or consistent levels of 
community engagement and participation in drought 
resilience initiatives.
→Data collection: Workshop attendance records, 
Surveys, ACT Government data.
Strategic Priority: Economic 
Resilience
Outcome 1: Access to and engagement  
with data
→Short term indicator: Number of landholders 
accessing climate data projections.
→Long term indicator: Landholder satisfaction with  
→Data collection: Surveys.
Outcome 2: Land management agreements 
support climate adaptation
→Short term Indicator: Number of workshops or 
training sessions offered on farm business resilience, 
farm diversification.
→Long term indicator: Number of farms  
undertaking whole-of-farm planning and/or 
diversification planning.
→Data collection: Workshop attendance records, 
coaching engagement, Surveys.

Strategic Priority: Social Resilience
Outcome 1: Supporting education to cope  
with the social and psychological impacts  
of drought
→Short-Term Indicator: Number of landholders 
participating in drought preparedness training 
programs.
→Long-Term Indicator: Landholder self-reported 
knowledge of drought preparedness strategies, value 
of social connection, and peer to peer engagement.
→Long-Term Indicator: Improved landholder 
perception of their mental and emotional wellbeing 
alongside community drought resilience.
→Data Collection: Surveys, attendance records
Outcome 2: Increased recognition of the ACT 
as a producing region
→Short-Term Indicator: Progress on ACT Local  
Food Strategy. 
→Short term indicator: Number of media articles 
or promotional campaigns highlighting the ACT's 
agricultural sector.
→Long-Term Indicator: Increased market opportunities 
for ACT-produced agricultural products.
→Data Collection: Media monitoring, Partnership 
agreements, Market analysis reports.
Strategic Priority: Governance
Outcome 1: Effective collaboration between 
government and the community
→Short-Term Indicator: Frequency and effectiveness  
of engagement between the RDRP Steering Group  
and the farming community.
→Long-Term Indicator: Landholder satisfaction 
with the level of government support for drought 
preparedness.
→Data Collection: Meeting minutes, surveys.
Reporting:
→Regular monitoring reports will be prepared to track 
progress towards achieving the RDRP's outcomes.
→Evaluation reports will be prepared and disseminated 
to stakeholders, including the ACT Government, rural 
landholders, and the public.
→The monitoring and evaluation framework will be 
reviewed and updated periodically to ensure its 
continued effectiveness.
Responsibilities:
→The ACT RDRP Steering Group will be responsible  
for overseeing the implementation of the monitoring 
and evaluation plan.
→The Environment, Planning and Sustainable 
Development Directorate (EPSDD) will be responsible 
for collecting and analysing data, preparing reports, 
and conducting evaluations.
→Stakeholders, including rural landholders, will  
be consulted throughout the monitoring and  
evaluation process.
This monitoring and evaluation plan provides a 
framework for assessing the ACT RDRP's impact on 
building drought resilience in the ACT's rural community. 
By tracking progress, conducting evaluations, and 
adapting the plan as needed, the ACT Government can 
ensure that the RDRP is effectively meeting the needs 
of rural landholders and helping them prepare for the 
challenges of drought and climate change.
92   |   ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan

93

Revision 3 – 22-Dec-2022 
Yes this was raised in the workshop 
Prepared for – Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate – ABN: 31 432 729 493 
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Final R eport
Final Report 
Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
22-Dec-2022 
Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Prepared for 
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 
ABN: 31 432 729 493

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
Revision 3 – 22-Dec-2022 
Prepared for – Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate – ABN: 31 432 729 493 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Final Report 
Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Client: 
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 
ABN: 31 432 729 493 
Prepared by 
AECOM Australia Pty Ltd 
Gadigal Country, Level 21, 420 George Street, Sydney NSW 2000, PO Box Q410, QVB Post Office NSW 1230, Australia 
T +61 2 8008 1700  www.aecom.com 
ABN 20 093 846 925 
22-Dec-2022 
Job No.: 60683480 
AECOM in Australia and New Zealand is certified to ISO9001, ISO14001 and ISO45001. 
© AECOM Australia Pty Ltd (AECOM). All rights reserved. 
AECOM has prepared this document for the sole use of the Client and for a specific purpose, each as expressly stated in the document. No other 
party should rely on this document without the prior written consent of AECOM. AECOM undertakes no duty, nor accepts any responsibility, to any 
third party who may rely upon or use this document. This document has been prepared based on the Client’s description of its requirements and 
AECOM’s experience, having regard to assumptions that AECOM can reasonably be expected to make in accordance with sound professional 
principles. AECOM may also have relied upon information provided by the Client and other third parties to prepare this document, some of which 
may not have been verified. Subject to the above conditions, this document may be transmitted, reproduced or disseminated only in its entirety. 
However, caution must be taken when considering our conclusions because significant uncertainty remains due to the inherent complexities 
involved in analysing the past climate and variables typically encountered when modelling future climate change. AECOM cannot guarantee the 
accuracy of the climate observations and projections described in this report and cannot be responsible for any third party’s reliance upon on this 
information.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Quality Information 
Document 
Final Report 
Ref 
60683480 
Date 
22-Dec-2022 
Originator 
Natalia Milojevic, Sophie Moss, Lucas Baita, Harley Lewington 
Checker/s 
Suzanna Remmerswaal 
Verifier/s 
Adam Davis 
Revision History 
Rev 
Revision Date 
Details 
Approved 
Name/Position 
Signature 
1 
19-Oct-2022 
Draft for client review 
Adam Davis 
Technical Director 
2 
25-Nov-2022 
Final 
Adam Davis 
Technical Director 
3 
22-Dec-2022 
Final 
Adam Davis 
Technical Director

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table of Contents 
Acronyms 
i 
Glossary 
ii 
Executive Summary 
i 
1.0 
Introduction 
7 
1.1 
Project context 
7 
1.2 
Structure of this report 
7 
1.3 
Overview of agriculture in the ACT 
8 
2.0 
Method 
10 
2.1 
Overview 
10 
2.2 
Develop drought scenarios 
11 
2.3 
Stakeholder engagement 
11 
2.4 
Adaptation and case studies 
12 
2.5 
Final report 
12 
3.0 
Climate data and drought in the ACT 
14 
3.1 
Conditions relating to drought 
14 
3.2 
ACT experience of drought 
16 
3.2.1 
Agricultural water uses in the ACT 
17 
3.2.2 
Drought in Focus – 2017 to 2020 
20 
3.3 
Spatial boundaries for climate data in the ACT 
21 
4.0 
Observed climate 
23 
4.1 
Summary of observed climate 
23 
5.0 
Future climate 
25 
5.1 
Climate hazards and climate change projections for the ACT 
26 
5.2 
Summary of future climate trends for the ACT 
27 
5.2.1 
Visualisations of future projections 
29 
5.3 
Climate Analogues 
30 
5.4 
Future drought scenarios for the ACT 
32 
5.5 
High emissions scenario for the North-East ACT 
33 
6.0 
Impacts of drought 
35 
6.1.1 
Value domains 
35 
6.1.2 
Priority impacts identified 
35 
6.2 
Environmental 
37 
6.2.1 
Reduced water availability 
37 
6.2.2 
Increased weeds and pests 
38 
6.2.3 
Loss of on-farm biodiversity 
39 
6.2.4 
Other impacts of drought 
40 
6.3 
Economic 
41 
6.3.1 
Reduced carrying capacity 
41 
6.3.2 
Other impacts 
42 
6.4 
Social 
43 
6.4.1 
Reduced wellbeing 
43 
6.4.2 
Other impacts 
44 
6.5 
Governance 
45 
6.6 
Impacts on viticulture 
46 
7.0 
Adaptation actions to build drought resilience in the ACT 
47 
7.1 
Overview 
47 
7.1.1 
Adaptation 
47 
7.2 
Summary of adaptation actions 
49 
7.3 
Environmental adaptation actions 
52 
7.3.1 
Focus actions 
52 
7.3.2 
Other actions 
57 
7.4 
Economic adaptation actions 
62 
7.4.1 
Focus actions 
62 
7.4.2 
Other actions 
64 
7.5 
Social adaptation actions 
65

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
7.5.1 
Focus actions 
65 
7.6 
Governance adaptation actions 
67 
8.0 
Case studies 
68 
8.1 
Case study – data to support rotational regenerative agriculture 
68 
8.2 
Case study – drought preparedness for graziers 
70 
8.3 
Case study – adaptation in viticulture 
71 
9.0 
Discussion 
73 
9.1 
Key findings 
73 
9.2 
Recommendations 
76 
 Appendix A 
Climate projections – Scenario selection 
A 
 Appendix B 
BOM Observed Data 
B 
 Appendix C 
Climate Change Projections (NARCliM) 
C 
 Appendix D 
NARCliM Data 
D 
 Appendix E 
Desktop review –  
Climate change impacts and adaptation responses 
A 
 Appendix F 
Workshop slides and factsheet 
E 
 Appendix G 
Survey Questions 
F 
 Appendix H 
Climate change analogues for Canberra 
G

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
i
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Acronyms  
Acronym 
Meaning 
ABARES 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics 
ACT 
Australian Capital Territory 
AEP 
Annual Exceedance Probability 
BoM 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CSIRO 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 
DAFF 
ENSO 
El Niño Southern Oscillation 
EPSDD 
The Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gases 
GVP 
Gross Value Production 
IOD 
Indian Ocean Dipole 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
ISO 
International Organization for Standardization 
LMA 
Land Management Agreement 
MDB 
Murray Darling Basin 
MLA 
Meat and Livestock Association 
NARCliM 
NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling project 
NRM 
Natural Resource Management 
NSW 
New South Wales 
NUZ 
Non-Urban Zone 
RDRP 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
RCP 
Representative Concentration Pathway 
SAM 
Southern Annular Mode 
SDL 
Sustainable Diversion Limit 
SPI 
Standardised Precipitation Index 
SSPs 
Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 
VPD 
Vapour Pressure Deficit 
PDO 
Pacific Decadal Oscillation 
IOD 
Indian Ocean Dipole

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
ii
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Glossary 
Key term 
Definition 
Adaptation (to climate 
change)  
In human systems, the process of adjustment to actual or expected climate 
and its effects, to moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. In natural 
systems, the process of adjustment to actual climate and its effects; human 
intervention may facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its effects 
(IPCC, 2022). Adaptation actions may include physical changes to an asset to 
achieve or facilitate adaptation including changes/upgrades to technology and 
equipment, design standards for particular project elements, operational 
actions, or natural resource management actions (e.g., assisted colonisation, 
mixed-provenance plantings, restoration of key connectivity pathways to 
enable movement). 
Adaptive capacity  
The ability of institutions, systems, humans and other organisms to adjust to 
potential damage, to take advantage of opportunities, or to respond to 
consequences of environmental variability and change (IPCC, 2022). 
It includes adjustments in both behaviour and in resources and technologies. 
Cascading impacts 
Occur when an extreme hazard generates a sequence of secondary events in 
natural and human systems that result in physical, natural, social or economic 
disruption, whereby the resulting impact is significantly larger than the initial 
impact (IPCC, 2022). 
Climate change  
A change in the state of the climate persisting for an extended period, typically 
decades or longer (IPCC, 2022). Climate change may be due to natural 
variability or a result of human activity. In this report ‘future projections’ refer to 
projections informed by climate change modelling. 
Climate hazard 
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event or 
trend or physical impact that may cause loss of life, injury, or other health 
impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, livelihoods, 
service provision, ecosystems, and environmental resources1 In this report, 
the term hazard refers to climate-related hazard events (such as floods or 
heatwaves) and evolving trends which are likely to be hazardous to agricultural 
activities (e.g., change in number of hot days or the frequency of days with 
high rainfall).   
Climate projections  
Simulated response of the climate system (including variables such as 
temperature, precipitation, wind, solar radiation, sea level) to a scenario of 
future emissions or concentrations of greenhouse gases and changes in land 
use, generally derived using climate models. Climate projections depend on an 
emission scenario, in turn based on assumptions concerning factors such as 
future socioeconomic and technological developments that may or may not be 
realised (IPCC, 2022). 
Climate variables   
Factors that determine and govern the climate. Main factors include rain, 
atmospheric pressure, wind, humidity, and temperature. 
Changes in climate variables (such as temperature) can lead to changes in 
climate hazards (such as heatwaves).  
Compound events 
The combination of multiple drivers and/or hazards that contributes to societal 
and/or environmental risk (IPCC, 2022). 
Consequence 
Outcome of an event affecting objectives. A consequence can be certain or 
uncertain and can have positive or negative direct or indirect effects on 
objectives. Any consequence can escalate through cascading and cumulative 
effects (ISO, 2018). 
1 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 5. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/ar5_wgII_spm_en-1.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
iii
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Key term 
Definition 
Drought 
A prolonged period of abnormally low rainfall when the available water is 
insufficient to sustain normal use. (BoM, 2022) 
El Niño Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO) 
The oscillation between the El Niño climate phase and the La Niña phase, 
usually over several years. Defined as a climate pattern that describes the 
unusual warming of surface waters in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. 
Emission scenarios 
Possible pathways that society might take in the emission of greenhouse 
gases in the future. 
Exposure  
The presence of people, livelihoods, species or ecosystems, environmental 
services and resources, infrastructure, or economic, social, or cultural assets 
in places that could be adversely affected (IPCC, 2022). 
Extreme weather event 
An event that is rare at a particular place and time of year. The characteristics 
of what is called extreme weather may vary from place to place (IPCC, 2022). 
Fraction of Absorbed 
Photosynthetically Active 
Radiation (FAPAR) 
FAPAR is the fraction of incoming solar radiation absorbed for photosynthesis 
by a photosynthetic organism (live leaves). 
Greenhouse gases 
Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere that absorb and emit radiation at 
specific wavelengths within the spectrum of radiation emitted by the Earth’s 
ocean and land surface, by the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. This property 
causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour, carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, 
methane, and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth’s 
atmosphere (IPCC, 2022). 
Hazard (climate hazard) 
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event or 
trend or physical impact that may cause loss of life, injury, or other health 
impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, livelihoods, 
service provision, ecosystems, and environmental resources (IPCC, 2022). 
Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) 
Defined by the difference in sea surface temperature between two areas – a 
western pole in the Arabian Sea and an eastern pole in the eastern Indian 
Ocean south of Indonesia. The IOD affects the climate of Australia and other 
countries that surround the Indian Ocean Basin and is a significant contributor 
to rainfall variability in this region. 
Infrastructure 
The designed and built set of physical systems and corresponding institutional 
arrangements that mediate between people, their communities, and the 
broader environment to provide services that support economic growth, health, 
quality of life, and safety (IPCC, 2022). 
Likelihood 
The chance of something happening (ISO, 2018).  
Mitigation (of climate change)  
Actions taken globally, nationally, and individually to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and/or increase the amounts of greenhouse gases removed from 
the atmosphere by greenhouse sinks (IPCC, 2022).  
Pacific Decadal Oscillation 
(PDO) 
Defined by the leading pattern of sea surface temperature anomalies in the 
North Pacific basin. 
Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCPs) 
Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concentrations of 
greenhouse gases and aerosols and chemically active gases, as well as land 
use/land cover. The word representative signifies that each RCP provides only 
one of many possible scenarios. The term pathway emphasises the fact that 
not only the long-term concentration levels, but also the trajectory taken over 
time to reach that outcome are of interest (IPCC, 2022). 
Resilience (climate resilience) 
Ability for interconnected social, economic, and ecological systems to absorb, 
respond, and recover from droughts and other hazardous events ((IPCC, 
2022; Hughes et al, 2020).

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
iv
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Key term 
Definition 
Risk  
The effect of uncertainty on objectives. An effect is a deviation from the 
expected and may be positive and/or negative. Risk is often expressed in 
terms of a combination of the consequences of an event (including changes in 
circumstances) and the associated likelihood of occurrence (ISO, 2018). 
Rural landholders/ACT 
Farming community 
Rural land in the ACT is leased by farmers, as is the case with all residential 
land in the ACT. The Territory's 159 farming families collectively manage 180 
leases covering 40,000ha (15%) of the ACT. 
Sensitivity   
The degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by 
climate variability or change. The effect may be direct (e.g. a change in crop 
yield in response to a change in temperature) or indirect (e.g. damages 
caused by an increase in the frequency of flooding) (IPCC, 2022) 
Simulation 
A computer simulation of global climate modelling that is built using real data. 
Standard Precipitation Index 
(SPI) 
The Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) reflects soil moisture and precipitation 
conditions and is the most used indicator for detecting and characterising 
meteorological droughts. SPI is an index where negative values are 
associated with below average rainfall and drought while positive values 
indicate wetter than average conditions. 
Standardised Precipitation-
Evapotranspiration Index 
(SPEI) 
The Standardised Precipitation-Evapotranspiration Index is an extension of the 
widely used SPI and can be used for determining the onset, duration, and 
magnitude of drought conditions with respect to normal conditions in a variety 
of natural and managed systems. 
Vulnerability  
This report conceptualises drought risk in line with existing frameworks 
(Hughes et al, 2020) outlined in Figure 1. This framework conceptualises 
drought risk as a function of exposure and sensitivity, whereby farm drought 
risk depends both on a farm’s exposure to climate variability and the sensitivity 
of its production systems to that variability.  
Figure 1 Framework for assessing drought vulnerability and resilience2 
2 Hughes, N., Burns, K., Soh, W., & Lawson, K. (2022). Measuring drought risk | The exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms 
to drought.  https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/climate/measuring-drought-
risk#:~:text=This%20study%20presents%20estimates%20of,to%20display%20greater%20drought%20risk.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
i
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Executive Summary 
The ACT Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate engaged AECOM to 
conduct a study on the future drought scenarios facing ACT’s agricultural community. The Study was 
established to build an understanding of the impacts of these scenarios on the ACT’s agricultural 
community and support the development of the Regional Drought Resilience Strategy. This study has: 
• 
Developed a baseline current climatology of droughts in the ACT 
• 
Developed three future drought scenarios for the ACT utilising existing projection data, reviewing 
water availability, temperatures, precipitation, evapotranspiration, seasonal shifts in rainfall and 
other metrics associated with these scenarios. 
• 
Assessed the impacts of those scenarios on the enterprises of the ACT farming and rural 
community  
• 
Identified mitigating actions that improve climate and drought resilience. 
• 
Provides three case studies of successful mitigation activities in the ACT  
Method and stakeholder engagement 
The assessment took a four-phase approach: 
• 
Collation of existing climatology and future climate projections for the Territory. 
• 
Stakeholder engagement was undertaken via one-on-one interviews with stakeholders, a multi-
stakeholder workshop, and an online survey to develop an understanding of landholders’ current 
consideration of droughts and future climate change 
• 
Desktop review whereby impacts on ACT rural landholders and adaptation actions they have 
underway or planned are identified over four domains, followed by prioritisation of impacts and 
actions based on stakeholder engagement. 
• 
Reporting and follow-up desktop research to consolidate findings.  
The project employed an integrated engagement program with ACT rural landowners to gather inputs to 
inform the resilience plan.   
Agricultural context 
ACT agriculture consists of almost 160 farming families collectively managing 180 leases covering 15% 
of the ACT. The region supports a wide variety of agricultural outputs but geographically covers a small 
area compared to other Australian states and territories.  
Climate context 
Drought is a recurring hazard in the ACT that will likely accelerate and continue to provide challenges to 
the ACT’s rural community in the coming years. Historically, the ACT has seen: 
• 
13 periods of heatwaves since 2008 
• 
The four hottest summers and three hottest springs have occurred in the last 20 years  
• 
The four hottest years have occurred in the last 20 years. 
Three future scenarios of drought have been developed based on NSW and ACT’s latest climate 
models. These scenarios outline future climate change projections assuming a range of global emission 
scenarios – ranging from an accelerated transition to a low carbon economy to a scenario of continued 
high emissions. Under all scenarios, the ACT’s climate is projected to become warmer and drier, with 
more extreme weather events. These trends are more severe under scenarios with higher emissions. 
Projected higher average temperatures and reductions in average annual rainfall are likely to see 
periods of drought increase in both frequency and intensity. A summary of climate change projections 
under the ‘middle’ scenario is outlined below.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
ii
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Higher average temperatures, with an increase of about 1.8°C in both the average minimum and 
maximum daily temperatures by 2045 compared to the 2000 baseline, increasing to about 3.3°C 
By 2070.  
• 
A shift towards extreme heat days with, on average, at least 11 more days above 35°C each year 
by 2045, increasing to 18 more days by 2070. 
• 
A shift away from cold days with, on average, more than 55 fewer days below 2°C each year by 
2045, increasing up to 36 fewer days by 2070. 
• 
A reduction in total soil moisture content with an 11% decrease annually by end of the century 
and an 18% decrease in December by the end of the century. 
• 
A likely decrease in annual rainfall by 2045 by 3.1%, further decreasing by 9% and 9.3% in 2070 
and 2090 respectively. 
• 
While an annual decrease is projected on average, there are significant changes to seasonal 
rainfall distributions. Summer rainfall is projected to increase and winter rainfall is projected to 
decrease. 
• 
Despite the likely decrease in average rainfall, there is expected to be an increase in extreme 
rainfall events, which will also account for a great portion of all rainfall (i.e., on those days when it 
does rain, it is likely to be more intense, even if there are fewer days when it rains). Rainfall will 
likely decrease in winter and spring but increase in summer. 
• 
Consecutive dry days (days without rainfall) are projected to increase to 29 days in 2045 and 32 
days in 2070 compared to the 2000 baseline of 27 days. 
Value Domains 
The report outlines the impacts of drought, and responses that are being implemented, in the context of 
four domains. The domains encompass environmental, economic, social, and governance implications 
of drought events on the ACT’s agricultural community. 
Impacts on ACT rural landholders 
Impacts felt by ACT rural landholders were collated and categorised across the four domains, and 
prioritised. Impacts are considered a ‘priority’ if they were frequently identified by stakeholders in 
multiple forums and re-validated through desktop review as particular areas of consequence. Priority 
impacts include: 
• 
Reduced water availability and quality for livestock watering, household use, and other farm 
activities. 
• 
Reduced carrying capacity of land and inability to maintain ground cover  
• 
Increasing occurrence of weeds, pests, and diseases, challenging existing measures and requiring 
new methods to manage.  
• 
Reduced on-farm biodiversity because of species loss 
• 
Reduced well-being of the farming community concerning both physical and mental health 
Actions taken by ACT rural landholders during times of drought 
ACT rural landholders described actions they have taken in the past to respond to droughts, and how 
drought management can be improved in the future. Key actions have been identified based on 
stakeholder input and validated through desktop research. Key strategies were determined by the 
frequency with which they were raised by ACT rural landholders. These included: 
• 
Land management strategies that preserve or enhance ecosystems without compromising farm 
production. Examples include farming appropriately to the farms carrying capacity, carrying less

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
iii
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
stock, planting trees for shade and heat protection and adding cooling misting sprays (with large 
droplets that can reach the skin surface, and monitoring respiration)3 for livestock. 
• 
Stock management strategies include destocking to sustain remaining livestock. Inventory 
reduction strategies including selling feeder animals early, reducing breeding animal numbers, in 
the worst-case scenarios, selling the herd, and ceasing production. 
• 
Water management examples include covering dams to reduce evaporation, actions to improve 
water quality of water stored on-farm, dam enhancement (e.g., deepening dams) and restoring the 
environment around dams, increasing investment in water infrastructure systems, and seeking 
water extraction licenses where available. 
• 
Enterprise selection strategies consider physical factors such as land, climate, access to water, 
farm structures and machinery as well as financial and management factors. Examples include 
diversifying the enterprise, undertaking greater stock rotations, changing enterprises to those that 
require less rainfall, switching from breeding to trading stock, selecting drought-resilient breeds of 
livestock, and use of perennial drought-tolerant grasses. 
• 
Infrastructure strategies include installing new or upgrading existing infrastructure such as 
increasing on-farm storage for water and feed (e.g., dams, bores, accessing town water, piping 
from local streams, storage for fuel, feed, grain, etc.), improving fencing infrastructure to reduce 
paddock sizes to better manage grazing and density (new or upgrades), storing silage. 
• 
Planning and regulations in agriculture aim to provide opportunities to adapt through the 
diversification of farming enterprises or expansion in the future. Examples include water licensing 
(getting approval for bores), seeking amendments to land management agreements, and working 
with the government on improving access to tools and resources.   
Assessment wide findings 
Farmers are concerned about drought. The 2017-2020 drought had more significant impacts than 
previous droughts, and for many farmers, the impacts are still being felt. Strong engagement indicated 
that farmers are keen to connect within the farming community and work with the ACT Government to 
better plan for future droughts. Key findings across engagement activities and literature reviews include:  
• 
Most rural landholders were confident that they would be able to introduce adaptation 
measures sufficient to manage the scale of changes expected. Despite this confidence, climate 
change projections and scenarios indicate that future drought conditions will increase in severity 
and frequency which may overwhelm the levels of drought preparedness able to be achieved by 
individual farmers. Few saw that transformative changes in their practices were needed (e.g., 
existing farm enterprises becoming no longer viable or the introduction of new enterprises). 
• 
Recognising that prolonged periods of drought can elevate bushfire-related risks, the exposure to 
bushfire risk was highlighted throughout stakeholder engagement as a major climate change-
related concern. It is recommended that the relationship between drought and bushfire risk is 
acknowledged in the RDRP, specifically the cascading impacts of drought and bushfire on rural 
landholders in the ACT and upon the wider community. 
• 
Typical drivers of vulnerability such as poor socioeconomic circumstances are not as evident 
amongst landholders in the ACT due to off-farm incomes and high land values. 
• 
Stakeholder engagement indicated that very few farmers had engaged previously with future 
projections of climate change. To improve the engagement landholders, have with climate 
projections, there is a need to improve the availability of data to scales relevant to farm planning.  
• 
Literature on agricultural drought risks across Australia regularly finds that enterprises that depend 
on irrigation for primary production are more vulnerable to droughts. Given the low representation 
of irrigators operating within the ACT, compared to other jurisdictions in Australia there is an 
inherent opportunity for the region to lead in having a drought-resilient agricultural community. 
3 Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, 2022. Managing heat load and heat stress in sheep and cattle at 
saleyards, Government of Western Australia. available at: https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/beef-cattle/managing-heat-load-and-heat-
stress-sheep-and-cattle-saleyards

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
iv
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
A common theme was the reflection on the ‘place’ of rural land within the ACT as a region. 
Stakeholders shared a desire to have the importance of rural land acknowledged and 
emphasised in future planning. There is an opportunity to protect rural land from future 
development and emphasise the importance of rural land in supporting biodiversity and providing a 
buffer zone for managing bushfire risk to the region. 
• 
Crown leasing arrangements create multiple challenges to adaptation. The inflexibility of lease 
purpose clauses challenges farmers' ability to diversify or change enterprises and impacts farm 
decision-making. Restrictions on secondary dwellings hinder succession planning. 
• 
Farmers expressed concerns relating to access to key supporting infrastructure such as an 
abattoir, ACT Government staff with agronomic expertise and local agricultural product suppliers. 
This raises costs associated with transport, raises food miles, and contributes to the financial 
viability concerns of smaller farms. 
• 
Government engagement with adaptation activities in the ACT has the potential to deliver 
effective action, compared to other jurisdictions in Australia. With its single level of government 
structure, relatively small geographical area and small rural population, the Government is in a 
strong position to make effective decisions. 
• 
Improvements to farm management practices that are not specifically associated with 
drought are ongoing. Technology already being adopted such as minimal tillage principles, 
prioritising the selection of drought tolerant native pastures, and investment in on-farm 
infrastructure improvements (e.g., storage, fencing) is leading to multiple improved farm outcomes, 
but also tend to improve the ability of farms to manage droughts when they do occur. 
Recommendations 
Recommendations across five themes of water security; data provision; land use planning; education; 
and collaboration have been identified and outlined below.  
Action 
Enhance water security 
Identify opportunities to review farmers’ access to alternative water sources to improve water security 
• 
Inefficient allocation of water allocations 
- 
Review water licence allocation mechanisms to enable better sharing of water within 
catchments. For example, there may be opportunities to allow existing water license 
holders that do not efficiently use their existing allocation to trade water with others in need 
elsewhere in their catchment.  
- 
Review water licencing arrangements to acknowledge higher value end uses. For example, 
water licences could be prioritised for enterprises in line with the Capital Food and Fibre 
Strategy. 
• 
Investigate opportunities and understand barriers to greater adoption of wastewater reuse e.g.  
Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre effluent reuse scheme which supplies water to the 
nearby golf course, and previously supplied to local vineyards 
• 
Ensure that water security on farms during droughts is included in the planned ACT Water 
Vulnerability Assessment by the Office of Water. 
Data provision and engagement 
Stakeholder engagement indicated that very few farmers had engaged previously with future 
projections of climate change. In addition, few saw that transformative changes in their practices 
were needed (e.g. shifting to produce different agricultural products). To improve the engagement 
landholders have with climate projections, there is a need to improve scales relevant to drought 
planning. It was identified that the use of long-term climate projections is not strongly resonating with 
landowners. Therefore, there is an opportunity for improving drought monitoring and early warning 
systems.  
Engage with projects of national scope to ensure ACT is well-represented within data sets and 
reporting outputs. E.g. adequate inclusion of ACT’s farming community within ABARES data, ACT’s 
inclusion within Droughthub mapping and advice.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
v
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Action 
Recognising that droughts and bushfires are driven by many of the same changes in climate 
variables, it is recommended that the relationship between drought and bushfire risk is acknowledged 
in the RDRP. Specifically, the cascading impacts of drought and bushfire on rural landholders in the 
ACT and the wider community.  
Land use planning 
In the long term, climate futures may increase pressure for more transformative change for certain 
farms. This could include the emergence of new land use activities such as carbon abatement, 
biodiversity conservation, or renewable energy generation as complements to traditional farming. 
Defining ACT Government’s ambitions in such spaces would aid existing landholders plan long-term 
farm improvement measures. 
Review land use zone development controls in the Territory to seek the protection of areas of 
important landscape settings, or nature conservation corridors 
Review change of use charges to NUZ1 and NUZ2 (rural and broadacre) zoned land where the main 
activity is to produce food or fibre i.e. allow ancillary uses without lease purpose change process and 
costs (provided there is adequate consultation and investigation of impacts of the changes) 
Remove current lease and land use restrictions to enable flexibility in farming enterprise selection 
(e.g. switching from sheep to goats) and timing (e.g. removing minimum stock requirements during 
times of drought) 
Introduce stewardship payments where conservation of important areas of biodiversity, landscape 
settings or biodiversity restricts agricultural use or could provide additional farm incomes. 
Supporting education 
The support ACT Government has been providing to the agricultural community is well received, and 
it is recommended that these activities continue. Suggested topics include: 
• 
Alternative climate-resilient enterprises that may be viable in the ACT 
• 
Extension of existing farm financial management principles and practices  
• 
Support development and implementation of farm-scale drought management plans including 
identification of trigger points for actions such as selling stock. 
Partner with education providers to highlight climate change adaptation and opportunities in 
agriculture within school curriculums e.g. farm demonstrations/visits  
Collaboration and awareness 
Encourage the Commonwealth’s development of a food security plan to identify and protect farming 
regions that can continue to produce food under future conditions, including the ACT and its border 
regions.  
Support communication and marketing of produce that is more drought resilient e.g. helping to shift 
consumer preference to local products or away from meat breeds not suitable for ACT’s climate

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
6
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Part 1 
Introduction and 
Method

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
7
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
1.0 
Introduction 
1.1 
Project context 
Government has been funded to develop a Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP).  
The Future Drought Fund is a long-term investment fund that provides a sustainable source of funding 
to help Australian farmers and communities become more prepared for, and resilient to, the impacts of 
drought.. 
The ACT’s RDRP will focus on reviewing and increasing the resilience of ACT’s rural areas and 
agricultural community to drought. The project will align with other Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
being developed across Australia.  
AECOM was engaged to undertake research as input to the RDRP being developed by the ACT 
Government. Specifically, they were engaged to provide a summary of climate and drought resilience 
risks for rural landholders in the ACT based on stakeholder engagement, a review of observed climate 
and the development of future drought scenarios for the ACT. This report details the results of their 
research including: 
1. 
a baseline current climatology of droughts in the ACT utilising existing observational data, including 
that collected during the 2017-2020 drought. 
2. 
three future drought scenarios for the ACT utilising existing projection data, primarily from the NSW 
and ACT Regional Climate Modelling (NARCliM) project.  
3. 
assessing changes in related environmental parameters relevant to agriculture including water 
availability, temperatures, precipitation, evapotranspiration, seasonal shifts in rainfall and other 
metrics associated with these scenarios.  
4. 
assessing the impacts of those scenarios on the enterprises of the ACT farming and rural 
community and proposing mitigating actions that improve climate and drought resilience.  
5. 
Undertaking in-person engagement with members of the farming community through one-on-one 
interviews and a multi-stakeholder workshop. 
6. 
identifying up to three case studies of successful mitigation activities in regions and farming 
businesses like those in the ACT to increase drought resilience or adapt to climate change, to 
inform future decision-making.  
7. 
Compiling the above into a report that is readily accessible, understandable, and useable to 
EPSDD staff and the ACT farming and rural community.   
1.2 
Structure of this report 
This report is structured as follows: 
• 
Sections 1 and 2 outline the context for the study and the method for developing its findings 
• 
Section 3 introduces drought concepts, climate data, and observed droughts in the ACT 
• 
Sections 4 and 5 outline observed and future projections of drought-related climate variables 
• 
Section 6 describes the impacts of drought on stakeholders  
• 
Sections 7 and 8 describes the how the ACT’s rural community has previously responded to 
drought 
• 
Section 9 summarises the key findings relating to the vulnerability of ACTs farming community to 
droughts.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
8
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
1.3 
Overview of agriculture in the ACT 
The Territory's 159 farming families collectively manage 180 leases covering 40,000ha (15%) of the 
ACT. The Territory supports a range of agricultural enterprises, in 2020/2021, the Territory’s total value 
of agricultural commodities produced was $9 million of Australia’s total value of $70.8 billion (0.013%). 
Grazing (cattle and sheep) is the most common form of agricultural production followed by egg, poultry, 
and others4. 
Neither intensive cropping activities nor horticulture has a high prevalence in terms of the number of 
farms in the ACT, with these categories represented by a small number of orchards and turf production. 
Production data is not well represented in national agriculture statistics, likely due to the low number of 
farms. ABARES’ latest figures (2020/2021)4, for example, identify a total of 34 farms that are 
recognised as farm businesses, which is not representative of known families and businesses in the 
region. However, the spread of those businesses identified within national datasets is in line with 
general numbers represented by the full cohort of landowners. Other agricultural enterprises include 
egg and chicken production; horse agistment and equestrian enterprises; alpacas and llamas; fruit 
orchards and vegetable market gardens; nurseries; fodder cropping including lucerne, oats and other 
fodder crops (primarily for on-farm use); wine; olives and truffles. 
This agricultural production profile is generally consistent with that of surrounding NSW regions, which 
also have grazing (cattle and sheep) as key agricultural activities. Broadacre cropping is more 
significant in the central western part of NSW while dairy and nursery industries are more prevalent in 
the eastern regions. 
Figure 2 Number and type of farms in the ACT represented within 2020/21 ABARES data 
Agricultural production occurs primarily within areas identified as non-urban zones under the Territory 
Plan (Figure 3). Within this, agricultural production is only a specific objective on land zoned NUZ2 
(rural) or more generally NUZ1 (broadacre). Permitted activities on rural and broadacre lands can be 
further restricted by purpose clauses in crown leases. General planning rules may allow for grazing in 
some regions, but purpose clauses in crown leases often specify cattle or sheep grazing and that other 
grazing animals (e.g., goats) or agricultural uses more generally would require a change to the lease 
agreement. The lease also specifies requirements for appropriate environmental management and 
monitoring of conservation assets including identification of pest animal and invasive plant management 
programs. As a total proportion of land within the ACT, these rural zonings comprise approximately 
15%. 
4 ABARES (2022). About my region dashboard. 
https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/australian.bureau.of.agricultural.and.resource.economics.and.sci/viz/AMR_v9_A3L/Dashbo
ard1 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Nursery Production (Outdoors)
Grape Growing
Apple and Pear Growing
Sheep Farming (Specialised)
Poultry Farming (Eggs)
Horse Farming
Sheep-Beef Cattle Farming
Beef Cattle Farming (Specialised)

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
9
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 3 
Agricultural land use zoning within the Territory Plan5 
5 ACT Government. (2022). Territory Plan. https://app2.actmapi.act.gov.au/actmapi/index.html?viewer=territoryplan

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
10
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
2.0 
Method 
2.1 
Overview 
Delivery of the project was undertaken in four key stages (Figure 4): 
• 
Developing scenarios of future droughts by collating projections of future climate change  
• 
Undertaking stakeholder engagement via interviews, farm visits, and a stakeholder workshop to 
understand the lived experience of drought within the ACT’s farming community 
• 
Gathering examples of how farmers have responded to drought and collating potential future 
actions 
• 
Producing a final report outlining all key findings of the study. 
Figure 4 
Method overview

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
11
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
2.2 
Develop drought scenarios 
This report provides a summary of three future scenarios of drought for the ACT to inform the 
development of the ACT’s RDRP. The method used to develop these scenarios is outlined below. 
A literature review was undertaken to identify observed and projected impacts of drought and climate 
change on ACT-relevant agricultural sectors (nationally and regionally) and appropriate drought 
preparation and climate change adaptation responses (refer to Section 5.3). Sources reviewed included 
scientific papers, government websites, and community agricultural websites. For this stage of the 
study, this review informed the selection of climate variables to be requested from data providers. This 
process is described in Figure 5. 
Figure 5  
Method to develop drought scenarios 
2.3 
Stakeholder engagement 
Following the development of the scenarios, several stakeholder engagement activities were 
undertaken to identify: 
• 
ACT rural landholders’ previous experience of droughts and how they responded 
• 
What actions they have taken to improve their resilience to drought, 
• 
Future projections of climate change, and  
• 
Understand what aspects of their enterprise may need to change to account for future projections.  
To ensure the project captured the views of a diverse range of stakeholders, engagement activities 
were undertaken in three ways: 
• 
One-on-one interviews were conducted with six landholders face-to-face and via phone to discuss 
the impacts of the 2017-2020 drought, and the impacts of droughts more generally. Interviews 
were generally held at the landholder’s property or in a public location such as a café and ran for 1-
2 hours. 
• 
A three-hour landholder workshop was conducted on Wednesday 31 August at the Weston Creek 
Labour Club, Canberra. It was attended by 16 ACT rural landholders and one NSW rural 
landholder. The workshop was advertised to landholders by EPSDD via email and follow-up phone 
calls to encourage attendance. 
• 
Following the workshop and additional community engagement activities, a survey, “Have Your 
Say – ACT’s Regional Drought Resilience Plan”, was sent out to the ACT rural community. The 
• Review of existing data previously collected for the ACT (i.e. NARCliM outputs from the ACT Climate 
Change Risk Assessment)
Data review
• Identification of gaps and additional climate variables relevent to agriculture and drought planning
Gaps
• Review of spatial boundaries and update to ensure accurate reflection of geographical spread of 
ACT's agricultural sector
Spatial boundary
• Collation of observed climate (Bureau of Meterology) and future climate projections (NARCliM, via 
NSW Government)
Data request
• Consolidation and analysis of data
Data analysis

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
12
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
survey sought input from ACT’s agricultural community about experiences of the past drought, the 
challenges that were faced, and any ideas that will help build resilience to future droughts. 15 
responses to the survey were received. The survey questions sent out can be viewed in Appendix 
F. 
2.4 
Adaptation and case studies  
Findings from the literature review were collated alongside the engagement results. These were 
mapped into respective domains and themes. Priority impacts and focus actions were identified based 
on the frequency in which they were cited. These priority items are subject to deeper analysis and 
research in this report. Results have been supplemented with three case studies, which primarily draw 
on conversations with farmers during stakeholder engagement activities.   
2.5 
Final report  
Drought scenarios, stakeholder engagement results and literature review findings were then 
consolidated to form the final report (this document).

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
13
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Part 2 
Baseline climate 
and future drought 
risk

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
14
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
3.0 
Climate data and drought in the ACT  
The ACT has experienced periods of drought in the past, and long-term climate change projections 
indicate that drought will occur more frequently and become more severe in the future. This section 
describes the meteorological, agricultural, and hydrological conditions that define drought, and outlines 
recent drought events that have occurred in the ACT. 
3.1 
Conditions relating to drought 
Drought is typically a slow-onset phenomenon that is driven by climate variables such as lower-than-
average precipitation (incl. rain, sleet, snow, hail, or drizzle), often higher average temperatures, and 
increased evaporation. It is frequently more recognisable through its associated impacts including 
reduced water availability, reduced soil moisture, reduced plant growth and reduced carrying capacity of 
the land, reduced on-farm biodiversity and more.  
Defining drought 
The Bureau of Meteorology defines drought as a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of available 
water is insufficient to meet our normal use. There is no universal definition of drought, and it is difficult to 
compare one drought to another, since each drought differs in the seasonality, location, geographic extent, and 
duration of the associated rainfall deficiencies. Additionally, each drought is accompanied by varying 
temperatures, soil moisture and water availability. Droughts typically have a slow-onset with recognisable 
impacts to agriculture including reduced soil moisture, reduced carrying capacity of land, and reduced on-farm 
biodiversity6. The following factors are used to measure and track drought conditions: 
• 
Meteorological data (e.g. reductions in average rainfall) 
• 
Agricultural data (e.g. soil moisture) 
• 
Hydrological data (e.g. reductions in surface stream flow and deep drainage; water storage levels) 
Droughts are monitored through several hydrometeorological and land-surface indicators, summarised 
in Figure 6. There are three basic approaches to measuring drought as a physical phenomenon: 
meteorological, hydrological, and agricultural. All droughts originate from a deficiency of precipitation or 
meteorological drought but other types of drought and impacts cascade from this deficiency7.  
6 BoM. (2022). Understanding Drought. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-
centre/understanding.shtml#:~:text=Drought%20is%20a%20prolonged%2C%20abnormally,be%20in%20almost%20perpetual%2
0drought. 
7 National Drought Mitigation Center, 2022, Types of Drought, https://drought.unl.edu/Education/DroughtIn-
depth/TypesofDrought.aspx

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
15
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 6 Schematic representation of drought propagation through the hydrological cycle, related drought stages and 
key influences8 
Drought conditions arise from changes in a range of atmospheric conditions. Weather patterns relating 
to drought include: 
• 
Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO): defined by the leading pattern of sea surface temperature 
anomalies in the North Pacific basin.9 
• 
Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD): defined by the difference in sea surface temperature between two 
areas – a western pole in the Arabian Sea and an eastern pole in the eastern Indian Ocean south 
of Indonesia. The IOD affects the climate of Australia and other countries that surround the Indian 
Ocean Basin and is a significant contributor to rainfall variability in this region.10 
• 
El Niño: defined as a climate pattern that describes the unusual warming of surface waters in the 
eastern tropical Pacific Ocean.11 El Niño is often, but not always, associated with drought in 
Australia. 
These weather patterns contribute to low-frequency changes in persistent atmospheric circulation 
patterns associated with drought conditions. For example, both El Niño and a positive Indian Ocean 
Dipole contribute to increased dry weather in the ACT and can increase the duration and intensity of 
droughts. Short-term influences on drought include weather variability and annual cycles such as wet 
and dry seasons, rain squalls and cyclones. Longer-term influences on drought include climate change, 
where long-term increases to atmospheric temperatures and changes in rainfall totals along with 
increased rainfall variability are observed. Changes in rainfall and rainfall variability due to climate 
change are the focus of this report (Figure 7). 
8 UNDRR. (2021). Special Report on Drought 2021. https://www.droughtmanagement.info/literature/UN-
GAR_Specia_Report_on_Drought_2021.pdf 
9 NCAR Climate Data Guide, 2022, Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO): Definition and 
Indices,https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data/pacific-decadal-oscillation-pdo-definition-and-indices 
10 BOM, 2022, The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD), www.bom.gov.au/climate/enso/history/ln-2010-12/IOD-what.shtml 
11 National Geographic, El Niño, 2022, https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/el-nino

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
16
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 7 shows the relationship of droughts with the weather, climate variability and climate change. 
Figure 7 A guide to the timescale applicable to weather, climate variability and climate change12 
The Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) 
The Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) reflects soil moisture and precipitation conditions and is the 
most used indicator for detecting and characterising meteorological droughts. Negative values are 
associated with below-average rainfall and drought while positive values indicate wetter-than-average 
conditions. The index categories are as follows: 
• 
Mildly dry (SPI less than (<) 0 or greater than (>) -0.99) e.g., soil moisture and precipitation 
conditions are average to slightly less than average  
• 
Moderately dry (-1.0 > SPI > -1.49) 
• 
Severely dry (-1.5 > SPI > -1.99)  
• 
Extremely dry conditions (SPI less than -2.0) 
SPI is a key indicator to characterise drought conditions. In the ACT, historical SPI observations show 
that there have been eight periods of extremely dry conditions over the past century (refer to Figure 14, 
Appendix F). There appears to be a relationship between SPI and average maximum temperatures 
which suggests that higher temperatures are generally associated with periods of drought in the ACT 
(Figure 15, Appendix B). 
3.2 
ACT experience of drought 
Like much of NSW, the ACT experiences variability in its average climate conditions both over time 
(e.g. high temperatures in summer, low temperatures in winter) and spatially (the North-Eastern region 
of the ACT is much warmer and drier than the alpine areas to the south-west).  Large-scale weather 
patterns (described in Section 3.1), including ENSO, SAM, and IOD also affect the region. More 
recently, extreme climate events have increased in intensity, frequency, and duration13,14. 
projections/understanding-climate-variability-and-
change/#:~:text=Climate%20is%20the%20long%20term,trend%20in%20the%20mean%20climate.  
13 CSIRO. (2015). Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia's NRM Regions. 
https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/CCIA_2015_NRM_TechnicalReport_WEB.pdf  

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
17
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
The ACT has experienced several periods of serious and severe drought, three recent examples 
include: 
• 
1982: Periods of rainfall deficiency which had a major impact on Canberra include the severe 
drought beginning in April 1982, which saw only 141.7 mm of rainfall over 9 months. Significant 
relief for Canberra came in the form of increased rainfall during the period of March-May of the 
following year.  
• 
2001 to 2009: known as the Millennium drought, this period experienced drought episodes and a 
long-term decline in rainfall. For example, in February of 2004, Canberra received 79.8 mm of 
rainfall over a 6-month period. Figure 8 below depicts the rainfall received as a percentile of all 
rainfall data on record.  
• 
2017 to 2020: Drought conditions were experienced in the ACT from 2018 to 2020. For example, 
in two separate 6-month periods during the two years, Canberra received less than 150 mm of 
rainfall. Section 3.2.2, “Drought in Focus – 2017 to 2019”, explores this in greater detail. 
Figure 8 Rainfall Deciles November 2001 to 31 October 200915 
3.2.1 
Agricultural water uses in the ACT 
Water use in the ACT is guided by the ACT Water Strategy 2014-204416 which provides long-term (30-
year) strategic guidance to manage the Territory’s water resources. Given that the Territory is entirely 
within the Murrumbidgee catchment and wider Murray Darling Basin (MDB), the Water Strategy 
conforms to obligations under the MDB Plan17. Under the MDB Plan, the Water Strategy notes that the 
ACT has a sustainable diversion limit (SDL) for surface water of 52.5 gigalitres (GL) per annum, with a 
further 30,160ML per annum allocated for groundwater extraction 
15 Bureau of Meteorology. (2022). 122 years of Australian rainfall. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/history/rainfall/ 
16 ACT Government. (2014). ACT Water Strategy 2014–44 | Striking the Balance. 
https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/621424/ACT-Water-Strategy-ACCESS.pdf  
17 Murray-Darling Basin Authority. (2022). A plan for the Murray–Darling Basin. https://www.mdba.gov.au/basin-plan/plan-murray-
darling-basin

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
18
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
The Australian Bureau of Statistics Water Accounts 2019-2020 notes the ACT had net water extraction 
of 21,166 megalitres (ML) of water, with 334ML used for the purposes of agriculture (1.58%). Between 
2014 and 2020 the average annual water extracted for agricultural purposes has been 236ML 
compared to an average net extraction of 16,201ML for the ACT (1.55%) (Figure 9). Groundwater 
resources in the ACT are very small in comparison to other areas in Australia. ACT Government policy 
limits the extraction of groundwater to 10% of the volume of long-term recharge. 
Figure 9 
ACT’s net water extraction and agricultural water use18 
The ACT has four dams which are managed by Icon Water:  
• 
Corin dam (70.79 GL capacity) 
• 
Bendora Dam (11.45 GL capacity) 
• 
Cotter dam (76.2 GL capacity) 
• 
Googong dam (110.41 GL capacity).  
The current combined dam capacity for the ACT is 277.84 GL.19 During the Millennium drought, the 
combined storage level fell below 32% in 2007. During the most recent drought of 2017-2020, the 
combined storage level fell below 46%. Measures to increase dam capacity to support drought 
resilience have been undertaken, with the enlargement of Cotter dam in 2013 increasing the combined 
dam capacity by 70 GL. This upgrade resulted in an extra 62 GL of water being available during the 
2019-2020 drought in comparison to the Millennium drought (Figure 10). In addition, the upgrade also 
resulted in no water restriction requirements as experienced during the Millennium drought.   
18 Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2021). Water Account, Australia, 2019-20 financial year. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/environment/environmental-management/water-account-australia/2019-20#data-download  
19 Icon Water. (2022). Water Storage Levels | Icon Water. https://www.iconwater.com.au/water-education/water-and-sewerage-
system/dams/water-storage-levels.aspx 
13,823
15,868
11,697
15,669
18,981
21,166
191
155
387
187
160
334
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Net water extraced (ML)
Total ACT
ACT Agriculture
Sustainable Diversion Limit

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
19
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 10 Historical Dam Storage Levels of Icon Water Dams15 
While confidence that average rainfall will decrease as a result of climate change is high, modelling 
depicting inflows to water storage during drought periods is not well understood. Increasing average 
temperatures is thought to be a key driver in this changing relationship – when comparing impacts on 
water storage inflow between the Millennium Drought and the 2017-2020 drought, the latter was more 
heavily affected. Further research is required into this subject, but early findings suggest there are 
disproportionately higher reductions in runoff and dam inflows for every percentage change in average 
rainfall.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
20 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
3.2.2 
Drought in Focus – 2017 to 2020 
2017 – 2020 Drought 
There have been several periods of severe drought since Canberra’s climate records commenced. Both El Niño and a positive Indian Ocean Dipole contribute to an increased 
likelihood of dry weather in the ACT and can increase the duration and intensity of droughts. The 2017 – 2020 drought saw the lowest rainfall on record. In two separate 6-month 
periods across these years, Canberra received less than 150 mm of rainfall. 
The observed climate during this period included:  
• 
44% decrease in average rainfall (385mm in 2019 compared to the 1990-2021 baseline average of 690mm) 
• 
91% decrease in soil moisture during Dec 2019 – Jan 2020 (compared to 1990-2021 December months baseline average) 
• 
Soil moisture was zero in the summer of 2020 
• 
SPI (3-month) during Dec 2019 – Jan 2020 was classified as extremely dry, with the driest conditions recorded since 1982 
• 
80% increase in extreme heat days (>35°C) with 15.3 days recorded (compared to the 1990-2021 baseline average). 
Observed data for North-East ACT

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
21
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
3.3 
Spatial boundaries for climate data in the ACT  
Two distinct geographical regions were identified in the ACT to assist with defining two sets of distinct 
climate change projections related to drought for the ACT. Two regions (outlined in Figure 11) were 
identified based on Districts within the Territory Plan and informed by a clear difference in climatic 
zones between the North-Eastern region (warmer, with a greater increase in average and extreme 
temperatures into the future), compared to the alpine and sub-alpine regions of the South-Western 
region (where the drivers of climate risk are more likely driven by a reduction in cold nights). 
Given that the majority of rural landholders in the ACT are located in the North-Eastern region, climate 
projections and climate data related to the North-Eastern region are included in the body of this report, 
whilst climate projections and climate data related to the South-Western region are included in 
Appendix G, H and D.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
22
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 11 Map of the ACT showing the North-Eastern region (shaded green) and South-Western region (red shading)

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
23
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
4.0 
Observed climate 
To develop a historical climatology of droughts in the ACT observed annual, monthly, and seasonal 
data was requested for seven climate variables from the Bureau of Meteorology’s (BOM) Australian 
Gridded Climate Data collection, regionalised for the study areas (Appendix G). Variables include: 
• 
rainfall,  
• 
maximum temperature,  
• 
minimum temperature,  
• 
soil moisture,  
• 
standard precipitation index,  
• 
days with minimum temperatures less than 2°C  
• 
days with maximum temperatures exceeding 35°C.  
Table 1 provides a summary of the seven climate variables, the timescales at which this data is 
presented (i.e. monthly, annually) and the region's representative of the data. All observed data covers 
the period 1910-2021 (in some cases starting from 1900). All detailed data is available under a separate 
copy. 
Table 1 
Summary of observed climate variables  
Climate variable 
Timescale 
Period 
Region 
Rainfall 
Annual, monthly and 4 seasons 
1900-
2021 
Mean Maximum 
Temperature 
Annual, monthly and 4 seasons 
1910-
2021 
North-East ACT 
Mean Minimum Temperature 
Annual, monthly and 4 seasons 
1910-
2021 
(Section 4.0) 
Soil Moisture (root zone) 
Annual, monthly and 4 seasons 
1911-
2021 
Standard Precipitation Index 
(SPI) 
3-month and 12-month SPI 
1900-
2021 
South-West ACT 
Days less than <2°C 
Annual, monthly and 4 seasons 
1910-
2021 
(Appendix G) 
Extreme heat days (>35°C) 
Annual, monthly and 4 seasons 
1910-
2021 
4.1 
Summary of observed climate  
Table 2 summarises observed climate data for each variable under two timeframes, 1910-1990 and 
1990-2021. The data has been split into these two periods to compare recent trends to the longer-term 
record. Section 4.1 demonstrates the growing warming of the ACT climate during these periods. Refer 
to Appendix A for further detail on observed temperature and rainfall in North-Eastern ACT. 
Table 2 
Observed Climate Data Summary for North-East ACT 
Climate 
Trend 
variable 
1910-1990 
1990-2021 
Temperature 
Maximum 
temperature 
• 
Average annual 
maximum 
temperature of 
18.8°C annually 
• 
Average annual maximum temperature of 19.6°C 
annually 
• 
Since 2008, there have been 13 periods of 
heatwaves 
• 
Hottest temperature on record in Canberra was 
44°C in 2019

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
24
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Climate 
Trend 
variable 
1910-1990 
1990-2021 
• 
The four hottest summers and three hottest 
springs have occurred in the last 20 years  
• 
The four hottest years have occurred in the last 
20 years 
Minimum 
temperature 
• 
Average annual 
minimum 
temperature of 
6.1°C 
• 
Average annual minimum temperature of 6.7°C 
• 
2019 saw the hottest January with a monthly 
average minimum temperature of 17.62°C 
recorded across the month, compared to 12.6°C 
baseline average 
Extreme 
heat days 
(>35°C) 
• 
On average 2.3 
extreme heat 
days annually 
• 
Hottest year 
experienced 
8.71 extreme 
heat days (1983) 
• 
On average 5.7 extreme heat days annually 
• 
Hottest year experienced 23.34 extreme heat 
days (2019) 
• 
86% increase in 2019 in the number of extreme 
heat days compared to 1990-2021 baseline 
average 
• 
Overall significant increase in extreme heat days 
annually compared to pre-1990’s 
Days below 
<2°C 
• 
Average of 7.9 
days below <2°C 
annually 
• 
Average of 7.2 days below <2°C annually 
Rainfall 
Average 
annual 
rainfall A 
• 
Average annual 
rainfall of 
679mm 
• 
Average annual rainfall of 686mm 
• 
Four of the driest springs in the last century have 
happened in the last 20 years 
• 
Two of the wettest years and two of the driest 
years have happened in the last 20 years 
Soil 
moisture 
Average 
annual soil 
moisture 
• 
Average annual 
soil moisture of 
362mm 
• 
Average annual soil moisture of 337mm 
SPIA 
SPI-3 month 
• 
Six periods of 
‘moderately’ dry 
conditions  
• 
One period of ‘moderately’ dry conditions B 
SPI-12 
month 
• 
Three periods of 
‘moderately’ dry 
conditions 
• 
Two periods of 
‘extremely’ dry 
conditions 
• 
Two periods of ‘moderately’ dry conditions B 
A Observed data starts at 1900. B Note that table displays two timeframes however with different lengths, 80 and 30 
years, making it hard to compare SPI pre 1990 and post 1991 due to the same amount of time not having passed 
yet.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
25
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
5.0 
Future climate 
Changes to the global climate are already being observed, with increased periods of drought, increased 
temperatures, more frequent extreme rainfall, flooding, and bushfires impacting agriculture worldwide. 
The frequency, intensity, spatial extent, duration, and timing of extreme weather events are also 
expected to increase. The impact of this changing climate is already being felt by the agricultural sector 
and events including periods of drought are expected to increase in frequency and intensity. Section 5.0 
describes the projected future climate for the ACT using a range of climate variables relevant to 
agriculture in accordance with global greenhouse gas emission scenarios.  
Scenario selection 
Climate scenarios refer to the global greenhouse gas emissions scenarios which underpin projections 
of future climate and provide an indication of possible future impacts. Plausible physical pathways have 
been developed by industry and scientific groups including the NSW Government and the CSIRO and 
Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), based on robust scientific data and climate modelling provided by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), to outline projected changes to the climate and 
anticipated responses across the public and private sector. 
Scenario analysis is an important tool for understanding and exploring the strategic implications of 
climate-related physical risks and opportunities. It provides an understanding of how resilient 
organisations are to a range of plausible climate-related scenarios, and how sensitive an organisations 
assets and operations are to the differences between these scenarios. 
Box 1 Understanding scenarios 
A scenario describes a path of development leading to a particular outcome. Scenarios are not 
intended to represent a full description of the future, but rather highlight central elements of a 
possible future to draw attention to the key factors that will drive future developments. Scenarios are 
hypothetical constructs; they are not forecasts or predictions20. 
The purpose of this chapter is to present the rationale for proposing the climate change scenarios that 
will be used to assess physical risks for the ACT farming community.  The scope of this chapter 
includes: 
• 
Analysis and recommendation of climate (emissions) scenarios that allow for the identification of 
physical risks to ACT farming community. 
• 
Analysis and recommendation of multiple time horizons to consider in developing climate scenarios 
and understanding future projections which are appropriate to the planning, design, and 
operational lives of the ACT farming community. 
• 
Selection and understanding of the climate variables (hazards) that may result in physical risks to 
the ACT’s agricultural sector. 
Climate projections and data availability 
In 2021, the NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling project (NARCliM 1.5) released a suite of 
improved climate change projections downscaled for NSW and the ACT. Compared to NARCliM 1.0 
these models better capture the seasonal patterns and magnitudes of precipitation as well as the 
potential hotter and drier futures that are being experienced within these regions.  
NARCliM 1.5 also provides the added benefit of future projections for two AR5 scenarios to allow for a 
greater interrogation and understanding of future changes in climate in line with other modelling 
datasets compared to NARCliM 1.0. NARCliM 1.5 has been used to inform the climate projections for 
this study.   
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) describe potential scenarios of global climate 
emissions and underly the three drought scenarios presented in this study. These scenarios are 
described in Table 3. 
20 TCFD, 2017, Technical Supplement - The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate-Related Risks and Opportunities. 
Page 10. https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/FINAL-TCFD-Technical-Supplement-062917.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
26
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table 3 
Description of Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) 
Scenario 
Description of scenario21 
RCP 4.5 
(Low-medium 
emissions 
scenario) 
Assumes a high level of mitigation with no active removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
Emissions are anticipated to peak around 2070 and then remain consistent until 2100. This 
scenario assumes full uptake of renewable energy however no carbon capture to help 
reduce the levels of carbon dioxide. As a result, it is anticipated that temperature increases 
can be limited to 1.8°C by the end of the century (based on a 1985 – 2005 baseline) and 
while there will be some increase to extreme weather events due to historical climate 
change, these will result in medium level adaptation costs to mitigate risk. 
RCP 8.5 
(High 
emissions 
scenario) 
Assumes minimal effort to reduce emissions. Emissions will continue to grow unchecked, 
marked by the continued use of conventional fossil fuel energy to power cities homes and 
businesses. Without sizeable intervention this scenario assumes an average temperature 
increase of up to 4°C by the end of the century (based on a 1986 – 2005 baseline). It will 
require costly adaptation to minimise the impact of extreme weather events which have 
continued to increase dramatically over the past century. 
RCP 8.5 
(High 
emissions 
hotter/ drier 
scenario) 
Same as above however when using this scenario the upper limit of the model is taken to 
assume worst case scenario, hence “hotter/ drier scenario”. 
Time horizons 
NARCliM and other climate projection projects generally include 20-year time horizons centred on a 
‘fixed year’, for example, 2070 accounts for the period 2060-2079. The time horizons reviewed for this 
study include: 
• 
A baseline period of 1990-2009,  
• 
future time horizons of 2030, 2045, 2070 and 2090. 
Further detail on these scenarios can be found in Appendix F. 
5.1 
Climate hazards and climate change projections for the ACT  
Climate change modelling produces projections for various climate variables (such as temperature, 
precipitation, wind, solar radiation, etc), and uses a combination of these variables to derive climate 
hazards (such as the number of hot days, cold days, heavy rainfall days, drought patterns, extreme 
wind speeds, relative humidity).  
Based on desktop review and stakeholder feedback, a number of variables have been selected for their 
relevance to the ACT’s agricultural community. Future trends as informed by relevant climate change 
projections are outlined below and visualised on the following pages. The climate change projections 
described in Section 5.2 align with the high-emission scenario (RCP 8.5). Refer to Section 5.0 and 
Appendix F for more detail on scenario selection. Given that most rural landholders in the ACT are in 
the North-Eastern region, climate projections related to the North-Eastern region are included in the 
body of this report, whilst climate projections related to the South-Western region are included in 
Appendix F.  
Table 4 outlines the climate hazards investigated as part of this work and the relevance of the climate 
hazard to agriculture. 
21 Australian Govt. Department of the Environment and Energy, (n.d.). What are the RCPs?. 
https://coastadapt.com.au/sites/default/files/infographics/15-117-NCCARFINFOGRAPHICS-01-UPLOADED-
WEB%2827Feb%29.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
27
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table 4 Climate hazards: Climate variables and future projections used to inform drought scenarios 
Average annual temperature 
Average annual rainfall 
Soil moisture and drought 
indicators 
• 
Projected Monthly Daily 
Maximum Temperature 
• 
Mean Daily Minimum 
Temperature 
• 
No. of Days per Month with 
Maximum Temperatures 
greater than 35°C 
• 
Percentage of Days with 
Maximum Temperature 
Above 90th Percentile 
• 
Warm Spell Duration Index 
• 
Annual precipitation 
• 
Maximum Length of a Dry 
Spell Annually (No. of 
Days) 
• 
Projected Days Above 20 
mm 
• 
Total Soil Moisture Content 
• 
Standardised Precipitation 
Index (SPI) 
5.2 
Summary of future climate trends for the ACT 
Table 5 Summary of future climate trends for North-East ACT22 
Average annual temperature 
Hazard description 
Average atmospheric temperature increases over time 
Trend 
Average temperatures are increasing, with higher average maximum and minimum temperatures 
Example impacts 
Reduce yields of desirable crops, heat stress to livestock 
Climate variables 
1990-2009 
(Baseline) 
Future projections (RCP8.5) 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Annual average minimum temperature (°C) 
6.93 
8.01 
8.56 
9.59 
10.81 
Annual average maximum temperature (°C) 
26.04 
27.19 
28.03 
29.31 
31.04 
Annual days below 2°C  
84.17 
65.96 
55.07 
36.95 
23.33 
Annual extreme heat days (days above 
35°C) 
4.97 
8.13 
11.88 
18.55 
29.27 
Average annual rainfall 
Hazard description 
Average precipitation changes over time and periods of dry weather including extended periods with 
no rainfall 
Trend 
Summer rainfall is projected to increase,  with reductions in winter rainfall expected. Overall projected 
decreases in average annual rainfall however increasing intensity of extreme rainfall eventsA 
Example impacts 
Grazable land is dependent on precipitation 
22 North-East region in the ACT under RCP8.5

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
28
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Climate variables 
1990-2009 
(Baseline) 
Future projections (RCP8.5) 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Annual precipitation (mm) 
629.5 
634.6 
610.1 
570.9 
548.2 
Consecutive wet days 
(average maximum number of 
consecutive days with rainfall in a 12-
month period) 
5.49 
5.68 
5.36 
5.32 
5.29 
Consecutive dry days 
(average maximum number of 
consecutive days without rainfall in a 
12-month period) 
27.30 
27.34 
29.12 
32.23 
36.26 
Drought and soil related climate variables 
Hazard description 
SPI is the most used indicator for detecting and characterising meteorological droughts. Soil moisture 
is the amount of water in the top 2 m of soil measured in millimetres 
Trend 
Soil moisture and SPI are both decreasing 
Example impacts 
As moisture availability declines, the normal function and growth of plants is disrupted, and crop 
yields are reduced 
Climate variables 
1990-2009 
(Baseline) 
Future projections (RCP8.5) 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Standard Precipitation Index (SPI 
trending negative indicates drying)B 
-0.0172458 
-0.0048 
-0.14801 
-0.4225 
-0.6094 
Total Soil Moisture Content (mm) 
 544.7860 
 543.823 
 529.795 
 506.493 
  482.828 
A  Projections related to storms are not available for NARCliM 1.5 and have instead been sourced from NARCliM 1.0 . B Standard 
Precipitation Index (SPI) 12-month scale for ACT. Mildly dry (0>SPI>-0.99), moderately dry (-1.0>SPI>-1.49), severely dry (-
1.5>SPI>-1.99) and extremely dry conditions (SPI less than -2.0).23 
23 Agricultural and Meteorological Software. (2020). What is SPI(Standardized Precipitation Index). 
https://agrimetsoft.com/faq/What%20is%20SPI(Standardized%20Precipitation%20Index)

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
29
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
5.2.1 
Visualisations of future projections  
The following section presents visualisations of future projections for the identified climate variables 
using NARCLiM 1.5 projections for the North-East region of the ACT under RCP8.5. Monthly average 
maximum temperatures are projected to increase for all future periods; monthly average precipitation is 
expected to increase in summer months over time, and decrease in winter months, with an overall 
decrease in annual rainfall projected (Figure 12). Additional visualisations of climate projections are 
located in appendices to this report.  
Figure 12 Future projection for temperature and rainfall variables, under an RCP 8.5 scenario for North-Eastern ACT 
Another important variable for the agricultural community is vapour pressure deficit (VPD) which 
measures the difference between moisture content in the air and the total moisture capacity of the air 
when it is completely saturated. The projected increasing average temperatures and humidity 
decreases are likely to increase VPD. The projected increase in VPD will cause increased evaporation 
thus increasing the risk of crops drying out. A detailed explanation of VPD can be found in Appendix A.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
30
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
5.3 
Climate Analogues 
Box 2  
Climate Analogues for the ACT 
Climate analogues is a tool that matches the proposed future climate of a region of interest with the 
current climate experienced in another region using annual average rainfall and maximum temperature. 
The changes to the ACT’s climate mean it is more likely to resemble the climate of other warmer, drier 
regions in Australia. The figure below matches the proposed future climates of Canberra (which can be 
used to be representative of the ACT) with a similar climate currently experienced in another location. 
These projections use the annual average rainfall and maximum temperature as a basis for identifying 
analogue towns and allow Canberrans to picture what the future climate of Canberra is under different 
emissions scenarios. Analogue towns for Canberra in 2030, 2050, and 2090 under RCP 8.5 are 
presented below. An overview of what agriculture looks like in these towns is presented in Table 6 and 
in further detail in Appendix G. 
CSIRO Climate Analogues Climate Projections used:  
Canberra, RCP8.5 2030 - Temperature change 1°C, rainfall change 0% | Canberra, RCP8.5 2050 - Temperature change 2°C, 
rainfall change -5% | Canberra, RCP8.5 2090 - Temperature change 4.2°C, rainfall change -12% 
CSIRO Climate Analogues Climate Projections used:  
Canberra, RCP4.5 2030 - Temperature change 0.9°C, rainfall change 0% | Canberra, RCP4.5 2050 - Temperature change 1.2°C, 
rainfall change 1% | Canberra, RCP4.5 2090 - Temperature change 2°C, rainfall change -4%

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
31
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 13 Analogue towns for Canberra under RCP8.5 for 2030, 2050 and 2090 
Table 6 Types of agricultural practises for Canberra's analogue towns

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
32
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
5.4 
Future drought scenarios for the ACT  
Three scenarios were reviewed to inform the development of drought scenarios for the ACT. Climate 
projections produced by NARCliM are the result of running an ensemble of six different climate models. 
Results for the average across these six models are referred is the ‘ensemble model mean’. For this 
study, three scenarios were developed including a low-medium emissions scenario (RCP 4.5 model 
ensemble mean), high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model ensemble mean) and a hotter/drier scenario 
(adopting the hottest and driest model of the RCP 8.5 model ensemble for the given time period). 
Appendix A summarises the future drought scenario based on a high global emissions scenario, 
described as RCP 8.5 (model ensemble). Future projections described are in accordance with the 
model assemble mean of projections under the modelling produced under this scenario. For further 
information regarding the low emission scenario, the ‘hotter and drier’ model scenario and the selection 
of drought scenarios, refer to Appendix A.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
33
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
5.5 
High emissions scenario for the North-East ACT

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
34
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Part 3 
Impacts to ACT’s 
agriculture sector

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
35
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
6.0 
Impacts of drought 
The future drought scenarios and climate observations described in Section 4.0 and 5.0 was presented 
to stakeholders during stakeholder engagement to help inform discussions regarding impact of drought 
on rural landholders in the ACT.  
The following section presents the impacts identified by both stakeholder engagement (workshops, 
interviews, and the survey) and the desktop literature review.  
6.1.1 
Value domains  
The report outlines the impacts of drought, and responses that are being implemented, in the context of 
four ‘domains’. The domains encompass environmental, economic, social, and governance implications 
of drought events on the ACT’s agricultural community. This framing recognises that droughts impact 
on-farm activities such as animal husbandry and pasture production, which drive poor outcomes in each 
of the domains. They are a hybrid of existing domains adopted within strategic work of the ACT 
Government such as the ACT’s Whole of Government Climate Change Risk Assessment, the ACT’s 
Territory Wide Risk Assessment, and the ACT Wellbeing Framework. They also align to the Future 
Drought Fund’s three categories of environmental management, economic development, and wellbeing 
and social capital. It is recognised that the domains are interconnected and apply at a range of levels.  
In accordance with findings from the literature review and stakeholder engagement, the impacts of 
drought identified were categorised into these four thematic domains. 
Table 7 
Domains used in this report 
Domain 
Description 
Environmental 
Environmental resilience for sustainable and improved functioning of farming 
landscapes 
Environmental and biophysical impacts of drought and actions relating to soils, plant 
and animal growth, management of invasive species, animal welfare, conservation, 
and regeneration 
Economic 
Economic resilience for an innovative and profitable agricultural sector 
Impacts of drought relating to farm revenues, costs, subsidies, and grants; and actions 
relating to financial management. 
Social 
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable communities 
Drought impacts and responses relating to people and social networks, including their 
skills, knowledge, human health (physical and mental) and culture.  
Governance 
Relationship and process of interaction and decision making in and between 
government and the community. This theme is distinct from others because impacts 
and actions are indirect and cut across all the domains, and emerge from other 
domain risks 
6.1.2 
Priority impacts identified 
Priority impacts were identified based on stakeholder feedback, findings of the literature review, and 
analysis based on future drought scenario. A vulnerability framework (refer Glossary) was used as a 
lens to assist prioritisation by qualitatively rating their exposure (i.e. to what extent does each impact 
affect multiple agricultural enterprise types) and sensitivity (i.e. to what extent are affected agricultural 
types likely to be impacted by the given impact). Impacts have then been categorised by value domain.  
The priority impacts of drought, in the context of the drought scenarios, the vulnerability framework 
developed for this project and informed by feedback from ACT rural landholders and literature, are 
outlined in include:

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
36
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table 8 Impacts identified, by domain 
Group 
Impact 
Environmental 
Economic 
Social 
Governance 
Priority impact 
Reduced water 
availability 
● 
● 
Increased weeds 
and pests 
● 
● 
Reduced carrying 
capacity of land 
● 
● 
Reduced on-farm 
biodiversity 
● 
Increased 
occurrence of natural 
disasters 
● 
Reduced wellbeing 
of farming 
community 
● 
Other impacts 
Table 17, Appendix 
E) 
Shifts in timing of 
farm 
activities/operations 
● 
● 
Damage to assets 
and infrastructure 
● 
● 
Increased 
crop/pasture 
sensitivity 
● 
● 
Heat stress on 
livestock 
● 
● 
Erosion of soil and 
crop/pasture damage 
● 
● 
Land becomes 
unsuitable for 
agricultural 
enterprises 
● 
● 
● 
Increased need to 
import feed 
● 
● 
Shifts in timing of 
farm 
activities/operations 
● 
● 
Financial 
vulnerability 
● 
● 
● 
Safety and reduced 
employment 
● 
These impacts are discussed in detail below and a summary of all impacts can be found in Appendix E. 
Overall, there were five impacts identified to be driven by both a high exposure across ACT’s farming 
community and farming enterprises were generally all found to be sensitive to their impacts. These 
impacts are subsequently described in detail. 
The following sections describe the priority impacts within each Domain in detail. Given grazing 
systems (including both cattle and sheep) are the dominant agricultural enterprise in the ACT, there is a 
significant focus within the discussion on these systems. Other agricultural types (such as viticulture) 
are separately discussed where appropriate.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
37
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
6.2 
Environmental  
The priority environmental impacts of drought included:  
• 
Reduced water availability 
• 
Increased weeds and pests 
• 
Reduce carrying capacity of the land 
• 
Reduced on-farm biodiversity 
• 
Increased soil degradation including loss of groundcover, increased soil compaction, loss of soil 
carbon, reduced soil water holding capacity, and catastrophic erosion following drought-induced 
fires 
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned environmental impacts of drought were 
relating to reduced water availability (10), followed by increased weeds and pests (8), and on-farm 
biodiversity (5). Collectively these themes comprise three quarters of environmental impacts of drought 
identified by ACT landholders. Other impacts are explored further in Section 6.2.4.  
6.2.1 
Reduced water availability 
“With the last drought, we had to monitor our water. We were fortunate to access ground[water] 
allocation which meant we were able to provide clean and secure water for livestock” C  
Priority impact: Reduced water availability 
Context 
Agricultural practices are highly dependent on the availability of water. The future drought scenarios 
project less water availability manifested as reduced surface water, groundwater, and soil moisture, 
as well as reduced water for irrigation and other uses. This is due to a combination of lower rainfall 
(particularly in winter and spring) and higher temperatures reducing inflows to rivers and dams and 
reduced recharge rates for underground water D, 24. Due to increases in extreme rainfall events, the 
soil may remain dry despite the rain due to its inability to soak up as much water during an extreme 
rainfall event D. This can lead to soil erosion and damage to crops and pastures.   
Impacts 
ACT rural landholders noted reduced water quantity, and quality and increased reliance on off-farm 
and non-surface water sources. 
A direct impact of drought is reduced water availability and reduced soil pasture. ACT rural 
landholders noted that dams and on-farm water storage dried up in droughts A, B, D. This reduced 
water availability for farms which relied on surface water. Some landholders used town water to 
continue to service paddocks and house water demands B, whilst others noted a reliance on bore 
water to water livestock C. Some landholders noted they made use of natural springs to water stock. 
This allowed them to keep stock out of riparian corridors and protect these areas of native 
biodiversity. 
Cropping enterprises are more sensitive to drought than livestock farms. Low water availability has a 
close relationship with yield for irrigated crops D, and reduced water quality can also affect the quality 
of food crops. D 
In addition to reduced water quantity, landholders noted that it was a challenge to maintain dam 
water quality in drought, with water quality in dams degrading and requiring treatment. 
Flow on impacts of reduced water quantity and quality in drought include reduced production, and 
reduced stock health and growth, particularly for irrigated crops D.  
Climate variable 
• 
Decrease in annual rainfall 
24 AdaptNSW. (2022). Climate projections used on AdaptNSW. https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/climate-
projections-used-adaptnsw

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
38
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Increase in annual average temperatures 
• 
Reduced SPI 
• 
Reduced soil moisture content 
Prioritisation 
Adaptation actions 
• 
Section 9.4.1.1 Land management 
Legend: * priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through 
workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
6.2.2 
Increased weeds and pests 
“When you graze too hard, weeds can get a footing more easily.” 
“Lots of weeds getting blown in - if our neighbours have it, we'll have it” 
Priority Impact: Increased weeds and pests 
Context 
Climate change will affect the spread and competitiveness of weeds and pests in the ACT. This will 
impact crops and livestock. 
Impacts 
It was noted that periods of drought and elevated grazing pressure resulted in weeds gaining a 
foothold A, D. This led to a proliferation of weeds following drought, of which African lovegrass was of 
particular concern to landholders A. 
With minimum temperatures increasing, landholders noted that more weeds were blowing in from 
neighbouring properties/public land and that poor management of weeds on neighbouring properties 
nullified good management on their property. A.  
Weed spreading events will increase with increased incidence of flooding, bushfires, and winds D and 
transport by native and pest animal species. The costs of weed management are also likely to 
increase D. This is significant, as weeds are one of the most costly agricultural pests25. 
Wild and feral animals may carry diseases that can infect livestock, including Foot-and-mouth 
disease, Johne's disease, sheep measles, Newcastle disease, leptospirosis, and anthrax.26 Drought 
conditions can amplify the effects of parasites and infectious diseases through increased 
transmission in crowded conditions such as around water and feed sources and lowered immunity 
associated with poor nutrition.27 
These impacts ultimately result in a reduction in agricultural productivity and damage to the 
environment and natural resources D. 
Climate variable 
25 Schonbeck, M., & Tillage, B. (2011). Principles of sustainable weed management in organic cropping systems. In Workshop for 
Farmers and Agricultural Professionals on Sustainable Weed Management (Vol. 3, pp. 1-24). Clemson, SC, USA: Clemson 
University. 
26 Department of Primary Industries. (2022). Biosecurity, wildlife and feral animals. 
https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/biosecurity/animal/wildlife-and-feral-animals  
27 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Animal health in a drought. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/livestock-and-animals/livestock-health-and-
welfare/animal-health-in-a-drought

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
39
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Increase in annual average temperatures 
Prioritisation 
Adaptation actions 
• 
Section 7.3.2.6 Weed and pest management 
Legend: * priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through 
workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
6.2.3 
Loss of on-farm biodiversity 
“Following the 2003 bushfires, it took 12 years to see a possum again.” 
”[During a heatwave] small birds with enclosed nests all died in their nests.” 
Priority impact: On-farm biodiversity 
Context 
Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services (such as pest regulation, water purification, and 
pollination) leaves agricultural systems more vulnerable to threats such as pests, pathogens, and 
continued impacts from climate change. The loss of biodiversity observed by ACT landholders in 
drought is consistent with scientific literature.  
Impacts 
Impacts to on-farm biodiversity and impacts on the farm enterprise from on-farm biodiversity were 
noted by ACT rural landholders.  
The grazing pressures from kangaroos during drought were considered a significant impact, with one 
landholder quoting that each kangaroo was equivalent to three-quarters of the same number of 
sheep. That is, having 100 kangaroos grazing on the property was equivalent to carrying an 
additional 75 sheep A. The significance of kangaroo grazing impacts, which are exacerbated by 
drought is echoed in other jurisdictions and presents a complex environmental, social, and economic 
problem for management.28 
Additionally, ACT landholders observed the impacts of the drought on on-farm biodiversity. 
Landholders noted that during heatwaves, small birds in enclosed nests were observed dead in their 
nests due to the extreme heat. One landholder noted that after the 2003 bushfires it took twelve 
years to see a possum on the property again B. Another noted that in their bush paddock, a quarter of 
the trees died out during drought B. Landholders generally felt a responsibility to support native 
wildlife during drought A. 
Damage to biodiversity and ecosystem functioning can have flow-on effects on farm health and 
productivity. Healthy ecosystems benefit farms by providing services, such as pollination, controlling 
soil erosion and maintaining water quality for farm use. 29, B 
Climate variable 
• 
Increase in annual average temperatures  
28 Hacker R. B., Sinclair K., Pahl L. (2020) Prospects for ecologically and socially sustainable management of total grazing 
pressure in the southern rangelands of Australia. The Rangeland Journal 41, 581-586. https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/rj20006  
29 Power, A. (2010). Ecosystem services and agriculture: tradeoffs and synergies. 
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2010.0143

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
40
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Increase in extreme heat days over 35°C 
• 
Reduced SPI 
• 
Reduced soil moisture content 
Prioritisation 
Adaptation actions 
• 
Section 7.3.2.9 On-farm biodiversity management 
Legend: * priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through 
workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
6.2.4 
Other impacts of drought  
6.2.4.1 
Increased occurrence of natural disasters  
Extreme events, especially floods and droughts, can harm crops and pastures and reduce yields D. 
Bushfire risk is also exacerbated by drought conditions due to very dry vegetation and soils and record-
breaking heat30. Drought and heatwaves intensify the drying of dead bushfire fuel and can even lead to 
megafires which are defined by their enormous size and the number of resources required to bring 
them under control 31. In addition, floods can follow bushfires, compounding the effects of natural 
disasters A. There is projected to be higher occurrences of fluctuating extremes D. Extreme high rainfall 
events can also lead to erosion of soil and damage to crops, particularly where soil infiltration is 
reduced. 
6.2.4.2 
Damage to assets and infrastructure 
Damage to assets and infrastructure on farms in the ACT can be caused by natural disasters including 
bushfires. Costs include damage to farm fencing, buildings and equipment, and a reduction in farmland 
values, loss of crops and pastures and livestock deaths.32 The social impacts of bushfires are explored 
further in Section 6.4.1. 
Bushfires resulted in long-term impacts on soil health. Fire can damage soil microbial communities, as 
well as many nutrient and organic matter cycling functions33. A landholder reported that after the 2003 
bushfire the soils on their property became hydrophobic (repelled water). The recovery from this took 6 
– 7 years following the bushfire. 
6.2.4.3 
Unsuitable land for agricultural enterprises 
Land for agriculture may become less suitable for certain enterprises due to longer droughts and 
harsher fire weather causing crop and pasture stress and attracting new pests that thrive in warmer 
temperatures34 . As a result of more extreme temperatures, a landholder with a horticulture enterprise 
noted that they could no longer grow crops on the same side of the hill that they had previously, and 
had to adapt their management accordingly to find more suitable locations A. 
30 Climate Council, 2019, Dangerous Summer: Escalating bushfire, heat and drought risk, https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/report-dangerous-summer_V5.pdf  
31 UNSW Sydney, 2021, How heatwaves and drought combine to produce the perfect firestorm, 
https://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/science-tech/how-heatwaves-and-drought-combine-produce-perfect-firestorm  
32 Strom, M (2021) Black Summer bushfire season cost farmers up to $5 billion. University of Sydney. Accessed on 18 October 
2022, https://www.sydney.edu.au/news-opinion/news/2021/12/13/black-summer-2019-20-bushfires-cost-farmers-5-billion-
australia.html 
33 Farrell, M. (2020). Recovery of Australia’s soils following bushfires - ECOS. https://ecos.csiro.au/soil-fire-recovery/  
34 AdaptNSW (2022) Climate change impacts on drought. 
https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/drought#:~:text=Drought%20has%20huge%20impacts%20on%20Australia's
%20agriculture%20industry%2C%20causing%3A,leading%20to%20shortages%20in%20supply

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
41
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
6.2.4.4 
Shifts in the timing of farm activities and operations 
The seasonal timing of farm management actions is changing, this is particularly prevalent in the 
viticulture industry (refer to Section 6.6 for more detail on these impacts on viticulture). While livestock-
rearing stakeholders didn’t raise this as a key impact at this stage, there is evidence this will be a rising 
issue into the future3536.  
In additon, many important animal diseases are affected directly or indirectly by weather and climate. 
These links may be spatial (with changes in climate affecting disease distribution) or temporal (with 
weather affecting the timing of an outbreak) or may relate to the intensity of an outbreak. 
6.2.4.5 
Heat stress on livestock 
Livestock experience heat stress resulting in reduced appetites, less desire to breed, increased animal 
stress and significant productivity loss for the livestock industry. A, D  
6.2.4.6 
Erosion of soil and crop damage 
Crop losses due to the bushfire smoke were a significant impact, particularly for the viticulture industry B 
(refer to Section 6.6 for more detail on these impacts on viticulture). 
Extreme rainfall events lead to erosion of soil and damage to crops D. Despite rain events, the soil may 
remain dry due to its inability to soak up as much water during an extreme rainfall event D. This can 
increase flood and erosion risk and can be exacerbated by other extreme events as described in 
Section 6.2.4.2. Erosion and crop damage was not raised by ACT landholders as a significant concern. 
6.3 
Economic  
The priority economic impacts of drought included:  
• 
Reduced water availability 
• 
Reduced carrying capacity of the land 
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned economic impacts of drought were 
related to the reduced carrying capacity of the land for the grazing enterprises category (3). These 
comprised just under half of the impacts identified by ACT landholders.  
Other impacts are explored further in Section 6.3.2. 
6.3.1 
Reduced carrying capacity 
“Learned to de-stock early before you graze too hard” 
Priority impact: Reduced carrying capacity 
Context 
Carrying capacity is the average number of animals that a grazing area can be expected to support 
over a set period. 37 During times of drought, the carrying capacity of the land is reduced. During 
periods of drought, many farmers destock to sustain the remaining livestock. Strategies to minimise 
the economic impacts of reducing stock numbers include selling feeder animals early, reducing 
breeding animal numbers, and selling the entire herd. 
Impacts 
35 Henry, B.K. & Charmley, E. & Eckard, Richard & Gaughan, J. & Hegarty, Roger. (2012). Livestock production in a changing 
climate: Adaptation and mitigation research in Australia. Crop and Pasture Science. 63. 191-202. 10.1071/CP11169. 
36 Cullen, Brendan & Harrison, Matthew & Mayberry, Dianne & Cobon, David & Davison, Tom & Eckard, Richard. (2021). Climate 
change impacts and adaptation strategies for pasture-based industries: Australian perspective. NZGA: Research and Practice 
Series. 17. 10.33584/rps.17.2021.3476. 
37 Queensland Government (2016) Understanding carrying capacity and stocking rates in grazing systems. Queensland 
Government. Accessed on 18 October 2022, https://www.business.qld.gov.au/industries/farms-fishing-
forestry/agriculture/grazing-pasture/improved-production/carrying-
capacity#:~:text=Long%2Dterm%20carrying%20capacity%20is,(e.g.%2010%2B%20years).

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
42
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Drought results in increased costs and decreased production and income.38 Landholders were 
unable to maintain pre-drought stocking levels and needed to destock during and in the lead-up to 
drought periods. Selling livestock enabled landholders to reduce the financial and environmental 
costs of keeping animals on the land in dry periods by avoiding the need to buy supplementary feed 
and reducing the impact of livestock traffic on bare soil A. Landholders used drought plans and 
weather predictions to decide when to destock. B They also noted a need to sell earlier going into a 
drought A, and that it took a long time to build stock numbers back up, and recover economically from 
destocking A, B. Landholders also noted that buying-in feed was expensive and the embodied energy 
used to transport the feed (‘food miles’) was considered high (refer to Section 6.3.2.1).  
Landholders had to factor kangaroo grazing pressure into grazing calculations and decisions around 
stock management A. As stated in Section 6.2.3, kangaroos contribute significantly to grazing 
pressure. 
To ameliorate some of these impacts, landholders allowed their cattle to graze in roadside 
vegetation, or ‘bush paddocks’ during drought to supplement feed and reduce the fire risk of 
biodiversity corridors, which could otherwise facilitate the movement of fire across the landscape. 
However, this can have a negative impact on on-farm biodiversity (refer to Section 6.2.3). 
Climate variable 
• 
Increase in annual average temperatures  
• 
Reduced SPI 
• 
Reduced soil moisture content 
Prioritisation 
Adaptation actions 
• 
Section 7.3.1.4 Stock Management  
Legend: * priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through 
workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
6.3.2 
Other impacts 
Other economic impacts identified through stakeholder engagement and the literature review included: 
• 
Increased need to import feed 
• 
Financial vulnerability 
• 
Shifts in the timing of farm activities and operations. 
These impacts are expanded on below. 
6.3.2.1 
Increased need to import feed  
When there is less pasture available for stock to eat due to drought, buying in feed to supplement rain-
fed pastures is costly and compounded by increased costs of off-farm fodder purchased during drought 
periods B. Increased demand for feed during the most recent drought meant landholders had to source 
feed from further away, including Western Australia and Tasmania. Feed prices were therefore higher 
due to the additional transport costs A as well as the scarcity of feed. Higher feed costs contribute to the 
general trend of higher input costs experienced by farms in drought (refer to Section 6.3.2.2). 
38 MLA (2021) Drought feeding. Meat and Livestock Australia. Accessed 18 October 2022, mla.com.au/research-and-
development/livestock-production/livestock-nutrition/drought-feeding/

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
43
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
6.3.2.2 
Financial vulnerability  
Farm drought risk varies significantly across industries, with cropping enterprises more sensitive to 
drought than livestock enterprises. Crop yields are directly linked to weather conditions, leading to 
large, immediate declines in revenue during drought years. In contrast, livestock producers can smooth 
climate impacts over multiple years by selling livestock in drought years, which helps maintain revenues 
in the short-term and offset lower prices received and higher costs. 39 
The least profitable years for farmers tend to be drought years with unfavourable prices. Costs are 
increased for feed, fuel and fertilisers and other farm inputs such as herbicides C. Nationally, average 
farm returns decreased in 2018-19 in drought-affected regions 40. There is subsequently a greater need 
for financial assistance during drought leading to an increased need to access grants and/or to rely on 
off-farm income A. A key factor identified by stakeholders that mitigated the impacts of the 2017 – 2020 
drought was the high demand for Australian sheep and cattle which pushed prices to, in some cases, 
historic highs. In times of future drought, global and local political, economic, and social trends may not 
provide the same protections. A 
6.4 
Social  
The priority social impacts of drought included:  
• 
Reduced wellbeing of farming community 
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned economic impacts of drought were 
related to reduced wellbeing (3). These comprised over half of the social impacts identified by ACT 
landholders. Other impacts are explored further in Section 6.4.2. 
6.4.1 
Reduced wellbeing 
“Increased worry about bushfires” 
“[Bushfires] destroyed the community” 
Priority impact: Wellbeing 
Context 
The most significant social impacts of drought include erosion of income resulting in rural poverty, 
increased workloads, physical and mental health and welfare issues, problematic access to services 
and overload on service providers, declining access to education, and isolation. 41 Some of these 
impacts are less applicable to the ACT context and were not raised by landholders. This could be 
due to the proximity to Canberra as a major source of services and employment, and the prevalence 
of off-farm income among the ACT rural landholder community. This means that access to services 
including education and health and mental health services is less affected by drought, and therefore 
isolation is reduced.  
Other disasters such as bushfires have physical and mental health impacts on rural communities. A 
significant cost of the 2019-2020 bushfires was the physical health impacts from smoke inhalation by 
farmers and others who work outdoors, as well as the broader ACT and region community. 32 
It is well established that bushfires and other natural disasters have long-term effects on the mental 
health of affected individuals and communities.42 The effects of these events can last for years.43 The 
2019 - 2020 bushfires in Australia were catastrophic and unprecedented.44 
39 Hughes, N, Burns, K, Soh, WY & Lawson, K 2020, Measuring drought risk: the exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.25814/mqrp-rp16. CC BY 4.0. 
40 ABARES Insight, 2019, Analysis of the effects of drought and climate variability on Australian farm 
41 Alston, Margaret, and Jenny Kent. 2004. Social Impacts of Drought : A report to NSW agriculture. Wagga wagga, NSW: Centre 
for Rural Social Research, Charles Sturt University. 
42 Black Dog Institute. 2020. Mental Health Interventions Following Disasters. Randwick, NSW, Australia: Black Dog Institute.  
43 Gibbs, L., Waters, E., Bryant, R. A. et al. 2013. “Beyond Bushfires: Community, Resilience and Recovery - a longitudinal mixed 
method study of the medium to long term impacts of bushfires on mental health and social connectedness.” BMC Public Health. 
44 Morton, A. 2020. “Yes, Australia has always had bushfires: but 2019 is like nothing we've seen before.” The Guardian, 25 
December.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
44
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Studies have found that in addition to immediate distress related to financial and workload problems, 
people reported experiencing significant distress from the emotional impact of environmental 
degradation, from loss of hope for the future of their community, and from feelings of being 
misunderstood by the wider Australian community.45 The stressors affecting farming communities 
during times of drought are likely to be associated with increased risk of mental health problems. 
Impacts 
Wellbeing impacts include: 
• 
Reduced health and mental wellbeing from recent pressures including climate change, drought, 
pest and disease outbreaks and economic rationalisation D 
• 
Reduced wellbeing due to working long hours, having physically demanding work, and often 
being isolated socially and geographically from services D 
• 
Increased concerns about bushfires, and concerns related to evacuations A 
• 
Increased exposure to challenging working conditions (e.g. days with temperatures exceeding 
35°C) 
• 
Financial management pressures during periods of lower revenues and/or increased capital 
expenditure and operational expenditure. 
Climate variable 
• 
Decrease in annual rainfall 
• 
Increase in annual average temperatures 
• 
Reduced SPI 
• 
Reduced soil moisture content 
• 
Increased extreme rainfall events 
• 
Increase in extreme temperatures (greater than 35°C) 
Prioritisation 
Adaptation actions 
• 
Section 7.3.2.3 Knowledge sharing and information provision 
Legend: * priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through 
workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
6.4.2 
Other impacts 
6.4.2.1 
Safety and reduced employment 
Other social impacts identified through stakeholder engagement and the literature review included 
safety concerns and reduced employment. 
Physical health and welfare impacts were echoed to be a concern of ACT landholders. A safety impact 
identified was the occupational health and safety risks to farm workers with increasing temperatures B. 
Landholders expressed heat-related safety concerns for their staff B. Heat stress can also reduce labour 
capacity in agriculture D. There were concerns that during drought and times of financial stress there is 
less work available for people who rely on the agricultural sector for employment A.  
45 Sartore, G., Kelly, B., Stain, H., Albrecht, G., & Higginbotham, N. (2008). Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: A 
qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. 
https://search.informit.org/doi/abs/10.3316/INFORMIT.471246494717588

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
45
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
6.5 
Governance 
Governance impacts were less frequently raised during engagement activities however the following 
impacts have been identified: 
• 
Managing more frequent droughts places stress on governance systems 
- 
Government resources are diverted to drought response activities, redirecting staff from other 
strategic workstreams 
• 
Introduces greater reliance on financial assistance  
- 
Financial implications for the government providing grants are significant and as drought 
events prolong periods extend tend to increase in cost with time.  
- 
Perceptions by the greater community present reputational risks for the government if drought 
response is not seen as reasonable 
• 
Timing of when drought is declared  
- 
Concerns raised about the lack of clear direction from government authorities regarding the 
declaration of drought drove some challenges in farmers accessing federal financial relief, and 
perceptions within the farming community they were not a priority for the government.  
• 
Availability of drought assistance  
- 
Challenges were noted by farmers regarding access to financial aid because of strict eligibility 
criteria.   
• 
Different approaches between NSW and ACT impacting competitiveness  
- 
Pricing of water extraction, for example, was raised as an inconsistency for farmers competing 
with peers over the border.  
• 
Simultaneous, widespread, and long duration droughts impacting ability for farmers to leverage 
support from other regions who were also experiencing drought conditions.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
46
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
6.6 
Impacts on viticulture 
Impacts 
• 
Environmental 
- 
Increased weeds and pests: It was noted that for a vineyard, fungal problems were 
predicted to become less problematic if the climate became drier, however, there were 
concerns over scale insects and the brown marmorated stink bug B. Additionally, there was 
concern over diseases being vectored into the ACT, particularly Pierces disease - a deadly 
disease of grapevines B.  
- 
Shifts in the timing of farm activities and operations: The seasonal timing for when to 
take management actions is changing, this is particularly prevalent in the viticulture 
industry. Vintage advancement (earlier ripening) and vintage compression (shorter ripening 
periods) are known to be placing pressure on the Australian wine industry, due to increased 
difficulties in harvest logistics, with growers struggling to find sufficient harvesters and 
wineries being forced to delay harvest due to a lack of fermenter capacity.  Delays in 
harvest may result in yield loss due to berry dehydration, elevated grape sugar and wine 
ethanol concentration, and other negative impacts on fruit composition and wine style46 
- 
Crop damage: Bushfire smoke can taint fruit and vegetable crops, with wine grapes being 
particularly susceptible B 
- 
Reduced water availability: It was noted there was a reliance on bore water to irrigate and 
protect vineyards against drought and frost. 
• 
Economic 
- 
Financial vulnerability: A landholder noted that due to rebates on water prices for ACT 
wineries it was possible to reduce water input costs and hence compete on an equal footing 
with NSW vineyards and wineries A. 
Actions 
• 
Environmental 
- 
Management timing: Prune at different times of the year and water at night; plant earlier 
and later grape varieties to smooth the load of the growing season B 
- 
Monitoring: Temperature sensors to detect frost and turn on water pumps to protect vinesB 
• 
Water management: Using bore water for vineyard irrigation in drought and frost B 
Legend: A identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
46 Bindon, K. Petrie, P. 2020 Managing the impact of vintage advancement and compression, The Australian Wine Research 
Institute, Wine Innovation Central Building, Hartley Grove, cnr Paratoo Rd, Urrbrae (Adelaide), SA 5064

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
47
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
7.0 
Adaptation actions to build drought resilience in the ACT  
7.1 
Overview  
Farming in the ACT will continue to be affected by drought into the future. Future projections for drought 
mean the implementation of adaptation measures is increasingly vital to protect the contribution rural 
landholders make towards the ACT’s environment, economy, and community.  
Climate adaptation on Australian farms is impeded by barriers including financial and resource 
limitations; behavioural barriers that limit implementation capacity by individual farmers; and unclear 
benefits that spread widely across society and are not appropriately captured.47 To overcome these 
barriers, public-sector intervention and government support are needed to support adaptation by 
farmers.  
Section 7.2 explores adaptation actions appropriate for ACT’s agricultural community, identified through 
stakeholder engagement (workshops, interviews, and the survey) and the literature review. Of the 
adaptations discussed by landholders, most actions were within the environmental domain (80), 
followed by social (12), economic (11), and then governance (0). 
7.1.1 
Adaptation  
Adaptation refers to adjustments in environmental, social, or economic systems in response to actual or 
expected climatic changes and their effects or impacts. It refers to changes in processes, practices, and 
structures to moderate potential damages or to benefit from opportunities associated with climate 
change.48 
The vulnerability of agriculture towards climate change warrants a strong adaptation response to limit 
the impacts felt. Agricultural communities are adjusting to climate change. However, continual focus on 
adaptation is needed. Adaptations at an individual level include changes to on-farm practices and 
processes to respond to the physical risks of climate change. Adaptations at a government level include 
changes in decision-making to foster the implementation of these actions. 
ABARES has reported evidence of strong adaptation responses from farms to climate change. In 
addition, improvement in management practices is helping to increase farm productivity.49 Despite this 
adaptation and improvement in productivity, climate change events are becoming more frequent and 
severe and the time intervals between recovery periods are shortening. As a result, farm profits are 
becoming more sensitive to drought impacts. Further adaptation is needed to maintain resilience as well 
as competitiveness in international markets.  
ABARES notes the following key themes in adaptation which could help offset future climate impacts: 
• 
Improvements in technology  
• 
Farm structural change (such as changes to sizes of farms and degree of specialisation vs 
diversification) 
• 
‘Transformational change’ on farms and in the farming sector 
In addition, the Commonwealth Government released the Drought Response, Resilience and 
Preparedness Plan in 2019 which focuses on 3 key areas of action including 50: 
47 Arunanondchai, P., Fei, C., & McCarl, B. (2017). Adaptation in Agriculture. https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/58043  
48 United Nations, n.d. What do adaptation to climate change and climate resilience mean?  https://unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-
and-resilience/the-big-picture/what-do-adaptation-to-climate-change-and-climate-resilience-mean 
49 Hughes, N., & Gooday, P. (2022). Climate change impacts and adaptation on Australian farms. 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/insights/climate-change-impacts-and-adaptation  
Preparedness Plan. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/aust-govt-drought-response-plan_0.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
48
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table 9 
Immediate action for those in drought - 
measures to support farmers and 
communities facing prolonged drought 
conditions 
Support for wider 
communities 
affected by drought 
Long-term resilience and 
preparedness - accepting that 
the next drought is inevitable 
and the importance of building 
capacity to withstand drought 
periods in the long-term.  
• 
Farm Household Allowance, an 
income support payment for farmers 
and their partners experiencing 
financial hardship 
• 
Access to rural financial counselling 
services 
• 
Access to concessional loans 
• 
Better on-farm water management 
• 
Providing better information 
• 
Making up to 100GL of water 
available at $100 per megalitre in the 
southern connected Murray–Darling 
Basin (MDB) to increase the 
production of fodder, silage and 
pasture. 
• 
Dealing with the stress of drought 
through investment in mental health 
services 
• 
Battling pests and weeds 
• 
Keeping 
drought-affected 
regional 
communities 
open for 
business 
• 
Financial 
counselling for 
small 
businesses 
• 
Keeping kids in 
schools 
• 
Future Drought Fund 
• 
Water security initiatives 
• 
Investment into research 
and development to build 
drought resilience 
• 
Effective and strategic 
management of Australia’s 
soil, vegetation, and water 
resources 
Adaptation measures implemented by rural landholders and the ACT Government should be 

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
49
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
7.2 
Summary of adaptation actions 
Table 10 outlines actions that have been identified through stakeholder engagement activities and a desktop literature review. Focus actions have been 
identified through consideration of the impacts of drought in the ACT, relevance in the context of future drought scenarios, literature review, and stakeholder 
engagement feedback. Prioritisation of these focus actions has been informed by the frequency at which actions were raised by stakeholders (as an indicator of 
broad applicability across ACT’s community) and through mapping to identify the potential application for actions to address impacts – prioritising those actions 
that address multiple impacts (Table 18). Adaptation actions have been grouped under the domains of environment, economic, social and governance and 
categorised into themes including land management, enterprise section, water management, stock management, infrastructure, planning and regulations, 
knowledge sharing and information provision, well-being, monitoring, fire management, management timing, weed and pest management, land management 
tools, marketing, and pasture/crop management.  
Table 10 summarises the adaptation actions included within each category. Further detail on the adaptation actions within each Domain is provided in the 
sections that follow.  
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned environmental adaptation category was land management, followed by enterprise selection, 
water management, stock management and then infrastructure. These categories and their respective actions are explored in the following chapter. 
Fundamental to all of these is drought planning at a farm-level to enable farmers to undertake a SWOT analysis and identify gaps, opportunities, risks and how 
they plan to improve all dimensions of farm management under future drought conditions and where Government and community play a role. 
Table 10 Summary of adaptation actions for the ACT agricultural community  
Environment 
Economic 
Social 
Governance 
Category 
Adaptation actions 
✓ 
 
Land 
management 
Strategies that preserve or enhance ecosystems without compromising farm production. Examples include farming appropriately 
to the farms carrying capacity, grazing rotations, carrying less stock, and planting trees for shade and heat protection A,B,C. 
✓ 
 
✓ 
 
✓ 
 
Enterprise 
selection 
Enterprise selection should consider physical factors such as soils, land, climate, water access, farm structures and machinery as 
well as financial and management factors D. Examples include diversifying the enterprise C, engaging in greater stock rotations C, 
changing enterprise to one that requires less rainfall, switch from breeding to trading stock, selecting drought resilient breeds of 
livestock and use/establishment of perennial drought tolerant grasses A,B,D. These elements can be captured in drought farm 
planning

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
50
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Environment 
Economic 
Social 
Governance 
Category 
Adaptation actions 
✓ 
 
✓ 
Water 
management 
Agriculture and farming are highly dependent on water however are becoming increasingly subject to decreases in rainfall, 
impacting soil moisture, farm production and availability of surface and groundwater for stock and domestic use, and loss of 
access to irrigation water. Water management examples include covering dams to reduce evaporation, flocculating dams and farm 
water, dam enhancement (deepening dams C) and restoring environments around dams A , increasing investment in water 
infrastructure systems, and reviewing water license frameworks to ensure efficient allocation across catchments C. 
✓ 
 
✓ 
Stock 
management 
During periods of drought, many farmers are forced to actively manage stock levels, including destocking to sustain remaining 
livestock. Strategies to manage the impacts of destocking include increasing on-farm stockpiles of feed, increased production of 
silage, development of destocking triggers and thresholds in advance to support decision making, inventory reduction strategies 
including selling feeder animals early through to more interventionist approaches including reducing breeding animal numbers, 
selling the herd, or even ceasing animal production A,B,D. 
✓ 
 
✓ 
 
Infrastructure 
Infrastructure includes on-farm built assets (fencing, water infrastructure, etc), markets and businesses that support farms. 
Infrastructure cited to improve farm resilience to drought include storing silage underground to protect from fires B, construction of 
new dams or enlarging existing dams, installation of water tanks, improving feed storage, producing hay B and improving fencing 
infrastructure to enable better grazing management C. 
✓ 
✓ 
 
Planning and 
regulations 
Planning and regulations encompass strategic and regulatory aspects such as land use planning, lease management, water 
licensing and environmental approvals. Examples include water licensing (e.g. getting approval for bores), enabling flexibility in 
agricultural use types within leases, and having a drought plan in place A. 
✓ 
✓ 
 
Knowledge 
sharing and 
information  
Knowledge sharing and information provision are key to efficient farm production. Examples include utilising climate tools, soil 
probes, farming forecasts and bushfire hazard burning practises including cultural burning B a. 
✓ 
 
Wellbeing 
Droughts affecting the well-being of farming communities have been well-documented across Australia. Examples to improve well-
being include connecting with others A, improving networks, and facilitating engagement for well-being A farm planning succession 
B and sharing information around alternative markets e.g. carbon credits A. 
✓ 
Monitoring  
Actively collecting data and maintaining longer term records offers opportunities for farmers to adaptively manage their enterprise 
(e.g. understanding when to move livestock based on pasture biomass) and prepare for future impacts of drought (e.g. by having

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
51
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Environment 
Economic 
Social 
Governance 
Category 
Adaptation actions 
records of how pastures responded to previous droughts). Examples include using soil moisture sensors, temperature sensors for 
frost and water pumps and keeping records of the impact of different climate variables on farming systems B. 
✓ 
Fire 
management 
Fire is an all-year-round risk-management activity for farms. Preparing for and minimising the risk of fires includes: vegetation 
management A, installation of sprinkler systems on houses and farm sheds B, farms owning their own fire trucks to rapidly respond 
to fires B, intentionally overgrazing paddocks to reduce risk of fire on stock, C and protecting farm buildings and other infrastructure. 
✓ 
✓ 
Management 
timing 
Adjusting the timing of on-farm activities includes earlier planting times e.g. reproductive periods of livestock, changes to grazing 
timing and patterns, and adjusting to compressed timing for picking in vineyards. 
✓ 
Weed and 
pest 
management 
Climate change will affect the spread and competitiveness of weeds and pests in the ACT. Producers may need to increase pest 
surveillance, especially as pest life cycles change and respond to climate change D. Responses in this category include reviewing 
seasonal conditions that require pest control, and maintaining low pest populations to prevent their resurgence under more 
favourable seasonal conditions D. 
✓ 
Land 
management 
tools 
There are many different land management tools available across different sectors/industries which aim to support more 
sustainable production while protecting and enhancing farm ecosystems. Examples include feed calculators from CSIRO and MLA 
that help farmers to monitor pastures, and pasture biomass; while others from MaiaGrazing and RCS enable producers to view the 
pasture feed they have on offer for the next three to six months and the impact of livestock stocking rates and herd structure on 
demand for pasture B to assist in decision-making C . 
✓ 
Marketing 
This category captures business management improvements such as marketing to promote agricultural products or services. 
Examples include promoting regenerative, sustainable, and local food A, farm tourism or different revenue streams that are more 
resilient to climatic change C. 
✓ 
Pasture/crop 
management 
Pasture management strategies that can improve productivity include reviewing drought resilience of pastures, introduction of 
native pasture grass species, pasture management techniques that protect soils and groundcover, crop rotations and 
intercropping, improved pesticide and fertiliser management D 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D 
literature review.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
52
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
7.3 
Environmental adaptation actions 
7.3.1 
Focus actions 
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned category of environmental adaptation 
actions was land management, followed by enterprise selection, water management, stock 
management and then infrastructure. Collectively actions related to these themes comprise three-
quarters of environmental categories measures identified by ACT landholders.  
7.3.1.1 
Land management 
“We have too many endangered species. We want our farm to protect endangered grasslands and 
woodland.” 
“Our farm manages high-risk fire areas through grazing management” 
“We store silage underground to use as drought feed” 
Category: Land management 
Context 
Landholders can prepare for and minimise the impacts of drought, by developing resilient land 
management practices. Land management covers practices which cultivate certain aspects or 
arrangements of the agricultural system, and which are centred on managing the land, and its 
capability. 
Adaptation actions 
Land management strategies identified by landholders to foster resilience in drought included:  
• 
Planting trees for shade, shelter and heat protection and biodiversity A,B,C 
• 
Carrying less stock 
- 
Having clear trigger points to de-stock which are decided on before drought A 
- 
Having early trigger points to de-stock A 
• 
Monitoring pastures and pasture biomass and ground cover, creating feed budgets to make 
informed decisions around when to buy feed and sell stock B Rotational grazing: grazing stock in 
smaller paddocks, at a higher intensity for shorter periods A, B, C   Time control, herd, cell, crash, 
and management-intensive grazing are different systems of rotational grazing. While they all 
have slightly different philosophies and methods, they share the central principles of high 
stocking rates in confined areas, limiting the amount of time that animals are grazing an area. 
Initial costs to install adequate fencing for effective rotational grazing systems can be high. ACT 
landholders who have implemented this approach noted that having small paddock sizes aided 
in maintaining ground cover. B 
• 
To maximise groundcover, landholders can use the following strategies B 
- 
Groundcover is maintained at 80% or better in rural landscapes regardless of the season 51 
- 
Use of diverse exotic and native species which tolerate a range of climate conditions B 
- 
Pasture topping (cutting off the top of a pasture to encourage growth and nutritional 
quality)B 
- 
Use of deep-rooted perennial species which can offer better pasture cover during drought 
by accessing moisture from deeper in the soil than annual species. 52 
• 
Managing high-risk fire areas on farms through grazing management B 
- 
Implementing measures to improve and/or maintain soil health Maintaining soil moisture 
through practices such as conservation tillage 53 
- 
Establishing permanent stock containment areas for lot feeding during drought. When used 
strategically, containment areas take the pressure off land and soils during dry periods. 54  
51 EPSDD, Sustainable Agriculture Investment Plan Improving the grazing resource base - Environment, Planning and 
Sustainable Development Directorate - Environment (act.gov.au) 
52 WaterNSW. (2022). Groundcover. https://www.waternsw.com.au/water-quality/catchment/living/managing-land/groundcover  
53Hughes, N., Galeano, D., & Hatfield-Dodds, S. (2021). The effects of drought and climate variability on Australian farms. 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/insights/effects-of-drought-and-climate-variability-on-Australian-farms  
54 Young, M. (2022). Managing Soils During and After Drought in Grazing Systems. 
https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/Soil-CRC-Managing-soils-during-and-after-drought-grazing-2021.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
53
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
- 
Raising soil pH on acidic soil (for example by applying lime) B 
- 
Adding organic fertiliser additions which preserve fungal networks (e.g. turkey poo) B 
- 
Using biochar A, 55 
- 
Introducing dung beetles B  
• 
Storing silage underground to use as drought feed B 
• 
Manage pastures for rapid regeneration following drought 54 by: 
- 
Not overgrazing native and exotic perennial grass stubs as this will significantly slow 
regeneration. 
- 
Sowing quick-growing crops or annual pastures to provide soil cover and act as a break 
crop to reduce the risk where pasture needs re-establishment. 
- 
Reducing erosion risk by establishing quick-growing cover crops or annual pastures where 
cover is required to stabilise eroding paddocks. 
- 
Keep stock off paddocks until ground cover is at adequate levels for maximum growth. This 
level will vary with location and pasture type. 
- 
Use rotational grazing techniques for even grazing pressure 
- 
Ensure there are enough, suitably placed watering points to reduce the distance that 
animals must walk, and the energy required to get there, and to reduce the risk of bare soil 
from excessive traffic. 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced carrying capacity of land 
• 
Increased weed and pest infestations 
• 
Heat stress on livestock 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
• 
Cattle grazing 
• 
Sheep grazing 
• 
Livestock agistment 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.3.1.2 
Enterprise selection 
“Our farm is considering changing towards an enterprise that relies on less rainfall” 
Category: Enterprise selection 
Context 
Climate analogues which project what the climate of the ACT might look like under different drought 
scenarios and identify regions of Australia currently experiencing this climate could point to drought-
tolerant species and enterprises (refer to Section 5.3)) which could be appropriate for future ACT 
climates. Diversification of enterprises is known to improve the resilience of food systems and farm 
enterprises.56 
Adaptation actions 
Enterprise selection should consider physical factors such as land, climate, rainfall and water soil 
moisture and surface and groundwater availability, farm structures and machinery as well as financial 
and management factors D. Examples include: 
• 
Selecting and diversifying toward enterprises which rely on less rainfall A B, C 
- 
Chickens and pastured eggs A, 57 
- 
Enterprises with more controlled environments such as hydroponics or microgreens A 
- 
Farm tourism and accommodation (e.g. Airbnb) A 
55 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Feed budgeting takes out the guesswork | Agriculture Victoria. 
https://feedinglivestock.vic.gov.au/2022/03/22/feed-budgeting-takes-out-the-
guesswork/#:~:text=Feed%20budgeting%20allows%20for%20better,for%20different%20classes%20of%20stock  
56 Hertel, T., Elouafi, I., Tanticharoen, M. et al., (2021). Diversification for enhanced food systems resilience. Nature Food 2, 832–
834 https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021-00403-9  
57 Herrera de Leon, H. J., & Kopainsky, B. (2019). Do you bend or break? System dynamics in resilience planning for food 
security. System Dynamics Review, 35(4), 287-309.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
54
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
- 
Leasing land for other uses (e.g. solar farms) A 
- 
Bush tucker B 
- 
Flower foraging B 
- 
Sustainable forestry B 
- 
Marketing and producing insects 
- 
Switching from breeding to trading stock (to reduce the need to feed breeding stock through 
drought) 
- 
Having a sub-brand to buy fruit and sell wine, in addition to growing own fruit 
• 
Select species and breeds which are more drought tolerant A 
- 
Use deep-rooted perennial drought-tolerant grasses A,B,D. 
- 
Use summer active pasture species58 
- 
Use more endemic species that are tolerant of extremes in rainfall (both drought and 
flooding) A (e.g. kangaroo and wallaby grasses B) 
- 
Selection of more resilient breeds (e.g. switching from merino sheep to Dorper sheep) A 
• 
Technology-based enterprise management including:  
- 
Using knowledge gained from genomics and biotechnology tools, such as gene editing, to 
select crop varieties and livestock that are more climate resilient  
- 
Using sensors (i.e. drones, soil monitoring probes) to measure and only provide water and 
nutrients (i.e. cattle licks) when and where they are needed 
- 
Investigating traditional food production systems in Australia to adopt new crops and 
grasses that may be better climate-adapted.  
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced carrying capacity of land 
• 
Reduced water availability 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
• 
Cattle grazing 
• 
Sheep grazing 
• 
Livestock agistment 
• 
Viticulture 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.3.1.3 
Water management 
“Our farm had to use troughs and pumps to move water from dry paddocks to useable ones” 
"We need to exploit on-farm water sources" 
Category: Water management 
Context 
Soil and water conservation methods and new systems become even more important as climates 
fluctuate and more extreme events become more frequent. D Water management strategies can be 
achieved by identifying less water intensive production options, developing better water delivery 
technologies, and by implementing water markets and water-sharing arrangements (currently under 
investigation). 
Optimal dam design and maintenance can reduce water loss through seepage and evaporation. 59 
Water tanks can also provide additional water storage for stock watering, irrigation, household needs, 
and fire sprinklers. Landholders with access to bore water number also reported they had a reliance 
on bores to supplement water supply in drought A. A fit-for-purpose approach to water reuse and 
water management can result in more efficient water use. 60 
58 Cullen, B., Harrison, M., Mayberry, D., Cobon, D., Davison, T., & Eckard, R. (2021). Climate change impacts and adaption 
strategies for pasture-based industries: Australian perspective. NZGA: Research and Practice Series, 17, 139-148. 
59 Agriculture Victoria. (2020). Efficient use of farm water. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/water/farm-water-
solutions/efficient-use-of-farm-water

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
55
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Adaptation actions 
Agriculture and farming are highly dependent on water however are becoming increasingly subject to 
water risks from climate change D. Water management examples include: 
• 
Use fit for purpose water sources 
- 
Flocculating (removing sediment from) dams and on-farm water sources to improve water 
quality for stock and irrigation A 
- 
Reuse of wastewater 60 
• 
Exploiting on-farm water sources 
- 
Covering dams to reduce evaporation A 
- 
Dam enhancement A (e.g. deepening dams C)  
- 
Restoring the environment around dams to improve water capture A  
- 
Increasing investment in water infrastructure systems (installing water tanks or bores) A 
- 
Moving away from dams toward troughs C 
- 
Acquiring water licenses to use groundwater and alternative water sources C. 
• 
Improving water use efficiency by creating humid microclimates around crops (and grasses)61.  
• 
Water conservation strategies for viticulture include opening and closing vine canopies to 
manage humidity and create a beneficial microclimate for a vine. B 
• 
Identifying less water intensive production options, developing better water delivery technologies 
and implementing water markets and water-sharing arrangements. 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced water availability 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
• 
Cattle grazing 
• 
Sheep grazing 
• 
Livestock agistment 
• 
Viticulture 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.3.1.4 
Stock management 
“Our farm practice is not to be overstocked, and only hold young breeding stock in drought conditions, 
and endeavour to have minimal supplementary feeding.” C 
Category: Stock management 
Context 
Stock management and land management are inherently interrelated. Good stock management can 
minimise the impacts of drought on the land and confer resilience. 
Adaptation actions 
During periods of drought, many farmers are forced to destock to sustain remaining livestock. 
Strategies to manage stock include:  
• 
Carrying less stock 
- 
Having clear trigger points to de-stock which are decided on before drought A 
- 
Having early trigger points to de-stock A 
- 
Monitoring pastures to develop feed budgets which project pasture availability to determine 
when to destock and buy in feed  
• 
Developing drought lot feeding facilities, sacrifice paddocks/stock containment areas to 
concentrate stock in small areas and feed them fodder to protect most of the farm from damage 
60 Radcliffe, J., & Page, D. (2020). Water reuse and recycling in Australia — history, current situation and future perspectives. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666445320300064   
61 Hatfield, J., & Dold, C. (2019). Water-Use Efficiency: Advances and Challenges in a Changing Climate. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2019.00103/full

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
56
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
by stock trampling and overgrazing. This can also minimise energy usage by stock who would 
otherwise be moving around looking for sparse feed.62 
- 
Construct feed storage facilities such as sheds, silos, and silage pits 
- 
Growing and/or buying-in stock feed when fodder prices are lower and storing this feed 
during good seasons in preparation for droughts 
- 
selling feeder animals early (e.g. selling wethers first then ewes) 
- 
reducing breeding animal numbers A, D 
- 
selling the (in some cases entire) herd A,B,D. 
• 
Rotational grazing: grazing stock in smaller paddocks, at a higher intensity for shorter periods A, 
B, C   (refer to Section 7.3.1.1) 
• 
During the recovery phase, post drought, agisting sheep (or different grazing animals) when 
possible to manage a surge in pasture growth and to reduce bushfire risk. B 
• 
Reducing heat stress and ensuring stock welfare63 
- 
Ensuring a plentiful water supply 
- 
Ensuring shade and shelter – including artificial shade 
- 
Avoiding handling and transportation of animals in extreme heat 
- 
Adding cooling misting sprays for livestock (under certain conditions) D. 
• 
Use of stock containment areas or sacrificial paddocks to defer grazing on pastures until they 
have recovered. This can also minimise energy usage by stock who would otherwise be moving 
around looking for sparse feed. 
• 
Maintain a watching brief on emergent techniques to mitigate agricultural contribution to climate 
change, for example adjusting feed (such as certain algae/seaweeds) to reduce methane 
production.  
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced carrying capacity of land 
• 
Heat stress on livestock 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
• 
Cattle grazing 
• 
Sheep grazing 
• 
Livestock agistment 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.3.1.5 
Infrastructure 
“pest proof fencing, enhancing natural resources and improving storage capabilities” 
“build more underground water storage tanks and put in more shade houses.” 
“funding to move away from dams towards troughs” 
Category: Infrastructure 
Context 
Infrastructure can improve drought preparedness by increasing farmers capacity to store water and 
feed. This can reduce the need to buy resources during drought when availability is low, and prices 
are high. 
Adaptation actions 
Upgrading or adding on-farm infrastructure can include: 
• 
Increasing on farm storage for water, fuel, feed, grain, sileage and hay A, B 
- 
More, and well maintained dams A 
62 Agriculture Victoria. (2018). Stock Containment Areas | Case Study - Lachlan Ralton, Woodstock West. 
https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/563556/Case-study-stock-containment-areas-a-flexible-management-
tool.pdf  
63 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Caring for animals during extreme heat. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/livestock-and-
animals/livestock-health-and-welfare/caring-for-animals-during-extreme-heat

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
57
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
- 
Rainwater storage tanks A  
- 
Improved reticulation of clean stock water a 
- 
Feed, grain, silage and hay storage sheds and silos A 
- 
Underground silage storage to protect from fires B 
• 
Improving fencing infrastructure to reduce paddock sizes to better manage grazing and 
density. C. 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced water availability 
• 
Heat stress on livestock 
• 
Bushfire damage 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
All 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.3.2 
Other actions 
Other environmental drought adaptation actions identified through stakeholder engagement and the 
literature review, and covered in more detail below, included: 
• 
Improvements to on-farm monitoring of weather and longer-term climate trends (e.g., installation of 
weather stations)  
• 
Planning and regulations 
• 
Knowledge sharing and information provision 
• 
Fire management 
• 
Management timing 
• 
Weed and pest management 
• 
Land management tools 
• 
Marketing 
• 
Crop management. 
7.3.2.1 
Monitoring  
Drought monitoring is a critical component for drought early warning systems and a key instrument in 
timely risk management and drought planning. 64 Advancements in technology, particularly remote 
sensing, enable landholders to make more informed decisions, which can in turn lead to more targeted 
management. 
Drought adaptation actions relevant to monitoring include: 
• 
Using information from the series of soil moisture probes installed across southeast NSW 
(including Tidbinbilla Soil Moisture Probe in the ACT) to inform decision making by helping 
producers assess current seasonal conditions and the likely range in pasture availability and 
livestock performance during the next 3-4 months. More information can be found at: 
https://farmingforecaster.com.au/ 
• 
Using soil moisture sensors which allow more efficient irrigation where relevant B 
64 Tranka, M., & et al. (2018). Priority questions in multidisciplinary drought research. https://www.int-
res.com/articles/cr_oa/c075p241.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
58
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
- 
Assessing pastures using satellite imagery and observations to calculate total standing dry 
matter (TSDM)65. PastureKey by cibolabs66 is a satellite assisted forage budgeting tool which 
using time-series satellite imagery scout maps to optimise field pasture assessments.  
- 
Remote monitoring of voltage levels of electric fences on-farm65  
- 
Tools to assist condition assessments of cattle. For example, CattleAssess3D provide 
assessments of body condition of live cattle in real time to enable producers and feedlots to 
make informed decisions to optimise carcase performance and proﬁtability65   
• 
Keep records of significant climate factors related to temperature (e.g., number of days over 35 
degrees Celsius), precipitation (e.g., average precipitation) and combined climate variables (e.g., 
total soil moisture content). C 
- 
Be aware of and plan for shifts in disease and pest ranges D 
7.3.2.2 
Planning and regulations 
Planning and regulations in agriculture aim to provide opportunities to continue to operate, diversify or 
expand in the future. The agricultural planning and regulatory system in the ACT provide many barriers 
and enablers for landholders to navigate and adapt to drought (refer to Section 11). Examples of 
planning and regulatory adaptations adopted or suggested by ACT landholders include: 
• 
Obtaining approval to install a bore to access groundwater when surface water is scarce, where 
possible (this may not be possible in all areas of the ACT, due to sustainable limits on groundwater 
extraction) A 
• 
Developing a regional drought plan to guide agricultural adaptation to drought in the ACT A 
Planning and regulatory factors which influence landholders’ resilience and capacity to adapt are 
presented in further detail in Section 11. 
7.3.2.3 
Knowledge sharing and information provision 
Social networks and knowledge exchange is a key factor in the spread of successful drought 
adaptation. Studies on successful NSW farmers found they employ a range of strategies in adopting 
innovative management practices. These included observing signals from the landscape, independent 
testing and trialling, use of agronomists, and participation in farmer groups and in farmer-driven 
research programmes.67  
CSIRO notes that a contributor to successful adaptation to drought is wide communication and 
demonstration of the benefits of new climate adaptations.68 
There are numerous successful drought adaptation strategies and decision-making tools available. 
However, some ACT farmers are seeking understanding around climate predictions and adaptations, 
including: 
• 
More information on climate tools and farm decision support tools (for example grazing, and 
pasture management) 
• 
Evidence-based fire management, including the exploration of Indigenous Australian fire strategies 
such as cool mosaic burning. These strategies have had promising outcomes for fire management 
in other areas of Australia, and it is broadly considered that the application of these practices is 
likely to be beneficial.69 Fire management considerations are discussed further in Section 7.3.2.4. 
65 Crowley, M. (2021). Four tools to tap into on‑farm resilience | Meat & Livestock Australia. https://www.mla.com.au/news-and-
events/industry-news/four-tools-to-tap-into-onfarm-resilience/  
66 Cibolabs, 2022, PastureKey, https://www.cibolabs.com.au/pasturekey 
67 McKenzie, F. (2013). Farmer-driven Innovation in New South Wales, Australia. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00049182.2013.765349  
68 Stokes, C., & Howden, M. (2011). Adapting agriculture to climate change. 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/ebook/chapter/CSIRO_CC_Chapter%207 
69 Fletcher, M. (2021). Catastrophic Bushfires, Indigenous Fire Knowledge and Reframing Science in Southeast Australia. 
https://www.mdpi.com/2571-6255/4/3/61

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
59
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
7.3.2.4 
Fire management 
Rural landholders in the ACT, like urban residents, have a duty to take reasonable care to prevent the 
spread of a fire from their property. Most rural landholders have a high level of awareness of the risks of 
ignition associated with machinery, equipment, and infrastructure, particularly during elevated fire 
danger conditions. Managing fire fuel load is a key component of bushfire management. 70 
Rural landholders are required to have a Bushfire Operational Plan (BOP) through the Farm FireWise 
program. The ACT Emergency Services Agency (ESA) supports rural landholders to prepare their Farm 
FireWise plans, which must be reviewed every five years and approved by the ESA Commissioner. The 
requirement to identify reasonable measures for managing bushfire risk and any fire management 
requirement is also established under Land Management Agreements (LMAs). 
Drought adaptation actions relevant to fire management include: 
• 
The use of targeted grazing to reduce biomass 70 
• 
Installing additional water storage tanks and sprinkler systems to protect key farm assets A 
• 
Minimising fire risk at a landscape scale A 
• 
Use of informal fire truck network among rural landholders. Some landholders have fire trucks and 
help each other out when needed. A 
7.3.2.5 
Management timing 
Adaptations to manage the direct impacts of climate changes on management timing include: 
• 
Changing breeding cycles to adapt to changing climate conditions (e.g., elect not to breed, avoid 
having lambs in frosts, match calving/lambing to fit with changed seasonal pattern of pasture 
growth) B, 58 
These management decisions can be made in response to forecasts and climate indicators to 
ameliorate the impacts of drought.  
Additionally, actions are required to manage the indirect impacts of climate change on management 
timing. Weed, pest, and disease management must adapt to shifting ranges and times of year (refer to 
Section 7.3.2.6). 
7.3.2.6 
Weed and pest management 
Climate change will impact the timing and distribution of pests, weeds, and diseases. The effectiveness 
of natural enemies in controlling pests will decrease with pest distributions shifting into regions outside 
the distribution of their natural enemies. However, new communities of enemies may provide some 
level of control. 70 The effectiveness of natural enemies is altered through management strategies 
adopted by farmers to cope with climate change. Management strategies to discourage or encourage 
natural enemies (e.g. small bird species) of new pest species can impact pest reduction.  
Because of the diverse and often indirect effects of climate change on natural enemies, predictions will 
be difficult. Drought adaptation actions relevant to weed and pest management include: 
• 
Leasing land and agisting animals for weed control to buffer weedy areas B 
• 
Continuing to manage weeds and being aware of, and planning for shifts in disease and pest 
ranges D 
Common ways that weeds can be introduced are by supplementary feed, through livestock movements 
(i.e. when returning from agistment or restocking), through contaminated seed during sowing, or 
contaminated machinery, and though transmission by native and pest animals. 71 Actions that can be 
taken to mitigate these include:71 
70 ACT Government. (2019). Strategic bushfire Plan 2019 – 2024. https://esa.act.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-
09/ESA%20Strategic%20Bushfire%20Management%20Plan2019-2024_ACCESSIBLE.pdf  
71 Tounce, B., & et al. Weeds and drought. https://www.lls.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/803294/A3-weeds-and-
drought-factsheetfinal.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
60
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Restricting areas where grain and fodder are to be fed, and carefully monitoring these areas, 
particularly after rains, for up to two years after a drought.  
• 
Restricting/excluding livestock movement within catchment areas of farm dams, as manure and 
weed seeds can contaminate water storage systems. 
• 
Monitor riparian areas and water points, as these are often accessed by native and feral animals 
which can vector seeds and pests 
• 
Control weeds quickly after germination, and well before they set seed. 
In addition to reducing stocking rates, actions to manage the increased risk of infectious diseases to 
drought-affected stock can include: 
• 
Ensure ready access to sufficient supplies of suitable water. 72 
• 
Check stock regularly to minimise stock injuries and death. 72 
• 
Carefully consider using commercial lick blocks – these can be a costly form of supplementation 
and can be toxic to hungry stock if they contain grain or urea. 72 
• 
Segregate animals based on size and strength to minimise competition for supplements 73 
• 
Minimise handling, and the distances stock need to walk for food and water to limit the loss of body 
condition. 72 
• 
Get advice and be careful when feeding novel feedstuffs. Chemical residues may be present which 
may cause poisoning or contaminate meat.  72 
• 
Make dietary changes slowly. Feedstuffs such as fruit, bread, urea mixes, fat, milk products and 
grain can cause illness in stock if fed too much too quickly. 72 
• 
Never release hungry stock onto green pasture or crops. 72 
• 
Create stock containment areas (also known as drought lot feeding facilities or sacrifice paddocks) 
for feeding, watering, and monitoring stock. Containment areas protect paddocks from erosion, 
minimise walking for stock and can save labour. 72 
7.3.2.7 
Land management tools 
Online media and web-based tools can be used to drive informed decision-making and the adoption of 
new practices. Studies into knowledge-sharing around soil management noted that a multidimensional 
approach to education and outreach is needed that balances familiar models with new online tools and 
forums, to create an active learning environment that facilitates change.74 They noted that information 
provision, especially via online portals, will not necessarily result in knowledge acquisition, nor provide a 
dynamic learning environment that builds trust in the information and increases social capital to effect 
change. 
There are many land-management tools to provide data and assist rural landholders in decision-
making. Tools which were used and recommended by ACT rural landholders included: A 
• 
Farming forecaster 
• 
Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) feed demand calculator 
• 
Weatherzone and BOM apps 
• 
RCS, MAIA and other regenerative farming pasture assessment and management tools 
72 Agriculture Victoria. (2022). Animal health in a drought. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/livestock-and-animals/livestock-health-and-
welfare/animal-health-in-a-drought  
73 Business Queensland. (2022). Protecting your livestock in drought | Business Queensland. 
https://www.business.qld.gov.au/industries/farms-fishing-forestry/agriculture/disaster/drought/during/animal-welfare/protect  
74 Lobry de Bruyn, L., Jenkins, A., & Samson-Liebig, S. (2017). Lessons learnt: Sharing soil knowledge to improve land 
management and sustainable soil use. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 81(3), 427-438.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
61
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Social media and web-based tools can start conversations, in many cases. However, these should be 
followed by the face-to-face conversations, training, field tours, and hands-on demonstrations.74  
7.3.2.8 
Marketing 
In Australia, there is increased focus on food experiences and festivals, with State and Territory 
Governments developing strategies based on food tourism and artisan agriculture. Sustainable tourism 
experiences or events are increasingly playing an important role in the business models of artisan 
producers, allowing them to sell directly to consumers and often add value through tourism 
experiences. 75 
From an economic welfare perspective, mechanisms that directly link consumers and producers are 
likely to improve consumer knowledge and satisfaction with foods and encourage higher-quality 
production techniques.75 However, this can also play a role in fostering drought-resilient food systems. 
Drought adaptation actions relevant to marketing include promoting sustainable local food to local 
consumers. Farmers noted that they are subject to consumer demand for certain breeds or enterprises 
which often do not match the breeds and enterprises that are most suited to the landscapeA. As a 
result, there is a perceived pressure on farmers to conduct agricultural enterprises to fit consumer 
demand rather than selecting enterprises and breeds which are resilient on the ACT landscape, in the 
face of a changing climate. Educating consumers and promoting local, drought resilient food can assist 
farmers in economically benefiting from drought resilience. 
7.3.2.9 
On-farm biodiversity management 
Native vegetation is well adapted to the harsh Australian environment and provides essential 
ecosystem services such as integrated pest management, healthy soils, and landscapes. Striving 
towards ecologically healthy and diverse farming systems provides more resilience to climate change 
and can improve both farm profitability and on-farm biodiversity values. 
• 
Increasing the ground cover and abundance of native perennial grasses and forbs (herbaceous 
flowering plants that are not a grass, sedge, or rush) using rotational grazing can, allow natural 
regeneration of shrubs and trees for shelter.76 Native pasture and species regeneration benefits 
the soil food web and nutrient cycling process by enhancing the abundance of beneficial fungi and 
bacteria. These benefits are the result of the increased availability of suitable habitat structure and 
niches for native fauna and flora species in which they find shelter from competition, protection 
from predators and increased availability of food and nutrients. 
• 
Enhancing farm dams can lead to improvements in water quality and provide habitat for a wide 
variety of native wildlife. 77 Enhanced dams can be fenced to manage the impact of stock on the 
dam and have native vegetation in and around the dam. As a result of stock exclusion and 
vegetation, the water is cleaner. An enhanced dam may also have other features such as a 
hardened access point for stock, variable depths, islands, or snags. Enhanced dams can provide 
better quality drinking water, retain water for longer, support native plants and animals, and provide 
ecosystem services to the surrounding landscape. 
• 
Kangaroo densities are above pre-European densities in many areas, despite most Australian 
states (except Tasmania and the ACT) having a commercial harvest of kangaroos, all states and 
territories allowing licensed shooters to cull kangaroos on their properties to reduce total grazing 
pressure, and some jurisdictions allowing conservation culls. 78 The Australian Capital Territory 
(ACT) Government undertakes an annual ‘conservation cull’ of kangaroos within the urban 
reserves comprising Canberra Nature Park78. However, the management of kangaroo grazing 
pressure in agricultural settings is a contentious matter 
75 Star, M., Rolfe, J., & Brown, J. (2020). From farm to fork: Is food tourism a sustainable form of economic development?. 
Economic Analysis and Policy, 66, 325-334. 
76 Agriculture Victoria (2021) Managing for biodiversity. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/land-and-pasture-
management/native-pasture-management/managing-for-biodiversity  
77 Sustainable Farms (2022) Ways to improve natural assets on a farm: Enhance farm dams 
https://www.sustainablefarms.org.au/on-the-farm/farm-dams/  
78 Iain Gordon, et al., (2021), Herbivore management for biodiversity conservation: A case study of kangaroos in the Australian 
Capital Territory (ACT). https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/emr.12443

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
62
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
7.4 
Economic adaptation actions 
7.4.1 
Focus actions  
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned category of economic adaptation 
actions was enterprise selection, followed by planning and regulations, and infrastructure. Collectively, 
actions related to these categories comprise over three-quarters of economic adaptation measures 
identified by ACT landholders. 
7.4.1.1 
Enterprise selection 
“Our farm is considering changing towards an enterprise that relies on less rainfall” 
Category: Enterprise selection 
Context 
Farming enterprises remain exposed to significant climate and price risk.  
Drawing on extensive meteorological data collected and analysed by government agencies, and 
based on on-farm experiences and observation, farmers adjust their longer-term choices of farming 
enterprise, modifying choice of species/breed produced based on the local climate, stocking rates, 
fodder storage, tillage methods, and so forth for the purpose of income smoothing.53 Australian 
farmers have altered their mix of enterprises, adopted lower-cost methods (i.e. practices with 
reduced inputs, such as organic agricultural systems), and where possible, purchased or leased 
additional land to increase farm size in response to drought.53 
Two key economic ways farmers manage climate and price risk are by keeping debt low and 
maintaining sources of off-farm income. For many farms, these strategies are vital both to ensure the 
long-term survival of the farm business and to minimise variation in household income. 40 
Diversification of enterprises is known to improve the resilience of food systems and farm 
enterprises. 53 Economic diversification options can include both agricultural and non-agricultural 
enterprises. Farmers also use income smoothing strategies such as the farm management deposit 
scheme offered by the Australian Taxation Office. 
Adaptation actions 
Enterprise selection should consider physical factors such as land, climate, irrigation water, farm 
structures and machinery as well as financial and management factors D. Examples include: 
• 
Selecting and diversifying toward enterprises which rely on less rainfall A B, C These can include 
agricultural (i.e. varieties of food production and methods of production) and non-agricultural (i.e. 
farm tourism) based production. 
Agricultural-based diversification options: 
- 
Greenhouse/glasshouse production (utilising wastewater and circular bioeconomy – such 
as in composting food waste to use the nutrients to grow more food crops) 
- 
Emerging crops, produce and practices (e.g. saffron, aquaculture, tree crops, mushrooms) 
- 
Value adding products (e.g. supplying locally sourced meat to consumers) 
Other diversification options: 
- 
Farm tourism and accommodation (e.g. Airbnb) A 
- 
Leasing land for other uses (e.g. solar farms, agistment) A 
- 
Having a sub-brand to buy in fruit and sell wine, in addition to growing own fruit B 
- 
Selling credits and offsets for ecosystem services (through market based and/or 
government-based mechanisms)  
• 
Enterprise management strategies which use weather and commodity price forecasts which 
predict when drought conditions or poor output prices are likely. Management can then be 
adapted to minimise losses, for example to reduce crop area planted and inputs applied (such 
as fertiliser).D 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced carrying capacity of land 
• 
Reduced water availability 
Relevant agricultural enterprise

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
63
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
All 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.4.1.2 
Planning and regulations 
“we need to consider subdividing and selling land” 
Category: Planning and regulations 
Context 
The planning and regulatory context of agriculture in the ACT is unique. The barriers and enablers 
presented in this context are summarised in Section 11. 
Adaptation actions 
Planning and regulations in agriculture aim to support healthy farm ecosystems and improve 
productivity and farm income while ensuring the land is fit for future use. Economic adaptations to 
drought which involve planning and regulations include: 
• 
Subdividing and selling land 
• 
Varying leases to facilitate succession planning and construct secondary residences for the next 
generation 
• 
Varying leases to allow diversification of enterprises (refer to Section 7.4.1.1) 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Financial vulnerability 
• 
Employment 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
All 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.4.1.3 
Infrastructure 
“We use grants available to use to upgrade existing infrastructure” 
Category: Infrastructure 
Context 
Infrastructure can improve drought preparedness by increasing farmers' capacity to store water and 
feed. This can reduce the need to buy resources during drought when availability is low, and prices 
are high.  
Adaptation actions 
Management of on-farm infrastructure can include: 
• 
Use of contractors instead of buying machinery to minimise machinery costs and get high-
quality machinery that is well-suited to tasks B This can reduce debt and ameliorate the 
economic stress of drought. However, such strategies should be assessed on an individual farm 
level. 
• 
Using financial assistance (loans and grants) to upgrade existing infrastructure A 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced water availability 
• 
Heat stress on livestock 
• 
Bushfire damage 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
All

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
64
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.4.2 
Other actions  
7.4.2.1 
Sale of stock 
Drought adaptation actions relevant to the sale of stock include selling stock direct and avoiding 
feedlots and saleyards B. When destocking going into a drought, weaners can be sold to feedlots. 
Adaptation actions around destocking to manage drought are explored further in Section 7.3.1.4 
7.4.2.2 
Use of government financial support 
Box 3 describes the availability and adoption of government support by farmers in the ACT 
Box 3 Case study: government support for ACT farms 
The ACT Government provided ACT Rural Resilience Grants during 2018-2019, 2019-2020 and 
2020-2021 and administered a range of rebates for farmers to support landholders build resilience to 
drought conditions79. Conversations with farmers on their experience on receiving this government 
support during this time provided positive feedback regarding this approach and participants shared 
that they felt more inclined to act on building farm resilience.  
Initiatives that were highlighted by farms to be successful included79: 
• 
Transport subsidy where farmers bought fodder and/or water to a property, stock to/from 
agistment, stock to sale or slaughter, chemicals, fertiliser, and seed to farms and government 
covered up to 50% of the total freight cost.  
• 
National On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate where a 25% rebate was offered 
for the costs associated with the purchase and installation of on-farm stock water infrastructure 
and infrastructure for permanent horticultural crops (grapes, olives, orchards) to improve farm 
resilience to drought. 
• 
Rural Resilience Grants have been provided for 2018-2019, 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 to 
support landholders to build farm resilience. During conversations with landholders, it was noted 
that these grants were used to build drought lots, install siloes, construct fodder storage sheds 
and install a range of farm stock water infrastructure, as well as undertake post-drought weed 
and pest animal control  
• 
The Future Drought Fund Farm Business Resilience program which is offering training to 
farmers in financial management and natural resource management in preparation for drought. 
Under the pilot year of the program, 10 ACT farmers undertook Meat and Livestock Australia’s 
Business Edge Training; 14 landholders have been part-sponsored to attend a range of different 
natural resource management training courses; 4 farm families are receiving farm business 
coaching; and ACT NRM has offered 3 farm business webinars. 
• 
ACT Environment Grants are offered every year and provide farmers with the opportunity to 
seek support to protect environmental assets on their farms. 
Other support offered included relief grazing, requirements for fodder purchased from interstate and 
financial and mental health services.  
• 
Farm household allowance to provide assistance to farming families experiencing financial 
hardship 
• 
Rural financial counselling service help farmers find and apply for funds 
• 
Drought Communities Programme to support local infrastructure projects, to create new 
opportunities in drought-affected communities. 
79 ACT Government, ACT Farmers Support Package, https://www.environment.act.gov.au/act-nrm/grants-and-support-
packages/act-farmers-support-
package#:~:text=The%20%245%20billion%20Future%20Drought,to%2C%20the%20impacts%20of%20drought.  
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/assistance

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
65
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Barriers to receiving government support 
Despite federal government support being available, a number of farmers in the ACT were not able 
to qualify for some of the rebates due to receiving off farm income or due to their agricultural practise 
not being eligible to apply. Criteria that excluded several farmers from being eligible included: 
• 
“You are a sole trader, partnership, trust or private company and trade agricultural products” 
(Transport subsidy81) 
• 
“As owners and operators of the business you earn more than 50% of your gross income from 
the primary production enterprise under normal seasonal circumstances” (Transport subsidy81) 
• 
“As owners and operators of the business you do not have gross off-farm assets exceeding 
$5,000,000” (Transport subsidy81) 
amended the Farm Household Allowance to lift the off-farm income threshold to $100,000 and allow 
anyone running at a loss to access the offset82.  
Through conversations with farmers it was also noted that there was opportunity to streamline and 
simplify the grant systems, access, and applications. E.g. it takes two weeks to put together a $5,000 
grant. 
7.5 
Social adaptation actions 
7.5.1 
Focus actions 
During stakeholder engagement, the most frequently mentioned category of social adaptation actions 
was well-being, and knowledge sharing and information provision. Collectively actions related to these 
categories comprise over three-quarters of adaptation categories within the social domain identified by 
ACT landholders.  
7.5.1.1 
Wellbeing 
“[ACT farmers need] a regular get-together to share info and experiences.” 
Category: Wellbeing 
Context 
Natural disasters, including drought, have long-term effects on the mental health of affected 
individuals and communities. 83 
Community-led solutions that promote stress reduction, physical protection, and community cohesion 
can bolster resilience in crisis.84  
Educational programs including mental health-related events (for example mental health first aid 
training targeted at Aboriginal communities, teachers, general practice staff, youth workers, rural 
service providers, BBQ breakfasts at mental health service provider locations, activities, and mental 
health information days for young people to talk about mental health issues in a youth-focused 
format) and telephone crisis support have been implemented in NSW. This was considered effective 
in helping communities build capacity and resilience in the face of chronic drought-related hardship.85 
Adaptation actions 
There is evidence that the well-being of many farmers and farming families across Australia has 
decreased because of drought, fire and most recently floods as well as broader concerns about 
81 ACT Government, Transport Subsidy Application Guideline (Round Two)  
Allowance - DAFF (agriculture.gov.au)  
83 Black Dog Institute. (2020). Mental Health Interventions Following Disasters. Randwick, NSW, Australia: Black Dog Institute. 
84 Humphreys, A., Walker, E., Bratman, G., & Errett, N. (2022). What can we do when the smoke rolls in? An exploratory 
qualitative analysis of the impacts of rural wildfire smoke on mental health and wellbeing, and opportunities for adaptation. 
https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12889-021-12411-2 
85 Hart, C. R., Berry, H. L., & Tonna, A. M. (2011). Improving the mental health of rural New South Wales communities facing 
drought and other adversities. The Australian journal of rural health, 19(5), 231–238. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-
1584.2011.01225.x

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
66
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
climate change. However, there are lots of different strategies that can support improved well-being 
in farming communities, including: 
• 
Creation of opportunities (formal and informal) to bring the farming community together to share 
experiences and knowledge A. 
• 
Building and supporting more formalised networks such as the ACT Rural Landholders 
Association and the ACT Grazing Group. 
• 
Providing support and training in succession planning and other key farm decision-making 
processes 
• 
Sharing information about a range of new opportunities including carbon farming and alternative 
markets for biodiversity conservation A. 
• 
Provision and promotion of mental health support services such as telephone counselling, 
financial counselling information and other services. 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced wellbeing 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
All 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.5.1.2 
Knowledge sharing and information provision 
“Having sufficient forecast information is needed to be [a] sustainable farmer in 'good and bad' years. 
Information, if inaccurate or insufficient, means farming is high risk and can end badly for people and 
places.” 
“Mentoring, community support” 
Category: Knowledge sharing and information provision 
Context 
Effective individual farms’ responses to climate change require the farmers to have information about 
the different dimensions of climate change that affect them at the individual farm level, the broader 
industry level and nationally and internationally. 
State/Territorygovernments, industry bodies, businesses, science organisations, community-based 
organisations, the mass media, and social media can all play an important role in connecting key 
sectors of the community and sharing knowledge86. It was noted by ACT landholders that this 
function is performed to some extent by ACT NRM A. 
Farmers find community groups such as the RLA great ways to actively learn and share. There is a 
sense that more informal groups/ mentoring programs could exist. Although some landholders 
identified that this role was fulfilled for them by specific community groups relevant to their enterprise. 
A 
Complementary support by the government to provide information and facilitate knowledge sharing 
can include the provision of climate change and weather forecast information, help to evaluate the 
pros and cons of choices, and provision of a social safety net for those unable to adapt.87 
Adaptation actions 
Knowledge sharing and information provision is a key social component to adaptive, sustainable 
agricultural systems. Knowledge sharing and information provision actions include: 
• 
Ongoing farmer training and capacity building (field days, workshops, farm walks, newsletters, 
web-based information and more)   
• 
Support for different types of farming and farm diversification 
86 Harman, B.P, Cunningham, R., Jacobs B., Measham, T. and Cvitanovic, C. (2015), Engaging local communities in climate 
adaptation: a social network perspective from Bega Valley, New South Wales, Australia, CSIRO, Australia. 
87 Freebairn, J. (2021). Adaptation to Climate Change by Australian Farmers. https://www.mdpi.com/2225-1154/9/9/141

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
67
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Facilitating communication between farmers to share knowledge and experiences and support 
improved mental health and well-being. 
• 
Developing community leadership and supporting groups to build supportive social networks 
and resilience (such as the ACT Grazing Group, which provides a forum to share problems 
solutions and experience) 
• 
Farm preparedness can be improved by providing weather and climate projections which inform 
on-farm management and provide climate information at scales relevant to the decisions being 
made and combining information on both climate variability and trends in seasonal and medium-
term (decadal) forecasts.88 
Impacts addressed 
• 
Reduced wellbeing 
Relevant agricultural enterprise 
All 
Legend: * priority adaptation actions based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified 
through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by survey. D literature review. 
7.6 
Governance adaptation actions 
Common themes that came out of the rural landholders’ workshop, the one-on-one meetings and the 
survey include the ‘place’ of rural land within the ACT as a region; the need to protect rural lands from 
development; the important role rural land plays in supporting biodiversity and providing a buffer zone 
for managing bushfire risk; and the need for a clear agriculture policy that articulates these themes and 
acknowledges the importance of rural land. The role of local agriculture as a source of food and fibre 
and as a reservoir of habitat connectivity for protection of flora and fauna within the Territory was also 
queried. 
It was noted that the ACT Government’s key role is within planning and land use, and that identifying, 
valuing, and protecting rural land within the ACT has implications for the capacity of rural landholders to 
prepare for drought and invest in drought preparedness. Considerations raised by rural landholders 
included: 
• 
Having an appreciation for: 
- 
Support provided by the government to farming groups in the ACT such as the Rural Lands 
Association  
- 
Opportunities to review conditions on rural leases and the types of rural land uses permitted in 
association with these leases  
- 
Maintaining strong relationships with key agricultural extension and research organisations 
and consultants in the region. 
• 
Having a desire for: 
- 
Greater acknowledgement of the social, economic, and environmental benefits provided to the 
ACT associated with current rural land use  
- 
Stronger alignment with NSW drought measures (incl. drought declarations, financial 
assistance) to aid planning 
- 
Investigation of opportunities to increase investment in resilience measures like NSW 
Government’s Farm Innovation Fund, the Regional Investment Corporation’s low interest 
loans. 
- 
Opening permits and approvals for certain types of rural land uses and providing support for 
farmers seeking to transition enterprises 
- 
Reviewing water and irrigation permits for rural land with consideration which end uses 
provide the greatest benefits and outcomes  
88 CSIRO, (2011) Adapting agriculture to climate change  https://www.publish.csiro.au/ebook/chapter/CSIRO_CC_Chapter%207

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
68
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
- 
Providing support for the establishment of a new farming systems group for graziers in the 
ACT and border regions, and to continue sharing information  
8.0 
Case studies 
Throughout stakeholder engagement activities farmers shared innovative farming techniques, financial 
barriers to adaptation, and the multitude of responses that they are making to build resilience to 
drought. The following section presents three case studies including: 
• 
Data to support rotational regenerative agriculture  
• 
Drought preparedness for graziers  
• 
Adaptation in viticulture 
• 
Government support. 
8.1 
Case study – data to support rotational regenerative agriculture 
Callum Brae is a 150ha sheep farm (typically 300 head) in Symington which has seen continuous 
management by the same farming family for multiple generations. Over this time, droughts have 
been a recurring challenge and have had a significant impact on pasture and livestock production, 
leading to reduced income and increased costs for the family. Over the last 40 years, the family have 
experienced firsthand the challenges that drought can bring.  
Sustainability is a key ambition driving their farm management techniques, with a very strong desire 
to enhance endangered grasslands and woodlands and the many endangered species that are 
present. Rotational regenerative processes are the centrepiece to achieving these ambitions. 
Rotational regenerative agriculture is a holistic approach that takes into account the interconnections 
between soil, plants, animals, and the environment, and seeks to create a sustainable and 
regenerative farming system. It focusses on regenerating and enhancing the health of the soil 
through rotating crops, planting cover crops, minimising the use of synthetic fertilisers and pesticides, 
and incorporating animal manure and other natural amendments into the soil. 
One of the main benefits of rotational regenerative agriculture is that it helps to improve the fertility 
and structure of the soil over time. By rotating crops and grazing, Callum Brae has been able to add 
nutrients back into the soil and break up compaction, which can improve water retention and 
increase the soil's ability to support healthy pasture growth during periods of low rainfall. In addition 
to improving soil health, rotational regenerative agriculture has also led to other benefits for Callum 
Brae, including: 
• 
Increasing the efficiency and sustainability of farming operations 
• 
Reducing the need for synthetic inputs, such as fertilizers and pesticides 
• 
Enhancing the health, productivity, and quality of animals raised on the farm 
• 
Providing habitat and food for beneficial insects and other wildlife. 
Developing a detailed understanding of the carrying capacity of the land and pastures has been key 
in implementing and maintaining this approach.  
Rotational regenerative agriculture can be supported by collecting data and using software in several 
ways. Here are a few examples: 
• 
Tracking and analysing pasture performance: By collecting data on the performance of 
different pastures/grasses, the farm has been successful in identifying which ones are most 
successful for their particular soil and climatic condition to make informed decisions about which 
crops to plant in the future. This has helped to optimise pasture yields and improve the efficiency 
of the farm. 
• 
Monitoring soil health: By collecting data on soil health indicators such as pH, nutrient levels, 
and moisture content, farmers can get a better understanding of the health of their soil and

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
69
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
identify any areas that may need improvement. This can help to optimise the use of natural 
amendments and reduce the need for synthetic inputs. 
• 
Analysing weather patterns and forecasting: By collecting data on weather patterns and 
using software to forecast future conditions, farmers can make more informed decisions about 
when to plant and harvest crops, and how to allocate resources. For example, if a forecast 
indicates that a drought is likely, farmers may choose to encourage plant drought-resistant 
pasture species or implement water storage systems to prepare for the dry conditions. 
• 
Managing and optimising irrigation systems: By collecting data on soil moisture levels and 
weather patterns, farmers can use software to optimise their irrigation systems and reduce water 
waste. This can help to conserve water resources and improve the efficiency of the farm. 
There is a growing availability of climate-related data Callum Brae has been reviewing and using, 
adopting software to inform their decision-making to support these efforts. Below is a collection of 
tools cited as useful in their strategic planning and monitoring of conditions for better drought 
preparation and management outcomes. Examples are outlined in the table below. 
Purpose 
Tool 
Drought 
resilience 
planning 
• 
Monitoring 
climate 
conditions 
• 
Davis’ Weatherlink community-driven weather station monitoring and reporting  
• 
The Commonwealth Government’s CliMate tool which collates historical climate 
analyses relating to water variables 
• 
review climate projections and historical data 
• 
Use of Climate Atlas developed for the viticulture industry 
Bushfire 
monitoring 
• 
Bushfire.io and Fires Near Me to set alerts for fires within designated perimeters, data 
on weather and fire activity 
Soil 
moisture 
monitoring 
• 
SoilWater models plant available water using the app and farmers’ own rainfall data 
• 
Farming Forecaster also models plant available water analysed from multiple 
grassland sites in nearby regions from soil probes 
• 
APSoil/Soil Mapp provides analysis of soil water content and other items for 
designated soil type, provides base data 
Pasture 
monitoring 
• 
Farm Carbon Calculator; FarmGas; Cool Farm Tool – detailed emission data, 
validation for enteric fermentation output 
• 
Sequestration tools including FullCam; LOOC-C (calculate sequestration potential) 
• 
Farming Forecaster to calculate projected green herbage, daily growth rates, ground 
cover, condition scores 
• 
OneSoil; Data Farming; Biomass MDA for pasture monitoring, reviewing Normalized 
Difference Vegetation Index  
• 
CSIRO’s SoilMapp and NSW Department of Primary Industry’s eSpade for soil profile 
data 
• 
DataFarming to identify vegetation index across properties 
• 
CSIRO’s AusFarm, GrazFeed, and GrassGro  
• 
NSW Department of Primary Industry’s Drought and Supplementary Feed Calculator to 
help develop rations in dry periods as well periods leading into and out of drought 
• 
Meat and Livestock Australia’s Feed Demand Calculator to understand feed 
requirements over a 12-month period 
On farm 
data 
collection 
and 
database 
recording 
• 
Soil compaction measurements using a cone penetrometer (Agreto), recording 
pressure at 10cm intervals and relationship to bulk data 
• 
Soil health testing – assisted using Rapid Assessment of Soil Health (RASH) tool to 
develop a database aiding analysis  
• 
Documenting all native and exotic species on-farm to monitor for changes to 
biodiversity, species dominance, etc over time.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
70
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
8.2 
Case study – drought preparedness for graziers 
Introduction 
Drought and climate change are significant challenges facing many farmers in Australia, particularly 
in arid and semi-arid regions. These challenges can have a significant impact on livestock 
production, leading to reduced income and increased costs for farmers. This case study explores 
how one sheep and beef farmer in the ACT is adapting his farm to the impacts of drought and climate 
change. 
Background 
Michael has held his property for 33 years and has seen firsthand the impacts that drought and 
climate change can have on his operations. In the past, he has struggled to keep his livestock 
healthy and well-fed during dry periods, leading to reduced income and increased costs for 
supplementary feeding. Typically during good climatic conditions, the farm will have up to 25,000 
sheep and 1,000 cattle; whereas during drought periods this has dropped to 7,000 sheep and 150 
cattle. 
For his farm, the drought of 2017 to 2020 was the longest that’s been experienced, and the most 
difficult to manage in terms of water availability despite applying learnings from previous drought 
events (notably 2006). There is a history of improvement still, with the millennium drought seeing 
better outcomes following further lessons learned during the 1982 drought event. 
Current solutions 
To address these challenges, Michael has continued to implement strategies on his farm to adapt to 
the impacts of drought and climate change. Strategies that Michael has implemented include: 
•
The use of native grasses (which typically perform the best in average conditions), using
fertilisers to manage the composition across species, manipulating native grasses to achieve
desired outcomes at the time. However, there has been a need to introduce different, non-native
drought tolerant species during droughts which are more resilient to dry conditions.
•
Implementation of rotational grazing practices, which involve moving cattle to different paddocks
regularly to allow the grasses to regenerate and improve the health of the soil.
•
Reviewing 3-month outlooks from BOM – particularly ENSO indicators. This enables medium-
term planning of stock numbers, whereby stock are sold down ahead of drought conditions
which reduces future feed costs and provides capital to aid operations.
•
Adoption of government support through freight subsidies when importing feed, water rebates to
improve on-farm water infrastructure, and grants to help build drought lots.
•
In addition to improving his pasture management practices, Michael has also implemented an
irrigation system that uses weather data and soil moisture sensors to optimise water use and
minimise waste. The system has helped him to better manage his water resources and ensure
that his cattle have access to enough water to stay healthy and hydrated during dry periods.
•
The scale of Michael’s farming activities still means that during drought all feed is purchased for
sheep. Cattle, however, are generally able to be spread across paddocks and remain pasture-
fed.
Future actions 
In the coming years, Michael intends to further invest in improving the farm’s drought resilience. High 
priority actions include: 
•
Improving water infrastructure: investigating the installation of a water bore, and if unavailable
will build a new dam, to improve water security.
•
Planting shelter belts of trees and increasing paddock trees to increase shading for stock and
reduce erosion/impacts of wind.
•
Improving feed storage: looking at underground storage of silage and building grain storage
facilities.
•
Improving capital stores: saving more cash in the bank would aid farm operations during drought
and improve opportunities to invest in rebuilding stock levels following drought.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
71
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Investigating management tools: for example, Michael is seeking cost/benefit analysis tools to 
understand what the cost of 100% destocking and restocking is, compared to reducing stock 
numbers and purchasing feed. 
Conclusion 
Drought and climate change are significant challenges facing many farmers, but with the right 
strategies and technologies, it is possible to adapt and mitigate their impacts. Key outcomes include: 
• 
The broader implications of Michael’s strategies: The strategies that Michael has implemented 
on his farm not only benefit his operation but also have broader implications for the environment 
and the community. For example, the use of drought-tolerant grasses and rotational grazing 
practices can help to improve the health of the soil and reduce erosion, which can benefit the 
local ecosystem and water quality.  
• 
The importance of adapting to drought and climate change: The challenges of drought and 
climate change are likely to become more severe in the future, making it increasingly important 
for farmers to adapt and find ways to mitigate their impacts. Michael’s farm serves as a model 
for other farmers looking to adapt to these challenges and find ways to build resilience and 
sustainability into their operations. 
• 
The role of technology and innovation: Technology and innovation can play a critical role in 
helping farmers to adapt to drought and climate change. The improvements in data interrogation 
and the adoption of further financial modelling software help farmers to be more efficient and 
sustainable in their practices. 
8.3 
Case study – adaptation in viticulture 
The ACT is home to a small but vibrant viticulture community, with several wineries and vineyards 
located in the region. They are typically small to medium-sized operations, with many being family-
owned and operated.  The ACT has a long history of viticulture, with the first grapevines planted in 
the region in the late 19th century. Today, the region is known for producing high-quality wines, 
particularly cool-climate varieties such as Pinot Noir, Chardonnay, Riesling, and Pinot Gris. 
The ACT's viticulture industry is supported by a number of organisations, including the Canberra 
District Wine Industry Association, which represents the interests of winemakers and grape growers 
in the region. The association works to promote the region's wines and support the development of 
the industry. The industry is also supported by several research and education organisations, 
including the Australian National University's Research School of Biology and the University of 
Canberra's School of Science, Health and Engineering. These institutions research topics such as 
grape and wine production, viticulture practices, and the impacts of climate change on the industry. 
In addition to its wineries and vineyards, the ACT is also home to some winery restaurants and 
tasting rooms, which provide visitors with an opportunity to sample the region's wines and learn 
about the local viticulture industry. 
Mount Majura Vineyard 
Mount Majura Vineyard is at the top of the Majura Valley, just outside the city of Canberra. All wines 
are sourced from the single vineyard site, which also features a restaurant, cellar door, and vineyard 
tours. Water has been noted as the single most important resource for the vineyard, and concerns 
about the impacts of climate change are driving many changes on the property. The vineyard’s water 
supply consists of a water bore licence which is used to its full capacity, an on-farm dam approx. two 
to three megalitres in size, and town water connection for domestic supply. 
Impacts of climate change 
The vineyard and winery are already experiencing several impacts associated with climate change: 
• 
Vintage advancement describes the shift in the timing of grape harvests as a result of climate 
change. In many regions, grape harvests are occurring earlier than they did in the past due to 
warmer temperatures and changing weather patterns.  For example, Mount Majura Vineyard 
has observed that on average, chardonnay grapes advance 1.5 days each year. That is, in the

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
72
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
30 years since the inception of the vineyard, Chardonnay now ripens 45 days earlier than it once 
did.  
• 
Similarly, vintage compression is the term used to describe the shortening of the grape-growing 
season due to warmer temperatures. Mount Majura Vineyard has also experienced this 
compression, where some varieties that used to take six to eight weeks, now only take four 
weeks. 
• 
This has had several implications for the organisation, including: 
- 
Changes in grape quality: Shorter growing seasons can lead to grapes that are less ripe 
and have a different balance of flavours compared to grapes grown in a longer season. 
This can affect the quality and flavour of the final wine. 
- 
Changes in the timing of winemaking: The shorter growing season can also affect the 
timing of winemaking and has required Mount Majura Vineyard to adjust their schedules to 
accommodate the earlier or later arrival of grapes. This can be particularly challenging for 
the winery which doesn’t have the capacity to process the grapes within shorter or 
overlapping timeframes. This has flow on impacts to the availability of staff who work 
across multiple vineyards in the region – “we have contract pickers and it's already tough to 
get staff” 
- 
Changes in the economic viability of certain grape varieties: Some grape varieties may 
become less economically viable because of vintage advancement/compression, as they 
may not be well-suited to the changing growing season. This can lead to a shift in the types 
of grapes that are planted in a region and adds additional challenges around the marketing 
of new grape varieties – “there is conservatism in the market. A new grape variety is hard to 
sell if people don't recognise it” 
• 
Scale insects are a type of pest that can be a problem for vineyards, as they feed on the sap of 
grapevines and can damage the plants. Mount Majura is concerned that climate change is likely 
to exacerbate the problem of scale insects in vineyards, with studies showing they become more 
resistant under warmer conditions. Climate change can also lead to changes in the prevalence 
of other pests and diseases, which can affect the overall health of grapevines and make them 
more susceptible to scale insects. For example, if Mount Majura Vineyard is dealing with a 
disease outbreak, the vines may be weaker and more prone to damage from scale insects. 
Similarly, there are fears that vintage advancement may also affect the prevalence of scale 
insects. For example, if grapes are harvested earlier than usual, the vines may be more 
vulnerable to scale insects as they may not have reached their full maturity. Pierces Disease is 
of similar concern, among others.  
• 
Bushfire smoke has been a serious problem, as it can affect the quality and flavour of grapes 
and wine. In 2020 Mount Majura Vineyard lost the entire crop as a result of bushfire smoke 
damage. While this instance was manageable as a once-off event, consecutive events would be 
catastrophic for the business.  
Adaptation activities 
Mount Majura Vineyard is taking a variety of actions to adapt to climate change. Some of these 
actions include: 
• 
Changing grape varieties to counter winery and staff capacity concerns associated with vintage 
advancement/compression: replacing Pinot that is picked in March with a new variety that is 
instead picked in February. 
• 
Planting grape varieties that are more resistant to extreme weather conditions: Some grape 
varieties are more resistant to heat and drought than others, so Mount Majura are investigating 
alternative varieties. 
• 
Modernising irrigation systems: installation of temperature and soil moisture sensors to 
automatically activate water pumps under certain conditions to optimise irrigation and maximise 
water efficiency. 
• 
Implementing cover cropping: for Mount Majura, cover cropping means allowing grass to grow 
between rows of grapevines to help improve soil health and reduce erosion – although this does 
require additional maintenance to ensure this doesn’t interfere with grape growing it’s been 
beneficial in the long term.  
• 
Using weather forecasting and monitoring systems: Using wine-making specific resources such 
as Wine Australia’s Climate Atlas, as well as near and medium-term forecasting and monitoring 
systems to better understand and predict the impacts of climate change on their crops, and to

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
73
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
make more informed decisions about irrigation, pest management, and other aspects of 
vineyard management. 
• 
Data collection and analysis: there has been a strong culture of keeping weather records on the 
property to understand longer-term trends. Key indicators include growing degree days; winter 
rainfall; Brandis Index. 
• 
Collaborating with researchers and industry groups: working with researchers and industry 
groups to develop and test new approaches to adapting to climate change.  
• 
Managing wine inventories: to cater for years that see significant drop loss (e.g. following 2020 
bushfires), there is a concerted effort to build up stock inventories during good years – “we want 
to have a year’s worth of stock in the cellar to get us through”. 
• 
Diversifying land use: a portion of land is leased to a solar PV farm, helping create climate-
independent income streams for the business from what was previously unused land unsuitable 
for grape growing.  
9.0 
Discussion 
9.1 
Key findings 
Drought will continue to be a challenge for rural landholders and farmers in the ACT. Investment in 
adaptation measures to build resilience to drought will be essential to preserve rural land and farming 
activities within the ACT. Based on the observed climate, future drought scenarios, stakeholder 
engagement, review of climate change impacts and identifying adaptation actions, the following findings 
regarding resilience to drought in ACT have been developed. 
• 
Diversity of agricultural enterprises within the ACT. While sheep and cattle farming represents 
a large proportion of ACT’s agricultural enterprises, there is a long ‘tail’ of diverse agricultural 
products produced at a smaller scale.  
- 
Many federal government programs which focus on improving drought resilience are targeted 
at either larger-scale operations, generally larger than those of the ACT farming community; 
or industries that have only a small representation in the ACT such as cropping and 
horticulture.   
- 
Farming practices across the ACT generally require less water (i.e., few enterprises exist that 
require irrigation). Cropping, for example, which is subject to relatively higher drought risk due 
to the high need for irrigation is not prevalent in the ACT. This has likely shielded ACT farmers 
from some of the more severe financial impacts seen in other regions, as well as the tendency 
for farm profits to become more sensitive to drought impacts over the years. At the same time 
maintaining stock water, stock feed and animal health during drought has incurred 
considerable expenditure. 
- 
Other enterprises, such as vineyards, need longer lead times to adapt due to the high costs in 
switching grape varieties and the lengthy transition times from plant/grafting new varieties and 
harvesting grapes from the new varieties. For example, growing and marketing new grape 
varieties (that may perform better under different future climate conditions) takes more time 
and financial investment.  These expenses are also incurred by grazing enterprises that shift 
cattle or sheep breeds and can take years for a transition to fully occur. 
• 
Lack of government progress in planning for droughts. Stakeholder feedback indicated that 
participants felt that the policy context to support planning for, managing, and recovering from 
droughts is limited with limited representation for the farming community within the ACT 
Government. 
• 
There is broader exposure to multiple climate hazards. Whilst this report focusses on the 
impacts of drought, the ACT’s exposure to bushfire risk was highlighted throughout stakeholder 
engagement (e.g., refer to Section 6.2 for the impact of drought on bushfires). There may be a 
need to do additional work to support farmer preparedness for bushfires in the future, given the 
growing frequency and intensity of bushfires in the ACT.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
74
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Adoption of farm management software and the availability of farm-relevant data is 
increasing. 
- 
Farm sizes are typically small and as such have smaller revenues and expenditure budgets. 
As such, small farms are less likely to have digestible climate data available to them (e.g., 
destocking triggers), nor access to farm management software which is generally considered 
cost prohibitive. However, investment by the ACT Government and others in new data 
provision (e.g., soil moisture probes) and training (e.g., ACT Government’s sponsoring of 
farmers to receive interstate training) is increasing farmers’ engagement with new data 
sources. 
- 
Studies of national scope reviewed in the context of this report often entirely omit discussion 
of ACT as a farming region89 
- 
The lack of accurate production and consumption data is a significant impediment to the 
development of sustainable food production strategies by the government and the private 
sector to assess diversification options that generate increased availability of locally sourced 
food in the ACT. The ACT Food and Fibre Strategy is a good initiative that may help answer 
some of these questions. 
- 
Existing and emerging free tools such as Farming Forecaster appear to have good uptake, 
demonstrating an appetite for receiving and utilising more information to assist planning.  
• 
Strong ability to adapt to climate change. Rural landholders in the ACT are generally well 
positioned to prepare for future drought, reasons that support this include: 
- 
It was identified that some rural landholders expressed that they felt confident that they would 
be able to introduce adaptation measures sufficient to manage the scale of changes 
expected. Adaptation measures such as changing stocking rates, changing breeds or species 
selection and diversification of farm income were identified as key measures to support 
adaptation and drought preparation. 
- 
Despite this confidence, climate change projections and scenarios indicate that future drought 
conditions will increase in severity and frequency which may overwhelm the levels of drought 
preparedness able to be achieved by individual farmers. A key factor identified by 
stakeholders that mitigated the impacts of the 2017 – 2020 drought was beef and lamb prices 
and demand remaining high. In times of future drought, global and local political, economic, 
and social trends may not provide the same protections.  
• 
Access to alternative water supplies. Landholders have cited reliance on a range of sources 
including farm collection (e.g., tanks and dams), extraction of surface water, extraction of 
groundwater, and use of mains water. 
- 
The relatively short distance between rural properties and urban areas means many farms 
have access to mains-supplied water. While there is a higher cost associated with its use, it 
has meant these farmers have had security to water their core stock in times of drought.  
- 
Several landowners interviewed have invested in bore water extraction infrastructure; 
however, this is not an option for all properties. Key barriers to their use include high 
administration fees for bores that are not in use, difficulty in getting approved where 
catchment allocations have been exhausted, or unsuitable geology. Existing bore water users 
noted that there are inefficiencies in the way water allocations are distributed, with those 
establishing a bore first receiving first rights to water. Where users do not use their full 
allocation, it means other users within the catchment lose out. 
- 
The current use of wastewater recycling for agricultural production and other purposes in the 
ACT is minimal (if at all), though some farms benefit from releases by the Lower Molonglo 
Water Quality Control Centre. 
• 
A high proportion of farming families receive off-farm income. This is considered to greatly 
reduce the financial vulnerability of many farming enterprises as the financial pressures of drought 
89 https://daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/search/asset/1030903/0

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
75
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
are reduced. However, this can also affect their eligibility for grants or subsidies which have 
expectations that recipients derive a higher level of total income from the agricultural enterprise.  
• 
Crown leasing arrangements introduce multiple challenges to adaptation.  
- 
Each rural lease has a land management agreement in place specifying the type and number 
of stock to be held. This presents challenges to landowners looking to adaptively manage 
their stock based on conditions at the time or move towards different enterprises entirely.  
- 
Restrictions on the ability of landholders to construct a secondary dwelling presents 
challenges to farm succession planning. Many landholders noted that to support their next 
generation of farmers, enabling them to live on-farm before takeover is a key step. 
- 
The current duration of tenure for agricultural leaseholders in the ACT ranges from 99 years 3 
months, and in some cases, some landholders have no active lease. For some landholders 
with expired leases, tenure is a monthly or weekly consideration. In addition, most lease 
agreements contain withdrawal clauses allowing government to terminate short-term leases 
albeit with a requirement to recognise the value of some improvements. Landholders on short-
term arrangements are discouraged to make any substantial investment towards long-term 
adaptation for their properties. The lack of extended tenure for some leaseholders also 
significantly impacts their capacity to access finance for farm operations and diversification 
with banks reluctant to make loans for improvements that may not realise a return if leases 
are withdrawn or not renewed. 
- 
The duration of leases is intended to reflect future strategic land uses and planning intentions 
with an emphasis on maintaining flexibility for urban development. A lack of clarity in planning 
strategy is a particular disincentive on diversification options involving horticulture and other 
permanent plantings where large initial capital expenses are only recouped over an extended 
period as trees mature and production increases. 
• 
A lack of local agricultural infrastructure and skills.  
- 
The small agricultural market means there is limited access to key supporting infrastructure 
such as abattoirs and veterinary services. This raises costs associated with transport, raises 
food miles, and contributes to the financial viability concerns of smaller farms. 
- 
Access to skilled agriculture labour is likely to be more constrained, with the small size of the 
ACT farming sector unlikely to attract career agricultural managers in the long term. Casual 
labour is particularly important in the context of diversification where out-sourcing of relatively 
unskilled activities allows landholders to devote more time and focus on diversification efforts. 
• 
Government engagement with adaptation activities in the ACT has the potential to deliver 
effective action, compared to other jurisdictions in Australia. With its single level of 
government structure, relatively small geographical area and small rural population, opportunities 
to invoke transformational change are numerous.  
- 
Single-level government means decision-making is simplified and the community has direct 
access to key decision-makers.  
- 
The government has the opportunity to gather good on-ground information given the small 
size of the community. 
• 
Other triggers for reviewing farm practices may also enable the consideration of climate 
change planning e.g., review of farm practices or other reasons such as the potential to work 
towards biodiversity credits. 
• 
The ACT Government’s management of pests and weeds on crown lands is important in 
alleviating their spread into agricultural land, easing the pressure of invasive species on farm 
boundaries. Continued investment in providing guidance to landholders around drought recovery 
actions such as managing fodder, weeds etc. is appreciated. 
• 
A high proportion of farms receive off-farm income. This typically implies that these 
landholders are more financially resilient compared to others that are entirely reliant on their farm 
outputs.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
76
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
- 
A 2020 survey by ACT NRM indicates that almost 80% of landholders surveyed 
(approximately 48 responses) derived at least 50% of their income from activities not related 
to their rural holdings. These properties most likely have a higher degree of economic security 
and consequently have an increased capacity to trial and adopt new systems, technologies, 
and other diversification opportunities. 
- 
Growers with part-time or full-time employment off-farm may therefore find it difficult to 
allocate sufficient time-resources to maximise the probability of successful diversification. A 
balance of capital generation and time commitment is needed. 
- 
Household income amongst the broader ACT community is high in comparison to the 
Australian average – for example, in 2021, 38.3% of households in the ACT had an income of 
more than $3,000 per week90 (the Australian average was 24.3% of households). There is a 
sense among stakeholders that ACT residents have a higher propensity to support the 
purchase of premium sustainable products such as that grown in the ACT region. 
• 
Improvements to farm management practices that are not specifically associated with 
drought are ongoing. Technology already being adopted such as minimal tillage principles, water 
infrastructure improvements, and investment in more advanced machinery and equipment lead to 
multiple improved farm outcomes, but also tend to improve the ability of farms to manage droughts 
when they do occur 
9.2 
Recommendations 
Recommendations across five themes are provided in Table 11. These themes include: 
• 
Enhance water security 
• 
Data provision and engagement 
• 
Land use planning 
• 
Supporting education 
• 
Collaboration and awareness 
Table 11 
Recommendations 
Action 
Outcome 
Action owner 
Enhance water security 
Identify opportunities to review farmers’ access to 
alternative water sources to improve water security 
• 
Investigate Inefficient allocation of water 
allocations 
• 
Review water licence allocation mechanisms 
to enable better sharing of water within 
catchments. For example, there may be 
opportunities to allow existing water license 
holders that do not efficiently use their existing 
allocation to trade water with others in need 
elsewhere in their catchment.  
- 
Review water licencing arrangements to 
acknowledge higher value end uses. For 
example, water licences could be 
prioritised for enterprises in line with the 
Capital Food and Fibre Strategy. 
• 
Investigate opportunities and understand 
barriers to greater adoption of wastewater 
reuse e.g.  Lower Molonglo Water Quality 
Control Centre effluent reuse scheme which 
• 
Provision of 
sufficient 
affordable water 
for agriculture in 
the ACT’s water 
allowance (within 
bounds of MDB 
Agreement) to be 
able to grow food 
• 
Improvements to 
water security for 
the agriculture 
community 
• 
ACT 
Government 
• 
Icon Water 
90 https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/8

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
77
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Action 
Outcome 
Action owner 
supplies water to the nearby golf course, and 
previously supplied to local vineyards 
Data provision and engagement 
Stakeholder engagement indicated that very few 
farmers had engaged previously with future 
projections of climate change. In addition, few saw 
that transformative changes in their practices were 
needed (e.g. shifting to produce different 
agricultural products). To improve the engagement 
landholders have with climate projections, there is a 
need to improve scales relevant to drought 
planning. It was identified that the use of long-term 
climate projections is not strongly resonating with 
landowners therefore there is opportunity for 
improving drought monitoring and early warning 
systems.  
• 
Improved 
landholder 
engagement with 
projections of 
climate to 
enhance planning 
and demonstrate 
what sufficient 
preparedness 
looks like.  
• 
Continued 
investment in 
making climate 
data accessible 
and available  
• 
Providers of 
climate 
projection data 
such as the 
NARCliM 
project team, 
the 
CSIRO/Bureau 
of Meteorology, 
and others 
Engage with projects of national scope to ensure 
ACT is well represented within data sets and 
reporting outputs. E.g. enhanced inclusion of ACT’s 
farming community within ABARES data (noting 
privacy concerns), ACT’s inclusion within 
Droughthub91 mapping and advice. 
• 
Improved 
representation of 
ACT data within 
national data sets, 
enabling 
comparison with 
other regions 
• 
ACT 
Government to 
engage with 
data providers 
Recognising that droughts and bushfires are driven 
by many of the same changes in climate variables, 
it is recommended that the relationship between 
drought and bushfire risk is acknowledged in the 
RDRP, specifically the cascading impacts of 
drought and bushfire on rural landholders in the 
ACT and the wider community.  
• 
Improved 
resilience to wider 
climate-related 
shocks and 
stresses 
• 
All ACT 
Government 
agencies 
Land use planning 
In the long term, climate futures may increase 
pressure for more transformative change for certain 
farms. This could include the emergence of new 
land use activities such as carbon abatement, 
biodiversity conservation, or renewable energy 
generation as complements to traditional farming. 
Defining ACT Government’s ambitions and 
developing policies in programs in such spaces 
would aid existing landholders to plan long-term 
farm improvement measures. 
• 
Improve farmers’ 
abilities to 
undertake long-
term planning and 
investment 
• 
ACT 
Government 
Review land use zone development controls in the 
Territory to seek the protection of areas of 
important landscape setting, or nature conservation 
corridors 
• 
Improving  
• 
ACT 
Government 
Review change of use charges to NUZ1 and NUZ2 
(rural and broadacre) zoned land where the main 
activity is to produce food or fibre i.e. allow ancillary 
uses without lease purpose change process and 
• 
Enable farmers to 
adaptively 
manage their land 
and enterprises   
• 
ACT 
Government 
91 https://www.droughthub.nsw.gov.au/

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
78
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Action 
Outcome 
Action owner 
costs (provided there is adequate consultation and 
investigation of impacts of the changes) 
Remove current lease and land use restrictions to 
enable flexibility in farming enterprise selection (e.g. 
switching from sheep to goats) and timing (e.g. 
removing minimum stock requirements during times 
of drought) 
• 
Enable farmers to 
adaptively 
manage their land 
and enterprises  
• 
ACT 
Government 
Introduce payments where the conservation of 
important landscape setting or nature corridors 
restricts agricultural use  
• 
Recognition of 
farmers’ land 
stewardship  
• 
ACT 
Government 
Review the scope of land management agreements 
to only capture big picture data that the Territory 
needs to have info on (e.g. biosecurity, soils, water, 
landscape-scale wildlife links) and make clear the 
purpose and use of data 
• 
Land 
management 
agreements are 
an enabler to 
climate adaptation 
• 
ACT 
Government 
 Supporting education 
The support ACT Government has been providing 
to the agricultural community is well received, and it 
is recommended that these activities continue. 
Suggested topics include: 
• 
Alternative climate-resilient enterprises that 
may be viable in the ACT 
• 
Farm financial management principles to 
support drought preparedness 
• 
Implementing a farm-scale drought 
management plan including identification of 
trigger points for action. 
• 
Improved 
landholder 
drought 
preparedness and 
engagement with 
climate change 
projections.  
• 
ACT 
Government  
• 
Existing farm 
community 
forums (e.g. 
RLA) 
Partner with education providers to highlight climate 
change adaptation and opportunities in agriculture 
within school curriculums e.g. farm 
demonstrations/visits  
• 
Increased youth 
engagement and 
recognition of 
ACT’s agricultural 
community 
• 
ACT 
Government, 
education 
providers (e.g. 
Education 
Directorate) 
Collaboration and awareness 
Encourage the Commonwealth’s development of a 
food security plan to identify and protect farming 
regions that can continue to produce food under 
future conditions, including the ACT and its border 
regions.  
• 
Recognition of 
ACT as a 
producing region 
• 
Further support 
and data for 
ACT’s farmers 
• 
Commonwealth 
Government 
(i.e.  DAFF) 
Support communication and marketing of produce 
that is more drought resilient e.g. helping to shift 
consumer preference to local products or away 
from meat breeds not suitable for ACT’s climate  
• 
Improve 
economic viability 
of switching 
varieties, species, 
breeds (increased 
consumer 
demand for 
resilient 
enterprises) 
• 
ACT 
Government in 
partnership with 
local media; 
education 
providers

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix A 
Climate projections – 
Scenario selection

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix A 
Climate projections – Scenario selection 
Please note that this section is an extension of Section 5.0 in the main body of the report and therefore 
will include duplications between the text.   
Scenario selection 
Climate change is a significant challenge face the agriculture sector. Impacts are already being felt, in 
the form of drought, increasing temperatures, increasing extreme rainfall, and flooding and more 
frequent extreme weather events. Adaptation within the agricultural sector will play a crucial role in 
building resilience and mitigating these physical impacts.  
Climate scenarios refer to the emissions scenarios which underpin projections of future climate and 
provide an indication of possible future impacts. Each climate scenario is underpinned by a range of 
different climate projections. Plausible physical pathways have been developed by industry and 
scientific groups including the NSW Government and the CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), 
based on robust scientific data and climate modelling provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC), to outline projected changes to the climate and anticipated responses across 
the public and private sector. 
The purpose of this chapter is to present the rationale for proposing the climate change scenarios that 
will be used to assess physical risks for the ACT farming community.  The scope of this chapter 
includes: 
• 
Analysis and recommendation of climate (emissions) scenarios that allow for the identification of 
physical risks to ACT farming community. 
• 
Analysis and recommendation of multiple time horizons to consider in developing climate scenarios 
and understanding future projections which are appropriate to the planning, design, and 
operational lives of the ACT farming community. 
• 
Selection and understanding of the climate variables (hazards) that may result in physical risks to 
the ACT’s agricultural sector. 
This report does not cover the identification or assessment of transition risks and opportunities. 
Context setting 
Natural variations have always played a part in ACT’s climate and will continue to do so; but climate 
change is expected to shift the range and the pattern of this variability. 
The Territory is observing gradual changes, such as higher average and extreme temperatures, and 
more frequent and severe events such as heatwaves and bushfires. Climate change poses significant 
additional risks to ACT’s communities and environment and will require adaptive responses that 
increase resilience to its impacts.  
Droughts will change in frequency and intensity and therefore it is essential that farming communities 
and government acts now to strengthen resilience. The following section will unpack the complexity of 
drought hazards across north-east ACT and what future climate projections look like.  
Climate scenario selection considerations 
Scenario analysis is an important tool for understanding and exploring the strategic implications of 
climate-related physical risks and opportunities. It provides an understanding of how resilient 
organisations are to a range of plausible climate-related scenarios, and how sensitive an organisations’ 
assets and operations are to the differences between these scenarios. Scenarios are also a useful 
mechanism for informing stakeholders about how an organisation is considering physical risks and 
opportunities, and presenting forward-looking information to partners and other stakeholders. 
Box 4 Understanding scenarios 
A scenario describes a path of development leading to a particular outcome. Scenarios are not 
intended to represent a full description of the future, but rather highlight central elements of a

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-2
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
possible future to draw attention to the key factors that will drive future developments. Scenarios are 
hypothetical constructs; they are not forecasts or predictions92. 
Selecting climate scenarios requires careful consideration of:  
• 
The underlying greenhouse gas emissions scenario – accelerated action by governments 
globally to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the next ten years could mean we reduce the risks 
associated with future climate change, however conversely, in the absence of action, we may 
experience worsening climate risks. 
• 
Data confidence – there remains significant uncertainty in determining the likely impacts 
associated with each emission scenario. Data confidence in climate projections can be discussed 
in terms of model ‘mean’, where the ensemble of different model runs (or simulations) are 
averaged to determine a ‘likely’ projection while the spread of the individual model runs give the 
range of possible futures. For example, NARCliM 1.0 ran models across twelve simulations, while 
NARCliM 1.5 provides data across six simulations, each of which presents different results for 
climate variable projections.  
• 
The climate hazards likely to affect the organisation and its assets – a range of climate 
hazards are likely to affect the ACT Government’s assets and operations, and different climate 
hazards will begin to impact at different times depending on emissions pathways.  
• 
The year of interest – for example, there is little difference between maximum temperature 
projections between 2030 and 2045, whereas there is significant difference approaching 2070 and 
2090. As such, the choice of RCP for short term planning horizons has lower importance compared 
to those adopted for long term planning horizons (i.e. the end of the century). 
• 
Avoiding ‘path dependence’ – where future adaptation outcomes have a dependence on 
adaptation decisions (such as RCPs and the confidence interval of climate projections) made 
today. Some decisions create lock-in to a determined future pathway, which may be difficult to 
undo without significant expense and effort. For example, designing drainage infrastructure using 
rainfall projections from a lower RCP may mean the need to add additional capacity or replace 
existing drainage in the future to adapt to higher water volumes if greenhouse gas emissions 
continue to increase on their current trajectory (i.e. a higher RCP).  
Climate projections and data availability 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment report published in 2014, 
outlines a range of Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) designed to be ‘representative’ of 
possible future emissions and greenhouse gas (GHG) concentration scenarios to the year 2100. The 
pathways are based on global research and existing literature and comprise four scenarios: RCP8.5, 
RCP6.0, RCP4.5 and RCP2.6, each of which comprises a consistent set of projections for radiative 
forcing (the net balance between energy (sunlight) absorbed by the Earth and energy radiated back into 
space, measured in watts per square metre (W/m2)). Each RCP reflects a different concentration of 
global GHG emissions reached by 2100, based on assumptions of different combinations of possible 
future economic, technological, demographic, policy, and institutional trajectories93 -  
In 2014, the NSW Government (through the NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling (NARCliM 1.0)) 
released a suite of climate change projections, based on models used to inform the IPCC 4th 
Assessment Report and downscaled to provide higher resolution data for 12 regions across NSW 
(including the ACT). These projections used the SRES-A2 emissions scenario, which most closely 
aligns with the RCP8.5 scenario used in the IPCC 5th Assessment Report and used in subsequent 
more recent in climate change projections such as those provided by the CSIRO and BoM. The 
projections do not however provide for sensitivity testing between two different scenarios as the SRES-
A2 was the only modelled scenario.  
92 TCFD, 2017, Technical Supplement - The Use of Scenario Analysis in Disclosure of Climate-Related Risks and Opportunities. 
Page 10. https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/FINAL-TCFD-Technical-Supplement-062917.pdf  

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-3
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
In 2021 NARCliM released an improved iteration of simulations (NARCliM 1.5) which better captures 
the seasonal patterns and magnitudes of precipitation as well as the potential hotter and drier futures 
that are currently being experienced. NARCliM 1.5 also provides the added benefit of future projections 
for two scenarios (being RCP4.5 and RCP8.5) to allow for a greater interrogation and understanding of 
future changes in climate in lines with other modelling datasets. 
In 2015 the CSIRO and the Australian BoM released a suite of climate change projections for the 
entirety of Australia (broken into eight natural resource management regions) through the Climate 
Change in Australia Portal, based on the IPCC RCPs (RCP 2.6, 4.5 and 8.5) as provided through the 
5th Assessment Report and downscaled to provide higher resolution data for Australia’s natural 
resource management regions. By providing a range of scenarios, climate projections provided by 
CSIRO and BoM allow for comparison and sensitivity testing across both multiple emissions pathways 
and multiple time horizons. CSIRO has developed projection tools including climate analogues that 
matches the proposed future climate of a region of interest with the current climate experienced in 
another region using annual average rainfall and maximum temperature94. The CSIRO cluster reports 
also provide key climate change projections across a range of variables including drought.95 
It is noted that with the release of the IPCCs 6th Assessment Report – Working Group I96, a set of new 
illustrative emissions scenarios (called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways) have been considered to 
explore a range of future scenarios accounting for a broader range of greenhouse gas, land use and air 
pollution futures. The five Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) and respective future annual CO2 
emissions are highlighted in Table 12 In addition to the release of the 6th Assessment Report – Working 
Group 1, an Interactive Atlas has been prepared allowing a spatial and temporal analysis of the climate 
change information presented in the report at a regional level including Australasia.
94 CSIRO. (2020). Climate analogues. https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/climate-analogues/  
95 CSIRO. (2015). Murray Basin Cluster Report. 
https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/MURRAY_BASIN_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pd
f  
96 IPCC, 2021: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 
Ito the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. 
Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. 
Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 3−32, doi:10.1017/9781009157896.001. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_SPM.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table 12 Comparison of Representative Concentration Pathways for Australia 
Scenario 
Atmospheric 
CO2 
concentration 
Average 
temperature 
increase (to 
2090) * 
Range of 
temperature 
increase (to 
2090)* 
Description of scenario97 
RCP 2.6 
(Aggressive 
mitigation) 
421 ppm 
1.6oC 
0.9 to 2.3oC 
Assumes strong mitigation efforts, with early participation from all emitters followed by active removal of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. It is anticipated that emissions will peak by approximately 2030 and then reduce 
resulting in zero net emissions by about 2050. This scenario is marked by a considerable change in technologies 
predicated on the widespread uptake of renewable energy, energy and emissions capture and storage and 
changes to transport fuels and modes. As a result, it is anticipated that temperature increases can be limited to 
1°C by the end of the century (based on a 1985 – 2005 baseline) and while there will be some increase to extreme 
weather events due to historical climate change, these will result in low level adaptation costs to mitigate risk.  
RCP 4.5 
(Strong 
mitigation) 
538 ppm 
2.4oC 
1.7 to 3.2oC 
Assumes a high level of mitigation with no active removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Emissions are anticipated 
to peak around 2070 and then remain consistent until 2100. This scenario assumes full uptake of renewable 
energy however no carbon capture to help reduce the levels of carbon dioxide. As a result, it is anticipated that 
temperature increases can be limited to 1.8°C by the end of the century (based on a 1985 – 2005 baseline) and 
while there will be some increase to extreme weather events due to historical climate change, these will result in 
medium level adaptation costs to mitigate risk. 
RCP 6.0 
(Some 
mitigation) 
670 ppm 
2.8oC 
2.0 to 3.7oC 
Assumes a low to medium level of mitigation with no active removal of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Emissions are 
anticipated to slow, however continue through 2100. This scenario a mix of coal-fired and renewable energy with 
no carbon capture. As a result, it is anticipated that temperature increases can be limited to 2.2°C by the end of the 
century (based on a 1985 – 2005 baseline) and while there will be a moderate increase to extreme weather events 
due to historical climate change, these will result in medium level adaptation costs to mitigate risk. 
RCP 8.5 
(Business as 
usual) 
936 ppm 
4.3oC 
3.2 to 5.4oC 
Assumes emissions minimal effort to reduce emissions. Emissions will continue to grow unchecked, marked by the 
continued use of conventional fossil fuel energy to power cities homes and businesses. Without sizeable 
intervention this scenario assumes an average temperature increase of up to 4°C by the end of the century (based 
on a 1986 – 2005 baseline). It will require costly adaptation to minimise the impact extreme weather events which 
have continued to increase dramatically over the past century. 
* Assumes a pre-industrial baseline period of 1850-1900
97 Australian Govt. Department of the Environment and Energy, (n.d.). What are the RCPs?. https://coastadapt.com.au/sites/default/files/infographics/15-117-NCCARFINFOGRAPHICS-01-
UPLOADED-WEB%2827Feb%29.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Time horizons 
To consider risks appropriately and adequately to assets, operations and services, a series of time 
horizons are needed to understand how risks may change over time as well as identified intervention 
points for adaptation measures. Scientific data (including climate projections) from NARCliM and the 
CSIRO and BoM sources generally include 20-year time horizons centred on a ‘fixed year’, for example, 
2070 accounts for the period 2060-2079. The time horizons include: 
• 
A baseline period of 1990-2009, as well as future time horizons of 2030, 2045, 2070 and 2090 for 
the NARCliM1.5 data projections. 
Observed climate 
Historical SPI for the ACT 
Figure 14 supports The Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) discussion in Section 3.1 
Figure 14 Historical (1900-2020) Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) 12-month scale for ACT. Mildly dry (0>SPI>-0.99), 
moderately dry (-1.0>SPI>-1.49), severely dry (-1.5>SPI>-1.99) and extremely dry conditions (SPI less than -
2.0).98 
SPI and average maximum temperature 
Figure 15 supports The Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) discussion in Section 3.1 
98 Agricultural and Meteorological Software. (2020). What is SPI(Standardized Precipitation Index). 
https://agrimetsoft.com/faq/What%20is%20SPI(Standardized%20Precipitation%20Index)

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-2
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 15 Observed SPI and higher temperatures for North-eastern ACT. Mildly dry (0>SPI>-0.99), moderately dry (-
1.0>SPI>-1.49), severely dry (-1.5>SPI>-1.99) and extremely dry conditions (SPI less than -2.0). 
Temperature 
Periods of drought are often accompanied by higher-than-average surface air temperatures. 
Temperature variables that are indicators of drought include: 
• 
Higher maximum temperatures,  
• 
More days with maximum temperatures exceeding 35°C.  
Both maximum and minimum average temperatures have been increasing annually.  
Figure 16 Observed maximum and minimum temperatures for North-East ACT 
Similarly, there appears to be a relationship between above-average temperatures and a reduction in 
soil moisture through reduced rainfall and increased surface evaporation (Figure 19). Heat can 
exacerbate drought, enhancing evaporation, reducing surface water, and drying out soils and 
vegetation. Figure 17 shows an increase in the frequency of days experiencing maximum temperatures 
above 35°C in the recent two decades compared to the previous period of record. Of note, in 2019 
there was a recorded 86% increase in the number of days over 35°C compared to the 1990-2021 
baseline average. January 2019 recorded 12 days over 35°C compared to the 1990-2021 baseline 
average of 1.8 days.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-3
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Figure 17 Observed days over 35°C 1910-2020 for North-East ACT 
Figure 18 Soil moisture and increasing temperatures for North-East ACT 
The number of days with minimum temperatures below 2°C has also steadily decreased. Agricultural 
enterprises sensitive to frost risk (e.g. growing of pastures, horticulture, and viticulture) may benefit from 
this reduced frequency and associated damage.  
Figure 19 Observed days less than 2°C for North-East ACT 
Rainfall 
The frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall events have increased over the observed record. Large-
scale climate drivers have had a strong influence over rainfall in the ACT. Based on rainfall data

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-4
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
retrieved from the Bureau of Metrology’s data for the North-Eastern region, annual rainfall in the region 
has varied anywhere between 315 mm to 1172 mm from 1900 to present (Figure 20). 
Figure 20 Observed average rainfall 1900-2020 for North-East ACT 
Since 1900 Canberra has only twice experienced flooding events with an Annual Exceedance 
Probability (AEP)99. These events include the flooding in Yarralumla Creek catchment in January 1971 
and the flooding in the Sullivan’s Creek and Woolshed Creek catchments in February of 2018 in which 
Canberra received more than the expected total rainfall for February in a 6-hr period.  
Mainly due to the 2021-2022 La Niña event, the ACT has more recently experienced increased monthly 
rainfall. 2021 was the wettest year on record for the ACT, with North-Eastern ACT recording its wettest 
November on record in 2021 receiving 191.6 mm.  
Rainfall is the main source of soil moisture, with the two having a strong correlation with each other. For 
example, a period of reduced rainfall may reduce soil moisture and stress crops. Figure 21 shows the 
observed soil moisture content and rainfall for North-East ACT where there appears to be a relationship 
between both variables. 
Figure 21 Observed soil moisture content and rainfall for North-East ACT 
99 defined as the probability that a given rainfall total accumulated over a given duration will be exceeded in any one year greater 
than 1%.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
5 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Table 13 Climate hazards and corresponding NARCliM climate projections source and their relevance to agriculture 
Climate hazard 
Hazard definition 
Relevance to agriculture 
Consecutive dry days (cdd) 
Maximum number of consecutive days with precipitation < 
1mm 
Effective indicator and projector of periods of drought 
Cooling degree days (cddcoldn) 
Number of degrees that a day’s average temperature is above 
18°C 
It is a measurement designed to quantify the demand 
for energy needed to cool buildings 
Cold spell duration index (csdi) 
Annual count of days with at least 6 consecutive days when 
daily minimum temperature < 10th percentile 
Prolonged cold spells can damage pasture growth and 
is harmful towards animal health particularly in early or 
late growing seasons 
Consecutive wet days (cwd) 
Maximum number of consecutive days with precipitation ≥ 
1mm 
Indicator of waterlogging and increased fungal disease 
risk 
Frost days (fd) 
Annual count of days when TN (daily minimum temperature) < 
0°C 
Damage to pastures can occur with desiccation 
damage occurring at temperatures between 0 °C to -2 
°C and frost damage below -2 °C 
Growing degree days (gddgrow) 
Measure of heat accumulation 
Used to estimate the growth and development of 
plants and insects. 
Growing season length (gsl) 
Annual count between the first span of at least 6 days with 
daily mean temperature > 5°C and the first span after July 1st 
of 6 days with daily mean temperature < 5°C.  
Period of time where pastures can come to maturity 
without the risk of killing frost  
Relative humidity (hurs) 
Relative humidity at 2 m above the surface 
Increased humidity slows down the process of 
evaporation allowing water to condense on the 
pastures providing a good environment for pathogens 
Specific humidity (huss) 
Specific humidity 2 m above the surface 
Increased humidity slows down the process of 
evaporation allowing water to condense on the 
pastures providing a good environment for pathogens 
Total soil moisture content (mrso) 
Amount of water in the top 2 m of soil measured in millimetres 
Vital to ensuring fertile soil for plants and soil forming 
processes and weathering is dependent on water 
Bias corrected precipitation (pr_bc) 
Average monthly precipitation corrected against any erroneous 
data 
Grazable land and requirement for irrigation is 
dependent on precipitation 
Number of heavy rain days (r20mm) 
The number of projected days per month with precipitation 
above 20 mm 
Indicator of waterlogging and increased fungal disease 
risk 
Total annual PR from heavy rain days 
(r95p) 
Number of days with precipitation above 95th percentile 
Indicator of waterlogging and increased fungal disease 
risk

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
6 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Climate hazard 
Hazard definition 
Relevance to agriculture 
Maximum consecutive 5-day 
precipitation (rx5day) 
Maximum rainfall over 5 consecutive days in a month 
Indicator of waterlogging and increased fungal disease 
risk 
Simple precipitation intensity index 
(sdii) 
Mean precipitation on wet days 
Grazable land, requirement for irrigation, indicator of 
waterlogging and increased fungal disease risk is 
dependent on precipitation 
Standardised precipitation index (spi) 
Measure of drought and extremely wet weather; 
mildly dry (0>SPI>-0.99), moderately dry (-1.0>SPI>-1.49), 
severely dry (-1.5>SPI>-1.99) and extremely dry conditions 
(SPI less then -2.0) 
Grazable land, requirement for irrigation, indicator of 
waterlogging and increased fungal disease risk is 
dependent on precipitation 
Daily maximum temperature (tasmax) 
Monthly mean daily maximum air temperature 
Higher temperatures reduce pasture growth 
Daily minimum temperature (tasmin) 
Monthly mean daily minimum air temperature 
Damage to pastures can occur with cold damage 
occurring at temperatures below 5 °C desiccation 
damage occurring at temperatures between 0 °C to -2 
°C and frost damage below -2 °C 
Mean temperature of 5°C or lower 
(tmlt5) 
Count of days with mean temperatures of 5 °C or lower 
Count of days when minimum 
temperature is below 2°C (tntl2) 
Average number of days a year with minimum temperatures 
below 2°C. 
Mean daily temperature (tnm) 
Projected monthly daily minimum temperature 
Higher temperatures reduce pasture growth with 
extreme temperatures harmful to animal welfare 
Percentage of days with a daily 
maximum temperature above the 90th 
percentile (tx90p) 
Percentage of days when daily maximum temperatures > 90th 
percentile  
Daily maximum temperature of at least 
35°C (txge35) 
Projected no. of days per month with maximum temperatures 
greater than 35°C 
Mean daily maximum temperature (txm) 
The mean daily maximum temperature 
Monthly maximum daily temperature 
(txx) 
Projected daily maximum temperature in each month 
Warm spell duration index (wsdi) 
Annual count of days with at least 6 consecutive days when 
daily maximum temperature > 90th percentile

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
7
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Visualisation of future projections 
The following section presents visualisations of future projections for the identified climate variables using NARCLiM 1.5 projections for the North-East region of 
the ACT under RCP8.5.  
Temperature – Maximum and Minimum 
Figure 22 Future projections for temperature variables, average maximum, and minimum temperature, under an RCP 8.5 scenario for North-East ACT

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
8
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Temperature – Lows and Extremes 
Figure 23 Future projections for temperature variables, lows, and extremes, under an RCP 8.5 scenario for North-East ACT

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
9
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Rainfall – average precipitation and consecutive 5-day precipitation 
Figure 24 Future Projections for rainfall and consecutive 5-day precipitation, under an RCP 8.5 scenario for North-East ACT

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
10
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Soil Moisture and Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) 
Figure 25 Future projections for soil moisture and standard precipitation index, under an RCP 8.5 scenario for North-East ACT

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
11
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Box 5 
Vapour Pressure Deficit  
Vapour pressur e deficit (VPD) is a m easur e of the difference between m oistur e content in the air and the total m oisture capacity of the air w hen i t is com pletely satur ated. VPD can be used to express the drivi ng force of transpirati on fr om pl ants. As VPD i ncreases, there is l ess potential for w ater to evaporate. VPD has been shar ply i ncreasing since the l ate 1990s. 100 A high VPD increases the capability of the air to hol d a large am ount of w ater, as a r esul t: 101  
• 
Plants have an increased potential to transpire and an increased risk of drying out due to the 
greater potential difference between the leaf and the air 
• 
Carbon dioxide uptake from plant is reduced, the nutrient intake from the roots is increased 
and concurrently, due to all these factors, plants experience greater levels of stress.102  
Increased average temperatures and a decrease in relative humidity are projected across the 
ACT. The consequence of these projections is a sharp increase to VPD. A projection by Yuan et 
al. for global VPD is shown in Figure 26 below. The projected increase to VPD will cause 
increased evaporation thus increasing the risk of crops drying out. The likely consequences of this 
includes decreased yields and an increase in dry vegetation available for fires consequently 
increasing the intensity of potential bushfires. Increasing VPD is considered to have been an 
important driver in the severity of the droughts and fires of 2017-2020 in the ACT. Moreover, 
increased evaporation will also reduce water availability, soil moisture and pastures available for 
grazing. The resulting effect on the ACT agriculture industry includes an increase in water 
demand with reduced water availability, decreased yields and increased risk of fire damage. 
Figure 26 VPD Projection 100 
Future drought scenario 
Table 13 presents a comparison of trends across the three future drought scenarios.  
Table 14 Comparison of trends across the three future drought scenarios 
Future drought 
scenario 
Description 
Low emissions 
scenario  
(RCP 4.5 model 
ensemble mean) 
Under a low emissions scenario (RCP 4.5 model ensemble mean), it is 
projected that temperature will continue to increase, in line with a high 
emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model ensemble mean), until 2045, after 
this timeframe temperature increase is projected to plateau. Rainfall is 
projected to continue to decrease however not as significantly as under a 
high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model ensemble mean). Soil moisture 
content follows a like trend to high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model 
ensemble mean) where it is projected to decrease, however after 2070 it 
is projected to plateau. Overall, a low emissions scenario (RCP 4.5 
model ensemble mean) and high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model 
ensemble mean). follow similar trends in the near future.  
100 Yuan, W., et al. (2019). Increased atmospheric vapor pressure deficit reduces global vegetation growth. 
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aax1396  
101 Wollaeger, H., & Runkle, E. VPD vs. Relative Humidity. https://www.canr.msu.edu/uploads/resources/pdfs/vpd-vs-
rh.pdf  
102 Koverda, P. (2020). The Ultimate Vapor Pressure Deficit (VPD) Guide - Pulse Grow. 
https://pulsegrow.com/blogs/learn/vpd

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
12
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Future drought 
scenario 
Description 
High emissions 
scenario 
(RCP 8.5 model 
ensemble mean) 
Under a high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model ensemble mean), it is 
projected that temperature will continue to increase, particularly over 
summer months, with a significant increase occurring towards the end of 
the century. Rainfall is projected to decrease annually however there will 
be increasing intensity of extreme rainfall events. It is also projected that 
consecutive days without rainfall will increase. Soil moisture is projected 
to decrease, particularly during August – December months, with a more 
significant decrease expected by the end of century. In comparison to a 
low emissions scenario (RCP 4.5 model ensemble mean), projections 
are generally more significant, whilst milder in comparison to hotter/drier 
scenario (RCP 8.5 hotter and drier model). 
Hotter/drier 
scenario 
(RCP 8.5 hotter 
and drier model) 
Under a hotter/drier scenario (RCP 8.5 hotter and drier model), it is 
projected that temperature will continue to increase at a more significant 
rate than under a high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5 model ensemble 
mean). Rainfall is projected to decrease annually with increasing 
intensity of extreme rainfall days. Under a hotter/drier scenario, rainfall is 
much more variable per month than under a high emissions scenario; 
annually the maximum length of consecutive days without rainfall is 
significantly higher under an upper mean scenario. Decreases in soil 
moisture are also significantly greater however follow a similar trend to 
that of a high emissions scenario.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Drought Scenario – Low emissions scenario

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
A-2
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Drought Scenario – Hotter/ drier scenario

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix B 
BOM Observed Data

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
B-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix B 
BOM Observed Data 
Please refer to the Bureau of Meteorology Data Excel workbook provided under separate copy.

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix C 
Climate Change 
Projections (NARCliM)

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
C-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix C 
Climate Change Projections (NARCliM) 
Table 15 presents the trends in both regions of the ACT (northeast and southwest) under two emission scenarios (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5). 
Table 15 NARCliM climate change projections for Northeast and Southwest ACT 
Variable 
Definition 
Northeast 
RCP 4.5 
Northeast 
RCP 8.5 
Southwest 
RCP 4.5 
Southwest 
RCP 8.5 
Overall observations 
Cdd 
Consecutive dry days: 
maximum number of 
consecutive days with 
precipitation < 1mm 
• 
Increase in the number of 
consecutive dry days (growth 
rate of ~1 day per 20 years, 
compared to ~3 days per 20 
years under RCP 8.5) 
• 
Increase in the number of consecutive dry days 
(growth rate of ~3 days per 20 years, compared 
to ~1 day per 20 years under RCP4.5). 
• 
Greatest increase in consecutive dry days 
occurs between 2070 and 2090 timeframe 
(36.26 days in 2090 compared to 27.30 days 
baseline) 
• 
Upper end of 50.93 cdd in 2090 (compared to 
31.70 baseline) 
• 
Decrease in the number of cdd between 
2030 and baseline (~1 day decrease). 
Increases in cdd after 2050 timeframe.  
• 
Overall, cdd does not vary much from 
the baseline over all time periods 
• 
Increase in the number of cdd not as 
significant as in the northeast region, 
e.g. baseline – 23.19; 2070 – 25.83 (~2 
day increase, compared to ~5 day 
increase in northeast). 
• 
Greatest increase between timeframes 
occurs between 2070 and 2090 (~5-day 
increase) 
• 
RCP 8.5 increases the maximum length of a 
dry spell across both regions, but the effects 
are worse in the Northeast region 
• 
RCP 4.5 minimizes the effects in both regions 
but an increase in length of the maximum dry 
spell is expected in the northeast region while 
the effects are close to negligible in the 
Southwest region with only a small upward 
trend predicted 
cddcoldn 
Average demand for energy 
to cool a building 
• 
In the northeast region, the 
cddcoldn is projected to 
steadily increase towards 
2090 with an overall increased 
energy demand of 75%  
• 
Under RCP 8.5, cddcoldn is projected to nearly 
triple by 2090 in the northeast region 
• 
Under RCP 4.5, cddcoldn is projected to 
nearly double by 2090 in the southwest 
region 
• 
Under RCP 4.5, cddcoldn is projected to 
nearly quadruple by 2090 in the 
southwest region 
• 
• 
The average energy demand is projected to 
raise quite significantly und scenarios and in 
both regions. 
• 
Southwest ACT is expected to increase in 
energy demand more considerably than the 
North west 
• 
In both regions, RCP 8.5 sees an increase of 
more than double when compared to the RCP 
4.5 scenario 
csdi 
Cold spell duration index: 
annual count of days with at 
least 6 consecutive days 
when daily minimum 
temperature < 10th 
percentile 
• 
The baseline index is quite low 
at 0.25. It is expected that cold 
spells of duration 6 days or 
more will cease to exist in 
North-eastern ACT by 2040 
under RCP 4.5 
• 
The baseline index is quite low at 0.29. It is 
expected that cold spells of duration 6 days or 
more will cease to exist in North-eastern ACT by 
2060 under RCP 8.5 
• 
The baseline index is quite low at 0.17. 
It is expected that cold spells of duration 
6 days or more will cease to exist in 
South-western ACT by 2060 under RCP 
4.5 
• 
The baseline index is quite low at 0.19. It 
is expected that cold spells of duration 6 
days or more will cease to exist in 
South-western ACT by 2040 under RCP 
8.5 
• 
Cold spells of at least 6 days are already quite 
unlikely in both regions of the ACT. It is 
expected under both RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 
that the likelihood of cold spells will reduce to 
zero by 2060 in both regions. 
cwd 
Consecutive wet days: 
maximum number of 
consecutive days with 
precipitation ≥ 1mm 
• 
Decrease in the max. length of 
wet spell days between 2030-
2070. Slight increases seen 
after 2070 
• 
Less than one day difference 
• 
Decrease in the max. length of wet spell days 
after 2030.  
• 
Less than one day difference 
• 
Maximum wet spell length is expected to be 
lower when compared to RCP 4.5 
• 
Max. length of wet spells fluctuates 
across 2030-2090 timeframes. Greatest 
decrease occurs from 2050 to 2070  
• 
Wet spell length longer when compared 
to RCP 8.5 
• 
Gradual decrease in max. length of wet 
spells starting at 6.82 days in 2030 
decreasing to 6.17 in 2090. 
• 
In both regions and scenarios, the maximum 
length of wet spells is expected to shorten. 
• 
Additionally, in both regions, maximum wet 
spell length are expected to be reduced 
further if the RCP 8.5 scenario is experienced 
instead of the RCP 4.5 scenario. 
fd 
Number of frost days: 
Annual count of days when 
TN (daily minimum 
temperature) < 0°C.  
• 
Decrease in the number of 
frost days across timeframes. 
E.g. 12 days in July baseline, 
9 days in July 2090. 
Consistent decrease across all 
frost months. 
• 
Same trend in terms of the 
occurrence of frost days 
across months 
• 
Decrease across timeframes 
is not as significant as during 
RCP8.5 e.g. ~2 days decrease 
from 2030 – 2090 in July 
compared to ~8 days 
decrease under RCP8.5 
• 
Decrease in the number of frost days across 
timeframes. E.g. 12 days in July baseline, 4 
days in July 2090. Consistent decrease across 
all frost months. 
• 
Same trend in terms of the occurrence of frost 
days across months 
• 
Decrease in the number of frost days 
across timeframes. E.g. 23 days in July 
baseline, 15 days in July 2090. 
Consistent decrease across all frost 
months. 
• 
Same trend in terms of the occurrence 
of frost days across months 
• 
This region experiences more frost days 
than the north-east region (therefore the 
variable might be more significant to 
southwest region). 
• 
Decrease in the number of frost days 
across timeframes. E.g. 23 days in July 
baseline, 7 days in July 2090.Steady 
consistent decrease across all frost 
months. 
• 
Same trend in terms of the occurrence 
of frost days across months 
• 
Decrease across timeframes is more 
significant during RCP8.5, reduction of 
~16 frost days compared to ~8 days in 
the RCP 4.5 scenario 
• 
In both regions, a decrease in frost days is 
expected under both RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 
scenarios. 
• 
Moreover, both regions will experience a 
greater reduction in frost days per year if the 
RCP 8.5 scenario occurs. 
gddgrow 
Measure of heat 
accumulation 
• 
Heat accumulation is expected 
to steadily raise under 
emissions scenario RCP 4.5 
• 
The Northeast region is expected to see a 
sharper heat accumulation under emissions 
scenario RCP 8.5 of approx. 300 per timeframe 
• 
Heat accumulation is expected to 
steadily raise under emissions scenario 
RCP 4.5 approx. energy demand 
increase of 200 per time frame 
• 
The southwest region is expected to see 
a sharper heat accumulation under 
emissions scenario RCP 8.5 of approx. 
250 per timeframe 
• 
Both regions are projected to see a similar 
increase of heat accumulation under both 
emission scenarios

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
C-2
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Variable 
Definition 
Northeast 
RCP 4.5 
Northeast 
RCP 8.5 
Southwest 
RCP 4.5 
Southwest 
RCP 8.5 
Overall observations 
approx. energy demand 
increase of 200 per time frame 
gsl 
Growing season length: 
Annual count between the 
first span of at least 6 days 
with daily mean temperature 
>5°C and the first span after 
July 1st of 6 days with daily 
mean temperature <5 °C.103 
• 
Increases to the growing 
season length across all 
timeframes. 
• 
Minimal differences between 
RCP4.5 and 8.5  
• 
Increases to the growing season length across 
all timeframes. 
• 
Minimal differences between RCP4.5 and 8.5 
• 
Increases to the growing season length 
across all timeframes. More significant 
increase for RCP8.5 after 2050 
• 
Increases to the growing season length 
across all timeframes. Less significant 
increase when compared to RCP8.5 
after 2050 
• 
Increases to the growing season length in 
expected in both scenarios and regions. 
• 
The increase is predicted to be quite steady 
expect for a sharp increase in south-western 
ACT after 2050 
hurs 
Relative humidity at 2 m 
above the surface 
• 
Across the time periods, there 
is a slight downward trend for 
the relative humidity which is 
mainly experienced in 
summer. 
• 
By 2090, it is expected that 
the average annual relative 
humidity will reduce by ~1% 
• 
Across the time periods, there is a slight 
downward trend for the relative humidity which is 
mainly experienced in summer. This reduction is 
greater in the RCP 8.5 scenario 
• 
By 2090, it is expected that the average annual 
relative humidity will reduce by ~3%, a greater 
reduction than RCP 4.5 
• 
Across the time periods, there is a slight 
downward trend for the relative humidity 
which is mainly experienced in summer 
• 
By 2090, it is expected that the average 
annual relative humidity will reduce by 
~1% 
• 
Across the time periods, there is a slight 
downward trend for the relative humidity 
which is mainly experienced in summer. 
This reduction is greater in the RCP 8.5 
scenario 
• 
By 2090, it is expected that the average 
annual relative humidity will reduce by 
~3%, a greater reduction than RCP 4.5 
• 
A reduction in relative humidity should be 
expected in both regions and scenarios. 
• 
In both regions, it should be expected that the 
annual average relative humidity will reduce 
by ~1% by 2090 for RCP 4.5 and ~3% for 
RCP 8.5 
huss 
Near-Surface Specific 
Humidity 
• 
Steady slight increase in 
specific humidity. E.g., the 
baseline for January is 0.0082 
which increases to 0.0093 in 
2090 
• 
Steady more dramatic increases in specific 
humidity compared to RCP 4.5. E.g., the 
baseline for January is 0.0082 which increases 
to 0.0105 in 2090 
• 
Steady slight increase in specific 
humidity. E.g., the baseline for January 
is 0.008 which increases to 0.0091 in 
2090 
• 
Steady more dramatic increase in 
specific humidity compared to RCP 4.5. 
E.g., the baseline for January is 0.008 
which increases to 0.0102 in 2090 
• 
Specific humidity is projected to only increase 
slightly in all scenarios to 2090 
• 
In both regions, RCP 8.5 caused a greater 
increase in specific humidity by ~0.0011 when 
compared to RCP 4.5 
mrso 
Total Soil Moisture Content 
• 
Less significant decreases in 
soil moisture content than 
under RCP 8.5 e.g. decrease 
is ~100mm under RCP8.5 
between baseline and 2090 
compared to ~40mm under 
RCP 4.5  
• 
Decrease in total soil moisture content across 
timeframes, e.g. 546mm in Nov baseline 
compared to 436mm in Nov 2090.  
• 
Most significant decrease seen in months of 
Nov, Dec & Jan  
• 
Less significant decreases in soil 
moisture content than under RCP 8.5 
e.g. decrease is ~100mm under RCP 
8.5 between baseline and 2090 
compared to ~30mm under RCP4.5  
• 
Decrease in total soil moisture content 
across timeframes, e.g. 627mm in Nov 
baseline compared to 481mm in Nov 
2090.  
• 
Most significant decrease seen in 
months of Nov, Dec & Jan. 
• 
RCP 4.5 & RCP 8.5 scenarios have a similar 
effect on both regions.  
• 
The soil moisture content in both regions is 
projected to decrease for each time period 
with the months of Nov-Jan most effected. 
• 
In North-eastern ACT, by 2090, if scenario 
RCP 4.5 is experienced instead of RCP 8.5, 
soil moisture content will be projected to be 
~40 mm better off.  
pr_bc_ 
Bias corrected precipitation 
• 
Apart from the month of 
January, there is a slight 
downward trend on the 
amount of precipitation per 
month 
• 
Apart from the month of January, there is a 
slight downward trend on the amount of 
precipitation per month 
• 
When comparing RCP 8.5 to RCP 4.5, the RCP 
8.5 scenario experiences slightly less 
precipitation in every month by 2090 
• 
Apart from the month of January, there 
is a slight downward trend on the 
amount of precipitation per month 
• 
Apart from the month of January, there 
is a slight downward trend on the 
amount of precipitation per month 
• 
When comparing RCP 8.5 to RCP 4.5, 
the RCP 8.5 scenario experiences 
slightly less precipitation in every month 
by 2090 
• 
A slight downward trend of precipitation per 
month is projected. This downward trend is 
exacerbated in the RCP 8.5 scenario 
compared to the RCP 4.5 scenario in both 
regions   
r20mm 
Annual count of days when 
daily precipitation amount 
on day ≥ 20 mm 
• 
Projected days above 20 mm 
of rain is projected to increase 
in summer and decrease in 
winter by 2080-99 compared 
to 1990-2009 
• 
Projected days above 20 mm of rain is projected 
to increase in summer and decrease in winter by 
2080-99 compared to 1990-2009 
• 
When compared to RCP 4.5, winter months will 
experience less days above 20mm and summer 
months will experience more days above 20mm 
• 
Projected days above 20 mm of rain is 
projected to increase in summer and 
decrease in winter by 2080-99 
compared to 1990-2009 
• 
Projected days above 20 mm of rain is 
projected to increase in summer and 
decrease in winter by 2080-99 
compared to 1990-2009 
• 
When compared to RCP 4.5, winter 
months will experience less days above 
20mm and summer months will 
experience more days above 20mm 
• 
Both regions are projected to experience 
more days above 20 mm in summer and less 
days above 20 mm in winter. 
• 
When comparing RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 
scenarios, the effects are heighten will drier 
winters and wetter summers likely 
r95p 
Very wet days rainfall: 
Annual total precipitation 
when daily rainfall > 95th 
percentile. 
• 
Increase in the annual no. of days with 
precipitation above 95th percentile in 
2030 timeframe compared to baseline 
(and greater increase than under 
RCP8.5), then decreases are seen until 
2090 where it starts to increase again. 
• 
Increase in the annual no. of days with 
precipitation above 95th percentile in 
2030 timeframe compared to baseline, 
however after 2030, no. of days 
fluctuates with both decreases and 
• 
Increase in the annual no. of days with 
precipitation above 95th percentile in 
2030 timeframe compared to baseline 
and then decreases after 2030 in 
subsequent timeframes 
• 
Fluctuations in no. of days with 
precipitation above 95th percentile. No. of 
days increases by 30 days in 2030 
compared to baseline however then 
decreases by 81 days in 2050 before 
• 
North-eastern is projected to have a 
steadier increase while southwest is 
projected to have significant fluctuations 
across timeframes 
103 US EPA. (2022). Climate Change Indicators: Length of Growing Season. https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-length-growing-season

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
C-3
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Variable 
Definition 
Northeast 
RCP 4.5 
Northeast 
RCP 8.5 
Southwest 
RCP 4.5 
Southwest 
RCP 8.5 
Overall observations 
increases of approx. 2-4 day from 2030-
2090 
increasing and decreases again in the 
subsequent timeframes.  
rx5day 
Monthly maximum 
consecutive 5-day 
precipitation 
• 
Annual trend = fluctuations across 
timeframes. Increases are projected in 
2030 timeframe followed by decreases 
and then increases again in 2090 
timeframe. 
• 
Monthly trend = overall trend similar to 
baseline, more significant differences are 
seen under RCP8.5 
• 
Annual trend = Steady decrease across 
timeframes (compared to RCP4.5 where 
fluctuations across timeframes occur). 
• 
Monthly trend = overall trend of 
precipitation is similar to baseline. 
Differences include: 
• 
Higher precipitation in January across all 
timeframes when compared to the 
baseline. 
• 
Lower precipitation in June – August, 
particularly for 2090 timeframe. 
• 
Lower precipitation in Oct – Nov across 
all timeframes. 
• 
Annual trend = fluctuations across 
timeframes. Increases are projected in 
2030 timeframe followed by decreases 
and then increases again in 2090 
timeframe. 
• 
Monthly trend = overall trend similar to 
baseline except for December & January 
where increased precipitation is 
projected. 
• 
Annual trend = decrease across 
timeframes (compared to RCP4.5 where 
fluctuations across timeframes occur). 
No changes between 2070 to 2090 
timeframes. 
• 
Monthly trend = overall trend of 
precipitation is similar to baseline. 
Differences include: 
• 
Higher precipitation in January and 
December across all timeframes when 
compared to the baseline. 
• 
Lower precipitation in June – August, 
across all timeframes. 
• 
Lower precipitation in Oct – Nov across 
all timeframes 
• 
Higher precipitation projected in January 
and December across all timeframes 
when compared to the baseline. 
• 
Relatively similar trend across other 
months. 
• 
No significant differences between 
regions in terms of annual and monthly 
trends 
• 
Significant fluctuations across timelines 
under RCP4.5 
sdii 
Simple precipitation intensity 
index = mean precipitation 
in wet days 
• 
Fluctuations across timeframes. sdii 
projected to increase in 2030, decrease 
in 2050 and 2070 and increase again in 
2090. 
• 
Overall projected increases (except for 
between 2030 and 2050 timeframe 
where sdii is not projected to change).  
• 
Very different to southwest region 
• 
Significant fluctuations across 
timeframes. sdii projected to increase 
significantly in 2030, decrease slightly in 
2050, decrease significant in 2070 and 
then increase significantly in 2090. 
• 
Fluctuations across timeframes. sdii 
projected to increase in 2030, decrease 
in 2050 and 2070 and increase again in 
2090. 
• 
Very different to northwest region 
• 
Under RCP8.5 northeast, there are 
projected increases in sdii (except for 
between 2030 and 2050 timeframe 
where sdii is not projected to change).  
• 
Under RCP4.5 northeast and both 
scenarios under southwest, there are 
fluctuations projected for sdii. 
spi 
Standardised Precipitation 
Index: mildly dry (0>SPI>-
0.99), moderately dry (-
1.0>SPI>-1.49), severely 
dry (-1.5>SPI>-1.99) and 
extremely dry conditions 
(SPI less than -2.0). 
• 
SPI is expected to trend towards drier 
conditions from 2020 onwards. From the 
baseline of approximately 0.3 to an SPI 
of approximately -0.2 (mildly dry) across 
the year 
• 
Under the RCP 8.5 scenario, a dramatic 
decrease in SPI between all timeframes 
should be expected. 
• 
Between 2050 and 2070 the SPI is 
expected to drop from roughly -0.1 
across the year to approximately -0.4 
• 
By 2080, it is expected that the SPI will 
be approximately -0.6 across the year 
(mildly dry) 
• 
SPI is expected to trend towards drier 
conditions from 2020 onwards. From the 
baseline of approximately 0.2 to an SPI 
of approximately -0.4 (mildly dry) by 2060 
across the year 
• 
Under the RCP 8.5 scenario, a dramatic 
decrease in SPI between all timeframes 
should be expected. 
• 
By 2080, it is expected that the SPI will 
be approximately -1 across the year 
(mildly dry) 
• 
SPI is expected to decrease more 
substantially in the South-western region 
compared to the North-eastern region 
• 
If RCP 4.5 scenario can be followed, SPI 
is expected to improve by roughly 0.6 in 
Southwestern ACT and 0.4 in North-
eastern ACT 
tasmax 
Daily Maximum Near-
Surface Air Temperature 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx. 0.5°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Almost ~2.5°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline.  
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx..1°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Almost ~5°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline. Similar 
trend to RCP 4.5 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx. 0.5°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Almost ~2.5°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline.  
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx.1°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Almost ~5°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline. Similar 
trend to RCP 4.5 
• 
Observations between regions are very 
similar  
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx..1°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Almost ~5°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline.  
tasmin 
Daily Minimum Near-
Surface Air Temperature 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx. 0.5°C between timeframes, 
however greatest increases occur during 
Jan & Feb with approx. 1-2°C 
differences. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Approx. ~3°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline. Less 
significant increase under RCP 4.5 when 
compared to RCP 8.5 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx..1°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Approx. ~4°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline. More 
significant increase under RCP 8.5 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx..0.5°C between timeframes, 
however greatest increases occur during 
Jan & Feb with approx. 1-2°C 
differences. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Approx. ~2°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline. Less 
significant increase under RCP 4.5 when 
compared to RCP 8.5 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx..1°C between timeframes, 
however greatest increases occur during 
Jan & Feb with approx. 2°C differences. 
More significant increase under RCP 8.5 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Approx. ~4°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline. More 
significant increase under RCP 8.5 
• 
Observations between regions are very 
similar  
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
by approx. 0.5-1°C between timeframes. 
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes. Approx. ~4°C increase 
between 2090 and baseline for both 
regions. 
tmlt5 
mean temperature of at 
least 5 °C: (Number of days 
• 
Monthly = Projected 
decreases across all 
timeframes.  
• 
Monthly = Projected decreases across all 
timeframes.  
• 
Monthly = Projected decreases across 
all timeframes however after 2050, 
• 
Monthly = Projected decreases across 
all timeframes.  
• 
Projected decreases across all timeframes 
and regions.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
C-4
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Variable 
Definition 
Northeast 
RCP 4.5 
Northeast 
RCP 8.5 
Southwest 
RCP 4.5 
Southwest 
RCP 8.5 
Overall observations 
when daily mean 
temperature < 5 °C.) 
• 
Most significant decrease 
between timeframes to occur 
is at the 2030 timeframe (10 
days at baseline, 7 days in 
2030), for the month of July 
• 
After 2050, decrease plateaus 
whereas under RCP 8.5 
decrease continues until 
almost no days per month 
under 5°C under 2090. 
• 
Annual = projected decrease 
across each timeframe 
however not as significant as 
under RCP 8.5 after 2050 
timeframe.  
• 
Most significant decrease between timeframes 
to occur is at the 2030 timeframe (10 days at 
baseline, 6 days in 2030), for the month of July 
• 
By 2090, almost no days per month with mean 
temperatures lower than 5°C expected.  
• 
Annual = projected decrease by ~10C across 
each timeframe. By 2090, almost no days per 
month with mean temperatures lower than 5°C 
expected.  
decrease plateaus whereas under RCP 
8.5 decrease continues significantly 
• 
Annual = projected decrease across 
timeframes however plateaus after 
2070. 
• 
Decreases not as significant as 
northeast region.  
• 
Northeast region projections suggest 
almost no days per month with mean 
temperatures lower than 5°C however 
for southwest region this is not the case 
– 5 days expected in 2090 (compared to 
25 days at baseline), for the month of 
July 
• 
Annual = projected decrease by ~20°C 
across each timeframe. By 2090, 
approx. ~20 days per month with mean 
temperatures lower than 5°C expected 
compared to ~80°C at baseline. 
• 
Most significant decrease is for the northeast 
region for 2030 timeframe (10 days at 
baseline, 6 days in 2030), for the month of 
July. By 2090, almost no days per month with 
mean temperatures below 5°C 
tnlt2 
The number of days when 
minimum temperature is < 2 
°C. 
• 
Projected decreases across all 
timeframes however not as 
significant as under RCP 8.5 
• 
Average Number of Days 
when TN < 2 °C is projected to 
be 47 days in 2090 compared 
to 84 days at baseline. 
• 
Very similar trend to 
southwest region 
• 
Projected decreases across all timeframes by 
approx.. 10-20 days.  
• 
Average Number of Days when TN < 2 °C is 
projected to be 23 days in 2090 compared to 84 
days at baseline. 
• 
Very similar trend to southwest region 
• 
Projected decreases across all 
timeframes by approx.. 10-20 days.  
• 
Average Number of Days when TN < 2 
°C is projected to be 104 days in 2090 
compared to 149 days at baseline. 
• 
Very similar trend to northeast region 
• 
Projected decreases across all 
timeframes by approx.. 10-30 days.  
• 
Average Number of Days when TN < 
2°C is projected to be 60 days in 2090 
compared to 149 days at baseline. 
• 
Very similar trend to northeast region 
• 
Projected decreases across all timeframes 
• 
Very similar trend between regions 
tnm 
The mean daily minimum 
temperature. 
• 
Monthly = projected increase 
in mean daily temperatures 
across all months and 
timeframes however not as 
significant as under RCP 8.5  
• 
Annual = projected increases 
across all timeframes however 
not as significant as under 
RCP 8.5 
• 
Increase of 1.93°C between 
2090 and baseline 
• 
Monthly = projected increase in mean daily 
temperatures across all months and timeframes. 
• 
Increase of approx.~3°C between 2090 and 
baseline  
• 
Annual = projected increases across all 
timeframes.  
• 
Increase of 3.89°C between 2090 and baseline  
• 
Monthly = projected increase in mean 
daily temperatures across all months 
and timeframes.  
• 
Annual = projected increases in all time 
periods  
• 
increase of 1.93°C from baseline to 
2090 
• 
Monthly = projected increase in mean 
daily temperatures across all months 
and timeframes.  
• 
Projected increase means that there will 
be no longer a mean daily min temp of 
0°C during July under 2070 and 2090 
timeframes (compared to baseline  1°C)  
• 
Annual = projected increases in all time 
periods  
• 
increase of 3.91°C from baseline to 
2090 
• 
Similar increases are expected in both 
regions. 
• 
If the RCP 8.5 scenario is followed, an 
increase of approximately 3.9°C to the 
minimum should is projected 
• 
If the RCP 4.5 scenario is followed, an 
increase of approximately 1.9°C to the 
minimum should is projected. A reduction of 
2°C when comparing to the expected increase 
from the RCP 8.5 scenario  
tx90p 
Percentage of days when 
daily maximum temperature 
> 90th percentile 
• 
Projected increase of 
percentage of days with daily 
max temp above 90th 
percentile. 25% in 2090 
compared to baseline of 10% 
• 
Significant projected increase of percentage of 
days with daily max temp above 90th percentile. 
50% in 2090 compared to baseline of 10% 
• 
Projected increase of percentage of 
days with daily max temp above 90th 
percentile. ~25% in 2090 compared to 
baseline of 10% 
• 
Significant projected increase of 
percentage of days with daily max temp 
above 90th percentile. 50% in 2090 
compared to baseline of 10% 
• 
Upper end = in 2090 upper end is 60% 
compared to baseline of 10% 
• 
Similar trend between regions 
• 
Significant projected increase of percentage 
of days with daily max temp above 90th 
percentile. 
txge35 
daily maximum temperature 
of at least 35 °C 
• 
Projected annual increases to 
occur however after 2070 
plateaus. 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across all 
timeframes. Greatest increases to occur in 
month of January. ~4.5 days in January with 
max temp greater than 35°C  in 2050 compared 
to baseline of 2 days.  
• 
Annual = Projected annual increases to occur. 
More than doubling in 2050 where ~11 days per 
year with max temp greater than 35°C C to 
occur compared to baseline of 5 days. 
• 
Steady increases projected for RCP 4.5, 
compared to significant increases under 
RCP 8.5. Plateaus after 2070. 
• 
Monthly = Projected increases across 
all timeframes. Greatest increases to 
occur in month of December and 
January. ~2.5 days in January with max 
temp greater than 35°C in 2050 
compared to baseline of <0.5 days 
• 
Annual = Projected annual increases to 
occur. ~8 days per year with max temp 
greater than 35°C to occur compared to 
baseline of 1 day. 
• 
Similar trends observed between regions. 
Greatest increases to occur in months Jan & 
Dec. 
txm 
The mean daily maximum 
temperature. 
• 
Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. 
Increases are less significant 
than under RCP 8.5 
• 
Projected increases across all timeframes and 
months. Increases are approx. 1°C between 
timeframes 
• 
Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
less significant than under RCP 8.5 
• 
Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
approx. 1°C between timeframes 
• 
Similar trends observed between regions. 
• 
Projected increases across all timeframes and 
months.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
C-5
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Variable 
Definition 
Northeast 
RCP 4.5 
Northeast 
RCP 8.5 
Southwest 
RCP 4.5 
Southwest 
RCP 8.5 
Overall observations 
• 
Increases under RCP 4.5 are less significant 
than under RCP 8.5 
txx 
Monthly maximum value of 
daily maximum temperature 
• 
Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. 
Increases are approx. 0.5°C 
between timeframes 
• 
An increase of approximately 
2.3 °C is expected from the 
baseline to 2090 
• 
Projected increases across all timeframes and 
months. Increases are approx. 1°C between 
timeframes 
• 
An increase of approximately 5 °C is expected 
from the baseline to 2090 
• 
Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
approx. 0.5°C between timeframes 
• 
An increase of approximately 5 °C is 
expected from the baseline to 2090 
• 
Projected increases across all 
timeframes and months. Increases are 
approx. 1°C between timeframes 
• 
An increase of approximately 2.3 °C is 
expected from the baseline to 2090 
• 
The daily maximums are expected to increase 
roughly similarly between both regions 
• 
When comparing the RCP 4.5 and 8.5 
scenarios, the increase between time periods 
is nearly double. By 2090, this results in an 
increased average daily maximum of approx. 
2.7 °C if RCP 8.5 is followed rather than RCP 
4.5 
wsdi 
Warm spell duration index: 
annual count of days with at 
least 6 consecutive days 
when daily maximum 
temperature > 90th 
percentile 
• 
A steady increase in warm 
spell duration is projected from 
the baseline to 2090 from a 
baseline of 3.7 to 24.4 by 
2090 
• 
A steady increase in warm spell duration is 
projected from the baseline to 2050.  
• 
From 2050, it should be expected that the warm 
spell duration increases more significantly. From 
approx. 41.4 to 98.04 between 2070 and 2090 
• 
A steady increase in warm spell duration 
is projected from the baseline to 2090 
from a baseline of 3.9 to 28.72 by 2090 
• 
A steady increase in warm spell duration 
is projected from the baseline to 2050.  
• 
From 2050, it should be expected that 
the warm spell duration increases more 
significantly. From approx. 42.8 to 99.9 
between 2070 and 2090 
• 
Both regions experience similar conditions 
under both scenarios. However, warm spell 
duration is expected to increase slightly more 
in the southwest region in an RCP 4.5 
scenario 
• 
In both regions, in the RCP 8.5 scenarios, an 
increased growth in warm spell duration is 
expected from 2050 onwards

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix D 
NARCliM Data

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
D-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
 Please refer to the NARCliM Data Excel workbook under separate copy.

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix E 
Desktop review – 
Climate change impacts 
and adaptation 
responses

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix E 
Climate change impacts and adaptations desktop 
reviews 
Climate change impacts: desktop review summary 
Environmental 
Drought has huge impacts on Australia’s environment and agriculture industry, causing damage to 
arable land, including erosion and loss of topsoil and reduced food and fibre production. Environmental 
impacts identified in the literature include: 
• 
Reduced crop, horticulture, pastures and fibre production  
• 
Reduced groundcover and increased soil erosion and loss of nutrients during rainfall during and 
after droughts 
• 
Increased flammability of vegetation (native vegetation, crops, pastures) and landscapes 
• 
Increased frequency and intensity of bushfires, increased length of bush fire seasons, increased 
prevalence of extreme and uncontrolled bushfires, increased overnight temperatures which 
hamper firefighting efforts  
• 
Decreased surface and ground water availability and quality 
• 
Reduced soil moisture, increased vapour pressure deficit and increased aridity leading to greater 
demand for surface and ground water for stock and domestic purposes and by native fauna 
• 
Loss of terrestrial, riparian and in-stream habitat for native fauna and flora due to drying  
• 
Loss of native fauna and flora due to loss of food sources, available water, habitat and safe 
harbour from predators and temperatures (minimum and maximum and heatwaves) to allow 
recovery from heat.104 
• 
Narrower windows for planting pasture and crop species and native vegetation for environmental 
restoration and shade 
• 
Reduced predictability of key planting and harvesting times, with less room for error 
• 
Reduced average returns and increased variability of returns (assuming no changes of practice) 
• 
Reduction in soil health, including reduced soil carbon, which reduces water holding capacity of 
soils  
• 
Potentially reduced livestock herds, and reduced hay and grain stocks 
• 
Reduction in livestock health 
• 
Altered weed, pest, and disease ranges resulting in loss of agricultural produce. 105 
• 
Stress on biodiversity – during the Millennium Drought, numbers of waterbirds, fish and aquatic 
plants declined across the Murray–Darling Basin. Established drought-tolerant trees such as the 
river red gum were stressed by the prolonged dry period.106  
• 
Reduction in water availability for irrigation and access to irrigation water, 
Economic 
104 Climate Council, (2019). The Facts About Bushfires and Climate Change, https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/not-normal-
climate-change-bushfire-web/  
https://www.climatekelpie.com.au/Files/FactSheet12.pdf  
106 AdaptNSW (2022) Climate change impacts on drought. 
https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/drought#:~:text=Drought%20has%20huge%20impacts%20on%20Australia's
%20agriculture%20industry%2C%20causing%3A,leading%20to%20shortages%20in%20supply

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-2
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Drought has national negative economic impacts. Prolonged drought pushed national real Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) to 0.7 per cent or more below base in 2018–2019 and 2019–2020.107 Drought 
also has a substantial negative economic impact on farmers and others employed in the agricultural 
sector through reduced income and increased costs. 108 
Due to the reduced carrying capacity of land in drought, farmers must sell stock to conserve the natural 
assets of the farm (i.e. maintaining soil health, waterways, groundcover), or purchase fodder to feed 
stock. The reduction in stock leads to lower income, as farmers are often selling when prices are low at 
the beginning of drought. Fodder prices are often high, because of drought and shortages of fodder. 
Farmers often need to source feed from SA, WA or Victoria. 
During the 2017-2020 drought, stock prices remained high, ameliorating the economic impact of 
needing to sell stock going into a drought. However, the stock prices also remained high during drought, 
meaning that when the carrying capacity of land increased after drought, and farmers were able to 
support more stock on their lands, buying back stock was expensive. 
Other farm costs impacted by drought and fires include higher costs of fertilisers, farm chemicals such 
as herbicides, machinery parts for farm machinery, and fencing supplies etc. Supply chains of these 
products are affected by drought and fires. Additionally, tradespeople to undertake work on farms can 
become more expensive during and after the drought. 
Across Australia, farm profitability and incomes of larger farms are typically less sensitive to drought 
than small farms. Similarly, farms with younger (less than 50 years of age) managers are also generally 
less sensitive to drought For smaller farms, profits are highly sensitive to drought, but household 
income is relatively stable due to their relatively high off-farm incomes. 
Social 
Drought causes negative mental health impacts, and those who are most impacted are farmers and 
farm workers. More severe impacts on agricultural due to drought result in greater mental health 
impacts. 109  
There is also evidence that groups that are not employed in agriculture are adversely affected, with a 
widespread loss of services in drought-affected areas, and some marginal labour market groups  
experiencing poor employment outcomes in a drought-affected local economy108. These impacts are 
ameliorated to some extent, due to the proximity of Canberra, and the prevalence of off-farm income 
amongst ACT rural landholders. A   
Governance 
With increased incidence of extreme events, there is an increased reliance on the support systems 
provided by governments in times of hardship. In some cases, well-intentioned policies can 
disadvantage farmers who have been better prepared—or luckier—than farmers who are provided 
assistance and relief, diluting management incentives and raising difficult equity issues110. 
In the ACT, many rural landholders are not considered as having viable farming operations by ABARES 
and the ATO and are therefore not eligible for benefits targeted at farmers. 
107 Wittwer, G., & Waschik, R. (2021). Estimating the economic impacts of the 2017–2019 drought and 2019–2020 bushfires on 
regional NSW and the rest of Australia. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1467-8489.12441   
108 Edwards, B., Gray, M., & Hunter, B. (2018). The social and economic impacts of drought. 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ajs4.52  
109 Edwards, B., Gray, M., & Hunter, B. (2014). The Impact of Drought on Mental Health in Rural and Regional Australia. 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11205-014-0638-2  
110 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Page 5. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/ar5_wgII_spm_en-1.pdf

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-1 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Impact summary table 
Table 17 summarises the impacts identified by both stakeholder engagement (workshops, interviews and the survey) and the desktop literature review. Priority 
impacts were determined based on their exposure and sensitivity. 
Table 16 Exposure and sensitivity legend 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High 
High degree of exposure e.g. impact will affect a very large 
proportion of enterprises and communities and have a 
significant impact on most impacted farm households. 
High 
High degree of sensitivity e.g. high financial and 
productivity impacts (for example if the farming 
practice has high reliance on what is being impacted).  
Medium 
Medium degree of exposure e.g. impact will affect multiple 
(and different) farming systems and communities, and the 
impact will be moderately significant. 
Medium 
Medium degree of sensitivity e.g. medium financial and 
productivity impacts (for example if the farming 
practice has moderate reliance on what is being 
impacted). 
Low 
Low degree of exposure e.g. impact will affect only a few 
farming systems and communities and the impact won’t be 
significant. 
Low 
Low degree of sensitivity e.g. low financial and 
productivity impacts (for example if the farming 
practice has low reliance on what is being impacted). 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High  
Table 17 
Impact summary table 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
E
n
vi
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-2 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
Reduced 
water 
availability A, 
B, D 
Decreased rainfall, increased 
temperatures, reduced soil 
moisture and a decreasing SPI 
are all driving this impact. Future 
trends include: 
• 
Rainfall will likely decrease 
in winter and spring, but 
increase in summer 
• 
Decreasing average annual 
rainfall 
• 
Increased consecutive days 
without rainfall 
• 
Reduced water availability for livestock water 
and irrigation A, B, D 
• 
Poor water quality and challenges 
maintaining the quality of water resources A 
• 
Depletion of on-farm water storage (e.g. 
dams, water tanks) B 
• 
Transition to alternative water sources e.g. 
town water, and bore water B 
• 
Reduction in production and yield for irrigated 
crops D 
• 
Reduced water quality affecting quality of 
food crops D 
• 
Reduction in quality of water stored on-farm B 
High  
High  
Reduced water availability because of a 
changing climate will have far-reaching 
impacts across both grazing enterprises 
and other agricultural sectors, in the ACT 
such as horticulture. A decrease in 
available water can cause production and 
yield to decrease impacting high value 
farms. Given that all farms are likely to be 
affected by this impact (high exposure) 
and all farms are sensitive to this impact 
(high sensitivity), this is categorised as a 
priority impact. 
Environment 
 
Increased 
weeds and 
pests 
Increased temperatures are 
driving this impact. Future trends 
include:  
• 
Decreasing average annual 
rainfall and changing 
seasonality of rainfall 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Greater occurrence and incidence of weeds 
and pests during period of droughts A, D 
• 
Weed infestations in recovery phase 
following periods of drought A 
• 
Increased weed spreading events (e.g. 
flooding, bushfire, winds, native and pest 
animals) D 
• 
Increased costs of weed management 
(weeds are one of the most costly agricultural 
pests D) 
• 
Reduction in agricultural productivity and 
damage to the environment and natural 
resources D 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High  
Climate change will affect the spread and 
competitiveness of weeds and pests in 
the ACT. Both primary production 
industries and other agricultural 
enterprises are subject to these 
infestations and with greater climatic 
variations, pest management will become 
more important. Producers may need to 
increase pest surveillance, especially as 
pest life cycles change and response to 
climate change. The exposure and 
sensitivity are high due to the significant 
financial impact weed have, both in terms 
of control and lost productivity.   
Econo
mic 
* 
Reduced 
carrying 
Increased temperatures, 
reduced soil moisture and a 
• 
Reduced pasture and native grass 
productivity; reduced groundcover 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-3 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
capacity of 
land 
decreasing SPI are all driving 
this impact. Future trends 
include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Decreasing soil moisture 
content 
• 
Reduced stocking rates A 
• 
Long recovery times from destocking A 
• 
Increased costs to buy-in feed where 
pastures are unable to produce enough 
biomass (compounded by increased costs of 
feed during drought periods) B 
Primary production industries in the ACT 
have both high exposure and high 
sensitivity to managing appropriate stock 
levels due to impacts of drought making it 
challenging to recover from times of 
destocking and the increasing costs to 
buy-in feed. 
Environment 
 
Reduced on-
farm 
biodiversity 
Increased temperatures, 
increased extreme heat days, 
reduced soil moisture and a 
decreasing SPI are all driving 
this impact. Future trends 
include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
Decreasing soil moisture 
content 
• 
Increase in  total grazing pressure from a 
combination of native herbivores and farm 
stock which impacts on negatively on other 
native species and their habitat and food 
sources A 
• 
Added pressures to support native wildlife 
during periods of drought A 
• 
Damage to ecosystem functioning can have 
flow-on affects to farm health and 
productivity. Healthy ecosystems benefit 
farms by controlling soil erosion and 
maintaining the quality of water for farm use 
B, D 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High  
Reduced biodiversity loss leaves 
agricultural systems more vulnerable to 
threats such as pests, pathogens 
continued impacts from climate change. 
The exposure and sensitivity are high 
due to biodiversity loss reducing 
ecosystem functioning, resulting in less 
productive farms and added pressure for 
farmers to support native wildlife. 
Social 
* 
Reduced 
wellbeing of 
farming 
community 
Decreased rainfall, increased 
temperatures, increased 
extreme heat days, reduced soil 
moisture and a decreasing SPI 
are all driving this impact. Future 
trends include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
Reduced health and mental wellbeing from 
recent pressures in the form of climate 
change, drought, pest and disease outbreaks 
and economic rationalisation D 
• 
Reduced wellbeing due to working long 
hours, having physically demanding work and 
often being isolated socially and 
geographically from services D 
• 
Increased concerns about bushfires, poor 
experience with evacuations A 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High  
Climate change may increase the risk of 
mental health impacts among farmers as 
they face the hardships of practising 
agriculture along the ongoing impacts of 
greater climatic variations. The sensitivity 
and exposure are high as these impacts 
are making farmers and their agricultural 
systems more vulnerable.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-4 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
• 
Decreasing soil moisture 
content 
• 
Increased exposure to challenging working 
conditions (e.g. days with temps exceeding 
35°C) 
• 
Financial management pressures during 
periods of lower revenues and/or increased 
capital expenditure and operational 
expenditure.  
Environment 
 
Increased 
occurrence 
of natural 
disasters 
Decreased rainfall and 
increased temperatures are 
driving this impact. Future trends 
include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
Decreasing average annual 
rainfall and changing seasonality 
of rainfall 
• 
Extreme events, especially floods and 
droughts, can harm crops and reduce yields 
D 
• 
Loss of biodiversity in drought induced 
bushfires D 
• 
Erosion following bushfires, due to loss of 
stabilising soil features. This can result in 
reduced water quality, and impact riparian 
habitat. D 
• 
More occurrence of fluctuating and 
compounding extremes e.g. bushfire events 
followed by flood events A 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High  
High  
The frequency, intensity, spatial extent, 
duration and timing of extreme weather 
events is expected to increase. The 
impact of this changing climate is already 
being felt by the agricultural sector and 
events including periods of drought are 
expected to increase.  
Environment and Economic 
Shifts in 
timing of 
farm 
activities/op
erations 
Decreased rainfall, increased 
temperatures, increased 
extreme heat days, reduced soil 
moisture and a decreasing SPI 
are all driving this impact. Future 
trends include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
Decreasing soil moisture content 
• 
Compressed timing for picking B 
• 
Increasing constraints with staff availability B 
• 
Change in joining, weaning, sale and other 
stock management decisions to avoid 
projected feed gaps Winter, Spring   
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Medium 
Medium

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-5 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
Environment 
Damage to 
assets and 
infrastructur
e 
Increased temperatures and 
increased extreme heat days 
are driving this impact. Future 
trends include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
Loss of stock, crops, and infrastructure (e.g. 
fences due to increased fire risk) D 
• 
Bushfires can reduce water availability 
through damage to water infrastructure D 
• 
Reduced soil health from soils becoming 
increasingly hydrophobic after fires which can 
take 6–7-years to recover post bushfire 
events B 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Medium 
Medium 
Environment 
Increased 
crop 
sensitivity 
Reduced soil moisture and a 
decreasing SPI are driving this 
impact. Future trends include: 
• 
Decreasing soil moisture 
content 
• 
Cropping farms are more sensitive to drought 
than livestock farms D 
• 
Cropping farms are experiencing large, 
immediate declines in revenue during 
drought years due to crop yields being 
directly linked to weather conditions D 
• 
Cropping trends are expected to be similar 
for landholders growing fodder for livestock 
feed 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Medium 
Medium 
Environment 
Heat stress 
on livestock 
Increased temperatures and 
increased extreme heat days 
are driving this impact. Future 
trends include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
Livestock experience heat stress resulting in 
reduced appetites, less desire to breed, 
increased animal stress and significant 
productivity loss for the livestock industry A, D  
• 
Heat stress can be compounded by poor 
stock water quality 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
High 
Medium 
Environ
ment 
Erosion of 
soil and 
crop 
damage 
Changing rainfall is driving this 
impact. Future trends include: 
• 
Extreme rainfall events leading to erosion of 
soil and damage to crops D 
Exposure 
Sensitivity

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-6 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
• 
Decreasing average annual 
rainfall and changing 
seasonality of rainfall 
• 
Increasing intense rainfall 
events post drought  
• 
Bushfire smoke can taint fruit and vegetable 
crops, with wine grapes being particularly 
susceptible B,D 
• 
Despite rain events, the soil may remain dry 
due to its inability to soak up as much water 
during an extreme rainfall event D 
High 
Medium 
Environment 
Unsuitable 
land for 
agricultural 
enterprises 
Decreased rainfall and 
increasing temperatures are 
driving this impact. Future trends 
include: 
• 
Rainfall will likely decrease 
in winter and spring, but 
increase in summer 
• 
Decreasing average annual 
rainfall 
• 
Increased consecutive days 
without rainfall 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
Longer droughts and harsher fire weather 
causing crop stress and attracting new pests 
that thrive in warmer temperatures can result 
in land becoming unsuitable for certain 
agricultural enterprises D 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Medium 
High 
Economic 
Increased 
need to 
import feed 
Reduced soil moisture is driving 
this impact. Future trends 
include: 
• 
Decreasing soil moisture 
content 
• 
Increased need to import stock feed leading 
to increased feed and freight costs and 
greater requirements to source feed from 
Western Australia or Tasmania A 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Medium 
Low 
Economic 
and 
Governanc
Financial 
vulnerability 
All climate hazards including 
decreased rainfall and 
increasing temperatures are 
driving this impact. Future trends 
include: 
• 
Greater need for financial assistance leading 
to increased need to access grants and 
increase off-farm income A 
Exposure 
Sensitivity

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-7 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Domain 
Impact 
Climate variable and future 
projections 
Impact description/examples 
Prioritisation justification 
• 
Decreasing average annual 
rainfall 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
The least profitable years for farmers tend to 
be drought years with unfavourable prices 
such as in 2016-17. Nationally, average farm 
returns decreased in 2018-19 in drought-
affected regions D 
• 
Increased costs for feed, fuel and fertilisers C 
Medium 
Medium 
Social 
Safety and 
reduced 
employment 
Increased temperatures and 
increased extreme heat days 
are driving this impact. Future 
trends include: 
• 
Increases to both average 
minimum and maximum 
daily temperatures 
• 
Increasing number of days 
above 35°C 
• 
Heat stress can reduce labour capacity in 
agriculture D 
• 
Heat related staff safety concerns B 
• 
Heat stress can reduce labour capacity in 
agriculture D 
Exposure 
Sensitivity 
Medium 
Medium 
Legend: * priority impacts based on frequency of impact being cited by stakeholders and in literature. A identified through workshops. B identified through interviews. C identified by 
survey. D  literature review.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-1
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Climate change adaptation actions: summary of adaptation actions 
Table 18 shows how the actions identified address the impacts identified in this work. By mapping the actions against the impacts, it highlights areas where 
ACT landholder communities can expect to see the greatest effect and opportunity to build resilience to climate change. The dot represents where there is a 
relationship between the action and impact, e.g. land management can be seen to address ten impacts. Overall , land management, enterprise selection, water 
management and stock management can be observed to address the greatest number of impacts.  
Table 18 Applicability of action to address impacts  
Actions 
Impacts 
Reduced water availability 
Increased weeds and 
pests 
On-farm biodiversity 
Stock management 
Increased occurrence of 
natural disasters 
Damage to assets and 
infrastructure 
Unsuitable land for 
agricultural enterprises 
Shifts in timing of farm 
activities/operations 
Heat stress on livestock 
Erosion of soil and crop 
damage 
Reduced carrying 
capacity 
Increased need to import 
feed 
Financial vulnerability 
Reduced wellbeing 
Safety and reduced 
employment 
Land management 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Enterprise selection 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Water management 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Stock management 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Infrastructure 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Planning and regulations 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Knowledge sharing and information provision 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Wellbeing 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Monitoring  
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Fire management 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Management timing 
● 
● 
● 
Weed and pest management 
● 
● 
● 
●

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-2
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Land management tools 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Marketing 
● 
● 
● 
Crop management 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
On farm biodiversity management 
● 
● 
● 
● 
Sale of Stock 
● 
● 
● 
●

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-1 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Climate change adaptation actions: desktop review summary 
In accordance with findings from the literature review and stakeholder engagement, adaptation actions 
were categorised into four thematic areas or domains: 
The ability for these actions to be implemented, and the extent to which they are already implemented 
is influenced by the unique context of the ACT agricultural system, including barriers and enablers to 
uptake of these practices in the ACT. 
Environmental 
Much of the effort on farms to adapt to climate change has been directed towards improving productivity 
under dry conditions. For short term decisions to improve their returns, farmers use climate and weather 
forecasts of the climate to adjust their times of planting and harvesting, irrigation and destocking . 111 
However, adaptation oriented toward short time scale changes in the farming environment (droughts, 
market fluctuations) can have limited efficacy due to broad changes in the soil/water base and 
economic environment occurring over longer time scales.112 
Actions  are already being taken by farmers to make landscapes more resilient to Australia’s highly 
variable climate. Existing systems which successfully navigate this variability can inform more 
widespread uptake of effective agricultural management. These include: 
• 
Adjusting stocking rates to prioritise maintaining groundcover113 
• 
Creating shelter belts of trees for shade and habitat for biodiversity and to reduce evaporation from 
the soil surface113 
• 
Strategies to preserve soil moisture such as conservation tillage111  
• 
Composting and cultivating soil biology113 
Actions which can be taken to further cultivate resilience in Australian agriculture include:114 
• 
Biotechnology and traditional plant and animal breeding have the potential to develop new 
‘climate-ready’ varieties and new breeds, crops or pastures pre-adapted to future climates. 
111 Freebairn, J. (2021). Adaptation to Climate Change by Australian Farmers. https://www.mdpi.com/2225-1154/9/9/141/htm 
112 Risbey, J., Kandlikar, M., Dowlatabadi, H., & Graetz, D. (1999). Scale, context, and decision making in agricultural adaptation 
to climate variability and change. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1009636607038 
113 Soils for Life. (2022). Case Studies. https://soilsforlife.org.au/case-studies/ 
114 Stokes, C., & Howden, M. (2011). Adapting agriculture to climate change. 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/ebook/chapter/CSIRO_CC_Chapter%207 
Environmental
•The environmental 
domain covers 
environmental and 
biophysical 
adaptations to 
drought, for 
example, the 
introduction of 
different breeds, 
species or 
enterprises, 
methods of 
moving stock 
around to 
encourage 
groundcover and 
soil health. 
Economic
•The economic 
domain covers 
financial 
adaptations to 
drought, for 
example, selling 
stock early when 
prices are high.
Social
•The social domain 
covers drought 
adaptations 
involving people 
and social 
networks, 
including social 
capital and 
wellbeing 
initiatives. 
Governance
•The governance 
domain covers 
drought 
adaptations 
related to policy 
and government 
reforms. The 
adaptations 
relevant to each of 
these four 
domains are 
discussed in detail 
below.

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-2 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Plant nutrition can be adjusted by measures such as precision fertiliser use, legume rotations, and 
varietal selection to maintain the quality of grain, fruit, fibre, and forage sources. 
• 
Efficiency of water provision, including irrigation will become critical as water resources become 
more constrained. This can be assisted by identifying less water intensive production options, by 
developing better water delivery technologies, and by implementing water markets and water-
sharing arrangements. 
• 
Biosecurity, quarantine, monitoring, and control measures can be strengthened to control the 
spread of pests, weeds, and diseases under a warming climate. 
• 
Better models of agricultural systems can assess climate change impacts and more reliably 
explore and improve adaptation options. 
• 
Monitoring and evaluation systems are needed to track changes in climate, impacts on agriculture, 
and the effectiveness of adaptation measures, to help decide when to implement particular options 
and to refine them over time 
• 
Soil and water conservation methods and new systems become even more important as climates 
fluctuate more and extreme events become more frequent. 
While it remains difficult to quantify the long-term consequences of climate change for Australian 
agriculture, recent trends suggest that a number of structural changes are possible. Elsewhere in the 
country there could be a shift away from cropping towards livestock and mixed farming, particularly in 
lower rainfall areas. Given the low prevalence of cropping industries in the ACT these structural 
changes are not an issue in the short to medium term. Economic 
There is already evidence of strong farm adaptation responses to the recent climate shifts with 
improvements in technology and management practices helping to increase farm productivity and 
profits. Despite these improvements Australian farm profits have become more sensitive to drought 
impacts over time. ABARES found that the decline in rainfall from 2001 to 2021, compared to 1950-
2000, saw farm profits reduced, on average, by 23 per cent, or $29,200.115 That is, while average farm 
productivity and profits have increased, the difference between profits in normal years and drought 
years has widened.116 
As part of the strategy for adaptation to the variability of farm decision-making circumstances, some 
farmers have diversified their sources of income with inclusion of off-farm employment and capital 
income to cover variations in seasonal conditions and the likelihood of natural disasters111. 
Climate change could also lead to continued amalgamations of farms,  increasing average farm size as 
an adaptive response, and consequent reductions in farm business numbers. Farm survey data 
consistently show higher productivity and profit levels among larger farm businesses, while larger farms 
are also less sensitive to drought risk. Given their lower profit margins, smaller farms are likely to face 
greater pressure from climate change which could hasten farm consolidation trends117. 
Social 
The stressors affecting farming communities during times of drought are likely to lead to increased risk 
of mental health problems.118 Community-led solutions that promote stress reduction, physical 
protection (such as access to clean air spaces or air filtration), and community cohesion have the 
opportunity to bolster resilience during crises. 119 
115 Sullivan, K. (2021) ABARES says changing climate is costing every farm, on average, $30,000 every year.  
https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2021-07-29/abares-climate-change-costs-30k-per-farm/100331680 
116 Hughes, N., & Gooday, P. (2022). Climate change impacts and adaptation on Australian farms 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/insights/climate-change-impacts-and-adaptation  
117 117 Hughes, N., & Gooday, P. (2022). Climate change impacts and adaptation on Australian farms 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/products/insights/climate-change-impacts-and-adaptation  
118 Sartore, G., Kelly, B., Stain, H., Albrecht, G., & Higginbotham, N. (2008). Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: 
A qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. 
https://search.informit.org/doi/abs/10.3316/INFORMIT.471246494717588  
119 Humphreys, A., Walker, E., Bratman, G., & Errett, N. (2022). What can we do when the smoke rolls in? An exploratory 
qualitative analysis of the impacts of rural wildfire smoke on mental health and wellbeing, and opportunities for adaptation. 
https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12889-021-12411-2

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
E-3 
AECOM
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Additionally, knowledge sharing and information provision is an important social component of 
resilience and adaptive management. Information delivery to farmers can be enhanced by providing 
management- and policy-relevant weather and climate metrics (e.g. cold indices for stone fruit), at 
scales relevant to the decisions being made, and combining information on both climate variability and 
trends in seasonal and medium-term (decadal) forecasts68. 
Governance 
Policy and management decisions require timely inclusion of climate information as it becomes 
available, as well as closer collaboration between policy makers, managers, researchers, extension 
agencies, and farmers. 
Complementary support by the government includes the provision of climate change and weather 
forecast information, support for research into new technology, help to evaluate the pros and cons of 
alternative choices, and provision of a social safety net for those unable to adapt87.

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix F 
Workshop slides and 
factsheet

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
F-1 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix F 
Workshop slides and factsheet

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix G 
Survey Questions

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
G-1 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix G 
Survey Questions 
Following the workshop and additional community engagement activities, a survey, “Have Your Say – 
ACT’s Regional Drought Resilience Plan”, was sent out to attendees. The survey aimed to seek input 
from ACT’s agricultural community with regard to experiences of the past drought, the challenges that 
were faces, and any ideas that will help build resilience to future droughts. Questions that made up the 
survey are as follows: 
• 
What is your primary agricultural enterprise(s)? 
• 
What is the size of your landholding/how large is your farm? 
• 
Did you introduce new farm management measures during the last drought, or as a result of the 
drought and other climate events such as fire and flood? 
• 
What did you observe about the 2017-2020 drought and how did the drought impact you and your 
farm? 
• 
What measures did you have in place that helped you to manage the impact of the drought?  
• 
Noting these projected changes in climate, what additional measures are you considering to help 
manage future drought, now or in the future?   
• 
Given the projected changes in climate, is there a point at which you are concerned your current 
farm practices will no longer be feasible?  
• 
What information do you need going forward to help you make decisions about how you manage 
your farm under projected climate change? 
• 
What other support do ACT farmers need in preparing for and responding to droughts? 
• 
What do you see as the role of state and federal government and other organisations in 
preparing for and responding to droughts? 
• 
What are the roles and responsibilities for farmers? 
• 
Are there specific policy or legislative measures you would like to see being introduced or changed 
that would help you and other ACT farmers to prepare for and manage drought? Why? 
• 
Climate variables  - Depending on your agricultural enterprise, there may be certain climate 
variables that are particularly influential on the success of your season, or drive risks. Please 
review the following climate variables and rate the importance of these as you plan for future 
drought. The climate variables listed below are available in data sets provided by the NSW and 
ACT Regional Climate Modelling (NARCliM). 
- 
[climate variables listed in survey]   
- 
Please describe why you've rated some variables higher than others. 
• 
Are there any other climate indicators you use or regularly review? 
• 
Please let us know if there's anything further you'd like to share about how you use climate 
variables to inform your drought planning.

Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix H 
Climate change 
analogues for Canberra

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
H-1 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Appendix H 
Climate change analogues for Canberra 
Climate analogues is a tool that matches the proposed future climate of a region of interest with the 
current climate experienced in another region using annual average rainfall and maximum temperature. 
The following section is an extension of Section 5.3 where climate analogues for Canberra was 
explored. Please refer to that chapter for further context. 
2030 Climate analogues 
Australia has 54 natural resource management (NRM) regions, which are defined by catchments and 
bioregions. Statistics for each town are reported based on the 2022 agricultural data for the NRM region 
that the town sits within, unless otherwise referenced.120    
Bairnsdale (NRM region: East Gippsland VIC) 
Dominant agricultural enterprises 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing (wool, milk and meat) 
• 
Cropping 
• 
Vegetables (predominantly beans) 
Specific to Bairnsdale and Dargo region  
Cattle and sheep grazing is the most widespread form of agriculture although there are areas of 
horticulture on the Mitchell and Tambo River flats. Some cropping and irrigated horticulture using 
groundwater is carried out on the Red Gum Plains.121 
Agricultural issues 
Nitrate leaching and build-up of soil organic matter are the major causes of soil acidity under grazing 
systems.  
The use of acid tolerant plants is widespread in the higher rainfall grazing areas. Many producers rely 
on moderate to highly tolerant pasture species (eg subterranean clover, perennial ryegrass and 
cocksfoot). Since the mid 1990s there has been a revival in the establishment of perennial systems 
(phalaris). This trend is reflected in increased lime usage. There is growing interest in low input native 
pastures for light textured, rocky or steep areas where it is difficult to apply lime (Hughes 2001). 
Bathurst (NRM region: Central Tablelands NSW) 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing (wool, and meat) 
• 
Cropping, specifically broadacre crops, predominantly wheat 
• 
Crops for hay 
Specific to Bathurst  
In addition to the above, the below enterprises are specific to the Bathurst Local Government Area 
(LGA). 
• 
Vegetables 
• 
Nurseries and cut flowers122 
Benalla (NRM region: Goulburn Broken Regional Catchment VIC) 
• 
Cattle grazing (milk and meat) 
120 Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2022). Value of Agricultural Commodities Produced, Australia, 2020-21 financial year. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/value-agricultural-commodities-produced-australia/latest-release  
121 Agriculture Victoria. (2020). Soils and landforms of the Bairnsdale and Dargo Region | VRO | Agriculture Victoria. 
https://vro.agriculture.vic.gov.au/dpi/vro/egregn.nsf/pages/eg_soil_bairnsdale_dargo  
122 Bathurst Regional Council. (2016). Agricultural industry statistics | Bathurst | economy.id. 
https://economy.id.com.au/bathurst/value-of-agriculture

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
H-2 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
• 
Broadacre cropping (predominantly wheat) 
• 
Fruit and nuts (excluding grapes, predominantly apples) 
Specific to Benalla  
• 
Broadacre cropping and crop-pasture (North west of Benalla) 
• 
Pasture dryland (south east of Benalla) sheep and cattle grazing123 
Agricultural enterprises in detail 
Agriculture is predominantly dry land cropping and pastoral, with significant tracts of irrigation along the 
Broken River. Irrigated horticulture is a growing and valuable industry, particularly in the northern Warby 
Range area. 
The stone fruit industry is developing, as are wine grape production and wine making. Tree production 
is featuring as a new enterprise.124 
Agricultural issues  
• 
Irrigated salinity 
• 
Dryland salinity  
• 
Erosion due to land clearing, salinity and rabbit plagues123 
Albury Wodonga (NRM region: North East Catchment VIC, and Murray NSW) 
• 
Broadacre cropping predominantly wheat, canola, and barley 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing (milk and meat) 
• 
Pigs 
• 
Poultry  
• 
Fruit and nuts (excluding grapes), predominantly cherries 
• 
Vegetables 
Sale (NRM region: West Gippsland Catchment VIC) 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing (milk) 
• 
Poultry 
• 
Cropping 
• 
Vegetables 
Bendigo (NRM region: North Central Catchment VIC) 
• 
Broadacre crops predominantly wheat 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing (milk) 
• 
Pigs 
• 
Crops for hay 
Young (NRM region: Riverina NSW) 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing 
• 
Broadacre crops predominantly wheat, canola and barley 
• 
Fruit and nuts (excluding grapes) 
123 Agriculture Victoria. (2020). Landuse | VRO | Agriculture Victoria. 
https://vro.agriculture.vic.gov.au/dpi/vro/gbbregn.nsf/pages/gbb_landuse_map  
124 About Benalla - Tomorrow Today Foundation. (n.d.) , https://tomorrowtoday.com.au/about-us/about-benalla/

Climate and Drought Resilience Risks and Planning 
Final Report 
H-3 
AECOM
Classified as OFFICIAL 
Melbourne (NRM region: Port Philip and Westernport Catchment VIC) 
• 
Nurseries, cut flowers or cultivated turf 
• 
Vegetables 
• 
Cropping 
• 
Fruit and nuts (excluding grapes) 
• 
Livestock, predominantly poultry 
2050 Climate analogues 
Wangaratta (NRM region: North East Catchment VIC) 
• 
Livestock cattle and sheep (milk and meat) 
• 
Broadacre crops 
• 
Fruit and nuts, predominantly cherries 
Mudgee (Central Tablelands NSW) 
• 
Cattle and sheep grazing (wool and meat) 
• 
Broadacre crops predominantly wheat 
• 
Crops for hay 
2090 Climate analogues 
Dubbo (Central West NSW) 
• 
Broadacre crops predominantly wheat, barley and canola 
• 
Sheep and cattle grazing

Drought mitigation through 
farm diversification             
in the ACT 
Australian Farm Institute 
Author: Steve Thomas (ST Strategic Services)  
Editor: Katie McRobert (AFI) 
October 2022

1 
Australian Farm Institute  
The views and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Board of the Australian Farm Institute (AFI) or the Institute’s members or corporate sponsors. 
The material in this Report is provided for information only. At the time of publication, information provided is considered 
to be true and correct. Changes in circumstances after publication may impact on the accuracy of this information. To the 
maximum extent permitted by law, the AFI disclaims all liability for any loss, damage, expense and/costs incurred by any 
person arising from the use of information contained in this Report. The AFI acknowledges the financial assistance of the 
Australian Capital Territory Government - Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate in order to 
undertake this research. The views expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect the views of the report’s funders.  
be reproduced by any process without the written permission of the publisher. 
© Australian Farm Institute, October 2022 
ST Strategic Services 
This report is supplied in good faith and reflects the knowledge, expertise and experience of the consultants involved. The 
professional analysis and advice in this report has been prepared for the exclusive use of the party or parties to whom it is 
addressed (the addressee) and for the purposes specified in it. ST Strategic Services (STSS) its partners, agents and 
employees, disclaim any and all liability for any errors or omissions or in respect of anything or the consequences of 
anything done or omitted to be done in reliance upon the whole or any part of this document.  
In conducting the analysis in this report STSS has endeavored to use what it considers is the best information available at 
the date of publication, including information supplied by the addressee. STSS has relied upon the information provided by 
the addressee and third parties and has not sought to verify the accuracy of the information supplied. STSS gives no 
warranty or assurance and makes no representation as to the accuracy or reliability of any information or advice contained 
in this document, or that it is suitable for any intended use. The authors present information for discussion purposes only 
and not for any commercial use, decision-making or project assessment. No reliance or action must therefore be made 
based on this information without seeking prior expert advice. 
Publication Data: Thomas, S & McRobert, K (2022), Drought mitigation through farm diversification in the ACT, Research 
Report, Australian Farm Institute. 
Terms of reference 
The key objective of this project is to: 
Identify opportunities for ACT and region farmers to diversify their on-farm income, so they maintain 
farm viability during drought and downturns in commodity prices. 
The project will contribute to improving the viability of farm businesses in the ACT by: 
• 
Enhancing their capacity to diversify their business by taking advantage of the close proximity to 
urban markets, and 
• 
Increasing demand for environmentally friendly and socially responsible agriculture as well as rural 
experiences. 
The project specifically addresses opportunities for: 
1. Increased income from existing farm practices 
2. Improved farm diversification in the ACT 
3. Barriers and opportunities to farm diversification in the ACT

2 
Table of Contents 
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................. 4 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 9 
2. 
Agricultural production in the ACT and surrounds ................................................................... 11 
2.1 Climate .................................................................................................................................... 11 
2.2 Soils ......................................................................................................................................... 13 
2.3 Land planning and use ............................................................................................................ 16 
2.4 Water ...................................................................................................................................... 20 
2.5 Production and consumption.................................................................................................. 22 
2.6 Australian Capital Region ........................................................................................................ 24 
3. 
Farm Diversification .................................................................................................................. 26 
3.1 What is diversification? ........................................................................................................... 26 
3.2 Why is diversification required? ............................................................................................. 26 
3.2.1 Predicted climate ............................................................................................................. 27 
3.2.2 Meeting sustainability objectives .................................................................................... 29 
3.2.3 Addressing waste management ....................................................................................... 30 
3.2.4 Economics and employment ............................................................................................ 32 
3.2.5 The “Bush Capital” aesthetic............................................................................................ 32 
3.2.6 Bushfire Management ..................................................................................................... 33 
3.3 Farm diversification options ................................................................................................... 33 
3.3.1 Production-based options ................................................................................................ 34 
Intensive glasshouse/greenhouse production ...................................................................... 35 
Emerging crops, livestock and practices ............................................................................... 36 
Snails  ................................................................................................................................ 37 
Insects ............................................................................................................................... 38 
Tree crops ......................................................................................................................... 38 
Medicinal mushrooms ...................................................................................................... 40 
Spices and herbs ............................................................................................................... 40 
Essential oils ...................................................................................................................... 41 
Aquaculture ....................................................................................................................... 42 
Bio-active Honey ............................................................................................................... 45 
3.3.2 Value-adding to existing products ................................................................................... 46 
3.3.3 New marketing and distribution ...................................................................................... 47 
On-site selling ........................................................................................................................ 47 
Online sales - ecommerce ..................................................................................................... 48 
Alternative Agri-Food Networks ........................................................................................... 49 
Farmers’ markets .............................................................................................................. 49 
Co-operatives and community-supported agriculture ..................................................... 51 
3.3.4 Sustainability options ....................................................................................................... 51 
3.3.5 Non-production based options ........................................................................................ 53 
Farm tourism ......................................................................................................................... 53 
Lease and agistment ............................................................................................................. 55

3 
Ecosystem services ................................................................................................................ 56 
Carbon farming ..................................................................................................................... 59 
3.5 Case studies............................................................................................................................. 61 
3.5.1 Goterra ......................................................................................................................... 61 
3.5.2 Southern Harvest Association ...................................................................................... 63 
3.5.3 Gold Creek Station ....................................................................................................... 65 
4. 
ACT region competitive advantage ........................................................................................... 67 
4.1 Off-farm income ...................................................................................................................... 67 
4.2 Consumer disposable income ................................................................................................. 67 
4.3 Access to labour ...................................................................................................................... 67 
4.4 Provenance ............................................................................................................................. 68 
4.5 Location ................................................................................................................................... 68 
5. 
Lived experience of agricultural diversification in the ACT ...................................................... 69 
5.1 Land planning and lease agreements ..................................................................................... 69 
5.2 Lease tenure ............................................................................................................................ 71 
5.3 Land Management Agreements ............................................................................................. 72 
5.4 Farm size ................................................................................................................................. 73 
5.5 Labour ..................................................................................................................................... 74 
5.6 Contractors.............................................................................................................................. 75 
5.7 Transport ................................................................................................................................. 75 
5.8 Infrastructure .......................................................................................................................... 75 
5.9 Access to Information ............................................................................................................. 76 
6. 
Other opportunities .................................................................................................................. 77 
6.1 The circular bioeconomy ......................................................................................................... 77 
6.2 Wastewater ............................................................................................................................. 78 
6.3 Ecosystem services .................................................................................................................. 78 
6.4 Data sharing ............................................................................................................................ 79 
7. 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................. 80 
8. 
Recommendations .................................................................................................................... 82 
References ......................................................................................................................................... 84

4 
Executive summary 
The 2017-19 drought tested the capacity of ACT farmers, rural landholders and land managers to 
sustain farm incomes. Maintaining a financially resilient and diverse business with alternative 
income sources provides the most consistently effective mitigation of risk across production, market 
and institutional risk categories for Australian farmers. However, many farms in the ACT run single 
enterprises that are vulnerable to drought and other impacts.  
This report defines diversification as: 
the development of resilient agricultural businesses and systems using rational, affordable 
strategies to maintain ecosystem function and protect livelihoods.  
Opportunities for the diversification of agricultural production are supported by several 
characteristics of the ACT region and population. Some characteristics are also evident elsewhere in 
Australia, but the ACT is one of the only regions where all characteristics combine to provide a 
powerful opportunity for region-wide diversification approaches. 
The observations highlighted here and detailed in the report draw on interviews with a range of 
farmers in the ACT region across different production systems, farm sizes and farm business 
structures, as well as an extensive review of the literature. 
Barriers 
The range of diversification options available to ACT farm businesses are significantly impacted by 
several factors including farm size, human capital and variation in land capability and soil type.  
Other factors influencing diversification options include the risk appetite of the individuals involved, 
location and access to labour, life stage, family decision-making and ease of integration with current 
farm operations. 
The major disincentive for diversifying production system or revenue generation on farms in the ACT 
region is associated with land planning and the requirement to maintain alignment with purpose 
clauses under lease agreements that often do not appear fit for purpose. 
While there is significant variation across three principal soil types in the ACT region - including 
pockets of highly fertile soil - most of the soils in the ACT are of low to poor quality with respect to 
traditional production systems. While recent soil testing has found relatively high soil carbon across 
most paddocks, this has followed a very good series of seasons. Almost all the non-urban land in the 
ACT is classified as moderate-low (grade 5) to very low (grade 7) capability - meaning it is suited to a 
restricted number of uses (primarily grazing) and subject to a range of hazards that must be carefully 
managed. This has significant implications for diversification options.    
Under the Territory Plan, agriculture is largely prohibited on NUZ5 land (mountains/bushland zone) 
land and restricted on NUZ4 (river corridor zone) through the application of precinct codes. 
Agricultural production is only a specific objective on land zoned NUZ2 (rural zone) or more generally 
NUZ1 (broadacre zone). Land use in the ACT is subject to Land Management Agreements (LMAs), i.e. 
agreements between the lessee and the ACT government. LMAs can be very detailed and extremely 
resource intensive, and are often cited as onerous by farmers. Importantly, permitted activities on 
NUZs 2 and 1 can be further restricted by specific lease purpose clauses in LMAs. 
Lack of recognition of agriculture in strategic planning documents creates ongoing planning tension 
between rural and urban uses - driven on the one hand by the desire of the ACT Government to 
maintain maximum flexibility for future development, and on the other hand by leaseholders

5 
seeking greater certainty of tenure and clarity of allowable activities needed to generate the 
confidence to invest in land improvements and diversification options.  
Net water use in the ACT is less than half (19GL in 2018/19) of the sustainable diversion limit (SDL) 
approved in the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. Of the water extracted in the ACT, less than 1% (233ML) 
is utilised for agriculture. In addition, climate variability is a major risk to agricultural production 
across Australia that is likely to increase under future climate scenarios. 
Opportunities 
Options in current farming systems resulting from practice change - such as improving the organic 
matter of soils, maintaining groundcover to improve water infiltration, utilisation of mixed farming 
system approaches and pasture improvements - have not been discussed in detail for this report. 
These are important technologies and practices for improving the productivity, resilience and 
profitability of farming businesses; however, they are either already being routinely implemented or 
validated in most production systems, so offer little additional benefit.  
Rather, this report focusses on opportunities for non-traditional alternative production systems, 
value-adding, new markets and improving food distribution that align with the land capability and 
could potentially provide a market niche for the ACT and surrounding region.  
These are presented in brief below: 
Glasshouse / greenhouse production 
Assuming planning approval could be gained, the success of any intensive glasshouse / greenhouse 
venture would be largely dependent on cost and access to irrigation water and power. The green 
electricity strategy of the ACT would contribute to the sustainability credentials of an intensive 
production facility, but the economic feasibility would require careful consideration. Irrigation issues 
could be mitigated if access to treated wastewater could be obtained. Currently, the majority of 
treated wastewater from the ACT is returned to the Murrumbidgee River but the opportunity for its 
use in production should not be dismissed, especially if coordinated with compost production from 
organic waste recycling in a closed circular bioeconomy.  
Emerging industries 
Snails 
The small Australian snail industry is largely centred on the common brown garden snail (Helix 
aspersa). Despite a potential ready market, exports of snails from Australia in the past 5 years have 
been limited to 3,554kg (in 2019) compared with an import of almost 46,000kg (22,000kg in 2020 
alone). 
Insects 
The Australian insect market consists primarily of crickets and grasshoppers, mealworms and black 
soldier flies utilising waste streams and low-quality feeds. Promising immediate markets appear to 
be in the provision of alternative proteins to stock feeds (aquaculture in particular) and the pet food 
industry, especially where production can be co-located with waste streams suitable as feed sources. 
Canberra-based insect waste management and production company Goterra is one of the case 
studies for this project. 
Tree crops  
Tree crops with production potential in the ACT are most likely to be suitable for production only on 
areas with land capability class 5 or better. Regardless of market potential, the establishment of tree 
crops in the ACT is hindered by a number of environmental and regulatory issues.

6 
Mushrooms 
The potential of alternative edible and medicinal mushroom market remains largely untested – 
however, this is explored in some detail in a 2018 AgriFutures emerging industries report1. 
Saffron  
Saffron - the dried stigmas and styles of the crocus flower - is one of the most valuable spices in the 
world at about $30,000/kg gross value. Yields of 1-2kg/ha in Australia are usual but the higher 
summer temperatures and rainfall of the ACT region would probably require supplemental irrigation 
to achieve maximum yield. While there is potential for saffron production in the ACT, this 
opportunity would need to generate a premium product with specialist marketing to maximise the 
potential for viability. 
Essential oils  
Global growth in essential oils is predicted to be significant as the consumer focus on natural 
ingredients continues. Potential production suited to the ACT environment is most likely associated 
with lavender and an emerging essential oil derived from kunzea. Kunzea oil has been identified as a 
prospective emerging industry However, Kunzea ambigua or white tick bush, while native to the 
ACT, also has potential to be a problematic pest species. 
Aquaculture  
Aquaculture opportunities for the ACT include yabbies and finfish – however, zoning for intensive 
production may be a significant issue for these options. Aquaculture would need to align with the 
permitted uses zoning and would be subject to a development application.  
Value-adding 
One of the challenges for producers of commodity products is that they are generally price takers 
rather than price makers. Typically, larger commodity producers maintain and improve economic 
performance through adoption of scale economies (productivist approaches2), but product diversity 
and scope economies3 can also make significant contributions to farm business performance. This is 
particularly pertinent for smaller-scale producers (typically highly represented in the ACT region), 
where scale efficiencies can be difficult to achieve.  
Value-adding of product (for premium and non-premium markets) provides an opportunity to 
identify additional demand and increase prices received. However, diversification into value added 
products is not risk-free. Markets are often small and target a niche of consumers. In addition, the 
effort and expertise required for value-adding should not be underestimated. However, this option 
does represent a significant diversification opportunity for ACT producers, especially where products 
can be promoted as natural, local, traceable and sustainable.  
One of the most direct forms of value-adding is the supply of locally sourced meat to consumers. 
This may appear to be a relatively simple, low-risk diversification option, but meat processing in 
Australia is a high-volume, low-margin business where costs are strictly controlled, and ongoing 
quality assurance is a necessity.  
Marketing 
Direct marketing of farm products has exploded, particularly online, with the use of social media as a 
marketing tool and the relative ease by which webpages and shop platforms can be generated by 
1 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-041.pdf  
2 Productivism is a focus on measurable productivity and growth, i.e. more production is necessarily good. 
3 Scope economies: a proportionate saving gained by producing two or more distinct goods, when the cost of 
doing so is less than that of producing each separately.

7 
individual sellers. The strategies employed differ with the needs and demands of the market and 
several different approaches may need to be tested to identify those most effective for the product 
being sold. 
E-commerce platforms have become a feature of selling food and food products with the potential 
to increase profitability in agricultural markets by increasing sales while decreasing sourcing and 
transaction costs. However, the perishable nature of food products means that the relevance of e-
commerce platforms for direct to customer marketing for small farm businesses can be challenging. 
For many smaller farm businesses, such as those in the ACT region, e-commerce is more likely to 
form part of a combination of marketing channels needed to maximise overall sales.  
As well as online, there are two unique types of on-site selling: roadside stalls and attracting tourists 
to a location then on-selling product.  
Farmers’ markets and co-operatives are particularly important options for maintaining viability of 
small-holder farmers. Farmers’ markets and other alternative market mechanisms, often collectively 
referred to as Alternative Agri-Food Networks (AAFNs), represent a realistic alternative retail 
opportunity for many growers that is complementary to other selling options.   
Sustainability 
Meeting the challenge of demonstrating sustainable production is a pillar of the Federal 
Government’s $34m Agriculture Stewardship Package, supported by development of the Australian 
Agricultural Sustainability Framework4. Demonstrating the sustainability of production has moved 
from a value-adding activity embraced by the few, to an absolute requirement to maintain social 
licence and market access which underpins all farming businesses across multiple sectors.  
Tourism 
While all tourism in Australia has been impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic, tourism continues to be 
an important aspect of the ACT economy, with the gross value added to the ACT economy from 
tourism at $1.6bn in 2019/20. A 2018 survey of growers in the Cootamundra/Gundagai region 
indicated that agritourism has significant potential, yet remains niche and driven by farming family 
preference rather than a major market change. This may change significantly following the 
pandemic, which has resulted in far greater uptake of domestic travel and may provide a major 
opportunity for suitably inclined or positioned growers to diversify into tourism-based activities. 
Lease and agistment 
Horse riding is an extremely popular hobby in the ACT with more than 500 km of trails available to 
riders. Demand for equine service has been demonstrated to be more income elastic5 than 
commodity production (in the UK) and thus represents potentially important benefit to land 
managers, especially as disposable income across the population grows. The sale of services as an 
income diversification strategy also extends to other forms of agistment, particularly the cattle and 
sheep industries that are well-established in the ACT and surrounding region. In particular, the harsh 
winters in the ACT make agistment an attractive alternative to breeding herds that require 
supplemental feeding over the winter months. 
4 https://www.farminstitute.org.au/the-australian-agricultural-sustainability-framework/  
5 Income elasticity refers to the sensitivity of change in the quantity demanded for a good or service, as 
consumer income changes. If a product or service is highly income elastic, demand for it increases as incomes 
rise, whereas inelastic goods do not see a rise in demand as incomes increase.

8 
Ecosystem services 
Farmers manage 55% of the total land area in Australia and up to 15% of the total land area in the 
ACT. Ecosystem services are those ecological functions which lead to desirable environmental 
outcomes, such as air and water purification, drought and flood mitigation, and climate stabilisation. 
Market-based mechanisms (often preferred by economists to regulatory intervention) can provide 
the financial incentive to minimise costs while delivering the desired environmental outcomes. 
Despite this, the approach in the ACT to date has been largely regulatory, with requirements to 
deliver ecosystem services included in LMAs - the costs of which are mostly borne by the 
leaseholder.  
Carbon farming  
The Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF) enables land managers to earn carbon credits by changing land 
use or management practices to store carbon or reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Soil carbon 
farming has been mooted as a key strategy for offsetting Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions, with 
the ancillary benefit of improving farm productivity. However, several barriers restrict farmers from 
participating in schemes designed to monetise the production of carbon credits, e.g. what increase 
in soil carbon storage is achievable and whether credit income will exceed a project’s cost.  
Other opportunities 
Improved linkage of waste streams throughout the ACT with reuse activities such as insect 
production and composting has the potential to generate a circular bioeconomy that minimises 
organic waste, increase productivity and soil health on agricultural lands, provides opportunities for 
diversification and makes a significant contribution to the ACT Waste Minimisation Strategy.   
Greater clarity on potential access to water in the ACT and through water trading for agriculture 
would provide leaseholders with certainty when assessing diversification options that include the 
need for irrigation (most production options).   
Time-limited biodiversity stewardship schemes could be employed within the ACT to protect 
biodiversity and maintain natural capital that is then utilised as environmental offsets for other 
developments, as is routinely practiced currently. 
The ACT government could consider support for the construction and implementation of a database 
of growers, buyers and customers similar to MarketMaker. Such a database is part of the City-Region 
Food System developed by the Canberra Region Food Collaborative. 
Conclusions  
While biophysical limitations will always dictate the range of diversification options which can 
mitigate the vagaries of drought and other climate extremes, ACT farmers are resilient and 
innovative. The unique competitive advantage provided by co-location to consumers and potential 
labour, generation of off-farm income, and marketing of provenance attributes opens the door to 
diversification opportunities for the ACT. In particular, the opportunity to establish a world-leading 
agriculturally based circular bioeconomy should not be dismissed. With the cooperation of 
Government and industry to address and remove the barriers identified herein, opportunities 
aligned with land capability for non-traditional alternative production systems, value-adding, new 
markets and improved food distribution could potentially provide not only a market niche for ACT 
producers but also increased resilience to climate impacts.

9 
1. Introduction 
The 2017-19 drought tested the capacity of Australian Capital Territory (ACT) farmers, rural 
landholders and land managers (particularly those with livestock) to maintain farm incomes.  
The Australian Farm Institute (Laurie et al., 2019) notes that maintaining a financially resilient and 
diverse business with alternative income sources provides the most consistently effective risk 
mitigation across production, market and institutional risk categories for Australian farmers (Figure 
1). Many farms in the ACT run single enterprises that are vulnerable to drought and other impacts. 
By diversifying farm enterprise, farming in the ACT is likely to be more resilient to setbacks, 
disruptions and downturns. 
Figure 1: Comparative effectiveness scores of options in mitigating risk. Source: (Laurie et al., 2019) 
Many single-enterprise ACT (and nearby NSW) farmers are not fully utilising the opportunity to grow 
and sell clean, green farm produce and products to a nearby wealthy and sophisticated consumer 
market (Institute for Sustainable Futures, 2016). This research therefore assesses options to increase 
income from existing farms, and identifies barriers and opportunities to farm diversification in the 
region. 
The report provides an overview of agricultural production in the ACT (including the unique 
characteristics of the agro-ecological zone), sets out the concept of farm diversification, and 
considers the region’s competitive advantage. 
In discussing agricultural diversification in practice, interviews with growers and a workshop 
conducted for this project confirmed that the barriers identified in the research are reflected in the 
lived experience of ACT farmers and land managers (Figure 2). Primarily, the range of diversification 
options available to ACT farm businesses are significantly impacted by several factors including farm 
size, access to water, availability of human capital and variation in land capability and soil type.  
Other factors influencing diversification options include the risk appetite of the individuals involved, 
location and access to labour, life stage, family decision-making and ease of integration with current 
farm operations.  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Effectiveness scores (/10) of risk management options
Production risk
Market risk
Institutional risk

10 
Figure 2: Workshop feedback on biggest barriers to building farm resilience in the ACT and surrounds 
The term ‘diversification’ means different things to different stakeholders, with some workshop 
attendees highlighting environmental diversification via improved biodiversity as a drought 
mitigation strategy in their feedback. 
In this report, diversification is taken to mean: 
the development of resilient agricultural businesses and systems using rational, affordable 
strategies to maintain ecosystem function and protect livelihoods.

11 
2. Agricultural production in the ACT and surrounds 
The Australian Capital Territory (ACT) covers 2,358 square kilometres6 in the upper Murrumbidgee 
catchment. The ACT encompasses the city of Canberra, a number of smaller townships, a large area 
of nature reserves and a much smaller, but significant area of land utilised for agricultural 
production.  
2.1 Climate 
The ACT has a temperate climate, with warm to hot summers and cool to cold winters. In Canberra, 
average maximum temperatures in January exceed 30oC and average minimum temperatures 
approach 0oC in July (Figure 3). The climate across the ACT displays significant variation, 
predominately associated with changes in elevation (from just under 600m in Canberra to more than 
1900m in the southern alps). The north of the ACT is warmer and drier than the cooler and wetter 
regions in the south that merge with the northern part of the Australian Alps7.  
Figure 3: Average monthly maximum & minimum temperatures at Canberra airport 2008-22. Source: BOM Graphical 
climate statistics for Australian locations (bom.gov.au) 
Average annual rainfall totals range from 400-800mm in the north (including Canberra) to 800-
1200mm in the central and western region and greater than 1200mm in the southern alps. 
Rainfall occurs relatively uniformly throughout the year and likewise, days of high rainfall are also 
uniformly distributed across the year (Figure 4). Regional evaporation data over 10 years (required 
to calculate longer-term averages) is not available, but national evaporation data indicates that the 
ACT experiences only moderate evaporation in comparison to other areas of Australia (Figure 5). 
6 Area of Australia - States and Territories | Geoscience Australia (ga.gov.au) 
7 Australian Capital Territory Climate Change snapshot (act.gov.au)  
30.3
27.9
25
21
16.6
13.4
12.7
14.1
18
21.5
24.9
27.5
14.3
13.4
11.1
6.8
2.4
1.2
0.1
0.9
3.1
6.2
9.8
12.1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Monthly Temperature - Canberra
Mean maximum temperature (°C) for years 2008 to 2022
Mean minimum temperature (°C) for years 2008 to 2022

12 
Figure 4: Average monthly rainfall and highest daily rainfall at Canberra airport 2008-21; Source: BOM Graphical climate 
statistics for Australian locations (bom.gov.au) 
Figure 5: Average annual evaporation (based on at least 10 years data); Source: BOM Water and the Land: Evaporation 
(bom.gov.au)  
50.8
65.8
66.9
33
28
50.9
33.7
46.5
52.2
49.7
72.2
75.9
43
64.4
62.4
53.2
31.2
65.2
39
39.6
57.8
38.6
43.4
87.6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Monthly Rainfall - Canberra
Mean rainfall (mm) for years 2008 to 2022
Highest daily rainfall (mm) for years 2008 to 2022

13 
2.2 Soils 
In common with much of Australia, the soils of the ACT are old and generally infertile requiring 
significant inputs to increase traditional agricultural production capacity (Gunn et al., 1969; Sleeman 
and Walker, 1979) although there is significant variation across three principal soil types in the ACT 
region (Figure 6) including pockets of highly fertile soil (ABS, 20078).  
Figure 6: Soils of the ACT region; Source ACTmapi ©Australian Capital Territory. 
8 1307.8 - Australian Capital Territory in Focus, 2007 (abs.gov.au)

14 
Figure 7: Land Capability in the ACT; Source: ACTmapi ©Australian Capital Territory. 
Lithosols occur mostly in the south and west, are nutritionally poor and are subject to erosion 
particularly where native vegetation has been removed from landscapes with steeper slopes. 
Gradational soils are characterised by a gradual increase in clay content with depth and are, 
relatively fertile. They are the principal soil types under the Limestone Plains associated with many 
of the waterways in the north of the ACT. Texture contrast (or duplex) soils are the dominant feature 
of most of the ACT. They are relatively infertile, are vulnerable to erosion on bare slopes, and have a 
fragile surface structure that can become hard setting and impermeable to water if they are not 
carefully managed.  There is moderate to high retention of water in clay subsoils, but permeability 
and root penetration are issues that restrict productivity (Gunn et al., 1969). 
Soils in the ACT are classified into land and soil capability (LSC) classes (Figure 7). LSC represents the 
physical capacity of land to sustain a range of land uses and management practices without long-
term degradation to soil, land, air and water resources9. LSCs are calculated based on a range of 
variables including landform position, slope gradient, drainage, climate and soil characteristics that 
are used to derive detailed ratings for a range of land and soil hazards.  Almost all the non-urban 
land in the ACT is classified as moderate-low (grade 5) to very low (grade 7) capability meaning it is 
suited to a restricted number of uses that consist primarily of grazing and are subject to a range of 
hazards that must be carefully managed (Table 1)10. This has significant implications for 
diversification options.  
9 Soil and Hydrogeological Landscapes Map (act.gov.au) 
10 Land and soil capability assessment scheme (nsw.gov.au) 
Much of the non-urban 
land in the ACT is classified 
as moderate-low (grade 5) 
to very low (7) capability

15 
Table 1: Land & Soil Capability Classes - General Definitions. Source: NSW Office of Environment and Heritage. 
LSC CLASS 
GENERAL DEFINITION 
Land capable of a wide variety of land uses (cropping, grazing, horticulture, forestry, nature conservation) 
1 
Extremely high capability land: Land has no limitations. No special land management practices 
required. Land capable of all rural land uses and land management practices. 
2 
Very high capability land: Land has slight limitations. These can be managed by readily available, 
easily implemented management practices. Land is capable of most land uses and land 
management practices, including intensive cropping with cultivation. 
3 
High capability land: Land has moderate limitations and is capable of sustaining high-impact 
land uses, such as cropping with cultivation, using more intensive, readily available and widely 
accepted management practices. However, careful management of limitations is required for 
cropping and intensive grazing to avoid land and environmental degradation. 
Land capable of a variety of land uses (cropping with restricted cultivation, pasture cropping, grazing, 
some horticulture, forestry, nature conservation) 
4 
Moderate capability land: Land has moderate to high limitations for high-impact land uses. Will 
restrict land management options for regular high-impact land uses such as cropping, high-
intensity grazing and horticulture. These limitations can only be managed by specialised 
management practices with a high level of knowledge, expertise, inputs, investment and 
technology. 
5 
Moderate–low capability land: Land has high limitations for high-impact land uses. Will largely 
restrict land use to grazing, some horticulture (orchards), forestry and nature conservation. The 
limitations need to be carefully managed to prevent long-term degradation. 
Land capable for a limited set of land uses (grazing, forestry and nature conservation, some horticulture) 
6 
Low capability land: Land has very high limitations for high-impact land uses. Land use 
restricted to low-impact land uses such as grazing, forestry and nature conservation. Careful 
management of limitations is required to prevent severe land and environmental degradation 
Land generally incapable of agricultural land use (selective forestry and nature conservation) 
7 
Very low capability land: Land has severe limitations that restrict most land uses and generally 
cannot be overcome. On-site and off-site impacts of land management practices can be 
extremely severe if limitations not managed. There should be minimal disturbance of native 
vegetation. 
8 
Extremely low capability land: Limitations are so severe that the land is incapable of sustaining 
any land use apart from nature conservation. There should be no disturbance of native 
vegetation.

16 
2.3 Land planning and use 
Zoning of land for different purposes in the ACT reflects a range of considerations, including 
environmental outcomes and aesthetics as well as current and future uses with a focus on the 
maintenance of access to land for urban expansion. Land planning objectives and regulations are set 
out in the Territory Plan11 and the ACT Planning Strategy12.  
Agricultural production in the ACT is limited to the areas identified as non-urban zones under the 
Territory Plan (Figure 8), as well as some production in the Majura Valley that is a ‘Designated Area’ 
and regulated under the National Capital Plan.  
Figure 8: Non-urban land zoning the ACT; Source: ACTmapi ©Australian Capital Territory  
11 Territory Plan 2008 | Notifiable instruments (act.gov.au) provides a full description of the planning 
objectives, permitted activities and development requirements on different zones of non-urban land, subject 
to statutory approval. Under the Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Management) Act 1988 Cwth, the 
Territory Plan must not be inconsistent with the National Capital Plan. 
12 ACT Planning Strategy 2018

17 
Agriculture is defined13 in the Territory Plan as:  
broadacre animal farming, crop and pasture production, and horticulture for commercial 
wholesale production, but does not include animal husbandry or any cultivation or animal 
farming carried out primarily for the personal enjoyment of, or consumption by, the owner(s) 
or occupant(s) of land. 
Horticulture is specifically included as a subcategory of agriculture as:  
the use of land for intensive plant production such as fruit, vegetable or flower production 
(including berries and vines). 
Intensive animal production is explicitly not captured under the definition of agriculture but is 
defined separately:  
Animal husbandry means any form of animal production that either takes place within the 
confines of a building or buildings where livestock are reared in confined areas excluding any 
husbandry carried out mainly for the personal enjoyment of, or consumption by, the owner(s) 
or occupier(s) of the land. 
Under the Territory Plan, agriculture is largely prohibited on NUZ5 (mountains and bushland zone) 
land and restricted on NUZ4 (river corridor zone) land through the application of precinct codes.  
For example, the Cotter River Precinct Code14 specifically prohibits agriculture on NUZ5 land and the 
Coree District Precinct Code15 limits production on NUZ4 land to plantation forestry where livestock 
grazing may be permitted subject to development assessment. Some agriculture is permitted on 
NUZ3 (hills, ridges and buffer zones) land but agricultural production is only a specific objective on 
land zoned NUZ2 (rural zone) or more generally NUZ1 (broadacre zone). Zone objectives, as they 
relate to planning and development are available publicly16, and for NUZ1 and NUZ2 are provided in 
Table 2.  
Importantly, permitted activities on rural and broadacre lands can be further restricted by specific 
purpose clauses in Crown lease agreements. General planning rules may allow for grazing in some 
regions, but lease purpose clauses may specify that this must be cattle or sheep grazing and that 
other grazing animals (e.g., goats, alpacas etc.) would require a change to the lease agreement. 
Changes to lease agreements are assessed in the same manner as development applications with 
similar associated costs, requirements to meet environmental and other regulations and application 
of general administrative processes.   
13 https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/DownloadFile/ni/2008-27/copy/141509/PDF/2008-27.PDF  
14 ibid. 
15 ibid.  
16 Territory Plan 2008 | Notifiable instruments (act.gov.au)

18 
Table 2: Planning objectives of key agricultural production zones – NUZ1 (broadacre) and NUZ2 (rural). 
ZONE 
OBJECTIVES 
NUZ1 – Broadacre 
Make provision in a predominantly rural landscape setting for a range of uses which require larger 
sites and/or a location outside urban areas. 
Make provision for activities requiring clearance zones or protection from conflicting development. 
Ensure that development does not adversely impact or visually intrude on the landscape and 
environmental quality of the locality. 
Ensure, where appropriate, that development and the use of land does not undermine the future 
use of land which may be required for urban and other purposes. 
NUZ2 – Rural 
Conserve the distinctive rural landscape setting of Canberra and maintain its ecological integrity 
Conserve sufficient wildlife habitats to adequately protect native plant and animal species 
Make provision for the productive and sustainable use of land for agriculture 
Make provision for other uses which are compatible with the use of the land for agriculture 
Ensure that land parcels are appropriate in size for their approved uses 
Offer leases for time periods which reflect planning intentions for the locality 
Reinforce a clear definition between urban and rural land 
In both NUZ1 and NUZ2 areas, planning processes must accommodate the somewhat competing 
objectives of providing long-term security for food production and landscape management while 
maintaining capacity for urban development in areas that are subject to a Disallowable Instrument 
or identified in the ACT Planning Strategy.  
The ACT Planning Strategy, 201817 specifically identifies the need to: 
• 
Recognise and protect existing industrial, commercial and service trade areas as 
important elements of a diverse economy (Strategic Direction 2.4). 
• 
Reduce vulnerability to natural hazard events and adapt to climate change (Strategic 
Direction 3.2). 
• 
Plan for integrated water cycle management to support healthy waterways and a liveable 
city (Strategic Direction 3.4). 
• 
Protect biodiversity and enhance habitat connectivity to improve landscape resilience 
(Strategic Direction 3.5). 
• 
Reduce waste, improve resource efficiency and decrease our ecological footprint 
(Strategic Direction 3.6). 
17 ACT Planning Strategy 2018

19 
Agriculture is not identified as a significant contributor to the 
liveability of Canberra in any current strategic planning 
approaches (i.e. the ACT Planning Strategy). This is surprising 
given these strategic directions either directly impact 
agricultural leaseholders or would benefit from alignment with 
agricultural and rural policy. The lack of recognition of the 
importance of agricultural production in the ACT is exacerbated 
when considering the commitment of Government to support 
sustainable urban growth by working towards delivering up to 
70% of new housing within the existing urban footprint, and by 
concentrating development in areas located close to the city centre, town and group centres and 
along key transit corridors (Strategic Direction 1.1). While a target of 70% urban infill is laudable, 
30% of future urban development will need to be furnished from greenfield sites, with consequent 
impacts on agricultural leaseholders and the capacity to diversify production and income.  
This leads to an ongoing planning tension between rural and urban uses that is driven on the one 
hand by the desire of the ACT Government to maintain maximum flexibility for future development 
of land, and on the other hand by leaseholders seeking greater certainty of tenure and clarity of 
allowable activities needed to generate the confidence to invest in land improvements and 
diversification options. Despite conflicting interests, opportunities exist to explore collaborative 
strategic planning directions in water, biodiversity and waste management that could deliver 
benefits to leaseholders while meeting the objectives to maintain land availability for urban 
development. These are discussed later in this report and are currently being considered in the 
development of a dedicated agriculture policy for the ACT. 
In addition to planning rules and lease purpose clause in crown leases, land use in the ACT is also 
subject to Land Management Agreements (LMAs)18. Unique to the ACT, all rural lessees are required 
to enter a LMA under the Planning and Development Act, 2007.  
A LMA neither authorizes nor permits a particular use of the land. Rather, LMAs are an agreement 
between the lessee and the ACT government with the objective to “establish appropriate 
sustainable agricultural management practices and good farm biosecurity for the subject land while 
maintaining ecological and cultural values present on the land and protecting the environment from 
harm.” LMAs are extremely detailed documents that describe: 
• 
Details of existing rural enterprises conducted on the property and any additional approved 
activities planned for the future. This includes estimates of annual stocking levels 
encompassing both domestic and native/pest animals.  
• 
Future management objectives with timetables, potential associated land management 
issues and proposed management practices. 
• 
Identification of sites of significant environmental value and guidelines for their 
management. 
• 
Identification of other native vegetation, an assessment of its health and associated specific 
management actions and timelines. 
• 
An assessment of soil condition and a management action and timelines to address each 
issue identified (e.g., salinity, acidity etc.) 
18 LMA Guidelines and Agreement 2020. 
Planning must accommodate the 
competing objectives of long-
term security for food 
production and landscape 
management while maintaining 
capacity for urban development

20 
• 
Identification and management of contaminated and hazardous materials sites 
• 
Identification of the introduction and management of spoil 
• 
Identification of surface and ground water sources and plans for their management. 
• 
Identification of and management plans for riparian zones 
• 
Identification of and management plans for erosion 
• 
Drought risk management plans (with limited information on diversification options) 
• 
Bushfire risk management plans 
• 
Estimation of Eastern Grey Kangaroo numbers and any future plan to apply to cull. 
• 
Identification of and management plans for pest plant populations 
• 
Identification of and management plans for pest animal populations 
• 
Identification of and management plans for heritage areas including those listed on the ACT 
Heritage Register and all Aboriginal places and objects. 
The detail required in LMAs make them extremely resource-intensive and potentially even onerous 
agreements for both leaseholders and government. Their ongoing implementation has been the 
subject of considerable criticism, with both the Auditor General and leaseholders questioning the 
value of LMAs in the most recent audit.19. The latest audit report places significant emphasis on the 
variable quality and depth of information and assessment in LMAs that, together with a lack of 
ongoing compliance activities, compromises their ability to be used as active land management 
tools. For an approach to land management that is based on regulation and compliance, this is 
undoubtedly a significant issue.  
However, perhaps the most informative aspect of the audit report is the acknowledgement of the 
lack of coordination of effort and cooperation between ACT Government business units and 
stakeholders such that there is no formal, regular and systematic opportunity to share knowledge 
and discuss potential system and process improvements. The current approach to lease 
management clearly hinders the Directorate’s ability to implement and monitor jointly developed, 
agile approaches to lease management that meet the needs of the ACT government, rural 
leaseholders and wider society and are essential for the successful identification and 
implementation of diversification options. 
2.4 Water 
The ACT sits entirely within the Murrumbidgee catchment that is part of the wider Murray-Darling 
Basin (MDB). Water use is managed under the ACT Water Resources Act 2007 consistent with 
obligations placed on the ACT under the MDB Plan,20 which establishes extraction limits and 
environmental water requirements.  
Water extraction within the ACT is limited by the sustainable 
diversion limit (SDL) defined under the MDB Plan (2012). The SDL 
is the long-term average volume of water that can be taken – i.e., 
the amount of water extracted for household use, manufacturing, 
industry and agriculture. The ACT’s SDL for surface water is 42.7 
gigalitres (GL) and 3.16 GL for groundwater extraction (ACT Water 
Resource Plan). 
19 Report No. 01 of 2021 - Land Management Agreements (act.gov.au) 
20 A plan for the Murray–Darling Basin | Murray-Darling Basin Authority (mdba.gov.au)  
Of the water 
extracted in the ACT 
during 2018-19, less 
than 1% was utilised 
for agriculture

21 
The ACT extracted a total of 49.5GL in 2018/19 of which 30.5GL was returned to the environment, 
predominately as treated wastewater (ABS Water Account, Australia21). Water returned to the 
environment provides an offset in accounting for water use under the SDL.  
Figure 9: Agricultural water use in the ACT 2018/19; Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2018-19). Water Account, 
Australia. ABS. 
Of the water extracted in the ACT during 2018-19, less than 1% (233ML) is utilised for agriculture. 
The vast majority of water is used for domestic supply, sewerage and drainage services (48.5GL). Of 
the water utilised for agriculture, 35% is used for nursery and floriculture production, 10% for fruit 
and nut production and 55% for livestock farming or grain growing (Figure 9).  
Groundwater resources in the ACT are very small in comparison to other areas in Australia. ACT 
Government policy is to limit extraction of groundwater to 10% of the volume of long-term recharge 
(ACT Water Resources (Water Available from Areas) Determination 201922).  
The current use of wastewater recycling for agricultural production and other purposes in the ACT is 
low. Some wastewater (approx. 250ML/year) from the Lower Molongolo Water Quality Control 
Centre (LMWQCC)23 has been used for irrigation of nearby vineyards (100ha) and is currently 
supplying a golf course (30ha)24. The North Canberra Water Re-Use Scheme provides water to 70ha 
over seven sites. Figures from 2004-2009 indicate daily wastewater inflow to the LMWQCC of 
80ML/day (from an average use of 164L per person per day) with outflows to the Murrumbidgee 
catchment between 1990 and 2008 averaging 81ML/day.  
Outflow from LMWQCC is an important contributor to river flow in times of low rainfall and drought; 
however, the reuse of water from treatment plants provides an opportunity for water supply that is 
less dependent of climate factors and of a high-water quality. The reuse of treated wastewater is an 
important option in a new policy that is (at the time of writing) in draft, regarding management of 
point source pollution. It will also feature strongly in a future integrated water management plan. 
21 46100DO010_201819.xls (live.com) 
22 Water Resources (Water Available from Areas) Determination 2019 | Disallowable instruments (act.gov.au) 
23 Sewage Reuse Projects | Icon Water 
24 Microsoft Word - cover page (act.gov.au) 
35%
10%
55%
Nursery and floriculture production
Fruit and tree nut growing
Sheep, beef, cattle, grain growing and other livestock farming (b)

22 
Other opportunities for wastewater treatment facilities in (or that discharge into) the ACT are 
emergent, but are yet to be explored. 
2.5 Production and consumption 
Production and consumption data for the ACT is imprecise due to the low number of farm 
businesses and the minor contribution that the ACT makes toward national agricultural production 
statistics. The most recent ABS production data for the ACT (2019-20) shown in Table 3 should be 
interpreted with a degree of caution; for example, the ABS estimates only one egg production 
business whereas consultation identifies at least three (ACT NRM Rural Landholder Survey, 2020).  
Of the 235,000ha of land in the ACT, ABS estimated approximately 21,500ha was utilised for 
agricultural production in 2019/2025, supporting the operation of 40 agricultural businesses26. 
Grazing remains the most common form of agricultural production on either unimproved 
(approximately 7,000ha) or improved (approximately 14,000 ha) pasture. Grazing is focused on the 
production of sheep (meat and wool) and lambs (approximately 30,000 head across 13 businesses) 
as well as cattle (2,300 head across 26 businesses). Egg production is also a feature, with at least 
2,600 layers producing 52,000 dozen eggs annually. Alternative animal production is focused mainly 
on the well-established horse and equestrian sector.  
Broadacre cropping is insignificant with only marginal activity targeted toward production of animal 
feed. Horticultural production is dominated by orchards (4 businesses) with more than 2,200 trees, 
1,500 of which are of bearing age. Almost all orchard production is focused on apples (1,452 mature 
trees bearing 14 tonnes of fruit) with lower production of pears (35 trees bearing 2t) and other fruits 
and nuts (45 trees) that includes olives as well as hazelnuts as a host for truffle production. There is a 
single viticulture business growing grapes for wine production on 9ha. 
25 NB: The actual area of agricultural production is estimated to be larger (i.e. closer to 40,000ha) but is 
comprised of agricultural enterprises that do not meet the ABS definition of agricultural businesses. 
26 71210DO001_201920.xlsx (live.com)

23 
Table 3: Agricultural production in the ACT 2019-20. Source Australian Bureau of Statistics.  ^estimate has a relative standard 
error of 10% to less than 25% and should be used with caution. * estimate has a relative standard error between 25% and 50% and should 
be used with caution. (a) Including hens in moult, (b) E.g. horses, goats, beehives, domesticated buffaloes. 
COMMODITY DESCRIPTION 
ESTIMATED 
AREA (ha) 
NUMBER OF 
BUSINESSES  
Land use - Land mainly used for agricultural production - Total area (ha) 
21,598^ 
40 
Land use - Land mainly used for grazing - Total area (ha) 
21,006^ 
35 
Land use - Land mainly used for grazing - Grazing on improved pastures - Area 
(ha) 
13,959^ 
27 
Land use - Land mainly used for grazing - Grazing on other land - Area (ha) 
7,048^ 
21 
Livestock - Sheep and lambs - Total (no.) 
30,703^ 
13 
Livestock - Cattle - Total cattle (no.) 
2,371 
26 
Livestock - Poultry and eggs - Live poultry - Layers (no.) (a) 
2,675* 
1* 
Livestock - Poultry and eggs - Commercial hen egg production for human 
consumption - Total (dozens) 
52,091* 
1* 
Livestock - All other livestock n.e.c. (no.) (b) 
537^ 
15 
Land use - Land mainly used for forestry (including plantation and native 
forest) - Area (ha) 
13* 
1* 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit and nuts - All orchard fruit (including nuts) - Total 
trees (no.) 
2,208^ 
4^ 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit and nuts - All orchard fruit (including nuts) - Total 
trees not yet of bearing age (no.) 
676* 
1* 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit and nuts - All orchard fruit (including nuts) - Total 
trees of bearing age (no.) 
1,532^ 
3^ 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit - Apples - Trees of bearing age (no.) 
1,452* 
3^ 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit - Apples - Production (t) 
14* 
3^ 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit - Pears (including Nashi) - Trees of bearing age 
(no.) 
35* 
1* 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit - Pears (including Nashi) - Production (t) 
2* 
1* 
Fruit and nuts - Orchard fruit - All other orchard fruit n.e.c. - Total trees (no.) 
45* 
1* 
Fruit and nuts - Grapes for wine production - Total area (ha) 
9 
1 
Consumption data is even more sparse than production data. The most accurate source of 
consumption data is from the 2012 Food in the ACT study (Turner et al., 2012) but even these figures 
are based on 1988/89 data. Error! Reference source not found. summarises potential ACT c
onsumption of key foodstuffs based on average per capita assumption as reported (Turner et al., 
2012) adjusted for population growth to 431,500 as at December 202027. The figures therefore do 
not account for changes in diet since 1988/89 (e.g., they do not capture the significant increase in 
the consumption of chicken meat over the last two decades) and are not directly comparable with 
the production figures above. They are included here to provide some context of the average food 
consumption in the ACT. 
27 https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/population/national-state-and-territory-population/dec-2020

24 
Table 4: Predicted food consumption in the ACT extrapolated from Turner et al., 2012 adjusted for increased population size 
MAIN PRODUCT 
SUB-CATEGORY 
VOLUME P/C PER 
YEAR 
INDICATIVE TOTAL 
ACT CONSUMPTION  
Dairy 
Butter 
2.9kg 
1,251t 
Cheese 
10.7kg 
4,617t 
Milk 
102.4L 
44,186 kL 
Meat & meat products 
Beef 
36.4kg 
15,707t 
Lamb & mutton 
16.3kg 
7,033t 
Pig (including ham and bacon) 
28.3kg 
12,211t 
Poultry 
30.8kg 
13,290t 
Fresh Fruit (including juice) 
Citrus 
56.4kg 
24,337t 
Other 
55.4kg 
23,905t 
Vegetables 
Potatoes 
68.0kg 
29,342t 
Other root and bulb 
vegetables 
24.4kg 
10,529t 
Tomatoes 
24.9kg 
10,744t 
Leafy and green vegetables 
20.6kg 
8,889t 
Other vegetables 
25.1kg 
10,831t 
Eggs 
137 
4,926,292doz 
Grain products 
Flour 
16.3kg 
7,033t 
Rice 
7.1kg 
3,064t 
Bread 
53.4kg 
23,042t 
Nuts 
Tree nuts 
4.8kg 
2,071t 
Peanuts 
2.3kg 
992t 
It is apparent that consumption in the ACT is highly reliant on food produced in other areas of 
Australia and, to a lesser degree, overseas. This introduces several potential risks to the ACT food 
supply chain but also highlights opportunities to replace or complement external food sources with 
local production of vegetables, fruit, eggs and meat. 
The lack of accurate production and consumption data is a significant 
impediment to the development of sustainable food production 
strategies by government and the private sector to assess 
diversification options that generate increased availability of locally 
sourced food in the ACT. The data gap has previously been identified 
(Turner et al., 2012) as a serious barrier to food resilience in the ACT 
and action by the ACT government, together with the ABS, to develop 
a common approach to data generation is needed. In addition, the ability to capture willingness to 
pay data, based on food quality and regionality would contribute significantly to a more accurate 
picture of ACT consumption trends that reflect the relatively high level of disposable income and 
discerning nature of consumers. 
2.6 Australian Capital Region 
The attributes of farms in the ACT are unique because of the size of operations, the use of land in 
the ACT and the regulations imposed. However, the general production environment and the 
relationship with buyers and consumers should be considered on a wider basis. The Australian 
Capital Region (ACR) includes the ACT and 17 surrounding NSW Local Government Areas and is 
Consumption in the 
ACT is highly reliant on 
food produced in other 
areas of Australia

25 
relevant to strategic planning decisions of both the ACT and NSW governments. It overlaps 
significantly with the NSW South-East Local Land Services28 and Southern Inland RDA29 areas.  
Agricultural production in the South-East and Tablelands region of NSW area provides a good 
depiction of that in the ACT region more generally30  as it includes the same focus on beef and sheep 
production. Unsurprisingly, broadacre cropping becomes more significant in the western part of the 
region while dairy and nursery industries are more prevalent in the eastern regions.  Beef, sheep and 
wool production are core agricultural activities across the region. 
The significant overlap of the ACT region with the SE Local Land Services and Southern Inland RDA 
provides significant opportunities for joint strategic planning and investment activities. In many 
areas, data sharing between ACT and NSW Government agencies is already in place (e.g., biosecurity 
and bushfire management). Effective collaboration for the delivery of some extension programs is 
also apparent, although often driven by officer-level interactions. There are further opportunities for 
more structured collaboration particularly as it relates to economic development in the region.  
28 South East - Website - Local Land Services (nsw.gov.au)  
29 About Us – RDA Southern Inland (rdasi.org.au) 
30 Agriculture Industry Snapshot for Planning South East and Tablelands Region (nsw.gov.au)

26 
3. Farm Diversification 
This report focusses on the options for diversification of 
production on farms in the ACT, the opportunities that can 
be explored and the constraints that may inhibit adoption. In 
doing so, it is first important to understand what is meant be 
diversification. 
3.1 What is diversification? 
Studies into farm diversification have been complicated by 
the lack of a generally agreed definition as to what 
diversification is.  For the purposes of this report, a 
modification of the definition by Lin (2011) is used with diversification being the development of 
resilient agricultural businesses and systems using rational, affordable strategies to maintain 
ecosystem function and protect livelihoods. Consistent with the terms of reference, off-farm 
diversification options such as off-farm employment and leasing of land/buildings are not directly 
considered in this report but are important contributors to grower wealth, as well as impacting the 
success of other diversification activities. 
3.2 Why is diversification required? 
Numerous studies have explored the drivers for diversification in Australia (RIRDC, 2002; Ollenburg 
and Buckley 2007; Mooney et al., 2010; Medhurst and Seagrave, 2007) and internationally (Bowler 
et al., 1996; Barbieri et al., 2008; Barbieri and Mahoney, 2009). While most have focused on the 
need for diversification in more traditional farming businesses that are not widely represented in the 
ACT, some common reasons for diversification include: 
• 
Addressing economic constraints to the farm business (e.g., increasing income) 
• 
Decreasing risk associated with variation in climate, environment and markets. 
• 
Providing an opportunity for family members to remain in the farm business (through 
succession planning and economic expansion).  
• 
Capturing new market opportunities. 
• 
Capitalising on an interest or hobby 
• 
Better use of farm resources 
• 
Other individual aspirations (e.g., learn new skills and provide a new challenge, desire to 
interact with community, enhancement of quality of life etc.). 
Primary producers in Australia have historically been exposed to a range of risks associated with 
markets, variable climate and environment. More recently, other risks to farm businesses have 
become more prominent including those associated with changes in competition and supply chain 
dynamics as well as the need to meet community expectations for social license, animal welfare, 
sustainability, provenance, and trust (Lockie, 2015; Laurie et al., 2019).  
Governments have increasingly viewed farm diversification as an economic lifeline for farm 
businesses (Ollenburg and Buckley, 2009) and an effective method to address many economic and 
environmental risks. However, it is not a panacea to all the risks associated with primary production. 
Indeed, despite anecdotal evidence that diversification has been increasing, there is little statistical 
supporting data (Medhurst and Seagrave, 2007). Regardless, there are some compelling reasons for 
diversification to be examined closely in the ACT and surrounding regions. 
Diversification (is) the 
development of resilient 
agricultural businesses and 
systems using rational, 
affordable strategies to 
maintain ecosystem function 
and protect livelihoods

27 
3.2.1 Predicted climate 
Climate variability is a major risk to agricultural production across Australia that is likely to increase 
under future climate scenarios (Lock et al., 2012). National climate trends31 and ACT specific trends32 
are shown in Table 5. 
Table 5: Modelled climate variability trends for Australia and the ACT 
NATIONAL CLIMATE TREND 
ACT CLIMATE TREND 
Australia’s climate has warmed by 1.44 ± 0.24°C 
since national records began in 1910. 
ACT’s annual mean maximum temperature has 
increased by over 1.5oC since records began in 1926. 
Annual mean minimum temperatures have warmed 
2oC in the same period. 
In SE Australia, rainfall between April and October 
has declined by approximately 12% since the late 
1990s.  
Rain is variable in the ACT region, but recent years 
have been drier than average (with the exception of 
2016). 
There has been a decrease in streamflow in the 
majority of waterways (where gauges are present) 
across southern Australia since 1975. 
There have been reduced inflows to water storages, 
with the majority of years between 2001–2002 and 
2018–2019 below the long-term average. 
Extreme fire weather and the length of the fire 
season has increased since the 1950s, especially in 
southern Australia. 
Increase in the average and maximum Fire Danger 
Index and an increase in the number of days with a 
very high Fire Danger Rating. 
Climate modelling, conducted with NSW (NSW and ACT Regional Climate Modelling project33), 
indicates a continued future drying and warming climate. Spring rainfall is predicted to decrease 
while rainfall in summer and autumn is expected to increase. Variability in the reliability of rainfall is 
a major source of farm production and viability risk (Kimura and Antón, 2011). Temperatures are 
expected to increase in the near future (maximum increase 0.6-0.9oC; minimum 0.4-0.7oC between 
2020 and 2039) and continue rising (maximum and minimum temperatures increase by 1.4-2.3oC by 
2079). In addition, the number of severe fire weather days in spring and summer is expected to 
increase. 
31 State-of-the-Climate-2020.pdf  
32 Office for the Commissioner for Sustainability and the Environment – An independent voice for sustainability 
and the environment in the ACT  
33 Australian Capital Territory Climate Change snapshot (act.gov.au)

28 
Figure 10: Simulation of percentage change in farm profits under the Recent (1999-2019) scenario, relative to Historical 
(1949 to 2019); Source Hughes et al., 2019. 
Modelling of the potential impact of climate variability on farm profit is not precise, but the most 
recent simulation modelling by ABARES indicates that changes in average farm profits are already 
occurring based on a comparison of the 50 years between 1949 and 2019 and observations over the 
last 20 years (Figure 10) (Hughes et al., 2019). Future changes to profit may range from -2% to -50% 
depending on assumptions regarding global emissions scenarios (Table 6) (Hughes and Gooday, 
2021; Hughes et al., 2021). Importantly, the results do not account for the positive effects of long-
run adaptation, technological advances and carbon dioxide fertilisation. 
Table 6: Percentage change in farm profits relative to Historical (1950 to 2000). Source Hughes and Gooday, 2021. 
Industry 
Historical  
Profit ($) 
Recent 
(1999-
2019) 
Change 
Future Modelled Change to 
2050 with action to limit 
global emissions (Rcp 4.5, 
2050) 
Future Modelled Change to 
2050 with minimal action to 
limit global emissions (Rcp 
8.5, 2050) 
min 
mean 
max 
min 
mean 
max 
Beef – Northern  
152,815 
-3.1 
-22.1 
-11.7 
-3.0 
-54.5 
-27.6 
-16.3 
Beef – Southern  
20,968 
-22.5 
-26.6 
+0.5 
+10.3 
-63.8 
-18.0 
-2.7 
Sheep – lamb  
108,234 
-14.9 
-16.6 
-5.8 
-0.1 
-31.6 
-12.9 
-5.6 
Sheep – mixed  
58,817 
-26.7 
-37.3 
-13.2 
-6.3 
-66.3 
-28.1 
-15.9 
Cropping – Northern 
212,491 
-36.2 
-23.7 
-9.8 
-3.6 
-43.1 
-20.1 
-4.8 
Cropping – Southern  
179,423 
-21.7 
-27.7 
-3.3 
+11.5 
-30.8 
-8.5 
+4.1 
Cropping – Western  
437,227 
-26.8 
-55.9 
-31.6 
-5.1 
-68.1 
-50.5 
-7.3 
All Farms 
129,187 
-22.6 
-31.9 
-13.1 
-2.0 
-49.9 
-25.6 
-10.7 
Note: RCP4.5 - global emissions peak by 2040, and CO2 concentrations reach around 485 ppm by 2050. RCP8.5 - limited 
curbing of global emissions, such that CO2 concentrations reach around 540 ppm by 2050. 
The Canberra region is classified as part of the southern beef production system but has more 
recently been included as part of the northern cropping region. The potential impact of climate

29 
change on beef and sheep production systems is significant while impacts on broadacre cropping is 
of lower relevance in the ACT.  
While there are limits to the predictability of global climate systems (Nelson et al., 2010), climate 
variability over the past 20 years has increased the riskiness of farming in Australia (particularly 
south-western and south-eastern areas), with the risk of very low returns in any one year increasing 
from 1 in 10 in the period 1950-2000 to 1 in 5 (Hughes et al., 2019).  
One of the major risks associated with an increasingly variable climate is the increased likelihood of 
drought (Lock et al., 2012). Australia has a unique approach to drought policy amongst developed 
nations, having moved from the treatment of drought as a natural disaster up to 1992 (triggering 
subsidies, low interest loans and cash grants) to one that focusses on managing drought as an 
integral aspect of farming in Australia. Farmers are now expected to assume greater responsibility 
for preparedness and proactively manage the risks associated with increasing climate variability 
(Quiggin and Chambers, 2004; Botterill and Hayes, 2012; Kiem and Austin, 2013). The effectiveness 
of this approach is evident in recent analysis of the drought risk associated with wheat production, 
where the adoption of new technologies and practices since 2007–08 have resulted in wheat yields 
under dry conditions increasing by 14% (Hughes and Gooday, 2021).  
Some government support is required to address the social and economic impacts of a more variable 
climate, but most commentators agree that it should focus on adaptive capacity generated through 
resilience in preference to short-term responses (Kiem et al., 2010 and Goucher, 2020) This principle 
is clear in the Future Drought Fund, the key Federal investment to build drought resilience in 
Australia’s agriculture sector, the agricultural landscape, and communities34. The $5 billion fund35 
generates approximately $100m per annum invested to build drought resilience through: 
• 
Harnessing innovation - driving adoption of new drought resilient technologies and practices 
• 
Better risk management - helping farmers and regions plan for drought 
• 
Better climate information - making climate information accessible and useful 
• 
More resilient communities - building social capital to drive change and support resilient 
communities 
• 
Better land management - trial and adoption of land management practices that support 
landscape resilience 
While the lack of certainty regarding the precise impact of climate variability makes it difficult to 
assess the long-term viability of many diversification options (Kandulu et al., 2012) that form part of 
the Federal Drought Fund and other regional initiatives, diversification remains an important tool for 
managing predicted climate variability in the ACT, including periods of drought (Figure 1)(Laurie et 
al., 2019). 
3.2.2 Meeting sustainability objectives  
Urban transport and electricity generation have been the largest contributors to greenhouse gas 
emissions in the ACT and are specifically targeted in the ACT Climate Strategy36. The Climate Change 
and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 201037, adopted by the ACT Government sets targets for: 
• 
Zero net greenhouse gas emissions by 2060; 
• 
80% below 1990 levels by 2050; and 
34 Future Drought Fund - DAWE 
35 Future Drought Fund Annual Report 2020–21 (awe.gov.au) 
36 ACT Climate Change Strategy to a Net Zero Emission Territory (amazonaws.com)  
37 Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 2010 | PDF

30 
• 
40% below 1990 levels by 2020. 
An important but often overlooked contributor to greenhouse gas emissions in the ACT are 
emissions associated with the transport of food and other materials to the ACT from elsewhere in 
Australia. For example, it is estimated that 90% of Canberra’s leafy greens and fruits come from the 
Sydney Markets38.  
Initiatives to limit food transport miles by increasing the 
availability of local produce have the potential to increase 
freshness as well as contribute to ACT sustainability targets. 
Despite this, it is unrealistic to believe that the ACT could or 
should achieve 100% food sustainability from the ACT region. The 
reality is that some foods are more economically produced in 
other areas of Australia (or internationally) or can only be 
produced in other areas (e.g., tropical foods such as mango, 
banana, sugar etc.). There are opportunities, however, to produce and market some foods in the 
ACT that are currently transported from elsewhere - even if that incurs higher costs. This concept is 
explored in detail by Regional Development Australia (ACT and Southern Inland) and is the basis for 
its recently released Proposal for Sustainable Urban Food in the ACT. Importantly, the proposal 
recognises that a sustainable city must be fully integrated with the region which surrounds it and 
that regional food producers can be better engaged in closer collaboration to deliver desired 
sustainability outcomes. 
Agricultural production can also contribute to sustainability and the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions through sequestration of carbon in natural woodlands, grass lands and forestry 
plantations as well as managing emission from ruminant animals. Carbon sequestration 
opportunities in the ACT are limited as discussed later in this document. Management of animal 
emissions is most likely dependent on technology breakthroughs. For example, seaweed additives 
developed by CSIRO in their FutureFeed program which have been shown to reduce enteric 
methane emissions by more than 80%39. Given the close location with CSIRO and the University 
sector, ACT graziers are well placed to participate in exploring these opportunities to reduce 
methane generation as well as increasing profitability and sustainability of production. 
While there are opportunities for agriculture in the ACT region to contribute to meeting the ACT 
Government’s sustainability objectives, to make a meaningful contribution farmers must first be 
profitable in their own right. A sound financial base supports active participation in the sustainability 
debate, valued contributions to agricultural policy settings and engagement in the R&D required for 
innovative solutions to what are complex problems. 
3.2.3 Addressing waste management  
Waste minimisation and reuse schemes have been in place in Australia for decades and were 
originally targeted toward achieving human health, environmental and aesthetic outcomes. Over the 
past several decades, waste management has become a critical aspect of sustainability programs, 
with increasing recognition of the contribution that organic waste in landfill makes to greenhouse 
gases through the release of methane. Waste management in the ACT, and in particular the 
38 ACT sustainable urban food proposal - RDA ACT Aug 2019 | PDF (scribd.com)  
39 FutureFeed - CSIRO  
It’s estimated that 90% of 
Canberra’s leafy greens 
and fruits come from the 
Sydney Markets

31 
management of organic waste, is therefore an essential component of meeting sustainability goals 
and in meeting obligations of the Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Reduction Act 201040. 
The re-purposing and reuse of organic waste - often referred to as the circular bioeconomy - is an 
important focus of the National Food Waste Strategy41. The size and connectedness of businesses in 
the ACT mean that the region is well placed to implement many principles of the circular 
bioeconomy. Waste accounts for 3% of ACT greenhouse gas emissions42. There are significant 
opportunities for the innovative management of organic waste to reduce the ACT’s emissions profile 
while also contributing to agricultural productivity and sustainability through diversification and new 
business models. 
Figure 11: ACT waste going to landfill; Source: ACT Waste Feasibility Study 
More than 200,000 tonnes of green waste (over 90% of ACT’s total garden waste) per annum is 
recovered, processed, and reused43. However, the amount of food and other organic waste that is 
transferred to landfill (approximately 40-50% of 61,000t of annual household waste, Figure 11)44 
remains high. 
Commercial composting (as opposed to home composting, which is also important) provides the 
opportunity to combine food waste, biosolids and green waste to generate soil improvement 
products at scale. Given the low capacity of most soils in the ACT, the addition of organic matter to 
stimulate soil biology, increase water retention and improve soil nutrition could be part of numerous 
diversification strategies that not only increase productivity but also contribute to managing ACT 
organic waste streams. 
40 https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/DownloadFile/a/2010-41/current/PDF/2010-41.PDF  
41 National Food Waste Strategy: Halving Australia's Food Waste by 2030 (awe.gov.au) 
42 ACT Waste Management Strategy  
43 ACT Waste Management Strategy 
44 Waste Feasibility Study - Roadmap and Recommendations (amazonaws.com)

32 
3.2.4 Economics and employment  
Given that Canberra was specifically established as a location for Federal Government, it is not 
surprising that the ACT has a high reliance on central government administration as a driver of 
economic activity.  
A cursory examination of the ACT employment figures shows that 18.4% of employed people in the 
Territory worked in Central Government Administration (compared with 1.2% Australia wide). Other 
major industries of employment included defence (5.2%), hospitals (except psychiatric hospitals) 
(3.2%), State Government administration (3.1%) and higher education (3.0%)45. As noted in other 
regional areas, the dominance of a few large employers can leave a region susceptible to changes in 
employment environment (RAI, 2013). The ACT economy is significantly exposed to government 
decisions and policies that impact public service numbers. For example, the Federal Government’s 
approach to decentralisation of public service positions to regional Australia is designed to support 
regional economies but, given that 37.9% of the 152,000 public servants in Australia were located in 
the ACT when the decentralisation approach was first implemented in 201746, the policy has a 
significantly larger impact on employment in the ACT region than other capital cities. 
While the high level of public service employment in the ACT provides a sound and stable economic 
base, such a narrow economic focus, that is highly reliant on successive government policies, is also 
a substantial economic risk. Diversification of economic activity in the ACT beyond the public service 
and higher education is therefore a critically important goal to which agriculture can make a 
significant contribution. 
regarding production, land use, employment and value of commodities47. Gross value of agricultural 
production in the ACT in 2020-2021 was $9 million, dominated by cattle and sheep production. It is 
apparent that, while agriculture in the ACT is minor contributor to the national gross value of 
agricultural production (estimated at $61 billion in 2019-2048) it is an important contributor to the 
ACT economy. 
ABARES estimates that agriculture directly contributes approximately 2.6% to regional 
employment49. As a thumbnail sketch, applying that same percentage to the 215,833 people 
employed either part time or full time in the ACT at the last census50 indicates that agriculture could 
– at least in theory – support up to 5,600 jobs. Actual employment in the agriculture and fisheries 
industries in the ACT is estimated at 500 jobs or less51. Agricultural production in the ACT and the 
surrounding region therefore has the potential to make a more significant contribution to 
employment, even if only at a level of employment already achieved in agriculture in other areas of 
regional Australia. 
3.2.5 The “Bush Capital” aesthetic 
As one of only a few greenfield designed cities in the world, the planning of Canberra (and the ACT 
45 2016 Census QuickStats: Australian Capital Territory (abs.gov.au)  
46 Decentralisation of Commonwealth Entities – Parliament of Australia (aph.gov.au)  
47 About my region dashboard | Tableau Public 
48 Value of Agricultural Commodities Produced, Australia, 2019-20 financial year | Australian Bureau of 
Statistics (abs.gov.au)  
49 Snapshot of Australian Agriculture 2021 (sirsidynix.net.au)  
50 2016 Census QuickStats: Australian Capital Territory (abs.gov.au)  
51 About my region - Australian Capital Territory - DAWE

33 
Indeed, the rural and natural setting of Canberra has earned it the nickname of the “Bush Capital.” 
The desire to maintain the rural and natural setting of Canberra is captured in Part 2.3 of the 
National Capital Plan which specifies that: 
Urban expansion should be contained to minimise impacts on valuable natural and rural 
areas.52 
The Territory Plan Principles for Sustainable Development53 also note the importance of rural lands 
such that:  
Planning policies will provide for the sustainable management of rural areas, ensuring that 
rural lands nominated for future urban development or other purposes can be retained in 
productive use and properly managed for the time being. 
It could be suggested that the maintenance of the desired “Bush Capital” aesthetic requires that 
urban encroachment be given greater scrutiny while rural lands are managed in a productive and 
sustainable manner that maintains the visual and environmental quality of the landscape. Farm 
diversification remains an important tool to maintaining the sustainability of farms that contribute 
to the rural aesthetic of the ACT and the surrounding landscape. 
3.2.6 Bushfire Management 
The ACT is predicted to experience increases in both average and severe fire weather in the 
immediate (next 10-20 years) and far (next 50 years) future54 principally in Spring and Summer. With 
more than 50% of the ACT maintained as national or territory conservation reserves55, the potential 
for dramatic fire events, as seen in 2003 and again in 2020, is high. The fires in 2003 resulted in five 
fatalities as well as extensive damage to buildings (insured losses estimated at $660m), livestock 
(13,000 sheep and 4,000 cattle died or were euthanised) and forestry (almost $1.5bn in losses and 
only 39% of impacted plantation salvageable)56.  
While the maintenance of significant areas of natural bushland contributes to the Bush Capital 
aesthetic, diversified agricultural production on rural and broadacre land provides an important 
buffer protecting urban areas. This is reflected it the ACT Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019-
24 which identifies that the people occupying and managing rural properties are an important part 
of bushfire response and management57. Maintaining their presence and collaboration through 
diversification programs that support resilience are important aspects of the ACT fire management 
strategy. 
3.3 Farm diversification options 
The range of diversification options available to farm businesses is significantly impacted by several 
factors (Figure 12) including farm size, human capital and variation in land capability and soil type 
(Anosike and Coughenour, 1990). Other factors influencing diversification options include the risk 
appetite of the individuals involved (RIRDC, 2002), location and access to labour (Culas, 2006), life 
stage, family decision-making and ease of integration with current farm operations (Medhurst and 
Seagrave, 2007). 
52 Part Two – Statement Of Planning Principles | National Capital Authority (nca.gov.au)  
53 https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/DownloadFile/ni/2008-27/copy/118748/PDF/2008-27.PDF  
54 Australian Capital Territory Climate Change snapshot (act.gov.au)  
55 ACT Nature Conservation Strategy 2012-23  
56 a56c563caa5bb336050ed88c60dba7e4.pdf (climatecouncil.org.au)  
57 Strategic Bushfire Management Plan 2019–2024 (act.gov.au)

34 
Figure 12: Barriers to building farm resilience to drought in the ACT 
Considering these and other factors, eight general categories of diversification have been identified 
(Barbieri and Mahoney, 2009): 
1. Non-traditional crops, livestock and practices 
2. Value-adding to existing products 
3. New marketing and distribution 
4. Recreation, tourism and hospitality 
5. Historic preservation and adaptive re-use 
6. Leases, easements and timeshare 
7. Contracts and services 
8. Education, expertise and consulting 
Contracts and services, together with education and consulting (options 7-8) are largely off-farm 
income streams and, consistent with the terms of reference, are not considered further here. The 
remaining options can be further grouped into those associated with current or future production 
(options 1-3) and non-production options (4-6). These options have formed the basis for examining a 
range of diversification activities in Australia and overseas58 and are explored further below. 
3.3.1 Production-based options 
The relatively poor land capability in the ACT limits production-based diversification options that 
require more fertile soil and/or pose unacceptable hazards of environmental damage associated 
with production activities. Options in current farming systems such as improving the organic matter 
of soils, maintaining groundcover to improve water infiltration, utilisation of mixed farming system 
approaches and pasture improvements have not been discussed in detail here. While they are 
important technologies and practices for improving the productivity, resilience and profitability of 
farming businesses, they are either already being routinely implemented or validated in most 
production systems. This report focusses on non-traditional alternative production systems as well 
as opportunities for value-adding, new markets and improving food distribution that align with the 
land capability and potentially provide a market niche for the ACT and surrounding region. 
58 List of Alternative Crops and Enterprises for Small Farm Diversification | Alternative Farming Systems 
Information Center| NAL | USDA

35 
Intensive glasshouse/greenhouse production 
The reliance of the ACT on production and markets in Sydney for the bulk of its fruit and vegetables 
is a potential food security risk but is better explored as an opportunity for the diversification of 
production, in particular intensive greenhouse production. Under the Territory Plan, horticulture 
(including intensive production) is included as a sub-category of agriculture and is presumably 
permitted in zones acceptable for agricultural production, subject to the assessment of a relevant 
development application. The success of any application is likely to be highly dependent on the 
probability that greenhouse/glasshouse infrastructure can be accommodated within the aesthetic of 
the region and, in the case of lit glasshouses, the degree to which any light pollution can be managed 
to meet relevant standards. 
Assuming planning approval could be gained, the success of any intensive venture would be largely 
dependent on cost and access to irrigation water and power. The green electricity strategy of the 
ACT would contribute to the sustainability credentials of an intensive production facility, but the 
economic feasibility would require careful consideration especially given recent increases (and 
expected future increases) in retail electricity charges of 11.95% in 2021-2022 that would equate to 
an increase in the weekly bill of around $14.45 for an average non-residential customer consuming 
25,000kWh59. The electricity use of greenhouse complexes is likely to be significantly higher than this 
for supplementary lighting on overcast days and especially during winter when heating will also be 
essential.  
Irrigation may potentially be less of an issue if access to treated wastewater can be obtained. 
Currently, the majority of treated wastewater from the ACT is returned to the Murrumbidgee River 
but the opportunity for its use in production should not be dismissed, especially if coordinated with 
compost production from organic waste recycling in a closed circular bioeconomy.  
Only 3% of treated wastewater is utilised in agricultural production in Australia (Radcliffe, 2022) 
predominately for fodder production. Depending on the quality of water exiting treatment plants, a 
range of production opportunities exist from non-food options such as flowers and forestry to 
production of foods that are cooked before consumption and those that are eaten raw (highest 
quality water required). Many of the current integrated uses of wastewater have been developed to 
address concerns regarding the high nutrient load of treated water and several examples of utilising 
treated water for agricultural production exist in capital cities and larger regional towns (Table 
7Table 7). Costs vary widely depending on how much treatment infrastructure is also required. 
59 Retail electricity price recalibration 2021–22: standing offer prices for the supply of electricity to small 
customers (act.gov.au)

36 
Table 7: Treated wastewater production schemes - adapted from Radcliffe, 2022 
Location 
Year 
Quality 
Volume 
(GL p.a.) 
Cost ($) 
Cost 
($/kL) 
Distance 
(kms) 
Use 
South Australia 
North Adelaide 
1999 
A 
15 
$55m 
$0.05 - 
$0.09 
N/A 
Spray irrigation salad 
and other crops 
North Adelaide 
2017 
A 
12 
$155.6m 
$0.27* 
N/A 
Spray irrigation salad 
and other crops 
South Adelaide 
2002 
B/C 
8 
$7m 
$0.95 - 
$1.25** 
13 
Viticulture 
Victoria 
Werribee 
2019 
C 
13 
N/A 
N/A 
<5 
Pasture 
Werribee 
2005 
A 
8.5 
>$20m 
$0.36 
N/A 
Vegetables and salad 
Melbourne 
2014 
A 
5# 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Vegetables and salad 
Melbourne 
Current 
C 
Up to 19 
$116m 
N/A 
59 
Dryland farms 
Ararat-
Grampians 
1995 
C 
0.65 
$4.1m 
$0.205 
N/A 
Viticulture 
NSW 
Gerringong 
2002 
N/A 
>1.8 
N/A 
N/A 
<5 
Dairy pasture 
Tamworth 
N/A 
N/A 
6 
$35m 
50% 
OPEX 
N/A 
Fodder (lucerne) 
Dubbo 
N/A 
N/A 
2.8 
$6.8m 
N/A 
<5 
Fodder (lucerne) 
Narrabri 
N/A 
N/A 
0.65 
N/A 
N/A 
14 
Cotton & other crops 
Shoalhaven 
2003 
A 
5 
$34m 
N/A 
N/A 
Dairy pasture 
Queensland 
Hervey Bay 
2007 
A/B 
5 
$30m 
$0.035 
N/A 
Sugarcane & forestry 
Mackay 
2008 
A 
N/A 
$154m 
$0.05 
N/A 
Numerous 
Bundaberg 
2018 
A 
1 
$71m 
N/A 
<5 
Sugarcane 
Most successful examples of the use of treated water are observed when the treatment plant is 
situated within 15km of production (to minimise capital and operating costs). Applying a similar 
radius in the ACT highlights the potential for intensive horticulture in the west of the ACT assuming 
that integration with potential urban development in the Western Edge Investigation Area and 
adjacent greenfield sites60 can be achieved.  
Emerging crops, livestock and practices 
AgriFutures has previously commissioned extensive review of emerging industries in 2018 (Decker 
and Kurnik, 201861) and again in 2021 (Coriolis, 202062; Wilkinson et al., 202163). 
The initial review in 2018 (Decker and Kurnik, 2018) identified 50 potential emerging industries, of 
which 10 were selected for further investigation. Of the 10 industries investigated, only four (snails, 
insects, jujube64 and medicinal mushrooms) are considered suitable for potential production in the 
ACT regional climate (most others are tropical plants e.g., cocoa, sesame, turmeric or are regarded 
60 ACT Planning Strategy 2018 
61 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf 
62 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052a.pdf 
63 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052.pdf 
64 Jujube is a Chinese plum.  
* Growers also pay a one-off $3.16/kL capital contribution and annual $0.26/kL availability fee 
** Growers also pay a one-off $7260/GL capital contribution 
# A further 100Gl/year of class A water discharged to ocean that could be diverted.

37 
as weeds in Australia, e.g., tiger nut is a declared weed in NSW65). The 2021 review (Coriolis, 2020; 
Wilkinson et al., 2021) focused on emerging industries with the potential to generate $10m per 
annum turnover or more (based on qualitative assessment of fit with Australian capabilities and 
conditions, and the potential size of the industry) that were not the focus of the 2018 review.  
The following section provides a brief overview and summarization of potential new production 
opportunities and constraints with potential relevance to the ACT as identified in the AgriFutures 
reports (including further production details in some cases) and a range of other sources. This 
represents the potential of new industries, which is general in nature. It is not a definitive list, and, in 
most cases, there are likely to be significant variations in figures depending on farm type, market 
and season. No reliance on the data must be made without seeking prior expert professional advice. 
More detailed information is available in the AgriFutures reports (Decker and Kurnik, 2018; Coriolis, 
2020; Wilkinson et al., 2021) and on the AgriFutures farm diversity webpage66. 
Snails67 68 
The small Australian snail industry is largely centred on the common brown garden snail (Helix 
aspersa), a species thought to have been introduced in Australia in about 1890 and the only species 
permitted for farming in Australia69. Internationally, snail consumption is dominated by France and 
Spain with French consumption outstripping domestic supply. Despite a potential ready market, 
exports of snails from Australia in the past five years have been limited to 3,554kg in 2019 
compared with an import of almost 46,000kg of which more than 22,000kg was imported in 2020 
(UN Comtrade Database70). 
Snail production is relatively straightforward and has been described in detail (Murphy, 2001) with 
most production occurring in pens and crates. Snails can endure a wide range of environments 
including temperatures down to -4oC and up to 30oC but will enter dormancy when exposed to 
extreme cold or hot temperatures71.  
Snail farms have been established in most states including WA, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania and 
NSW. Snails can be sold domestically live or processed on-farm, although this would require the 
construction of facilities that meet associated food standards. Under the Territory Plan, snail 
farming is presumably a type of animal husbandry and therefore would be prohibited in NUZ2 but 
may be permitted in NUZ1 subject to development approval. 
As snail production is labour-intensive, it is expected that international markets will most likely be 
serviced by countries where labour cost structures provide a competitive advantage. In Australia, 
an opportunity for import replacement is possible although the domestic market is currently 
limited to growing snails for restaurants where supply relationships have already been 
established72.   
Other potential uses of snails include snail slime, which is finding a growing use in skin creams for 
wrinkles, dry skin, and acne. Snail secretion filtrate is widely used in Korean beauty products such as 
65 Cyperus esculentus | WEEDS AUSTRALIA - profiles (ala.org.au)  
66 Farm Diversity Search | AgriFutures Australia 
67 Snails | AgriFutures Australia  
68 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf 
69 Snails | AgriFutures Australia 
70 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics  
71 Snails | AgriFutures Australia 
72 Ibid.

38 
serums, facial masks, moisturisers, and fading creams. Demand for snail caviar in international 
markets has also been increasing steadily73. 
Insects74 
Insects have been a significant part of many human diets for centuries. As global demand for protein 
continues to increase, the global edible insect market is expected to grow to $1.3bn in 2025 with 
expected annual growth of 44% (FIAL, 2019). The global export trade is dominated by Belgium 
($US52m trade value), the Netherlands ($US19m), United Kingdom ($US18m), Israel ($US16m) and 
the USA ($US8m) (UN Comtrade Database75). 
The Australian insect market consists primarily of crickets and grasshoppers, mealworms and black 
soldier flies utilising waste streams and low-quality feeds. Several insect production companies are 
established in Australia and the Insect Protein Association of Australia (IPAA) advocates to promote 
the use and role of Insects within the Australian food and feed ecosystem76. Goterra, a startup insect 
business located in the ACT and founding partner of IPAA has recently completed a $5.5m capital 
raising co-led by Tenacious Ventures and Grok77 (see case study in Section 3.5). 
Promising immediate markets appear to be in the provision of alternative proteins to stock feeds 
(aquaculture in particular) and the pet food industry, especially where production can be located 
with waste streams suitable as feed sources78. The slow development of the insect market is 
associated with unclear regulatory requirements in different countries, the need to overcome 
customer aversion to insect consumption and a lack of scale that makes supply difficult even when 
demand is established79. Interestingly, there is relatively little publicly available information on the 
rearing and processing of insects in Australia despite its potential.  
As with snail farming, under the Territory Plan, insect rearing is presumably a type of animal 
husbandry and therefore would be prohibited in NUZ2 but may be permitted in NUZ1 subject to 
development approval. 
Tree crops 
Tree crops with production potential in ACT include hazelnuts, walnuts, and jujube80. They are most 
likely to be suitable for production only on areas with land capability class five or better. Regardless 
of market potential, the establishment of tree crops in the majority of the ACT is hindered by a 
number of environmental and regulatory issues that include: 
1. The lack of land with suitable capability. 
2. The requirement for irrigation infrastructure and water (8-10ML/ha/annum) to achieve 
consistent yields. 
3. The high cost of initial capital investment and long pay back periods (trees maturing in 10-15 
years) is not attractive to most potential investors/growers. 
73 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf 
74 ibid  
75 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics 
76 Insect Protein Association of Australia  
77 Tenacious co-leads Goterra's $6m Series A to launch Australia's first agrifoodtech VC - AFN 
(agfundernews.com)  
78 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf 
79 Edible insects (csiro.au) 
80 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf

39 
4. The long time to maturity is not compatible with the ACT zoning and planning regulations 
that limit the length and stability of some leasing arrangements, in particular the potential to 
exercise termination clauses. 
Hazelnut81 
Hazelnuts represent an opportunity for import replacement with Australia importing more than 
3,200t of shelled product annually and exporting less than 8t(UN Comtrade Database82). 
Approximately 60% of Australian production is utilised domestically (either in direct retail or through 
food service industries) with under 40% of production exported.  A single company (Ferrero) planted 
more than one million trees in 2013, which will mature in the next five years and can be expected to 
significantly impact market dynamics83. Indeed, in 2020 approximately 350t of in-shell nuts were 
produced and this is predicted to grow to 5,500t in 2021 as newer plantings begin to mature84. 
Current hazelnut production in the ACT region is more closely associated with truffle production for 
which the trees are a host.   
Walnut85 
Australian walnut production and consumption is largely self-sufficient but is characterised by export 
of approximately 4,400t of in-shell product and import of 4,900t of shelled product (UN Comtrade 
Database86) reflective of the opportunity for Australia to meet contra-season demand for fresh 
product in the northern hemisphere. Almost all demand for fresh, whole walnuts in the domestic 
market is expected to be met by domestic production while product to meet demand for kernel is 
expected to continue to be sourced from imports87.  Market opportunities for new growers are 
influenced by scale of production and ability to meet market demand, with export markets requiring 
significant volumes and domestic markets seeking fresh ‘direct from the grower’ product88. Walnut 
trees reach mature production levels in 10-15 years and production from extensive commercial 
plantings in the 2010’s can be expected to come on-line in the next few years limiting opportunities 
for small producers to local markets where a lack of scale can be more easily accommodated89.   
Jujube90 
Jujubes (Chinese dates) are hardy trees that tolerate poor growing conditions and extremes of 
temperature91. They prefer a cold winter and hot, dry summer and would be suitable for production 
in the ACT. Jujubes are an emerging industry in Australia principally located in the south-west of 
Western Australia where 10,000 trees are planted on 20ha. Jujubes from this source are sold 
domestically through specialist supermarkets and farmers markets. Domestic demand exceeds 
supply92.  China is the largest producer (over 8 million tonnes in 2015) and, as of 2015, was the only 
exporter of jujube fruit. There is some potential for export to China from Australia, but China 
maintains high inventories and given its large production base and regulated market, can exert 
81 Hazelnuts | AgriFutures Australia  
82 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics. 
83 Hazelnut industry snapshot - Hazelnut Growers of Australia Inc. (hazelnutgrowersaustralia.org.au)  
84 Ibid. 
85 Walnuts | AgriFutures Australia. 
86 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics.  
87 Walnuts | AgriFutures Australia. 
88 Ibid. 
89 Ibid. 
90 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf. 
91 Ibid. 
92 20131129 PRJ_005304 Final Report _ for edits (agrifutures.com.au)

40 
significant price control. Indeed, some Chinese growers have left the market in the last five years 
due to low prices and lack of return on investment93. 
Medicinal mushrooms94 
Several mushroom producers operate in the ACT region with most focused on the production of 
edible white and brown mushrooms (Agaricus) for the domestic market. Australia-wide other edible 
mushrooms are also produced including shitake, enoki and oyster mushrooms95. Australia imported 
only 40t of Agaricus mushrooms in 2020 but almost 4,000t of other mushrooms (UN Comtrade 
Database96). 
The potential of alternative edible and medicinal mushroom market remains largely untested but is 
explored in some detail in the AgriFutures emerging industries report97. A number of edible 
mushrooms with medicinal properties were identified including Reishi and Maitake, used in Chinese 
traditional medicine, as well as Chaga that potentially has anti-cancer properties. Most recently, 
researchers at University of Queensland have been given approval to collect and catalogue native 
‘magic’ mushrooms in Australia98. The Federal Government is investing $15 million in grants to 
support research into the use of mushrooms amongst other treatments to combat illnesses such as 
PTSD, major depressive disorders, addiction and eating disorders99. The edible medicinal mushroom 
industry remains in its infancy with some serious barriers to expansion associated with regulation (it 
is currently illegal to cultivate, possess or supply psychedelic mushrooms in Australia) standard 
identification and the detection of potential side effects associated with their use or consumption100. 
Spices and herbs 
Saffron101 
Saffron is the dried stigmas and styles of the crocus flower (Crocus sativus) and is one of the most 
valuable spices in the world (about $30,000/kg gross value)102. Crocus is well suited to growing in the 
ACT region requiring slightly acidic soils that are not too fertile. Crocus thrives at low temperatures 
and requires a cold shock to initiate flowering. Flowering occurs over a 15-day period in autumn and 
about 150–200 flowers are needed to obtain one gram of dry stigmas103. Yields of 1-2kg/ha in 
Australia  are usual104 but the higher summer temperatures and rainfall of the ACT region would 
probably require supplemental irrigation (Crocus requires 800-1,200mm rainfall per annum) to 
achieve maximum yield. Saffron production is highly labour intensive with flowers being picked by 
hand and subsequent processing also requiring manual labour. 
Australian production of saffron has varied greatly over the last decade as have exports, from a high 
of over 2t in 2017 to the current 178kg (UN Comtrade Database105). Imports regularly exceed 8t per 
annum and a strong domestic industry was established supplying Australian saffron to Coles and 
93 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf  
94 ibid 
95 Mushroom Varieties - Australian Mushroom Growers 
96 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics 
97 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf 
98 A trip into the therapeutic potential of Australia’s native magic mushrooms - UQ News - The University of 
Queensland, Australia 
99 Psychedelic renaissance' sees first legal collection of Australia's medicinal magic mushrooms - ABC News  
100 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/18-040.pdf 
101 Saffron | AgriFutures Australia  
102 ibid 
103 ibid 
104 ibid 
105 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics

41 
Woolworths supermarkets. However, Australian saffron is not price-competitive with international 
production (on a price basis), that is dominated by Iran106..  Australian saffron production is 
dominated by Tasmania (Tas-Saff107) with product distributed through some wholesalers as well as 
directly marketed to restaurants and boutique retailers and being sold online. There is potential for 
saffron production in the ACT, but it would need to generate a premium product with specialist 
marketing to maximise the potential for viability. 
Essential oils 
Global growth in essential oils is predicted to be significant as the consumer focus on natural 
ingredients continues. Capital annual growth between 2019 and 2026 of almost 10% is likely ( 
(Coriolis, 2020108). Several essential oils are produced on a commercial scale in Australia109 including 
eucalyptus oil, tea tree oil, Western Australian sandalwood oil, lemon myrtle oil, lemon-scented tea 
tree oil, lavender oil, peppermint oil, bitter fennel oil, parsley oil, boronia absolute, orange oil, lemon 
oil and Santalum album. Potential production suited to the ACT environment is most likely 
associated with lavender and potentially an emerging essential oil derived from kunzea.  
Lavender110 
Despite the current small size of the domestic lavender industry, it is predicted to grow to $5m-
$10m by 2030111.  Lavender is quite suited to the ACT region environment, being frost hardy and 
drought tolerant but it does prefer free draining soils with a pH of 6.0-8.0112 which are difficult to 
identify in the ACT. Lavender is grown commercially in the ACT region and surrounds at Laggan 
(Crystal Brook Farm), Coolagolite (Maryvale Farm), Wagga Wagga (Rustique), most often in 
conjunction with some form of agritourism, ecommerce and/or farm gate sales.  
Lavender is propagated by cutting and can take up to four years to reach mature oil and flower 
production (about 5t flowers/ha)113. The scale of production differs between those farms where 
lavender is one of a number of income streams to larger, specialist producers utilising mechanised 
harvesting and irrigation as well as distillation of the oil on farm. Growing for wholesale selling (e.g., 
supplying a third-party oil distillery) is unlikely to be profitable with some growers acknowledging 
that the high costs of production (mainly water and labour) require value adding in the form of on-
farm production of oil or other products114.   
Crystal Brook Farm, Larkman Nurseries, Golden Grove Naturals and La Trobe University are 
undertaking research into lavender agronomy, variety selection and essential oil production115 that 
may assist the further growth of the industry. 
Kunzea 
Kunzea ambigua or white tick bush is a native species belonging to the Myrtaceae that is found from 
NE Tasmania to NSW116. Kunzea oil has been identified as a prospective emerging industry with the 
106 Saffron | AgriFutures Australia 
107 Tas-Saff | Saffron. From Only the Finest Flowers  
108 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052a.pdf 
109 The Essential Oils Industry in Australia | EOPAA. 
110 Lavender Oil | AgriFutures Australia  
111 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052a.pdf 
112 Lavender Oil | AgriFutures Australia 
113 ibid. 
114 High Tasmanian lavender production costs a barrier to a booming industry - ABC News  
115 Could lavender be Australia's next $10 million rural industry? | About Regional  
116 Kunzea ambigua - Growing Native Plants (anbg.gov.au)

42 
possibility of growing from $2m in 2019 to $5m-$10m by 2030117. Current production is focused on 
Tasmania and the oil market is dominated by a single company, Zea Relief118. Zea Relief estimates 
current domestic production at 2-3t with most derived from material harvested from the wild. 
K. ambigua is native to the ACT but it, together with other species in the genus (e.g., K. ericoides) 
also have the potential to be a problematic pest species if changed production and/or environmental 
situations allow it to assume dominance in vegetation communities. Kunzea can form dense stands 
of growth that severely impact other plant and animal species. The invasiveness of K. ambigua and 
its potential to have severe to catastrophic effects on the environment has resulted in it being 
identified as a plant of concern in Victoria (Carr, 2001). Anecdotal evidence suggests that K. ericoides 
is similarly invasive in the ACT where environmental disturbance can result in significant stands that 
dominate the local flora. 
There is an opportunity to develop Kunzea into a commercially grown crop similar to that of tea tree 
(4000ha under production generating 900 tonnes of oil with a value of $35.32 million119) with the 
added benefit of addressing a potentially significant environmental issue of invasive weediness. 
Development of the Kunzea industry in the ACT would require confirmation that the subspecies 
present contains sufficiently high levels of oil to make extraction viable.  It may also need to address 
freedom to operate, with patents granted for the use of Kunzea oil in the internal treatment of a 
range of diseases, pests and other ailments120.  
Aquaculture 
In common with insect and snail production, if aquaculture is classified as animal husbandry under 
the Territory Plan, it would be prohibited in NUZ2 but may be allowed in NUZ1 subject to a 
development application.  
Yabbies121 
Of the freshwater crayfish that are commercially produced in Australia, the yabby (Cerax destructor) 
possibly represents the greatest potential for the ACT as they can withstand water temperatures 
from near freezing to above 35oC. Growth is fastest when water temperatures are between 23oC and 
25oC with limited growth when water temperatures are below 15oC or exceed 28oC122. 
Total yabby production in NSW for human consumption has declined in the last two to three years 
(due to drought and climatic conditions), compared with the growth in production of yabbies for bait 
(where they are sought after by Murray Cod and trout fishers) (Figure 13)123. Production volumes 
and prices are highly volatile, and it is assumed that in years of excess production for the human 
consumption market product is re-directed to the bait sector with a commensurate impact on price.  
117 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052a.pdf 
118 Zea | Australian Kunzea Products for Health and Wellness  
119 Tea Tree Oil | AgriFutures Australia  
120 http://pericles.ipaustralia.gov.au/ols/auspat/applicationDetails.do?applicationNo=2008241370  
121 Freshwater crayfish (Redclaw) | AgriFutures Australia  
122 ibid. 
123 Aquaculture production reports (nsw.gov.au)

43 
Figure 13: NSW yabby production (kgs and value) for human consumption and bait; Source: NSWDPI aquaculture 
production reports 
Yabbies consume a range of foodstuffs (both vegetation and scavenging animal carcasses) and are 
adaptable across a range of environments. Consequently, they have been a target of numerous 
attempts to culture them but, despite some success, the main Sydney market is still supplied mainly 
with wild caught yabbies from the west of NSW124.  
Yabbies are sold domestically and in some export markets in Europe and Asia although marron are 
the preferred freshwater crayfish in many export markets. However, the risks associated with yabby 
production are significantly lower than those for marron principally because marron can take 
between three and five years to grow to a marketable size125.  
Prices between AU$8 and AU$18 per kilogram have been recorded with larger yabbies commanding 
higher prices especially in domestic restaurants126. Yabby production is most extensive in farm dams 
with little intervention, but the potential of the species for semi-intensive production is significant127.  
Finfish 
Finfish suited to the ACT environment include trout and Murray cod. Trout are already extensively 
produced at Eucumbene trout farm, which also integrates a café, accommodation and fishing 
options128. Rainbow trout are the most commonly farmed of the trout species due to the ease of 
production and 207t was produced in NSW alone in 2019/2020129. Exports of fresh or chilled whole 
trout from Australia have averaged 80-90t over the past five years, while imports of chilled trout 
have declined from a similar figure to just 26t in 2019. Imports are instead dominated by the import 
of frozen fillets with quantities ranging from 416t in 2019 to 299t in 2020, and smoked products 
124 Yabby - aquaculture prospects (nsw.gov.au). 
125 Freshwater crayfish (Redclaw) | AgriFutures Australia  
126 ibid 
127 Yabby - industry profile (nsw.gov.au). 
128 Experience trout fishing the way it was meant to be - Eucumbene Trout Farm  
129 Aquaculture Production Report 2019-2020 (nsw.gov.au)  
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
2015/16
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20
Value ($)
Weight (kg)
NSW Yabby Production
Human Consumption (kg)
Bait (kg)
Human Consumption Value
Bait Value

44 
(457t in 2020 - UN Comtrade Database 130). Given the production requirements, especially the need 
to completely circulate water every hour131, establishment of a viable, artificial trout farm in the ACT 
seems optimistic. 
Figure 14: Value of NSW fin fish aquaculture (selected species). Source: NSWDPI Aquaculture Production Reports 
Murray cod production has experienced a period of accelerated development over the past four 
years (Figure 14). Industry value in 2019 was between $7m and $10m and estimated to grow to 
between $30m and $50m by 2030132. Production has previously been based on fish in farm dams 
(stocked at about 200 fish/ha)133 but is now undertaken by several commercial entities including 
Aquna and Uarah fisheries, both in the Riverina. Original assessments of Murray cod for aquaculture 
were not favourable with many believing the highly territorial nature of the fish would make it 
unsuitable for intensive raising. On the contrary, Murray cod has proven to be quite suitable for 
intensive production in recirculation tanks and hybrid systems where grow out is managed in pond 
systems134. Intensively-raised Murray cod require high protein diets and while conversion ratios of 
less than 1 have been reported, it is more likely that ratios in the order of 1.5-2:1 are achievable 
(e.g., 1.5kg feed for every 1kg body weight achieved). Water temperature of about 25oC has been 
shown to be optimal and water quality must be high135.  
The NSW DPI has identified the potential for both filleted and live fish in the domestic and export 
markets and has extensive material available to assess the economic viability of Murray cod farming, 
although most is somewhat dated136. Production information, including development of a genetic 
selection program is also available from the Victorian fisheries authority137. 
130 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics. 
131 Trout farming in NSW 
132 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052.pdf 
133 Murray cod - aquaculture prospects (nsw.gov.au) 
134 ibid. 
135 ibid. 
136 Murray cod - industry profile (nsw.gov.au). 
137 Murray Cod aquaculture - VFA  
0
1000000
2000000
3000000
4000000
5000000
6000000
7000000
8000000
Total (Kgs)
Value
Total (Kgs)
Value
Total (Kgs)
Value
Murray Cod
Rainbow Trout
Silver Perch
NSW Finfish Production and Value
2015/16
2016/17
2017/18
2018/19
2019/20

45 
Bio-active Honey 
Bio-active honey, also known as Manuka honey, is produced by bees that feed on species of 
Leptospermum. Australian bio-active honey producers are currently actively participating in legal 
action against certification of the trademark Manuka honey by producers in New Zealand138 which 
has recently seen the New Zealand application for trademark in the United Kingdom rejected139. 
Different species of Leptospermum confer different levels and types of compounds with anti-
microbial activity in the honey derived from them. Recent research (Cokcetin et al., 2019) has 
identified that honey produced from bees feeding on seven key species of Leptospermum has very 
high anti-bacterial activity associated with elevated levels of methylglyoxal.  The antifungal activity 
of some honey is more closely associated with the level of peroxide-type activity with honey derived 
from Leptospermum generally exhibiting non-peroxide activity (Cokcetin et al., 2019). Of the seven 
Leptospermum species generating honey with high levels of anti-bacterial activity, none are 
identified as endemic to the ACT region (Table 8).   
Table 8: Key Leptospermum species for bioactive honey production. 
LEPTOSPERMUM SPECIES 
STATES FOUND 
L. lanigerum 
NSW, Vic, SA, Tas 
L. liversidgei 
Qld, NSW 
L. nitens 
WA 
L. polygalifolium 
Qld, NSW, Vic 
L. scarposium 
Vic, Tas 
L. speciosum 
Qld, NSW 
L. whitei 
Qld, NSW 
Leptospermum lanigerum can be grown in the ACT - indeed it is listed as a native species of the 
region by the Australian Native Plants Society140 - but would likely require the establishment of 
controlled plantings to support bio-active honey production.  
Global trade statistics do not differentiate between bio-active honey and honey in general. However, 
imports of honey into Australia have, on average, exceeded exports by approximately 2:1 over the 
past five years (UN Comtrade Database141). 
A range of other production-based diversification options exist including alpacas, dairy goats and 
sheep, gamebirds, other essential oils and truffles. Some of the intensive animal industries may be 
prohibited developments on some land in the ACT while other industries have already been 
established in the ACT region. For all, the production requirements are well established, and the 
benefits and risks of diversification largely are associated with individual’s circumstances. They are 
therefore not discussed here but further information on some of the more common options, as well 
as case studies of individual growers, can be obtained from the AgriFutures website142. 
138 Time is Running Out: Australian Manuka Honey Industry in David vs Goliath Battle for Survival - Australian 
Manuka Honey Association (manukaaustralia.org.au). 
139 Australia emerges victorious in British manuka honey trademark battle with New Zealand - ABC News 
140 brochure-native-plants-canberra-region.pdf (nativeplantscbr.com.au)  
141 Download trade data | UN Comtrade: International Trade Statistics. 
142 Farm Diversity Search | AgriFutures Australia

46 
3.3.2 Value-adding to existing products 
One of the challenges for producers of commodity products is that they are generally price takers 
rather than price makers. Typically, larger commodity producers maintain and improve economic 
performance through adoption of scale economies (productivist approaches), but product diversity 
and scope economies can also make significant contributions to farm business performance (Paul 
and Nehring, 2005). This is particularly pertinent for smaller scale producers (that are typically highly 
represented in the ACT region) where scale efficiencies are more difficult to achieve. Value adding of 
product (for premium and non-premium markets) provides an opportunity to identify additional 
demand and increase prices received. Indeed, the EU has previously administered dedicated 
programs to support on-farm processing opportunities as part of their farm assistance packages 
(Gellynck and Viaene, 2002).  
However, diversification into value added products is not risk-free. Markets are often small and 
target a niche of consumers looking to access farm food as an alternative to industrialised processes 
and/or are seeking access to fresher food of known quality and origin (Gellynck and Viaene, 2002). 
The effort and expertise required for value-adding should not be underestimated but it does 
represent a significant diversification opportunity especially where products can be promoted as 
natural, local, traceable and sustainable.  
One of the most direct forms of value adding is the supply of locally sourced meat to consumers as 
an alternative to the sale of animals either through saleyards (the nearest to the ACT are the yards at 
Yass) or over the hooks where animals are marketed directly to an abattoir. Under a “locally 
sourced” approach, locally raised animals (mostly cattle or sheep in the ACT, but could also be goats, 
poultry or game birds) are processed at certified abattoirs capable of maintaining traceability of the 
carcass from slaughter to butchery that ensures provenance of the product. The resulting meat is 
sold either directly to the consumer or via a specialist butcher.  
While this may appear to be a relatively simple and low risk diversification option, the reality is that 
meat processing in Australia is a high-volume, low-margin business where costs are strictly 
controlled, and ongoing quality assurance is a necessity. As such, most facilities are geared toward 
specific, high-volume markets. For example, Frews at Stawell, Victoria, is slaughtering 4,500 
lambs/day but with capacity for 6,000143. On this scale, the entire ACT sheep flock could be 
processed by a single abattoir in under a week. 
There is little capacity in most major abattoirs for processing small numbers of animals, which is a 
requirement for the value-added operations described above. Consequently, growers exploring 
these opportunities have been required to either establish their own processing facilities (e.g., 
Tablelands Premier Meats at Canowindra144) or transport animals to the nearest abattoir that 
processes limited numbers (e.g., Moruya) with commensurate increases in costs. Some mobile 
abattoir options exist, but most are dissuaded from operating in the ACT by the small numbers of 
animals, the lack of a suitable site for operations and the high cost and difficulty associated with the 
disposal of offal.  
The opportunities and constraints for value-adding in other sectors differ with product. Alpaca 
growers may use wool to produce garments or toys, but the nearest mills for processing alpaca 
fleece are either in Victoria, Orange145 or Burra146. Apple and pear growers may use fruit for cider 
143 Thomas Foods International buys 50pc stake in Frew Group - Sheep Central  
144 https://tablelandspremiermeats.com/about  
145 Adagio Mills  
146 Processing | Bostonfinefibres

47 
making provided the varieties are suitable. Indeed 3 Sons Cider is an ACT cider making business 
based in Aranda that utilises apples from the local region, Batlow and their own grown trees to make 
a range of English ciders that are available from the Cook Friendly Grocer, Hop & Vine and Plonk147. 
Sully’s Cider is also made in the region, at Reidsdale, and sold via some local shops as well as through 
the Braidwood Farmers’ Market148.  The higher rainfall areas east of the ACT and down to the coast 
have a long history of dairying and still accommodate a range of cheese making enterprises from the 
boutique to large, national producers, including Bodalla, ABC Cheese Factory and Bega149. It is 
therefore somewhat surprising that there is only a single cheese making enterprise in Canberra, 
Gypsy Cheese Company, which uses milk sourced within 300km of Canberra and sells product at 
local markets150.   
Clearly, a range of value adding opportunities exist in Canberra, some on-farm and others through 
collaboration with other entities. Regardless of the value-adding opportunity, success is a factor of 
the capacity to meet the demands of maintaining current production while developing value-added 
opportunities. For some, the effort required to undertake value-adding is part of the lifestyle they 
seek. For others though, product development, innovation and marketing are additional tasks to be 
completed in addition to the production focus of the farm enterprise.  
3.3.3 New marketing and distribution  
Direct marketing of farm products has exploded, particularly online, with the use of social media as a 
marketing tool and the ease in which webpages and shop platforms can be generated by individuals. 
The strategies employed differ with the needs and demands of the market and several different 
approaches may need to be tested to identify those most effective for the product being sold. Both 
online and on-site options are canvassed here. 
On-site selling 
There are two unique types of on-site selling: 
1. Roadside stalls – In areas with high through-traffic, selling methods as simple as a road-side 
stall with an honesty box have been successfully utilised in many areas of Australia. In the 
Riverland, roadside stalls of citrus, vegetables and other fruit are common with almost all 
operating on an honesty system. In almost all cases, revenue from the roadside supplements 
the major farm operation that is selling product via other mechanisms. The roadside stall 
must therefore be inexpensive to establish and does not warrant the diversion of labour that 
could be better used elsewhere on the farm. The same principles are applied to roadside 
stalls in the ACT in the Majura Valley (e.g., Majura Valley Free Range Eggs151) and Pialligo, 
both of which have very high levels of through traffic. It also applies to a lesser extent in 
other areas but still principally on thoroughfares with high traffic loads (e.g., Amberley 
Farms Free Range Eggs152). 
2. Attracting tourists to a location then on-selling product – like roadside stalls, this involves 
direct sales to the consumer. However, rather than relying on through-traffic, the consumer 
is provided a separate reason to visit the farm then provided the opportunity to purchase 
147 3 Sons Cider 
148 Braidwoodmade - championing local produce and cultural distinctiveness 
149 Food & Wine - Canberra Region  
150 https://www.instagram.com/gypsy_cheese_co/. 
151 Eggs — Majura Valley Free Range Eggs (mveggs.com) 
152 Adam never thought he would be a chicken farmer but now he won't turn back | The Canberra Times | 
Canberra, ACT

48 
farm products. Cellar door sales are a prime example and in the ACT Mt Majura Vineyards153 
hosts events which attract potential customers (e.g., the RIEDEL sensory workshop154). These 
ventures require a greater outlay of capital in establishing a destination for people to visit 
and are therefore higher risk, but also provide greater opportunities for collaboration with 
others to make multiple offerings to visitors - thus sharing the risk as well as benefits. 
Online sales - ecommerce 
E-commerce platforms have become commonplace for purchasing everything from clothing and 
jewellery to properties and stocks. It is therefore unsurprising that e-commerce is also a feature of 
selling food and food products with the potential to increase profitability in agricultural markets by 
increasing sales while decreasing sourcing and transaction costs (Carpio et al., 2013).  
Data from U-box, the largest direct to customer agri-food platform in Taiwan, has shown that the 
Covid-19 pandemic has resulted in significant increases in demand (5.7% increase in sales) and 
customers (4.9% increase) for fruit, vegetables, and other agricultural products (Chang and 
Meyerhoefer, 2021).  
However, the perishable nature of food products means that the relevance of e-commerce 
platforms for direct to customer marketing for small farm businesses can be challenging. For many 
smaller farm businesses, such as those in the ACT region, e-commerce is more likely to form part of a 
combination of marketing channels needed to maximise overall sales (LeRoux et al., 2009). Often 
this occurs through the use of e-commerce as a platform to coordinate product offerings across 
multiple producers to meet demand or as an offering from a single producer that may also use other 
sales channels such as wholesale and/or farmers’ markets.  
Perhaps one of the most successful uses of e-commerce in small producer marketing is the 
MarketMaker155 platform developed in 2000 by extension staff at the University of Illinois to connect 
Illinois food producers with new markets. MarketMaker is now a multi-state, national network 
covering more than 18,000 food related enterprises in an electronic farm directory/food 
marketing/educational tool providing information about products, availability, affiliations, attributes, 
certifications and more.  
MarketMaker does not have a sales feature, meaning that consumers and buyers cannot make 
direct purchases via the website. The directory instead focusses on the development of relationships 
between producers and buyers. Producers, that might otherwise find it difficult to promote their 
product, register their businesses in MarketMaker to efficiently communicate their products or 
services, reach a larger number of potential buyers and develop profitable business relationships. 
Buyers register with MarketMaker to connect with food producers that are growing or looking to 
grow produce with the buyer’s preferred product attributes. Likewise, consumers use the database 
to locate suppliers of a desired product or to find local farmers markets, co-op grocers, agritourism 
sites, and restaurants using local produce. MarketMaker also allows producers to match their 
products more effectively with the needs of buyers and consumers and promotes the production of 
differentiated, high-quality products that are efficiently sourced and generate higher margins.  
MarketMaker is only one of a range of similar directories offered by private suppliers, local grower 
organisations and government entities. A similar platform is being developed within the Canberra 
Region Food Collaborative (CRFC) a collaboration of the ACT and Southern Inland RDAs. The CRFC is 
153 Mount Majura Vineyard | Canberra District Wine  
154 Mount Majura Vineyard | RIEDEL Sensory Workshop 
155 MarketMakerWebsite (foodmarketmaker.com)

49 
envisaged to be an independent information broker and coordinating body that, through a range of 
R&D, training initiatives, data platforms and other assistance, will encourage producers and retailers 
to shorten the food supply chain and deliver better food options in the ACT region156. The CRFC has 
an ambitious agenda that will require strong government and private sector support to be 
successfully implemented. If successful, it provides the opportunity to bring together participants 
from across the ACT region food supply chain to make transformational changes to food production 
and consumption that can support diversification at the grower level while providing fresh, high-
quality product to consumers and contributes to the ACT targets for greater sustainability.  
Alternative Agri-Food Networks 
Farmers’ markets  
Farmers’ markets and co-operatives are particularly important options for maintaining the viability 
of small-holder farmers. Productivist policy settings157 (based on ongoing improvements in 
production efficiency) require farmers to continually increase productivity to remain viable but 
small-scale farmers are not always able to adapt (Fielke and Bardsley, 2013). Farmers’ markets and 
other alternative market mechanisms, often collectively referred to as Alternative Agri-Food 
Networks or AAFNs (Andree et al., 2010), provide complementary options or an alternative to 
conventional supply chains with an emphasis on quality, locality and sustainability. Hybrids can and 
do exist, with producers diversifying risk by selling some product through conventional wholesalers 
and retaining some product for sale through AAFNs (Ilbery and Maye, 2005; Fielke and Bardsley, 
2013). 
Farmers’ markets are the more visible AAFN model and have been popular for many years. As 
defined by the Australian Farmers’ Market Association,158 farmers’ markets are predominately a 
fresh food market operating regularly within a community at a public location providing a suitable 
environment for farmers and specialty food producers to sell farm-origin and associated value-
added specialty foods for human consumption (and plant products) directly to customers. 
In the ACT, the major farmer’s markets are the Capital Region Farmers’ Market (CRFM) (located at 
EPIC on a Saturday) and Southside Farmers’ Market at Phillip (held on Sunday) as well as smaller 
markets at the Bus Depot and Hall. Taking the CRFM as an example, rules159 for stallholders are in 
place that maintain the authenticity of regional produce and maintains consumer trust. Stall fees160 
are modest, $150 registration fee, $75 for a small site and $5 each for power and advertising. Nearly 
80% of farmer respondents to a survey in 2014 indicated that they made a profit from their farmers’ 
market stall (Woodburn, 2014) but most growers acknowledged the need to be regular stallholders 
to maximise impact. To overcome the need for a continual presence, some smaller producers will 
utilise an agent to sell their product. Agents are permitted at CFRM but are required to pay an 
agents’ fee and must indicate who grew the produce they are selling and where it was grown.  
Farmers’ markets represent a realistic alternative retail opportunity for many growers that is 
complementary to other selling options. Very few growers use farmers’ markets as the sole sales 
point (only 7% in the 2014 survey) with most using a range of distribution channels to sell their 
156 CANBERRA REGION FOOD COLLABORATIVE - Home (agrifood-hub.com) 
157 i.e. the tenet that measurable growth is the primary purpose of an endeavour, such that more production is 
inherently good. 
158 Australian Farmers' Markets Association (farmersmarkets.org.au) 
159 Capital Region Farmers and Food Producers Market Rules (capitalregionfarmersmarket.com.au)  
160 Provisional Rotary Club of Mitchell—Gungahlin (capitalregionfarmersmarket.com.au) 
https://capitalregionfarmersmarket.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Stall-Fees-January-2017.pdf

50 
produce. The most frequent alternative market options were local shops and restaurants and direct 
to the food service sector (Woodburn, 2014). The strengths and weaknesses of farmers’ markets, 
from the perspective of growers, consumers and local communities have been well established 
(Woodburn, 2014) and are summarised below (Table 9). 
Table 9: SWOT analysis of farmers' markets for growers, consumers and community; Source Woodburn (2014) 
GROWER STRENGTHS & OPPORTUNITIES 
GROWER WEAKNESSES & THREATS 
• 
Reliable distribution channel 
• 
Ease of incorporation into a broader mix of 
selling options 
• 
Positive economic outcomes 
• 
Low risk environment to grow a business, 
test products and develop a brand 
• 
Opportunity to meet with and learn from 
like-minded people. 
• 
Increased control of business outcomes and 
outputs compared to other distribution 
options. 
• 
High time requirement that may not fit 
with other parts of the business or lifestyle 
• 
Customer numbers can vary with weather, 
other events, holidays etc. 
• 
Highly reliant on the skill of market 
management to attract customers and 
suitable stall holders. 
• 
Limited ability to influence the actions of 
other stallholders that can impact on 
market reputation. 
• 
Some rural and regional markets may not 
offer adequate returns for stallholder 
participation especially when compared 
with metro markets that have consumers 
demanding and willing to pay for particular 
types of food products (e.g., organic, local 
product). 
• 
In some cases, stall availability can be 
limited especially where others are already 
providing like products. 
Consumer strengths & opportunities 
Consumer weaknesses & threats 
• 
Access to local, fresh produce 
• 
Range of new foods a food-related 
products 
• 
Direct support of local growers and food 
businesses 
• 
Sustainability advantages regarding food 
miles and packaging. 
• 
Decreased convenience compared with 
supermarkets 
• 
Produce availability impacted by 
season/weather 
• 
Assumption that products are better for 
the environment and human health often 
with little supporting evidence. 
• 
Potential for misrepresentation of foods 
being local. 
Community strengths & opportunities 
Community weaknesses & threats 
• 
Alternative avenue to access fresh and local 
produce. 
• 
Viable avenue for growers to sell their 
produce. 
• 
Enhance community economy, leadership, 
wellbeing and regional development. 
• 
Informal learning environment. 
• 
Mechanism for community organisations to 
fund raise. 
• 
Reliance on public venues and facilities 
• 
High reliance on volunteers subject to burn 
out. 
• 
Must manage small risk of food safety. 
• 
May require ongoing support and 
investment especially for smaller markets 
and those at startup phase. 
Overall, farmers’ markets can be a useful selling option for some farmers and food businesses, but 
they are not suitable for every farm business.

51 
Co-operatives and community-supported agriculture 
Co-operatives are another form of socialised selling opportunity that, in contrast to farmers’ 
markets, use more structured relationships to provide collective offerings to consumers that could 
not be viably offered by a single producer.  
Numerous farm co-operatives operate in Australia many targeted toward increasing purchasing 
power of members for inputs. Examples of selling co-operatives also exist, some of which are large 
firms in their own right (e.g., CBH, Sunrice, Bega), but co-operatives at the local and regional level 
are more significant contributors to providing selling options for producers in the ACT region.  
Southern Harvest (see section 3.5.2 Southern Harvest Association - multi-producer boxes) is a not-
for-profit association established to “foster the sustainable growth and availability of local produce 
within the Southern Harvest region”.161 The association is supported by membership contributions 
and volunteers and undertakes two activities of significance for ACT region producers. Southern 
Harvest coordinates the Bungendore Farmers’ Market that supports local growers many of whom 
also maintain stalls at the ACT Farmer’s Markets.  
Southern Harvest also maintains an active producer box scheme that is based on a Community 
Supported Agriculture (CSA) model162. CSAs vary in detail but follow the same general principle of 
consumers buying a share of future grower products in advance for a set period and in return 
receive regular food deliveries (Coles, 2019). Consumers commit to supporting farmers through the 
season and share the ups and downs of food production. The Southern Harvest scheme asks 
subscribers to commit to a thirteen-week season to receive weekly deliveries of fruit, vegetables, 
herbs and nuts as they are harvested. Southern Harvest facilitates this by aggregating produce from 
a range of local growers such that consumers are provided a greater variety than a single farm could 
viably produce. A typical producer box contains 8-10 different vegetables and fruit from different 
producers. Recently, producer boxes have been expanded to include requested non-food items. 
Southern Harvest coordinates aggregation and provides advice to producers on seasonal 
opportunities and what produce is likely to be demanded by consumers. Produce costs are paid 
direct to the farmer and Southern Harvest Association charges an administrative cost of 30%. As the 
association is not-for-profit it does not charge a margin and therefore is highly dependent on the 
contributions of benefactors and volunteers.   
3.3.4 Sustainability options 
The increasing demand for products that have been produced in a sustainable manner is a well-
defined consumer and buyer need.  As consumers in domestic and international markets have 
become wealthier, the influence of factors other than price is evident in purchasing decisions that 
reflect personal values relating to sustainability of production, climate change and social welfare 
outcomes.  
International recognition of the need for sustainable development is captured in the 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals and 169 targets of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development adopted in 2015163. Countries are implementing various approaches to achieve these 
goals with the EU one of the most progressed through its Farm to Fork Strategy164 which outlines a 
transition to a sustainable food system that should: 
161 Constitution-of-Southern-Harvest-Association.pdf (southernharvest.org.au)  
162 Produce Boxes – Southern Harvest  
163 United Nations Official Document  
164 Farm to Fork Strategy (europa.eu)

52 
• 
have a neutral or positive environmental impact 
• 
help to mitigate climate change and adapt to its impacts 
• 
reverse the loss of biodiversity 
• 
ensure food security, nutrition and public health, making sure that everyone has access to 
sufficient, safe, nutritious, sustainable food 
• 
preserve affordability of food while generating fairer economic returns, fostering 
competitiveness of the EU supply sector and promoting fair trade 
The sustainability policies of the EU extend beyond domestic production to other areas such as the 
requirement for certification of sustainable production of canola in Australia destined for the EU 
biodiesel market (approximately 50% of Australian canola production) under the EU Renewable 
Energy Directive165. 
Major Australian agriculture export markets in Asia are also demanding greater levels of 
transparency over the sustainability of production166. The demand for sustainable production also 
extends to the Australian domestic market particularly for millennial and ‘Gen Z’ consumers167.  
Meeting the challenge of demonstrating sustainable production is a pillar of the Australian 
Government’s $34m Agriculture Stewardship Package, supported by the iterative establishment of 
the Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework (AASF), coordinated by the National Farmers’ 
Federation. Objectives identified in the Framework168 include:  
• 
Integrate productivity, sustainability and biodiversity on Australian farms to provide lasting 
benefits to farmers and the community. 
• 
Ensure Australian farmers can showcase best practice sustainability and biodiversity 
management of natural resources – and ensure these actions are recognisable by supply 
chains, markets, investors, the community and other farmers. 
The first and second phases of development of the Framework have been completed by the 
Australian Farm Institute. The AASF intends to “communicate the sustainability status and goals of 
the Australian agricultural industry to markets and to the community”, and the supporting report 
identifies existing and emerging commodity-focused sustainability schemes in Australia and 
comparable international schemes169. As expected, some Australian agricultural sectors are further 
advanced in sustainability reporting and opportunity capture than others. The current iteration of 
the AASF identifies 17 overarching principles of sustainability (i.e., a desired outcome or ideal state) 
for the Australian agriculture industry under the themes of environmental stewardship; people, 
animals and community; and economic resilience (Figure 15).  
165 EU_Canola_Certification_-_GRDC_Fact_Sheet.pdf (australianoilseeds.com)  
166 From Food Bowl to Health Food Store - Disruptive Asia (asiasociety.org) 
167 Getting acquainted with a more mindful Australian consumer | McKinsey  
168 Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework - National Farmers' Federation (nff.org.au)  
169 The Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework - Australian Farm Institute

53 
Figure 15: The Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework. Source: Australian Farm Institute 
Review of the commodity-specific frameworks confirm that demonstrating sustainability of 
production has moved from a value-adding activity embraced by the few, to an absolute 
requirement to maintain the social licence and market access which underpins all farming businesses 
across multiple sectors. As such, payments of premiums for sustainable production are less likely in 
future markets that will require demonstratable sustainable production as a pre-requisite to even 
participate. 
3.3.5 Non-production based options 
One of the notable features of agricultural production is that demand for food (especially 
commodity-based foods) is relatively income-inelastic; consumers demand a set volume and as 
incomes change, that volume remains the same (Anderson, 1987). Therefore, as incomes increase 
consumers tend to purchase other products such as luxury items, manufactured products and 
services. In effect, producers of core agricultural commodities cannot exploit the growing wealth of a 
population to sell more product. Subsequently, it has been demonstrated that diversification of 
agriculture into products and services with high income demand elasticity (e.g., demand increases 
with increasing consumer income) are more likely to generate long term benefits for farmers in 
comparison to traditional agricultural commodity production (Bailey et al., 2000). The diversification 
options below capture a range of non-production opportunities that may present benefits to farmers 
over the longer term. 
Farm tourism 
One of the most common on-farm, non-production options to diversify income is farm tourism. 
Tourism generally is an important aspect of the ACT economy and, while all tourism in Australia has 
been impacted by the Covid pandemic, the gross value-added to the ACT economy from tourism was 
$1.6bn in 2019/20170.  
Farm tourism is viewed as an important farm income diversification strategy in the northern 
hemisphere (Sharpley and Vass, 2005), particularly in the European Union where 10-20% of farms 
operate some form of tourism. In Australia only 0.2% of farms are engaged in tourism activities 
170 Australian Capital Territory tourism summary | Tourism Research Australia

54 
(Ollenburg, 2007). A survey of growers in the Cootamundra/Gundagai region indicates that 
agritourism has significant potential but remains niche and driven by farming family preference 
rather than a major market change (Olsauskas et al., 2018).  This may change significantly with the 
pandemic, which has resulted in far greater uptake of domestic travel and may provide a major 
opportunity for suitably inclined growers to diversify into tourism-based activities. 
The motivation to undertake farm tourism includes both social and economic drivers, although 
economic outcomes remain the most important driver in most situations (Sharpley and Vass, 2005; 
Ollenburg and Buckley, 2007; Northcote and Alonso, 2010). The influence of these drivers is 
apparent in the four predominate farm types that undertake tourism activities (Ollenburg, 2007; 
Ollenburg and Buckley, 2007): 
1. Full-time farmers utilise tourism as an option to manage economic risk – tourism activities 
are a direct trade off from farming and must generate significant income to warrant their 
pursuit. 
2. Part-time farmers are broadly similar to full-time farmers but in general have already 
undertaken a level of income diversification, often through off-farm part time work.  
3. Retirement farmers may use tourism to boost cash flow while residing on the property in 
semi-retirement and tend to place a greater value on social outcomes. 
4. Lifestylers have often chosen farming because of the amenity and social aspects and for 
these people, tourism can be a primary source of income. 
Farm tourism in the ACT region varies from conventional farm-stay arrangements (often advertised 
through hosting services such as Airbnb) to more sophisticated tourism operations for local, national 
and international visitors. Farm tourism, as defined in the Territory Plan171 means operating a craft 
workshop, shop, guesthouse, outdoor recreation facility, overnight camping area or other activity for 
tourists that is secondary to the use of the land for the primary purpose authorised by the lease. 
Planning in the ACT specifically accounts for fostering tourism, including farm tourism, by permitting 
a variety of entertainment, leisure and accommodation facilities, including opportunities for 
ecotourism, in appropriate locations throughout the Territory (section 1.15 of the Territory Plan) 
although such activities also need to be consistent with land use clauses in lease agreements. 
Farm stay accommodation is widespread with a cursory review of Airbnb identifying multiple farm 
stay options within an hour of Canberra with most highlighting either the opportunity to stay on a 
working farm, and/or the seclusion of accommodation away from the city. The value of these selling 
points depends on the clients being targeted and their promotion requires a marketing approach 
that clearly identifies the target audience and presents them options that appeal to their desired 
accommodation type. Platforms such as Airbnb and others provide a level of sophistication in their 
algorithms that allow users to search for farm stays, but further marketing via dedicated websites 
and advertising is also needed.  
Ad hoc events (weddings, birthdays etc.) could also be important diversification options requiring 
relatively little capital input. Within the ACT there are numerous opportunities for ad hoc events on 
farming properties located in areas of natural beauty and especially when associated with historical 
events or buildings. For example, Lambrigg Station is the former home of William Farrer whose 
contributions to wheat breeding in Australia were commemorated by his portrait on the two-dollar 
note and would be of historical interest. The property itself is also stunning and has previously 
featured in Country Style172 and other magazines. 
171 2008-27 (40).PDF  
172 Historic Lambrigg garden in Tharwa, ACT | Country Style (homestolove.com.au)

55 
The degree to which ad hoc agritourism events such as event hospitality aligns with ACT leasing 
requirements is unclear. Such events would potentially be ancillary to the use of the land for the 
primary production purposes but are aligned with the activities to foster tourism outlined in section 
1.15 of the Territory Plan. They are however subject to ambiguity of what constitutes a tourist which 
is not defined in the Plan. 
At the other end of the scale of farm tourism sophistication are the properties that maintain 
dedicated tourism offerings as an important part of adding value to the primary farm operations. 
These operations clearly fall within the definition of farm tourism under the Territory Plan and are 
important income diversification options requiring significant investment of capital and time to be 
effective. They are often associated with dedicated national tour operator companies such as 
Contiki, Adventure Tours Australia, Trafalgar and AAT Kings. As such, they must be able to offer 
standardised tours of a consistent quality while also offering diverse experiences associated with the 
facilities and activities. Perhaps the most well-known of these operations in the ACT is Gold Creek 
Station173 (see section 3.5.3 Gold Creek Station) which works with tour operators to demonstrate 
sheep farm operations. 
The focus and drive for different approaches to farm tourism are clearly defined by individual 
circumstance but the basis for successful farm tourism (Sharpley and Vass, 2005) is common across 
farm types and includes: 
1. Location – not all areas are equally attractive. In Australia, as elsewhere, most farm tourism 
operations are located close to major population centres (Ollenburg, 2007). 
2. Investment – like other forms of diversification, farm tourism requires significant 
investment. Of the diversification case studies assessed by Campbell White & associates and 
Black for RIRDC in 2002 (RIRDC, 2002), the two that involved farm tourism both required 
substantial investment ($1.2m and $500,000 in 2002 dollars) with break-even periods of 15 
and 10 years. Both had cost: benefit ratios less than one. 
3. Marketing – unsurprisingly, most individual farm businesses possess neither the skills nor 
the resourcing for effective marketing. 
4. Quality – the standard of farm tourism must meet the expectations of clients. 
Agritourism activities require time and effort that must be diverted from other farm activities and 
entail an entirely new skill set that many current growers would need to acquire via additional 
training. Greater clarity of how and which agritourism events can be hosted on farming properties 
would provide certainty to leaseholders required to devote the time and capital toward realising 
such options to diversify income. 
Lease and agistment 
Horse riding is an extremely popular hobby in the ACT with more than 500 km of trails available to 
riders174. Canberra is characterised by the wide availability of private and public horse agistment 
facilities within the urban fringes as well as more broadly across the rural and broadacre zones. The 
ABS estimates that there were approximately 15 businesses in the ACT offering agistment and 
grazing for more than 500 horses (although the exact number may vary considerably). 
Demand for equine service in the United Kingdom has been demonstrated to be more income elastic 
than commodity production and thus represents potentially greater benefit to growers especially as 
disposable income across the population grows (Bailey et al., 2000). The relatively high income of 
173 Blog — Gold Creek Station  
174 Horses - City Services (act.gov.au)

56 
ACT residents and large number of horses suggest a similar benefit for the providers of equine 
services in the ACT. In addition, the provision of such services has the potential to generate demand 
in other parts of the rural economy particularly in the provision of high-quality horse feed.  
The sale of services as an income diversification strategy also extends to other forms of agistment, 
particularly the cattle and sheep industries that are well-established in the ACT and surrounding 
region. In particular, the harsh winters in the ACT make agistment an attractive alternative to 
breeding herds that require supplemental feeding over the winter months from reserves of hay and 
silage or feed imported from outside the ACT region. For landowners in the ACT, that are often 
earning off-farm income and can be time-poor, the agistment of stock can be a profitable enterprise 
that maintains a rural lifestyle without a large time commitment. Agistment of livestock as an 
income diversification option has the additional advantage that contracts can be made on a seasonal 
or annual basis or on an agreed set period that aligns with lease tenure and use requirements. 
Multiple agencies provide access to generic agistment agreements and background information on 
key clauses and requirements that should be considered175,176. 
Ecosystem services 
Farmers manage 55% of the total land area in Australia177 and up to 15% of the total land area in the 
ACT178. Growers are therefore important custodians that manage their lands in a sustainable manner 
to deliver economic and environmental benefits to their businesses and the wider community. While 
the direct farm benefits of sustainable production are obvious and rewarded by market access and 
potential economic return, the rewards for ecosystem services have, up to now, been largely 
undefined.  
Ecosystem services are the ecological functions that lead to desirable environmental outcomes, such 
as air and water purification, drought and flood mitigation, and climate stabilisation (Murtough et 
al., 2002). Ecosystem services benefits include provisioning services such as food and water; 
regulating services such as flood, fire and disease control; cultural services such as spiritual, 
recreational, and cultural benefits; and supporting services such as nutrient cycling. 
Markets for ecosystem services have historically been rare and numerous governments, including 
Australia, have explored mechanisms to create markets by defining a new property right that is 
linked to the ecosystem service that can be exchanged for reward (Murtough et al., 2002). 
Alternatively, the absence of a market can be addressed via regulation that imposes certain 
ecosystem service duties on landholders. Market-based mechanisms are generally preferable as they 
provide the incentive to minimise costs while delivering the desired environmental outcome. 
Despite this, the approach in the ACT to date has been largely regulatory with requirements to 
deliver ecosystem services included in land management agreements, the costs of which are mostly 
borne by the leaseholder, with a degree of subsidisation for agreed ecosystem improvement 
activities. Indeed, while the recent Auditor General’s report into Land Management Agreements 
concluded that they were of questionable value, the criticism was focused mainly on the lack of 
process for regulatory and compliance oversight rather than their effectiveness as instruments to 
deliver ecological and cultural outcomes.179 
175 Agistment guidelines (nsw.gov.au). 
176 Horse agistment contracts | Agistment for horses | Horses | Livestock and animals | Agriculture Victoria  
177 Snapshot of Australian Agriculture 2022 - DAFF 
178 71210DO001_201920.xlsx (live.com)  
179 Report No. 01 of 2021 - Land Management Agreements (act.gov.au) f

57 
Prominent reasons why markets for ecosystem services have been difficult to establish are 
uncertainty about ecosystem processes and how they can be valued180 and an inability to define and 
enforce ownership (Murtough et al., 2012). Valuations are critical to the development of market 
mechanisms that deliver desired environmental, social, cultural and financial benefits to the broader 
public while also providing the financial incentive for farming businesses to adopt approaches that 
build greater resilience and generate income diversity through the provision of improved ecosystem 
services. Admassu et al., (2019) discussed lessons to be learnt from the UK, where payment for 
ecosystem services models are more established, noting that provision of robust data a clear value 
proposition for both buyer and seller of the services are vital for success181. 
Despite these difficulties, the provision of ecosystem services remains an important objective of the 
NFF’s strategy to deliver $100 billion in farm gate value by 2030. Specifically, the NFF Roadmap calls 
for the establishment of payment for ecosystem services like that already in place in EU, UK, US, 
Canada and New Zealand generating a net benefit equal to 5% of farm revenue ($5 billion)182. NFF 
has worked with KPMG to explore models that could allow Australian growers to utilise 
commitments to sustainably managing their land to access payments for ecosystem services and/or 
access to sustainable finance183 via market-based mechanisms. Access to sustainable finance is 
already a reality, with Queensland beef producer Stockyard Group entering into a sustainability-
linked loan with Commonwealth Bank in 2021184. 
Other private and public sector approaches to generating ecosystem services have also emerged. 
The most developed approaches in Australia are the programs administered by the NSW Biodiversity 
Conservation Trust (BCT)185 and the Reef Credit Scheme186. Agreements administered by the BCT are 
relevant examples of the opportunities to establish ecosystem services in the ACT. Under the 
Conservation Management Plan, landholders can apply for agreements with ongoing annual 
payments under conservation tenders or fixed price agreements. The budget for the Conservation 
Management Plan in 2020-21 is approximately $47 million. 
180 A Return on Nature (assets.kpmg) 
181 Admassu, S, Fox, T & McRobert, K, (2019) Lessons from the UK on ecosystem services models, Farm Policy 
Journal (16)3, 24-34. 
182 NFF_Roadmap_2030_FINAL.pdf. 
183 A Return on Nature (assets.kpmg) 
184 CBA seals Australia’s first sustainability-linked loan for agriculture (finextra.com). 
185 Home | BCT (nsw.gov.au)  
186 Reef Credit as Market-Based Incentive Mechanism - Eco-Markets Australia

58 
Figure 16: Target area for expressions of interest in the conservation agreements for the management of Snow Gum 
woodlands and grasslands; Source NSW Biodiversity Trust 
Fixed price offers are made by the BCT through expressions of interest to protect high priority 
landscapes that provide habitat for threatened species, threatened ecological communities and/or 
important wetlands. Landholders with land that meets the specifications for a minimum size of high 
priority landscapes can apply for a Fixed Price Agreement under which the Trust pays an annual fee 
for the land to be managed to protect its biodiversity187. Fees differ across the state with high value 
areas in the Snowy Valley currently attracting payments of $106.74/ha/year. Landholders may also 
be eligible to access further funding if fencing of the conservation area is required. Fixed Price 
Agreements are made in perpetuity and are recorded on the land title. 
Conservation Tenders under the Conservation Management Plan allow landholders to put forward a 
package for consideration in which they specify the area of land, price for management and 
timeframe (15 years or in perpetuity) in response to BCT calls for expressions of interest targeted at 
187 BCT-FS-CMP-FPO5-Central Eastern-WEB.pdf (nsw.gov.au).

59 
distinct ecological zones. For example, the BCT completed the EOI for conservation agreements in 
the Snow Gum Woodlands and Grasslands in 2020188. The defined area surrounds the ACT (Figure 
16) and is one of several calls made each year. Conservation agreements are recorded on the land 
title.  
Finally, landholders can enter a Biodiversity Stewardship Agreement to generate biodiversity credits 
from all or part of their land for sale to public and private entities that may include developers (to 
offset other biodiversity impacts) the BCT or other entity. The operation of the scheme including 
costs and benefits as well as potential financial and tax implications of a BSA are set out in the 
landholders’ guide189 and landholders are advised to contact an accredited assessor to guide them 
through the BSA process. BSAs are in perpetuity and are recorded on the land title with payments 
and liabilities transferring with ownership of the land. 
More recently, in June 2022 the NSW Government announced a Sustainable Farming Program190 to 
improve both the state’s natural assets and agriculture sector’s productivity. Under the nascent 
program, farmers who voluntarily want to manage biodiversity and carbon while enhancing their 
land for productive use could achieve certification through agreed sustainability actions, including 
farm planning; grazing and land management; improvement and restoration. 
Carbon farming 
The Carbon Farming Initiative (CFI) was a voluntary carbon offsets scheme, integrated into the 
Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF) in 2014. Carbon credits markets in Australia are still often referred 
to by the previous descriptor (CFI). The ERF enables land managers to earn carbon credits by 
changing land use or management practices to store carbon or reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  
In the carbon market, Australian carbon credit units (ACCUs) represent one tonne of carbon dioxide-
equivalent (CO2-e) which has been sequestered or removed from the atmosphere. ACCUs are a 
generated primarily from land restoration projects. Offsetting carbon via the purchase of ACCUs (i.e., 
funding an activity for emissions reduction to compensate for emissions generated elsewhere) is 
driven by a combination of compliance and voluntary demand. While offsetting creates income for 
the producers of the ACCUs, this also means the carbon sequestered or removed no longer ‘belongs’ 
to the accounts of that enterprise; e.g. if a farm business is claiming to be carbon neutral due to 
carbon sequestration activities, but then sells ACCUs beyond the emissions neutrality threshold, it 
could lose carbon neutral status. However, carbon negative (or ‘climate positive’) enterprises may 
choose to sell excess credits for income and retain carbon neutrality. 
Soil carbon farming has been mooted as one of the key strategies for offsetting Australia’s 
greenhouse gas emissions, with the ancillary benefit of improving soil health and farm productivity. 
However, several barriers restrict farmers from participating in schemes designed to monetise the 
production of carbon credits (e.g., differing perceptions of what increase in soil carbon storage is 
achievable and whether credit income will exceed a project’s cost). 
For example, a paper by White et al., (2021)191 compared soil carbon project compliance costs, which 
are variable, with the possible income from carbon credits. The overriding metric determining 
188 Conservation Tender Landholder Guide - Snow Gum Woodlands and Grasslands_14.09.20.pdf (nsw.gov.au) 
189 Biodiversity Stewardship Agreement Landholder Guide | BCT (nsw.gov.au). 
190 Sustainable Farming Program | NSW Environment and Heritage 
191 OCCASIONAL PAPER: A landholder's guide to participate in soil carbon farming in Australia - Australian Farm 
Institute

60 
whether a project is financially viable is the opportunity cost of changing the land management 
practice, which generally far exceeds the net income from carbon credits. However, the authors 
note the benefit-cost ratio could become more favourable if the value of ecosystem services 
provided by an improved soil condition could also be realised. 
Although there is no guarantee that soil carbon projects aimed at earning and selling carbon credits 
through the ERF will be profitable given current compliance costs and the price of ACCUs, there are 
many other co-benefits of increasing farm soil carbon, e.g. improvements to soil health and 
functionality in the form of enhanced structure, water holding capacity, biological function and 
cation exchange capacity. These benefits also extend to broader ecosystems through reduced 
erosion from more stable soils and flow-on beneficial impacts of improved water quality. Increasing 
soil carbon on-farm can lead to productivity improvements on farm which may be of greater value 
than participation in carbon markets. While these benefits are not direct financial rewards for 
diversification, they are clear drought resilience improvement measures. 
An emerging area of payment for ecosystem services is the Carbon + Biodiversity pilot192 developed 
by the Federal Government. The proposed scheme aims to allow farmers to stack carbon credits 
with biodiversity credits and be paid for biodiversity improvements on farm (namely through 
planting trees). There is little information available about the scheme at the time of this research, 
but this emerging area of ecosystem payments could be an option for farmers in the ACT to diversify 
their income streams.  
192 https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/natural-
resources/landcare/sustaining-future-australian-farming/carbon-biodiversity-pilot

61 
3.5 Case studies 
3.5.1 Goterra 
It’s hard to love baby black soldier flies. They aren’t cute or cuddly and they certainly don’t have the 
appeal of a lamb or calf. Yet the rearing of these ravenous insects, which consume a range of food 
and other wastes, requires the same level of care. Finding employees with an affinity for insects to 
tend to their needs has been one of the more unusual challenges faced by Olympia Yarger as she 
established Goterra, an insect production enterprise with facilities in Canberra, Albury and Sydney. 
Olympia and her family have strong ties to the land 
having worked on a range of rural properties. 
Ultimately, this led to purchase of 120Ac on the 
Monaro. Like many other small landholders, the 
consideration of production options on limited 
land needed to be compatible with employment 
off-farm. This resulted in an initial focus on poultry 
production. The interest in insect rearing began as 
Olympia researched alternative options for poultry 
feed that matched the nutritional components of 
commercial pellets. Black soldier flies were 
identified as a good option and so the beginnings of Goterra were set in motion. Today, Goterra is a 
leading example of insect production in Australia, an industry that CSIRO estimates to be worth 
more than $10 million per annum in the next five years. 
Principles 
The growing world population continues to drive increased demand for food that has contributed to 
the soaring prices of farming land Australia and abroad. In this environment, entering farming 
requires intergenerational land ownership or the deep pockets of corporate agriculture. For those 
wanting to enter farming with more limited budgets, the options are limited and must focus on 
avoiding the big capital outlays associated with land purchases.  
Goterra is based on the principle of modular agriculture where production systems minimise the 
need for large areas of land, can be scaled to be compatible with feed stocks and demand, and can 
be integrated into urban environments. The capacity to integrate modular insect rearing in an urban 
environment is a key principle that allows the establishment of facilities close to where food and 
commercial waste streams are available as feedstocks. This simplifies logistics, minimises transport 
costs and provides options for integration at scales ranging from regional production, exemplified by 
the facilities servicing Canberra at Hume, to individual commercial premises as seen in the more 
recent co-establishment of facilities with Lend Lease at their Barangaroo site. Simply put, the 
modular production system and deep technology employed by Goterra allows a re-imaging of the 
food system that supports the principles of a circular bioeconomy and provides the resilience 
needed to adjust to changing environments. 
Challenges 
Being a non-traditional production enterprise, the challenges associated with the development of 
insect production have been wide and varied. Some challenges, such as ensuring access to feedstuffs 
and developing commercial channels for demand, were identified early. Close collaboration with the 
stockfeed industry was quickly identified as a necessity that was met with a willingness of 
manufacturers to embrace insects as a sustainable source of protein, energy and essential nutrients.

62 
Production challenges included finding information on techniques and environmental requirements 
(there aren’t any brochures) for insect rearing as well as less obvious factors such as a lack of brood 
stock in Australia that required the collection of insects from the wild and trial and error to establish 
and grow a colony. One of the greatest challenges that remains is the indifference of the Australian 
population to most insects that means that the use of insects in food and feed in Australia does not 
match that in other countries in the region and worldwide. 
Common challenges of planning and zoning are also identified by Goterra. However, in an example 
of the need for management of planning on an individual basis, the challenges facing Goterra are not 
associated with a lack of planning permission, as highlighted in other diversification options, but 
rather identify the need to maintain zoning support for industrial operations close to the city in the 
face of increasing urban development as currently observed in Fyshwick. 
Drivers of Success 
A recurring theme across many diversification efforts has been the focus required for success and 
Goterra is no exception. Olympia highlights the need to do your homework on the options available 
and not be afraid to seek help. Indeed, Olympia readily admits that in hindsight, she would have 
hired an experienced person earlier that would have made the initial development of the business 
simpler.  
Access to resources in NSW Department of Primary Industries as well as grant support from the ACT 
government (ICON) was critical to establishing proof of concept that has subsequently allowed 
Goterra to access funding from venture capital that will support the expansion of Goterra’s 
operations targeting the management of 45,000 tonnes of waste. 
Lastly, but certainly not least, Olympia highlights the need to talk to as many people as possible. This 
means everyone up and down the supply chain as well as those associated with the wider value 
chain. It is important to understand their views, how this impacts the business model and how the 
business can add value to their enterprises. 
KEY MESSAGES 
• 
Diversification does not necessarily require large capital investment in land. Modular 
agriculture supports opportunities for scale appropriate diversification that can integrate 
in rural and urban environments to support a circular bioeconomy. Modular agriculture 
has a number of differences to traditional production, it is more reliant on deep 
technology to develop new products and deliver new service capacity. In addition, the 
financing of modular agriculture is more aligned with venture capital. Mentoring as well 
as grant programs for startups are therefore critical components of success. 
• 
Zoning of land and planning can have a big impact on diversification. Clear planning and 
land use requirements provide the confidence for business investment that, once 
established in the ACT, is likely to remain. 
• 
Most importantly, having identified the desired diversification option, commit to it 100%. 
Success requires focus and hard work. Gather and analyse as much information as 
possible, seek help where available and talk to as many people as possible.

63 
3.5.2 Southern Harvest Association - multi-producer boxes 
Packing boxes with locally grown fruit and vegetables is a long way from the original vision of 
Southern Harvest Association (SHA) when it launched in 2011 under the auspices of Regional 
Development Southern Inland with a focus on attracting food tourism to the region. However, from 
humble beginnings, SHA has developed into an innovative, farmer and volunteer led, not-for-profit 
organisation working to foster the sustainable growth and availability of local produce. Today, SHA 
supports producers, retailers and consumers across the Southern region including the ACT extending 
north to the Boorowa shire, west to Temora, Junee and Tumut, east to the coast and south to the 
Victorian border.  
Research workshops and meetings conducted 
early in the establishment of SHA highlighted a 
consumer desire to access local food through 
retailers, food boxes and farmer markets that 
was frustrated by the inability to identify locally 
produced food. Southern Harvest Produce Boxes 
commenced in 2016 instigated by Canberra City 
Farm (CCF) with a single event of producers and 
consumers coming together at the farm site in 
Fyshwick. Following this promising trial, further 
development and implementation of the produce 
boxes transitioned to SHA, with CCF remaining an 
important part of the scheme. The produce box 
scheme has since grown dramatically to now include more than twenty producers, 147 subscribers , 
and fourteen collection points on a weekly basis, as well as a delivery option. 
Principles 
The SHA produce box scheme follows the Community Supported Agriculture model that promotes 
the connection of consumers and producers through a subscription approach. Under the SHA 
scheme, subscribers share the risk of production by committing to a thirteen-week season, 
purchasing a share of produce that includes fruit, vegetables, herbs and nuts as they are harvested. 
SHA facilitates the link between growers and consumers by aggregating produce from multiple 
growers to provide a greater variety of food than can be offered by a single grower. 
Originally, produce boxes were focused on providing a market for growers to sell excess product to 
consumers seeking fresh, local food. The success of the scheme, as is evident in the growing number 
of subscribers and the expanding market opportunities for growers, supports more coordinated 
production to meet consumer demands while producers continue receiving fair retail prices for 
premium food. 
Challenges 
The viability of the scheme has historically been highly reliant on volunteers for packaging boxes, 
distribution and administration. Establishment of new drop-off points requires both a minimum 
number of subscribers and volunteers for box distribution. While volunteers remain an important 
feature of the scheme, the implementation of a 30% surcharge directly covers the costs of 
administration and volunteer support while maintaining the not-for-profit nature of SHA. The 
scheme is now viable in its own right. 
A key challenge to the scheme and other activities undertaken by SHA is the lack of consistent and 
scale-appropriate regulation across the NSW-ACT governments. For example, under ACT Food Safety

64 
regulations, most value-added products prepared in domestic kitchens cannot be offered for sale in 
the ACT or included in food boxes. In contrast, regulation is administered by local councils in NSW 
and adopts a more flexible approach to identifying and managing potential food safety risks. 
Differences between NSW and ACT are also apparent in the level of support that SHA has attracted. 
As an NSW-based organisation, it is unsurprising that successful applications for support of SHA have 
come from the NSW government. However, the produce box scheme clearly benefits consumers in 
the ACT and has the potential to provide greater support to ACT producers. 
Bringing producers and consumers together requires continual effort. SHA has developed a new 
local food directory on its website in response to industry and consumer demand for information 
about regional food. In addition, SHA continues to operate the Bungendore Farmers’ Markets that 
were established in 2015 and continue to this day. 
Drivers of Success 
Undoubtedly, a key driver of success is the engagement of community across the entire value chain 
from producers to consumers, not only in bringing people together but in shared decision making 
and vision. Models for operations, finances and infrastructure are developed with input from the 
whole of the value chain and therefore enjoy considerable support for adoption.  
In common with other start-ups in the not-for-profit and commercial sectors, the importance of 
individuals with the passion and tenacity to drive activity and impact cannot be under-estimated.  A 
succession of passionate people has been involved in the establishment and success of SHA and the 
produce box scheme in particular. The vision of SHA is important to identifying and supporting the 
next generation of champions that volunteer their time, skills and resources to achieve a shared 
goal.  
KEY MESSAGES 
• 
Approaches that bring like-minded groups together can benefit all members of the value 
chain from producers to consumers. 
• 
Alternative market mechanisms such as community supported agriculture require 
dedicated people with a shared vision to make it work. 
• 
Government support for these types of initiatives does not necessarily need to be 
financial. Consistency of regulation would generate significant value at low cost.

65 
3.5.3 Gold Creek Station 
Gold Creek Station is a popular stopover for 
tourists on guided holidays travelling between 
Sydney and Melbourne. Group tours of between 
30-200 people are conducted at the property. At 
the woolshed, tourists can see shearing, fleeces 
being thrown, classed and prepared for baling and 
the famous Kelpie dogs mustering sheep. Add a 
steak for lunch at the homestead and it is easy to 
see why the Gold Creek stopover is so popular. 
These are the results of the efforts of the Starr 
family over more than three decades. John Starr 
grew up in the Central West of NSW and worked as 
a shearer and wool classer before moving to the 
outskirts of Hall in the ACT in 1970 to manage the 
Gold Creek Station sheep and cattle property. Like 
other leaseholders in the ACT, when the lease 
withdrawal clause was enacted in 1974, the owner of Gold Creek Station decided it was time to 
move on. Fortunately for John some years later the opportunity to acquire part of the property on a 
99-year lease arose and so Gold Creek Station continued albeit on a more modest scale and with a 
need to diversify farm income.  
Principles 
Gold Creek Station has always been synonymous with wool production with up to 7,000 head shorn 
on the property in boom years. It is not surprising then, that the potential to provide shearing and 
sheepdog demonstrations to tourists arose early in John Starr’s employment as manager and later as 
owner of the property. However, while diversification into tourism has provided additional income 
as well as maintaining an active woolshed, a focused approach has been required to ensure the 
viability of the tourism business. 
According to John, the single most important principle of farm tourism is credibility. Inbound tour 
operators (ITOs) must be sure that the experience being offered is authentic, repeatable, cost 
effective and reliable with backup in the event of illness or disaster. It is most difficult to gain the 
trust and confidence of an ITO to have your business included in their brochure. A failure in any of 
these has a direct impact on credibility and an unwillingness of tour operators to include a stopover 
on the itinerary. 
Challenges 
One of the most challenging aspects of establishing and maintaining the farm tourism business is in 
ensuring that the tourism activities are compliant with the terms of the land use agreement for the 
lease especially when the interpretation and regulation of those agreements can vary. A lack of 
consistency in the application of regulations and the difficulty in seeking any adjustment has been 
the major disincentive to pursuing farm diversification opportunities. 
In addition, early Government support of tourism lacked scale appropriateness. Programs were 
designed to encourage tourism regardless of scale such that the needs and efforts of Gold Creek 
Station were considered in the same way as those of national entities such as the War Memorial or 
Questacon. The lack of scale-appropriate support resulted in the need to self-resource most tourism

66 
activities at Gold Creek including infrastructure improvements as well as training in computer 
systems and operator logistics. 
Interestingly, when support for smaller tourism start-ups was eventually provided, a number of 
unforeseen, perverse outcomes occurred. Not least, the support of under-prepared farm-tourism 
start-up companies resulted in failures of authenticity and reliability that damaged not only the 
credibility of individual businesses but the credibility and viability of farm tourism and established 
coach operators in the ACT region. 
Most recently, the bushfires of 2019-2020 and the ongoing Covid pandemic have contributed to a 
sharp decline in tourism. The effort required to re-establish the guided tourism sector will be 
significant as Australia again welcomes incoming visitors, but it remains a key to the viability of farm 
tourism at Gold Creek Station and at other destinations in the ACT and across the country. 
Drivers of Success 
John puts the success of Gold Creek Station down to the commitment to the principle of credibility. 
Entering guided farm tourism requires a 100 percent commitment, it is not a hobby and can’t be 
treated like one. Credibility takes years to establish and only a moment to lose. 
In addition to credibility, Gold Creek Station also benefits from its reputation to be agile, often filling 
vacancies with clients or supporting special needs of operators to ensure the farm tourism 
experience is the best that can be delivered. In particular, the capacity of John’s wife Beverly to host 
those people without the desire to see sheep farm operations ensures that all tourists enjoy the 
Gold Creek Station stop-off, regardless of their preference for different experiences. 
KEY MESSAGES 
• 
Greater clarification of terms and requirements in land use agreements and a working 
relationship with leaseholders would be a major contributor to a successful and diverse 
agriculture landscape in the ACT. 
• 
Targeted scale-appropriate support for tourism operator skills development and 
marketing are preferable to a blanket granting process. 
• 
If you are entering the farm tourism sector do not underestimate the commitment in 
time and resources required to establish the credibility in the industry needed to be 
viable. It seems easy but do the homework and understand what is necessary before 
jumping to action.

67 
4. ACT region competitive advantage 
Opportunities for the diversification of agricultural production are supported by several 
characteristics of the ACT region and population. Some characteristics are also evident elsewhere in 
Australia, but the ACT is one of the only areas where all characteristics combine to provide a 
powerful opportunity for region-wide diversification approaches. 
4.1 Off-farm income 
One of the major disincentives for diversification of agricultural production worldwide is the 
requirement for significant capital input and associated risk to the current farm business (RIRDC, 
2002). Not surprisingly then, the capacity to generate off-farm income is a significant driver of 
diversification (Barbieri et al., 2008).  
A 2020 survey by ACT NRM indicates that almost 80% of landholders surveyed (approximately 48 
responses) derived at least 50% of their income from activities not related to their rural holding. 
These properties most likely have a higher degree of economic security and consequently have an 
increased capacity to trial and adopt new systems, technologies and other diversification 
opportunities. However, reliance on off-farm income also has some drawbacks. The success of 
diversification activities is highly correlated not only with the amount of capital available but also the 
time and commitment required to develop business plans, relationships and marketing strategies 
(RIRDC, 2002). Growers with part-time or full-time employment off-farm may therefore find it 
difficult to allocate sufficient time-resources to maximise the probability of successful diversification. 
A balance of capital generation and time commitment is needed. 
4.2 Consumer disposable income 
While most consumers are aware of the benefits of eating a healthy diet and prefer purchasing 
products that are sustainably grown, the price of doing so comes with a premium (Barosh et al., 
2014). There is significant inequity in disposable income across households with those in the lowest 
income quintile spending 40% of their weekly income to purchase food compared with those in the 
highest quintile spending just 9% of their weekly income (Barosh et al., 2014). Households with 
higher incomes have greater capacity to purchase premium generating sustainable and healthy 
foods.  
Household income in the ACT is high in comparison to the Australian average. In 2016, 28.4% of 
households in the ACT had an income of more than $3,000 per week (Australian average was 16.4% 
of households193) and, while costs of living in the ACT are also relatively high, there is little doubt 
that ACT residents enjoy a level of disposable income exceeding most other regions that can support 
the purchase of premium sustainably produced, healthy foods such as those grown in the ACT 
region. 
4.3 Access to labour 
Despite a low level of unemployment in the ACT (4.7% c.f. Australian average of 6.9% in 2016194), 
there is a significant casual workforce available principally associated with the large number of 
students attending one of the universities in Canberra. Access to skilled agriculture labour is likely to 
be more constrained, with the small size of the ACT farming sector unlikely to attract career 
agricultural managers in the long term. Casual labour is particularly important in the context of 
193 2016 Census QuickStats: Australian Capital Territory (abs.gov.au)  
194 ibid.

68 
diversification where outsourcing of relatively unskilled activities allows landholders to devote more 
time and focus on diversification efforts. 
4.4 Provenance 
A range of studies indicate that consumers are willing to pay some form of premium for locally 
produced food (for example, Giraud et al., 2005) dependent on several consumer factors including 
product, age, income and education. Anecdotal evidence suggests that ACT consumers have a great 
deal of interest in the provenance of the food they purchase, an observation that is supported by the 
large numbers of shoppers making food purchases at farmer markets. The high demand and 
willingness to pay for locally sourced products in the ACT presents opportunities for diversification 
as products are more likely to find ready local markets if supply and quality can be maintained.  
Data to support these anecdotal observations is limited and should be the target of focused surveys 
to determine ACT region consumer demands and willingness to pay for locally grown, healthy and 
sustainable food. 
4.5 Location 
The planned location of the ACT between Sydney and Melbourne places it in ideal position to access 
two major markets with very large populations. Distance to the Sydney market (population 5.3m195) 
is less than 250kms from Canberra and Melbourne (population 5.1m196) is less than 500kms. The 
populations of both Sydney and Melbourne are projected to exceed six million by 2030197.   
The Hume highway, the major road transport route between Sydney and Melbourne passes close to 
Canberra and is linked to it via the Barton Highway. The ACT is not directly located on the inland rail 
passage being constructed between Melbourne and Brisbane but is expected to be linked to it via 
the line between Sydney and Stockingbingal. Freight logistics could therefore be expected to be well 
supported although anecdotal evidence suggests that the limited size of the ACT contributes to 
higher-than-expected transport costs. 
Canberra as a tourist destination and tourist thoroughfare, also provides market advantages that can 
support production diversification options. 6.13 million people visited Canberra in 2019 staying for 
more than 14 million nights and spending $2.82 billion198. This is a sizeable target for diversification 
options such as agri-tourism and farm stays and does not include through-traffic that may also 
purchase local produce. For example, pre-Covid, the NSW ski fields attracted almost 1 million visitors 
(year ending December 2019), with the majority (almost 40%) travelling from Sydney199 and 
transiting through Canberra. 
195 Centre for Population Annual Population Statement 2021  
196 ibid. 
197 ibid. 
198 Research – VisitCanberra Corporate (act.gov.au)  
199 Snowy Mountains Visitor Profile Factsheet - Year ending December 2019 (destinationnsw.com.au)

69 
5. Lived experience of agricultural diversification in the ACT   
The lived experience of farmers in the ACT provides insights to the opportunities and barriers for 
diversification. The following observations draw on interviews with a range of farmers in the ACT 
region across different production systems, farm sizes and farm business structures. 
5.1 Land planning and lease agreements 
The major disincentive for diversifying production system or revenue generation 
on farms in the ACT region is associated with land planning and the requirement 
to maintain alignment with purpose clauses under lease agreements that can 
appear to be outdated and ill-informed. While the specifics differ across 
leaseholders, all had significant issues 
understanding the multitude of rules, regulations and guidelines as 
well as the difficulties, costs and lack of consistency across different 
agencies associated with applying for and assessment of 
development approval and/or changes to land management 
agreements.  
The need to maintain land for future urban expansion is a 
significant issue in planning recognised by all stakeholders. 
However, it is a widely held belief that broadacre and rural land 
leases are managed to protect future availability for urban expansion at the expense of objectives 
relating to agricultural production. The experience of many leaseholders is of a “command and 
control” approach from planning and lease management agencies that is not conducive to jointly 
exploring opportunities to diversify systems to achieve resilient farming businesses that also deliver 
natural resource management outcomes and provide flexibility in meeting future development 
needs.  
Of particular concern is the apparent lack of consistency in interpretation of the Objectives of the 
Territory Plan across Strategic Planning Direction and the application of land use clauses in Land 
Management Agreements.  While it may be interpreted that broadacre zoned land is available for 
permitted agricultural activities as defined in the Territory Plan, most activities are in fact further 
curtailed by the imposition of strict land management agreements that then limit “agriculture” to a 
subset of industries. For example, agricultural production on land suited to several different 
industries can be limited to grazing under purpose clauses in individual lease agreements and further 
limited to grazing of sheep and cattle under the same agreement. Diversification of production, even 
within the broad definition of agriculture as it stands in the Territory Plan then requires the 
leaseholder to apply for a change to the lease purpose clause. This is an onerous process that 
requires input from multiple agencies and is associated with costs that are prohibitively expensive to 
most leaseholders. Under such regulations, the incentive to diversify the production base is 
extremely limited. 
Issues with planning and lease purpose clauses also extend to value-adding and non-production 
diversification options. In particular, confusion exists surrounding the definition and application of 
the term “ancillary use”.  
Under the Territory Plan, ancillary use is defined as “the use of land for a purpose that is ancillary to 
the primary use of the land”. Ancillary is then defined as “associated with and directly related to, but 
incidental and subordinate to the predominant use”. Ancillary uses of agricultural land could include 
diverse revenue generating activities that remain consistent with other aspects of the Territory Plan 
such as: 
The experience of many 
leaseholders is of a 
“command and control” 
approach from planning and 
lease management agencies

70 
• 
Value adding through processing 
• 
Waste stream diversification e.g., use of chicken manure to generate compost 
• 
Agri-tourism consistent with the definition of tourist facility 
• 
Event hosting – such as weddings, birthdays, open gardens etc. 
• 
Leasing of buildings and other infrastructure  
However, there remains considerable uncertainty regarding the variables that determine ancillary 
use. Is an activity ‘incidental and subordinate’ to agriculture if: 
• 
the revenue generated from it is less than that derived from agriculture? 
• 
the area of land use is less than that for agriculture? 
• 
the use of labour is less than that from agriculture? 
• 
operating costs exceed those for agriculture? 
While the determinant of ancillary use remains unclear, the impact on efforts to diversify farm 
production and income are profound. As the focus of diversification is to maintain farm viability 
(including business viability and sustainability in the long term), it should be expected that in periods 
of downturn, caused by drought or commodity price drops, a diversification activity may become the 
dominant contributor to farm viability at least for a limited period.  
The question is – do these remain ancillary if the intent is for them to be a major contributor to farm 
viability? The lack of clarity regarding how “ancillary use” is applied within the context of Territory 
planning results in high levels of confusion and distrust and is a major disincentive to investment in 
diversification opportunities.  
The lack of clarity regarding the application of “ancillary use” activities may have an even greater 
impact on diversification approaches that require coordinated efforts across leaseholders. Given the 
limited size of most ACT farms, the economic feasibility of many value adding opportunities depends 
on capacity to source supply from several individual farms. If processing of produce from multiple 
farms occurs at a single agricultural property, it is unclear if the relevant planning authorities would 
interpret that value adding activity as ancillary to agriculture.  
Furthermore, if the activity is not considered ancillary, there is the possibility that it could be 
classified as light industry and be prohibited on non-urban zoned land. A requirement to establish 
coordinated, value-added processing on industrial zoned land raises the economic feasibility given 
the high costs associated with accessing such a property in the ACT. The opportunity for farm 
income diversification under this scenario is limited. 
Opportunity: The ACT Government should provide clarity to leaseholders regarding the 
interpretation of the Objectives for Broadacre and Rural lands and how these are currently applied 
in planning and lease management. The current development of an Agriculture Policy is a potentially 
significant contribution, but it must have an impact on how planning and lease management are 
implemented if it is to have any discernible effect on agricultural production and diversification.  
Opportunity: The ACT government should work with leaseholders to better define and communicate 
the planning and approvals processes for non-urban zoned land with specific attention to 
diversification that requires change of use of the land to deliver business resilience and protection of 
natural capital while also maintaining flexibility for future development needs.

71 
Opportunity: the ACT Government could consider the merit of changes to the Territory Plan to 
facilitate diversification options where these involve the development of light industry on non-urban 
zoned land associated with current agricultural production. 
Opportunity: The ACT Government should review the process and costs structure for applications to 
change lease purpose clauses where the change relates specifically to a different form of agriculture 
as defined in the Territory Plan. Alternatively, the ACT Government could consider removing lease 
purpose clauses that apply further constraints beyond those of the general provisions of agriculture 
as defined in the Territory Plan. 
5.2 Lease tenure 
The current duration of tenure for agricultural leaseholders in the ACT ranges from 99 years to less 
than 10 years. For some landholders with expired leases, tenure is a monthly or weekly 
consideration. In addition, most lease agreements contain withdrawal clauses allowing the 
government to unilaterally terminate leases albeit with a requirement to recognise the value of 
some improvements. The duration of leases is intended to reflect future strategic land uses and 
planning intentions with an emphasis on maintaining flexibility for urban development that is a core 
aspect of a planned city such as Canberra.  
Future planning strategy is therefore a key determinant of 
lease duration which in turn has a major impact on options 
for farm income diversification, particularly options that 
involve extended periods prior to payback. A lack of clarity in 
planning strategy is a particular disincentive on diversification 
options involving horticulture and other permanent plantings 
where large initial capital outlays are only recouped over an 
extended period as trees mature and production increases. 
The lack of extended tenure for some leaseholders also significantly impacts their capacity to access 
finance for farm operations and diversification, with banks reluctant to make loans for 
improvements that may not realise a return if leases are withdrawn or not renewed. 
Short term tenure and the potential to withdraw lease agreements can also have a detrimental 
impact on adoption of farm diversification options that may deliver environmental benefits (e.g., 
ecosystem services contracts that require long-term agreements) or require significant capital 
investment in infrastructure (e.g., covered cropping, glass house production, aquaculture).  
Section 291 of the Planning and Territory Act, 2007200 outlines the requirement of the ACT Planning 
Authority to make payments of market value for improvements made to land when a lease expires, 
is surrendered or terminates.  Improvement, in relation to land, means: 
a) 
a building or structure on or under the land; or 
b) 
for land held under a rural lease; 
(i) a building or structure on or under the land; or 
(ii) any earthworks, planting or other work that affects the landscape of the land 
that is reasonably undertaken for rural purposes. 
It is unclear what payment would be made for land improvement efforts such as increasing soil 
carbon or maintaining biodiversity. Indeed, it is not clear if the value of improvements to pasture 
200 Planning and Development Act 2007 | PDF  
Short term tenure can have a 
detrimental impact on 
adoption of farm diversification 
options that may deliver 
environmental benefits

72 
achieved through judicious agronomy and nutrition management would be recognised in the current 
compensation model. 
Given that most options to receive payment for carbon storage or biodiversity conservation require 
agreements in perpetuity or up to 100 years, it is unclear how leaseholders in the ACT could enter 
such markets and generate natural resource and climate outcomes.  
Opportunity: The ACT Government could work with leaseholders to identify land that is unlikely to 
be utilised for urban development and could be rezoned to rural and accompanied by extended 
lease tenures that provide a level of certainty required for diversification and the access to required 
capital. 
Opportunity: The ACT Government could explore options to align lease tenure with the 
requirements of soil carbon and ecosystem services programs that would allow growers to 
participate in these emerging markets more easily. 
Opportunity: The ACT Government could seek expert agronomic advice and provide clarity on 
improvements that contribute to market value based on improved production capacity in the event 
that land is acquired by the government following withdrawal or expiration. 
5.3 Land Management Agreements 
Farmers in the ACT have a strong connection with the land and are passionate 
about protecting the ecological and cultural value of the environment upon which 
they are reliant. It was not surprising therefore that ACT grower attitudes are 
aligned with the environmental outcomes sought under the Planning and 
Development Act. However, the support to achieve those environmental outcomes through the use 
of highly regulated and compliance driven Land Management Agreements (LMAs) is more 
ambiguous even accepting that many Agreements have not recently been actively enforced201. LMAs 
offer advantages to lifestyle leaseholders with limited acreages and experience. For these 
leaseholders, LMAs provide access to expertise within the ACT government to develop appropriate 
natural resource management plans, ensure farming systems are appropriate to the land capacity 
and provide a mechanism for coordinated action especially in the management of invasive weeds 
and pests. For more experienced leaseholders and those more reliant on the land to generate an 
income, LMAs are a complicated instrument that lacks production expertise and requires the 
application of scarce resources to develop, implement and monitor. In particular, the focus of LMAs 
on activities associated with reporting detailed assessment and management actions utilises 
resources that might be better directed to meeting production, conservation and diversification 
targets.  
Leaseholders in general acknowledged the need to assess and manage their land. The argument is 
that the focus of government should be on the assessment of outcomes (e.g., how well the 
environmental and cultural values of the land are maintained or improved) rather than recording the 
specific actions required to achieve those outcomes. There will of course be exceptions, for example 
few would argue that agreement on specific activities is required to manage identified sites of 
significant environmental value. This should not, however, extend to other areas where the 
outcomes of land management should be the focus of attention rather than activities. The blunt 
201 Report No. 01 of 2021 - Land Management Agreements (act.gov.au)

73 
application of LMAs in the absence of any risk framework to articulate the priorities for management 
on leased land was likewise noted as a significant issue in the recent LMA audit.202 
Finally, the application of LMAs to achieve environmental and cultural outcomes may be a 
disincentive to leaseholders to undertake any activity beyond the minimum required to achieve 
compliance. Specifically, it prevents the adoption of market mechanisms to deliver biodiversity 
outcomes that are becoming common elsewhere in Australia and globally. As such, it removes a 
potential cost-effective and efficient diversification mechanism for achieving environmental 
outcomes that rewards pro-active management by leaseholders. 
Opportunity: The ACT government should review the effectiveness of current LMA models to 
achieve desired environmental outcomes together with leaseholders. The current LMA approach 
may be appropriate, and indeed welcomed by some leaseholders, but may not be as effective when 
applied to larger leaseholders and those more closely engaged in production. There is an 
opportunity to develop a more nuanced approach that focusses on delivering desired outcomes with 
leaseholders determining their requirements for engagement with government experts at the 
activity level. 
Opportunity: The ACT Government should consider the possibility of managing identified sites of 
environmental and cultural value via market mechanisms like those being adopted successfully for 
the delivery of biodiversity outcomes elsewhere.    
5.4 Farm size 
Farm size in the ACT is generally small and this impacts diversification in two ways. 
First, the small size of some holdings means that economies of scale in current 
systems cannot be achieved to an extent that time and resources can be dedicated 
to new ventures. Diversification then entails either a loss of efficiency in current 
activities and/or has sub-optimal resources allocated to it. In some situations, the physical farm size 
in the ACT is insufficient to accommodate more than one production enterprise. 
Second, farm size has a major influence on capacity to generate supply. One of the main 
requirements of markets is that supply can be maintained to meet current and future demand. 
Meeting continual supply requirements is a challenge on small acreages in the ACT. Some growers 
are addressing this through cooperative schemes that generate supply across several farms, but the 
lack of a coordinating mechanism means that opportunities of cooperative supply are largely 
realised through arrangements based on pre-existing relationships between growers.  
Opportunity: As there are few options for government to address the size of rural holdings, an 
effective action to address the need to maintain supply and encourage demand may be to facilitate 
the interaction between growers and buyers (local and elsewhere) where coordinated mechanisms 
of supply and demand can originate. This is one of the actions proposed in the Canberra Region Food 
Collaborative203 regarding the establishment of databases and information linking producers with 
buyers and consumers similar to the MarketMaker program and the Producer Box scheme outlined 
earlier.   
Opportunity: There is a need for resources to assist farmers and food businesses in determining if a 
farmers’ market is the most suitable strategy for their business including the benefits that may be 
realised and the risks that must be managed. More broadly, government agencies at the local, state 
202 ibid. 
203 https://www.agrifood-hub.com/

74 
and Commonwealth levels could focus greater expertise and resources on the potential for direct to 
customer business models to integrate into the broader community food dynamic with the 
realisation of commensurate social, economic and environmental benefits (Woodburn, 2014).  
Opportunity: The Farm Cooperatives and Collaboration Pilot Program launched by the 
Commonwealth Government in 2016 was not continued beyond 2018204 - yet made substantial 
contributions supporting farm collaboration under a model that could be further explored. In 
particular, support for farm cooperatives and access to farmers’ markets should focus on innovative 
ways to ensure ongoing supply of some produce while educating consumers about the use of 
seasonal foods that are more likely to be fresh and available at certain times of the year. There are 
also opportunities to celebrate the seasonality of food such as occurs annually in the sale of the first 
box of mangoes in Brisbane205, cherries in Sydney206, and internationally in celebrations such as 
Spargelzeit (asparagus season) in Germany207 that sees numerous stalls, festivities and special menus 
in restaurants dedicated to asparagus. 
5.5 Labour  
Several farming businesses in the ACT highlighted the difficulties in attracting and 
retaining labour. This may seem surprising given the large numbers of students 
attending university in Canberra that would be expected to be seeking part time 
work. However, the nature of agricultural employment is not conducive to 
attracting part time student employment with time demands during the day overlapping with study 
requirements. University students tend to favour more flexible work that can be managed in 
conjunction with study requirements.  
Australian agriculture has a high reliance on the use of foreign workers especially for seasonal work. 
develop a National Agriculture Workforce Strategy208, and the current focus on labour shortages in 
agriculture has ensured the issue is front-of-mind for federal policy-makers and industry bodies. 
The difficulty in attracting labour in the ACT region is not significantly different to that encountered 
across multiple agriculture industries nationwide and has a direct impact on farm businesses 
especially in achieving time-critical operations such as fruit picking, egg collection etc. It also has a 
profound impact on the capacity to diversify. As noted, (RIRDC, 2002) successful diversification 
requires the commitment of resources, including time, in both planning and execution. A lack of 
casual labour to maintain current business activities prevents owners from devoting the time 
required to explore diversification opportunities. 
Opportunity: ACT leaseholders should engage with the national Agricultural Labour Advisory 
Committee to ensure the specific agricultural labour needs of the ACT region are understood. 
Opportunity: Growers in the ACT region could explore the availability of support from the 
Commonwealth AgATTRACT209 program to attract young people to a career in agriculture. 
204 Cooperative program Farming Together ends without further funding in budget - ABC News  
205 Brisbane Produce Market Mango Auction hits $1 million raised for charities | Good Fruit & Vegetables | 
Australia (goodfruitandvegetables.com.au)  
206 First box of cherries at the Sydney Markets' Cherry Auction sold for $20,000 | Good Fruit & Vegetables | 
Australia (goodfruitandvegetables.com.au)  
207 10 facts about Spargelzeit AKA asparagus season (iamexpat.de)  
208 National Agricultural Workforce Strategy | Have Your Say - Agriculture, Water and the Environment 
(awe.gov.au)  
209 Agricultural Workforce - DAWE

75 
5.6 Contractors 
Reports on the availability of contractors for activities such as shearing, hay making, 
crop planting and spraying differed markedly across growers. Some had long-
standing arrangements with providers in region while others had difficulties 
accessing contract services or reported the contract services were very expensive. 
From a service provider perspective, the size of ACT farms and enterprises is not attractive to 
maintaining the capacity to service a relatively small market. Similar to opportunities to maintain 
supply via coordinating production across farms, the opportunity exists to co-ordinate demand for 
contract services to increase the probability of attracting a suitable provider at a reasonable cost. It 
is debatable that there is a role for government with such coordination probably best delivered by 
growers or as a business offering from potential providers. 
5.7 Transport  
The ACT region is well situated to supply domestic markets in Sydney and 
Melbourne by road as well as international markets via air from the same cities 
and the Canberra airport. Given the proximity to the Hume highway and the 
provision of goods into Canberra from both Sydney and Melbourne, it might be 
expected that capacity for backloading would be high resulting in substantial discounts for freight 
out of the ACT region. However, this does not appear to be the reality with most growers reporting 
that freight is expensive, difficult to acquire (especially for small volumes of perishable food) and is 
therefore a significant limitation to accessing markets. A similar issue has been reported by 
producers in Central West NSW many of whom have reverted to using Australia Post for small 
deliveries, despite the cost, and/or are delivering perishable goods to customers in Sydney and 
Canberra themselves210. In addition, transport of inputs to the ACT (especially feedstocks) can also 
be expensive and a limitation on the operations and expansion of a number of ventures. 
5.8 Infrastructure 
The size of the ACT farming sector, and even the ACT region, makes it difficult to 
attract required investment in infrastructure for localized processing and 
manufacture. This is particularly evident in the meat processing sector where the 
lack of abattoir infrastructure in the ACT, Southern Tablelands and Central West is 
an acknowledged block to the development of diversified animal production opportunities. In 
addition, the costs associated with travel to the ACT, meeting local regulations and disposing of 
waste (e.g., offal) in the ACT can be unattractive to mobile abattoir providers.  
The lack of infrastructure is further complicated by ACTs planning regulations that classify most 
processing infrastructure as light industry and require it to be established on industrial sites that are 
both expensive and not necessarily easily accessible to growers. Despite this, some infrastructure 
does exist such as the Capitol Chilled Foods (owned by Bega) packaging plant at Fyshwick.  
Opportunity: The development of processing infrastructure throughout the ACT is clearly not 
desirable. However, there is an opportunity for growers and government to work together to 
identify sites on broadacre and rural land where collaborative infrastructure that supports farm 
diversification could be developed without compromising the Territory Plan zoning objectives. 
210 FINAL-Value-Adding-to-Agriculture.pdf (rdacentralwest.org.au)

76 
5.9 Access to Information 
Some but not all growers related that accessing information on opportunities for 
diversification was difficult. Indeed, there is no single site to access information on 
multiple diversification topics, although it is hoped that this report provides some 
instruction on how such information can be obtained. In addition, the ACT and 
Southern Tablelands RDAs are good sources of information. However, it should be acknowledged 
that one of the most effective learning methodologies in agriculture entails growers learning from 
growers. This paradigm applies to exploring diversification opportunities.   
Recommendation: The ACT government, RDAs and landholders should consider methods to 
facilitate grower-to-grower and grower-to-customer exchanges of information. Food in the Capital is 
a good start but more frequent events, each focused on a limited number of topics, would provide 
the forum for more effective learning experiences.

77 
6. Other opportunities  
6.1 The circular bioeconomy 
Globally, approximately one third of all food produced (1.3 billion tonnes) is wasted 
with an annual direct cost of $1.75 trillion211. In Australia, food lost as waste is 
estimated to exceed 7.3 million tonnes per annum (2016/17) costing $20bn212.  
The ACT Government is aligned with the National Food Waste Strategy (FWS) targets213 with the aim 
to halve food waste by 2030. The FWS outlines approaches to halve food waste by 2030, identifies 
some of the opportunities for innovation that are likely to arise and is consistent with the UN 
Sustainability Goals214 that underpin growing consumer, producer and market demand for 
sustainably produced foods.  
The Fight Food Waste CRC (FFWCRC), in which the ACT government participates215, provides 
important leadership in the implementation of the FWS. The FFWCRC (together with KPMG) has 
developed a food recovery hierarchy216 which highlights areas where different interventions can 
impact food waste. Preferred strategies include reducing the volume of food surplus generated that 
could add to wastage and the redistribution of additional food to those in need. The use of food 
scraps in animal feed, industrial uses (e.g., generation of fuel from cooking oil) and composting are 
also important. Unsurprisingly, disposal of food waste in landfill is not a preferred option. 
Strategies of significant interest to diversification of primary production in the ACT region include: 
• 
Source reduction and reuse – Linked to initiatives such as the Proposal for Sustainable Urban 
Food that would encourage greater alignment of local production and consumption to 
reduce the amount of food transported into the ACT that subsequently goes to waste, 
• 
Feed animals – linked to opportunities to convert food waste and excess production to high 
value animal feed. 
• 
Composting – linking opportunities to produce nutrient-rich soil ameliorants.  
Opportunities associated with generating high value animal feed, particularly using insects, is well 
suited to the ACT. There are start-up companies (e.g. Goterra) already established, transport 
distances are manageable, and R&D via CSIRO and the universities is available.  
Most recently, insect farming has gained growing attention because of its capacity to generate 
protein from low value, low quality food stuffs using a minimal amount of water. Data collated by 
CSIRO217 in 2021 demonstrates the relative advantages of insect rearing compared to the main 
livestock production activity in the ACT of cattle grazing. Comparing cattle production with crickets 
as an example of insect production illustrates benefits in the proportion of edible protein (crickets 
have twice the amount of edible protein), land use (crickets use less than 10% of the land area 
required for cattle), greenhouse gas emissions (crickets generate less than 5% the CO2 of cattle), 
water use (less than 1%) and feed (less than 10%). Crickets also have a far superior feed conversion 
efficiency, that is the amount of feed required to generate 1kg of cricket protein. 
211 Tackling the 1.6-Billion-Ton Food Loss and Waste Crisis (bcg.com)  
212 (PDF) Primary Production Food Losses: Turning losses into profit (researchgate.net)  
213 National Food Waste Strategy: Halving Australia's Food Waste by 2030 (awe.gov.au)  
214 Take Action for the Sustainable Development Goals - United Nations Sustainable Development  
215 OUR PARTICIPANTS | Fight Food Waste CRC  
216 Fighting food waste using the circular economy (assets.kpmg)  
217 Edible insects (csiro.au)

78 
More generally, opportunities for composting are already being utilised by several individual 
businesses in the ACT (E.g., Two Before Ten’s urban farm project218) and some growers have utilised 
sewerage ash for soil amelioration and nutrient input onto pastures in the past.  
Opportunity: Greater linkage of waste streams throughout the ACT with reuse activities such as 
insect production and composting has the potential to generate a circular bioeconomy that 
minimizes organic waste, increases productivity and soil health on agricultural lands, provides 
opportunities for diversification and makes a significant contribution to the ACT Waste minimisation 
strategy.   
6.2 Wastewater 
A conservative estimate of the potential volume of wastewater from LMWQCC 
available for reuse is approximately 28GL/year and is expected to increase to 
32.6GL/year by 2060219. Initial assessments of reusing wastewater for urban and 
agricultural uses indicated a negative impact on downstream irrigators beyond 
about 25%220 although other modelling suggests the impact on downstream flows of increasing 
recycled water use in the ACT would be minimal due to increased overflows from the enlarged 
Cotter Dam221. The ACT Non-potable Water Master Plan study (2011) focuses on the provision of 
13,750ML/year (with a reliability of 95%) for non-potable demands222 that could include diversified 
agricultural production.  The appetite for water recycling in the ACT is unclear such that, despite the 
potential for at least some use of wastewater, opportunities for irrigated agriculture have been 
limited to the Hardies vineyard in Belconnen. Indeed, Icon Water (the water supply company in the 
ACT) have considered the introduction of minor water restrictions at a time when Canberra’s dams 
are all at 100% capacity223. 
Opportunity: Greater clarity on potential access to water in the ACT and through water trading for 
agriculture would provide leaseholders with certainty when assessing diversification options that 
include the need for irrigation (most production options).   
6.3 Ecosystem services 
Previous studies have identified that the supply of certain aspects of biodiversity 
conservation is hindered by rules for land tenure, competitive neutrality, and 
taxation (Productivity Commission 2001). The tenure of leases on rural land in the 
ACT makes it impractical to consider perpetual models of payment for ecosystem 
services. However, the ACT government could consider a model based on the 15-year conservation 
tenders utilised by the Biodiversity Conservation Trust (BCT) in NSW or indeed could adopt the same 
model to provide consistency across jurisdictions within the ACT region.  
The ACT government might also consider the use of time-limited stewardship models to recognise 
the value of landholders maintaining biodiversity and managing natural capital. However, any such 
model would need to adopt a timeframe appropriate to the market in which biodiversity credits 
218 Urban Farm | Two Before Ten  
219 https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/576077/ACT_Non-
potable_Water_Master_Plan_Study.pdf  
220 https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/576078/Appendix_A.pdf  
221https://www.icrc.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1246585/Submission6_5_January_2012_ACTEW_
Corporation_Ltd.pdf  
222 https://www.environment.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/576077/ACT_Non-
potable_Water_Master_Plan_Study.pdf  
223 Water restrictions for Canberra considered despite full dam capacity | The Canberra Times | Canberra, ACT

79 
might be traded and, given that most current models are based on biodiversity outcomes in 
perpetuity, a fixed timeframe may not be attractive to buyers or sellers or indeed may not meet the 
requirements of current and future market-based mechanisms for payment.  
Opportunity: The ACT Government could consider funding private on farm management of future 
biodiversity offset sites rather than the transfer of those sites into the public reserve system. Private 
management of the offset areas could provide a significant value proposition and enhance the 
overall farm viability and sustainability of adjacent on farm areas by undertaking more traditional 
farm practices.  
Opportunity: Time limited biodiversity stewardship schemes could be employed within the ACT to 
protect biodiversity and maintain natural capital that is then utilised as environmental offsets for 
other developments, as is routinely practiced currently. The approach would circumvent the 
difficulties in participating in broader schemes that require longer timeframes or perpetual models 
of management of protection.  
Regardless of timeframe, the adoption of a model to pay for ecosystem services that incentivises 
growers to manage natural capital for public and private benefit, generate an income stream and 
build resilience is an opportunity for diversification that has been adopted in other jurisdictions and 
is a significant opportunity in the ACT.  
Opportunity: Establishment of appropriate training and information services for landholders in the 
ACT region to increase their awareness of ecosystem services programs and broader sustainability 
programs that are already available or may become available in the future. 
6.4 Data sharing 
The size of ACT farms, small volumes of production and high freight costs make it 
difficult to explore diversification opportunities that require consistent supply to 
distributed buyers to achieve viability. Mechanisms such as databases (e.g., 
MarketMaker in the USA) have been shown to be effective in bringing together 
growers, buyers and customers as have farmers markets and community co-operatives. In the ACT 
the case for supporting the linking of growers, buyers and customers is compelling given that the 
population in general has a high degree of wealth, a solid understanding of the principles of 
sustainability and a willingness to pay a premium for locally produced food if they can find it. The 
current farmers’ markets and co-op schemes provide excellent support for growers to sell local 
products but could be supported through activities that support greater grower access. 
Opportunity: The ACT government could consider support for the construction and implementation 
of a database of growers, buyers and customers similar to MarketMaker. Such a database is part of 
the City-Region Food System developed by the Canberra Region Food Collaborative.  
Opportunity: For Community-based co-operatives, the high reliance on volunteers is a major risk to 
the business model that could be addressed through a small but targeted grant scheme.

80 
7. Conclusion  
The range of diversification options available to ACT farm businesses are impacted by several 
significant factors including farm size, human capital and variation in land capability and soil type, as 
well as individual risk appetite, location and access to labour, life stage, family decision-making and 
ease of integration with current farm operations. 
The major disincentive for diversifying production system or revenue generation on farms in the ACT 
region is associated with land planning and the requirement to maintain alignment with purpose 
clauses under ill-fitting lease agreements. A lack of recognition of agriculture in strategic planning 
documents creates uncertainty for producers in their tenure and clarity of allowable activities for 
landholders needed to generate the confidence to invest in land improvements and diversification 
options.   
While the biophysical limitations of soil quality and access to water (2022 notwithstanding) will 
always dictate the range of diversification options which can mitigate the vagaries of drought and 
other climate extremes, ACT farmers are resilient and innovative. The unique competitive advantage 
provided by co-location to consumers and potential labour, generation of off-farm income, and 
marketing of provenance attributes opens the door to diversification opportunities for the ACT 
(summarised in Figure 17).  
In particular, the opportunity to establish a world-leading agriculturally based circular bioeconomy 
should not be dismissed as idealistic rhetoric. The fledgling Bega Circular Valley 2030 program224 
demonstrates that audacious change is possible, and the ACT region’s agricultural economy is of a 
scale that makes such a project feasible. 
With the cooperation of Government and industry to address and remove the barriers identified 
herein, opportunities aligned with land capability for non-traditional alternative production systems, 
value-adding, new markets and improved food distribution could potentially provide not only a 
market niche for ACT producers but also increased resilience to climate impacts.  
224 Projects - Bega Circular Valley

81 
Figure 17: ACT farm diversification options overview

82 
8. Recommendations 
The following recommendations summarise opportunities identified throughout the report:  
1. The ACT government should establish a direct point of communication on agricultural 
issues.  While commendable that ACT NRM is so proactive on these issues, it is still very 
difficult for new entrants to know where to look or who to talk to regarding both 
opportunities for diversification and barriers.  
2. Leaseholder and Government interactions must be improved to overcome barriers of land 
use planning, land tenure, lease agreements and land management agreements. It is 
recommended that the ACT Government: 
i. 
provide greater clarity to leaseholders regarding the interpretation of the 
objectives for broadacre and rural lands and how these are currently applied in 
planning and lease management. 
ii. 
work with leaseholders to better define and communicate the planning and 
approvals processes for non-urban zoned land with specific attention to 
diversification. 
iii. 
consider the merit of changes to the Territory Plan to facilitate diversification 
options where these involve the development of light industry on non-urban zoned 
land associated with current agricultural production. 
iv. 
review the process and costs structure for applications to change lease purpose 
clauses where the change relates specifically to a different form of agriculture as 
defined in the Territory Plan; or, consider removing lease purpose clauses that apply 
further constraints beyond those of the general provisions of agriculture as defined 
in the Territory Plan. 
v. 
work with leaseholders to identify land that is unlikely to be utilised for urban 
development and could be rezoned to rural and accompanied by extended lease 
tenures that provide a level of certainty required for diversification and the access to 
required capital. 
vi. 
review the effectiveness of current LMA models to achieve desired environmental 
outcomes together with leaseholders. 
vii. 
seek expert agronomic advice and provide clarity on improvements that contribute 
to market value based on improved production capacity in the event that land is 
acquired by the government following withdrawal or expiration. 
viii. 
provide greater clarity on potential access to water in the ACT and water trading for 
agriculture to assist leaseholders decision-making when assessing diversification 
options that include the need for irrigation (i.e. most production options).   
3. The ACT Government and ACT NRM should consider region-specific activities and initiatives 
which promote participation in ecosystem services programs, which incentivise growers to 
manage natural capital for public and private benefit, generate additional income from land 
management and build drought resilience: 
i. 
Time limited biodiversity stewardship schemes could be employed within the ACT to 
protect biodiversity and maintain natural capital.  
ii. 
Appropriate training and information services should be established for 
landholders in the ACT region to increase ‘sustainability literacy’ and awareness of 
available ecosystem services programs and broader sustainability programs.

83 
iii. 
Consider aligning lease tenure with the requirements of soil carbon and ecosystem 
services programs that would allow growers to participate in these emerging 
markets more easily. 
4. ACT leaseholders must engage with the national Agricultural Labour Advisory Committee 
to ensure the agricultural labour needs of the ACT region are well understood, and explore 
options in the Commonwealth AgATTRACT program for workforce attraction assistance. 
5. Information exchanges: The ACT government, RDAs and landholders should consider:  
i. 
additional methods to facilitate grower-to-grower and grower-to-customer 
exchanges of information. While ‘Food in the Capital’ is a good start, more frequent 
events, each focused on a limited number of topics would provide the forum for 
more effective learning experiences. 
ii. 
supporting the implementation of a database of growers, buyers and customers 
similar to MarketMaker. 
iii. 
lift efforts to provide information resources, initiatives and programs (such as the 
discontinued Farm Co-operatives and Collaboration Pilot Program) to identify direct-
to-market opportunities for ACT farmers. 
6. A greater linkage of waste streams throughout the ACT could generate a circular 
bioeconomy; this is a unique opportunity for the ACT given the co-location of businesses in a 
defined region with strong social support. 
7. For community-based co-operatives, the high reliance on volunteers is a major risk to the 
business model that could be addressed through a small, targeted grant scheme.

84 
References 
Admassu, S, Fox, T & McRobert, K, (2019) Lessons from the UK on ecosystem services models, Farm 
Policy Journal (16)3, 24-34. 
Anderson K (1987) On Why Agriculture Declines with Economic Growth.  Agric. Econ. 1: 195-207. 
Andrée P, Dibden J, Higgins V & Cocklin C (2010) Competitive productivism and Australia's emerging 
‘Alternative’ Agri-food Networks: producing for farmers' markets in Victoria and beyond. Aust. 
Geograph. 41(3): 307-322. 
Anosike N & Coughenour CM (1990) The socioeconomic basis of farm enterprise diversification 
decisions. Rural Sociol. 55(1): 1-24. 
Bailey A, Williams N Palmer M & Geering R (2000) The farmer as service provider: the demand for 
agricultural commodities and equine services. Agric. Sys. 66(3): 191-204. 
Barbieri C, Mahoney E & Butler L (2008) Understanding the Nature and Extent of Farm and Ranch 
Diversification in North America. Rural Sociol. 73(2): 205-229. 
Barbieri C & Mahoney E (2009) Why is diversification an attractive farm adjustment strategy? 
Insights from Texas farmers and ranchers. J Rural Studies 25: 58-66. 
Barosh L, Friel S, Engelhardt K & Chan L (2014) The cost of a healthy and sustainable diet –  who can 
afford it? Aust. New Zld. J Pub. Health 38(1): 7-12. 
Botterill LC & Hayes MJ (2012) Drought triggers and declarations: Science and policy considerations 
for drought risk management. Drought Mitigation Center Faculty Publications. 125. 
https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/droughtfacpub/125  
Bowler I, Clark G, Crockett A, Ilbery B & Shaw A (1996) The development of alternative farm 
enterprises: a study of family labour farms in the Northern Pennines of England. J. Rural Stud. 
12(3): 285–295. 
Carr GW (2001) Australian plants as weeds in Victoria. Plant Protection Quarterly 16(3): 124-125. 
Carpio CE, Isengildina-Massa O, Lamie D & Zapata SD (2013) Does E-Commerce help agricultural 
markets? The case of MarketMaker. Choices 28(4): 1-7. 
Chang HH & Meyerhoefer CD (2021) COVID-19 and the demand for online food shopping services: 
Empirical evidence from Taiwan. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 103(2): 448-465. 
Cokcetin N, William S, Blair S, Carter D, Brooks P and Harry L (2019) Active Australian Leptospermum 
honey: New sources and their bioactivity. AgriFutures Australia Publication No. 19-037, Project 
No. PRJ-009186. 
Coles S (2019) Broccoli by subscription. The rise of community supported agriculture in Australia. 
Sanctuary: Modern Green Homes 49: 82-85. 
Coriolis (2020) The Next Wave of Emerging Industry Opportunities 2020 (Stage I). 
https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052a.pdf  
Culas RJ (2006) Causes of farm diversification over time: an Australian perspective on an Eastern 
Norway model. AFBM J. 3(1): 1-11. 
Decker C & Kurnik B (2018) Scan of new and emerging agricultural industry opportunities and market 
scoping. Agrifutures Publication No. 18/040, Project No. PRJ-01093. 
FIAL Protein Market: Size of the prize for Australia. 
https://workdrive.zohopublic.com.au/file/qx57642ed064d88b74fe983349f1d9a7beaf6

85 
Fielke S & Bardsley DK (2013) South Australian farmers' markets: Tools for enhancing the 
multifunctionality of Australian agriculture. GeoJournal 78(5): online 
Gellynck X & Viaene J (2002) Market-orientated positioning of on-farm processed foods as a 
condition for successful farm diversification. J. Agric. Econ. 53(3) 531-548. 
Goucher, G (2020) Government farm financial risk management measures, Australian Farm Institute 
https://www.farminstitute.org.au/product/government-farm-financial-risk-management-
measures/  
Giraud KL, Bond CA & Bond JJ (2005) Consumer preferences for locally made specialty food products 
across Northern New England. Agric. Res. Econ. Rev. 34: 204-216. 
Gunn RH, Story R, Galloway RW, Duffy PJB, Yapp GA & McAlpine JR (1969) Lands of the Queanbeyan-
Shoalhaven Area, ACT and NSW. Land Research Series 24. 
Hughes N, Galeano D & Hatfield-Dodds S (2019) The effects of drought and climate variability on 
Australian farms, ABARES, Canberra. http://doi.org/10.25814/5de84714f6e08. 
Hughes N, Lu M, Soh W & Lawson K (2020) Simulating the effects of climate change on the 
profitability of Australian farms, ABARES working paper, Canberra. 
https://doi.org/10.25814/5d9165cf4241d 
Hughes N & Gooday P (2021) Analysis of climate change impacts and adaptation on Australian farms, 
ABARES Insights, Canberra. https://doi.org/10.25814/589v-7662. CC BY 4.0. 
Ilbery B & Maye D (2005) Alternative (shorter) food supply chains and specialist livestock products in 
the Scottish-English borders.  Env. & Plan. A 37: 823-844. 
Institute for Sustainable Futures. (2016). Benefits of peri-urban farming | Sydney’s Food Futures. 
Sydney Food Futures. http://www.sydneyfoodfutures.net/benefits-of-peri-urban-farming/  
Kandulu JM, Bryan BA, King D & Connor JD (2012) Mitigating economic risk from climate variability in 
rain-fed agriculture through enterprise mix diversification. Ecol. Econ. 79: 105-112. 
Kiem AS, Askew LE, Sherval M, Verdon-Kidd DC, Clifton C, Austin E, McGuirk PM & Berry H (2010) 
Drought and the future of rural communities: Drought impacts and adaptation in regional 
Victoria, Australia, National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility, Gold Coast. 
Kiem AS & Austin EK (2013) Drought and the future of rural communities: Opportunities and 
challenges for climate change adaptation in regional Victoria, Australia. Global Env. Change 23: 
1307-1316. 
Kimura S & Antón J (2011) Risk Management in Agriculture in Australia, OECD Food, Agriculture and 
Fisheries Working Papers, no. 39, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kgj0d8bj3d1-en  
Laurie A, Curtis M, Heath R, Darragh L & McRobert K (2019) Australian agriculture: An increasingly 
risky business. Australian Farm Institute Report. 
LeRoux MN, Schmit TM, Roth M & Streeter DH (2009) Evaluating marketing channel options for 
small-scale fruit and vegetable producers. Working Paper 2009-14 Department of Applied 
Economics and Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853-7801 USA 
Lin BB (2011) Resilience in Agriculture through Crop Diversification: Adaptive Management for 
Environmental Change. BioSci. 61(3): 183-193. 
Lock A, Hatt M, Mamun E, Xu J, Bruce S, Heyhoe E, Nicholson M & Ritman K (2012) Farm risk 
management in a changing climate. ABARES Conference paper 12.5, Canberra, March. CC BY 3.0.

86 
Lockie S (2015) Australia’s agricultural future: the social and political context. Report to SAF07 – 
Australia’s Agricultural Future Project, Australian Council of Learned Academies, Melbourne. 
Medhurst A & Seagrave R (2007) Why Do Farming Families Diversify? RIRDC Publication No. 07/156, 
Project No.DAV214-A 
Mooney C, Defenderfer D & Anderson M (20101) Reasons why Farmers Diversify: Northern 
Midlands, Tasmania. RIRDC Publication No. 10/197, Project No. PRJ-002486 
Murphy B (2001) Breeding and Growing Snails commercially in Australia. RIRDC Publication No. 
00/188, Project No. ARH-1A. 
Murtough G, Aretino B & Matysek A (2002) Creating Markets for Ecosystem Services, Productivity 
Commission Staff Research Paper, AusInfo, Canberra 
Nelson R, Kokic P, Crimp S, Martin P, Meinke H, Howden SM, de Voil P & Nidumolu U (2010) The 
vulnerability of Australian rural communities to climate variability and change: Part II—
Integrating impacts with adaptive capacity. Environ. Sci. & Policy 13: 18-27. 
Northcote J & Alonso AD (2010) Factors underlying farm diversification: the case of Western 
Australia's olive farmers. Agric. & Human Values 28 (2): 237-246. 
Ollenburg C (2007) Farm Tourism in Australia: A Family Business and Rural Studies Perspective. PhD 
thesis. School of Environmental and Applied Sciences, Faculty of Environmental Sciences, Griffith 
University. 
Ollenburg C & Buckley R (2007) Stated economic and social motivations of farm tourism operators. J. 
Travel Res. 45: 444-452. 
Olsauskas D, Howorth P, Casanove S & Ryan M (2018) CGRC Rural Lands Strategy: Farm 
Diversification and Succession Planning Issues Paper. 
Paul CJM & Nehring R (2005) Product diversification, production systems and economic performance 
in U.S. agricultural production. J. Econometrics 126: 525-548. 
Productivity Commission 2001, Constraints on Private Conservation of Biodiversity, Commission 
Research Paper, AusInfo, Canberra. 
Quiggin J & Chambers RG (2004) Drought policy: a graphical analysis. Aust. J. Agric. Res. Econ. 48(2): 
225-251. 
Radcliffe J (2022) Current status of recycled water for agricultural irrigation in Australia, potential 
opportunities and areas of emerging concern. Sci. Total Environ. 807: 151676 
Regional Australia Institute (2013) Economic diversification and the competitiveness of regional 
Australia http://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Diversification-
Policy-Paper-RB_V2.pdf  
RIRDC (2002) Costs and benefits of diversification: Whole farm case studies. A report for the Rural 
Industries Research and Development Corporation by Campbell White & Associates Pty Ltd & 
Alan Black. RIRDC Publication No. 02/029, Project No ECU-7A 
Sharpley R & Vass A (2006) Tourism, farming and diversification: An attitudinal study. Tourism Mgt. 
27: 1040-1052. 
Sleeman JR & Walker PH (1979) The soils of the Canberra district. Soils and Land Use Series No. 58. 
Division of Soils, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Australia. 
Turner B, Pearson D & Dyball R (2012) Food in the ACT; a preliminary study of issues for the ACT 
Government, Environment and Sustainable Development Directorate.

87 
White, R. E., Davidson, B., & Eckard, R. (2021). A landholder’s guide to participate in soil carbon 
farming in Australia (p. 9). Australian Farm Institute. 
Wilkinson V, Morris T & Hughes D (2021) The next wave of Emerging Industry Opportunities 2020. 
AgriFutures Australia Publication No. 21-052, Project No. PRJ-012733. 
https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/21-052.pdf  
Woodburn V (2014) Understanding the characteristics of Australian farmers’ markets. RIRDC 
Publication No. 14/040, Project No. PRJ-008999.