Armidale Regional Council 
and Uralla Shire Council 
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan

Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge the Anaiwan and Kamilaroi people as the Traditional 
Custodians of the region’s lands and waters where we live and work, 
and pay our respected to Elders past and present.
We value the vital involvement of members of the primary production, 
service industries, health and education, First Nations, cultural and arts, 
and broader communities of the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire to the 
formulation of this plan and extend our thanks to those who contributed. 
This project is supported by Armidale Regional and Uralla Shire Councils, through 
 This document was prepared for Uralla Shire and 
Armidale Regional Councils by Meridian Urban.
Front cover image Michael Hull.

Contents
Introduction
2
Plan Framework
3
How this plan supports drought resilience 
6
Plan outcomes
7
Region snapshot
8
About Armidale Region and Uralla Shire
9
New England region
9
Armidale Region
9
Uralla Shire 
10
The Anaiwan and Kamilaroi First Nations peoples
10
How this plan was prepared 
12
A stakeholder-driven approach
13
Engagement outcomes and key community insights informing the plan
15
How our region is impacted by drought
18
Interconnected nature of drought impacts
19
Trends, stressors and shocks
21
Drought history 
22
Future drought
27
Anticipated future climate impacts 
30
Drought resilience in the region
32
A snapshot of vulnerability and resilience to drought 
32
Connected communities and partnerships
34
Drought resilience action plan
39
Drought resilience pathways and actions
40
Implementation 
51
Appendix A — Drought history 
56
Appendix B — Concepts to guide adaptive learning
64

Glossary
Key terms used throughout this plan are defined below.
ADAPTATION
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual or expected shocks 
and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and socio-
economic changes.
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE
Coordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between systems when designing 
interventions and for their implementation and evaluation.
COPING CAPACITY
Communities that may be constrained in their capacity to use available resources to cope with adverse 
events and to prepare for, absorb and recover.
DROUGHT
Drought means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount 
of available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors without changing 
the economic status or outcomes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while 
maintaining natural processes and ecosystem services.
GOVERNANCE
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a society 
share power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or informal.
INTERVENTION OPTIONS
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, initiatives and investments that are 
planned to bring about change in the system.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of lived experience within a 
landscape, bearing witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, 
culture – how people interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
RESILIENCE
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to maintain the existing functions, 
structure and feedbacks. Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic resilience, 
environmental resilience and social resilience.
RISK
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, recognising the diversity of 
values and objectives associated with such systems.
SHOCK
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples include: major storms, floods, bush 
fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism and cyber-attacks’.
SOCIAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
existing social and community functions.
STRESSOR
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect, e.g. drought.
SYSTEMS
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
THEORY OF CHANGE
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain how and why outcomes and 
impacts will be achieved through use, implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities 
and outputs.
TRENDS
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and are expected to shape 
change into the future.
THRESHOLD
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable causes a system to shift to a 
qualitatively different regime. Also referred to as a tipping point.
TRANSFORM
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, functions, 
feedbacks and identity.
TRIGGER POINT
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management intervention. Trigger points are 
usually defined in the planning phase
1
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Introduction
Drought is a recurring feature of the Australian landscape. It brings with it challenges 
at an individual and community level that can compound with broader local and 
regional issues. 
These challenges may be things that have not been 
experienced previously, or the impacts of drought 
may amplify existing issues. The effects of drought, 
whilst acutely felt on-farm, go beyond the farm gate, 
extending across the community and impacting the 
economic, social, and environmental characteristics 
of the region. 
How drought affects us depends on a range of 
dynamic factors, including social and market factors 
leading into dry conditions. For the Armidale 
Region and Uralla Shire, average annual rainfall is 
relatively high. Located at the top of several water 
catchments, its vast undulating hills are synonymous 
with the green character of the New England 
tablelands, supporting diverse and highly valued 
ecosystems and natural environments. However, 
past experiences with drought in the region have 
demonstrated that high rainfall levels are not always 
guaranteed. Historic droughts have given rise to 
expected and unexpected challenges, with more 
recent events demonstrating immense strains that 
can be placed on the values of the community when 
the pressures of drought take hold. 
The rapid cycle of hazard-related social and 
economic events over recent years has resulted 
in unique stresses. These stresses go beyond just 
drought, and ultimately challenge our preparedness 
ahead of the next dry period. The interlinkages 
between these compounding events, including 
drought, bush fire, COVID, housing pressures and 
the cost of living, can result in feelings of being in 
a constant state of response. This plan seeks to 
ensure a considered and comprehensive approach 
to drought is undertaken across the region. One 
that builds on the established strengths of our 
communities and seeks to address challenges early, 
in order to place us in the best possible position 
ahead of the next dry period. 
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP) is a collaboration between Armidale Regional Council 
and Uralla Shire Council, developed alongside their communities, working together to strengthen 
preparations for drought and broaden resilience to its impacts. The RDRP program is one of five focus 
areas under the Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought Fund and is jointly funded by the NSW 
Government support of regional consortiums of local governments and partner stakeholders to plan 
pragmatically and proactively for drought resilience.1
1 Other focus areas under the Future Drought Fund include farm business resilience, roll-out of the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool, and 
better land management practices that support landscape resilience
Environmental
Economic
Drought
resilience
Social and
Community
Image - Photo credit Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
2

Figure 1 ­— Plan Framework
Monitoring 
Evaluation and learning 
Implementation
Through collective preparedness, the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire is on the 
front foot to respond to the impacts of drought. We take advantage of the productive 
times and manage the low periods with an understanding of the pressures in our 
region and the scenarios we may face. We value the local assets we have in our 
community and build on these by acting together and acting proactively.
Strategic pathways
Priority Actions
›
Harnessing collaboration
›
Sustainable enterprise investment
›
Rural business planning
›
Economic diversification
›
Supporting local business
›
Leveraging the region’s strengths as an education hub
›
Focusing on community wellbeing
›
Investing in partnerships
›
Building capability and continuous improvement
›
A water-wise community
›
Community awareness
›
Landscape restoration
›
A focus on biosecurity
›
Build upon research
›
Expanding communications and engagement
during drought
›
Leveraging IP&R framework processes
›
Supporting continuous improvement in water management
Economics
Social and 
community
Specific 
actions
Environmental 
connectivity
Governance
Drought resilience vision
Action plan 
Guiding principles
Connected across community
Connected at the neighborhood 
level and connected across 
the region
Prepared for 
boom and bust
Prepared when drought looms 
and prepared to benefit and plan 
during highly productive times
Scenario ready
Learning from past 
and prepared for 
future scenarios
Proactive governance 
and action
Early interventions and 
communicating 
across community
Acting together
Build on the strong partnerships 
across other region, and 
organisations and disciplines
Land 
stewardship
Building on innovation of land 
management strengths, and 
support resilient landscapes
The plan establishes a vision and guiding principles drawn from stakeholder engagement 
and alignment to existing local plans. These components guide the development of 
priority areas and specific actions established in the action plan. Actions have been 
informed by feedback from stakeholders and alignment with existing strategies.
Plan Framework
3
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Plan purpose
Drought resilience, as described by the CSIRO (2022):
‘will ensure regional Australia can endure deeper, longer droughts, and recover from them 
sooner. This will help Australia’s agricultural industries maintain national farm income, increase 
food security, and protect the regional jobs that rely on agriculture during the toughest years. 
Importantly, it will also increase the resilience of rural and regional communities and improve 
environmental outcomes’.
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan has a focus on broader community resilience, specifically in the face 
of drought. The plan aims to highlight the impacts drought may have on the agriculturally strong and diverse 
areas of the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire, with the intention of providing a roadmap for the broader 
community. 
Whilst the role of local government is to continue to deliver on initiatives and projects to address water 
security, this plan provides a guide on potential steps to be taken outside of water security options to prepare 
for dry times. This builds upon the existing resilience of our region and the understanding of what worked 
well during past droughts, what could have been done better, and where we should collectively focus 
our attention.
Objectives of this RDRP
›
Develop an understanding of what contributes to drought resilience in the region, formed around
economic, environmental and community characteristics.
›
Build and strengthen existing partnerships, programs, community and organisation capacity in working to
address impacts from drought.
›
Identify what the priorities are in times of drought, recognising the anticipated future impacts both from
historical and anticipated impacts.
›
Ensure the region is positioned to adapt to changing circumstances and realise opportunities as they arise
to shift vulnerabilities.
›
Identify a suite of actions between the  short-term and the far-term, building upon what has been
done well.
›
what gaps still remain, and provide a direct focus towards transformational change.
›
Provide a platform and evidence-base to support public and private drought preparedness, response and
recovery investment in the region, in a meaningful and impactful way.
Implementation funding is available for long‑term annual investment across Australia through the 
Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought Fund and other grant assistance opportunities. This Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan provides a framework for implementation and identifies practical pathways for the 
regions community and businesses to prepare for and respond to drought impacts.
4
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Why we need a plan
The complex nature of drought distinguishes it from 
other climate and natural hazards. The impacts can 
be cascading, spanning across components of the 
community. These impacts can persist for some 
time after the drought ends and interacts with other 
existing pressures in the community. 
Having a regional plan ensures a collective 
approach in response to drought. The changing 
pressures on communities and the projected 
changes under future climate scenarios extend 
beyond administrative boundaries. Responses in 
isolation can create further issues or fail to consider 
the broader catchment in which the environment 
functions. 
The 2017-2019 drought was NSW’s worst drought 
on record. The Armidale Region and Uralla Shire’s 
existing contingency measures were particularly 
tested when the usually high average rainfall 
projection did not eventuate. This led to serious 
water shortages for domestic, agricultural and 
industry uses, and significant impacts on water 
quality. This plan takes learnings from the past to 
be better prepared next time. We want to be in a 
stronger position to adapt to changes and respond 
at different times of the drought cycle. 
group-arrows-rotate
Having a plan seeks to avoid 
tensions placed on our tightknit 
communities and the cohesive social 
fabric which are so emblematic 
of the region. It allows for clarity 
in communication across times of 
drought, and across the diverse 
community makeup of the region. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
5

How this plan supports drought resilience 
Drought occurs amidst the broader events cycle. This plan seeks to bring the existing basis of resilience 
work together in a manner which directs actions across a timeline of drought. Understanding and evaluating 
existing work ensures that drought preparedness remains a focus, even in times of good rainfall. 
This plan emphasises the role of risk reduction, acknowledging the need for clear governance in the 
management and impacts of drought. Drought resilience is linked to broader community resilience and 
therefore, the plan recognises the interlinkage of events that can strain a community through an accumulation 
of pressures. 
Actions are developed to target these pressures across the system. This supports a roadmap of what we can 
do to position ourselves as best we can for when dryer times arrive. Actions can address multiple issues or 
have multiple benefits or alleviate pressures at critical parts of the system. Within the plan, actions are directed 
across several intervention approaches as below.
The intervention approach may reflect the level of change in the system, the effort or cost associated, 
and the outcome desired. Some opportunities are short-term and more immediate, whilst others are more 
transformative in nature and require long-term effort to generate change.
This concept forms part of a resilience ‘theory of change’ model which helps us to break down and consider 
the complex elements of drought resilience and the links across issues.2 This makes it clear both how and 
why its impacts run so deep. This method also aids in guiding decision-making to improve resilience and 
adaptability as conditions and circumstances evolve over time
2 The plan integrates the ‘Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach (RAPTA) developed by CSIRO which provides a framework to map 
resilience interventions. Available at research.csiro.au/eap/rapta/
sun-plant-wilt
Absorb
swap-arrows
Adapt
seedling
Transform
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
6

Plan outcomes
The outcomes sought from this plan align with the guiding principles established through stakeholder 
engagement and the resilience assessment research. The outcomes are framed around broad themes to 
support plan implementation and tracking through the monitoring, evaluation and learning framework referred 
to in later sections of this plan.	
Figure 1 — Link of plan outcomes to key components of the RDRP process
THEME
OUTCOME
Social and 
community
O1	
Community connection and wellbeing is maintained
O2	 Capacity and capability of community groups and organisations 
is strengthened
O3	 Mental health services are available and are accessible across the community
O4	 Sustainable water management practices are routinely being used
Economic
O5	 Further diversification of the local economy is achieved
O6	 Cross-industry and cross-sector partnerships are leveraged to invest in 
innovative agri-business solutions and sustainable practices to prepare 
for drought
O7	 Local enterprise resilience to economic disruption is strengthened
O8	 Value-add industries are expanded
Environment 
O9	 Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways is reduced through 
investment in landscape rehydration, re-forestation, riparian restoration and 
groundcover management 
O10	 Innovative projects for water efficiency are delivered
O11	 Biosecurity outcomes are made easier to achieve through tools that grow 
capacity of individuals, businesses and organisations
O12	 Regionally-specific research is being leveraged through landholder and 
community organisation projects 
Governance 
O13	 Communications and engagement action is increased during drought periods
O14	 Drought resilience priorities are embedded across Council’s Integrated 
Planning and Reporting Framework and informs the plans, strategies and 
efforts of allied stakeholders
O15	 Transparency of information and knowledge regarding water use is available
Technical 
evidence 
base 
and
engagement
Plan 
outcomes
RDRP
actions
Align
Contribute
7
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

LARGEST INDUSTRIES 
REGIONAL 
(gross value add)
chalkboard-user Education and training
fish Agriculture, forestry and fishing
house Construction
PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL 
COMMODITIES
sheep Livestock
carrot Vegetables
flower-tulip Nurseries, cut flowers, cultivated turf
people-roof
POPULATION
29,938
FIRST NATIONS 
POPULATION
17.4%
(3.4% NSW average)
person-walking-with-cane
MEDIAN AGE
41.5
(39 NSW average)
money-bill
REGIONAL ECONOMY
Jobs (2021) 
17,833
Economy (2020) 
$2.0192b
Local businesses (2022)
3,300
user-minus
UNEMPLOYMENT 
Armidale
5.7%
Uralla
4.1%
people-roof
VOLUNTARY WORK
(organisations)
20.0% - 23.3% 
(NSW 13.0%)
Largest industries across LGAs (by employment)
ARMIDALE
chalkboard-user Higher education
user-nurse Hospitals
hand-heart Other social assistance services
URALLA
cow Beef and cattle farming (specialised)
chalkboard-user Higher education
building-columns Local government administration
Information sourced from: ABS 2021 Census data, Regional Development Australia, and AgTrack - Agricultural and Land Use Dashboard
Region snapshot
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
8

Figure 2 — Regional Drought Resilience Plan Region
About the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire
The Anaiwan and 
Kamilaroi First Nations 
peoples
The Anaiwan Nation and Kamilaroi 
Nation hold a deep historical 
connection to the Armidale Region 
and Uralla Shire. 
The Anaiwan Nation spans the 
Northern Tablelands of NSW. Mt 
Yarrowyck is home to the well-known 
Aboriginal rock art and numerous 
other historical and cultural aspects 
of the Anaiwan. The Uralla Shire 
area encompasses many Aboriginal 
artifacts within its bushland and 
national parks such as shield scar 
trees, stone tools, ochre quarries and 
flat pound grinding stones used for 
making seed derived flour. 
The Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/Gomeroi 
Nation encompasses about 30,000 
square miles of land. Colonisation 
drastically changed their way of 
life, leading to dispossession and 
cultural suppression. The history of 
colonisation has left a lasting impact 
on Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander languages. However, there 
are ongoing efforts to revive and 
preserve the Gamilaraay/Yuwaalaraay 
and Anaiwan language, with courses 
now available through institutions like 
the Australian National University and 
the Nēwara Aboriginal Corporation.
Despite past injustices, the 
descendants of this nation continue 
to occupy and cherish their ancestral 
lands today.
New England region
Armidale Region and Uralla Shire form part 
of the southern extent of the broader New 
England region which is characterised by 
landscapes in the tablelands of the Great 
Dividing Range in the east, to the rich black 
soils of the west. The New England region is 
home to successful agricultural industries and 
stunning natural landscapes which draw new 
residents and visitors each year. 
Other Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
have also been developed for surrounding 
areas in the New England region including 
Tamworth and Walcha, Gwydir and Inverell, 
and Glen Innes Severn and Tenterfield. This 
plan has regard to the shared regional values 
expressed within neighbouring regional 
drought resilience plans across the New 
England region, while focusing on the specific 
local conditions of, and opportunities for, the 
Armidale Region and Uralla Shire. 
Armidale Region and Uralla Shire are 
expecting to see an increase in the average 
age of its working population. Advances in 
technologies and the creation of new job 
opportunities, such as the evolving renewable 
energy industry and New England Renewable 
Energy Zone, will also shape the future 
population. Regional economic strategies 
seek to further grow the local education 
sector, local agri-business and visitor 
economy expansion. 
The agricultural strengths of the region are 
uniquely supported by the education and 
research capacity enabled by the University 
of New England. The University contributes 
to broader land management innovations, 
which position the region at the forefront of 
agricultural technology uptake and practices 
such as regenerative agriculture. 
The key economic drivers of the region 
include agriculture, education and training, 
tourism and renewable energy. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
9

Armidale Region
The Armidale Region includes the centres of 
Armidale and Guyra, supported by the villages of 
Wollomombi, Ebor, Black Mountain, Hillgrove and 
Ben Lomond. These smaller villages contribute 
to the broader regional identity and are filled 
with unique history and picturesque natural 
landscapes, including the World Heritage Listed 
Wollomombi Gorge, and New England, Cathedral 
Rock and Guy Fawkes River National Parks. The 
high-altitude environment of the region supports 
unique ecosystems, and the surrounding landscape 
features a mix of open farmland, and native forests. 
As a regional city, much of the anticipated 
population growth for the region is projected 
to occur in Armidale. The city is home to the 
University of New England, a mainstay of the local 
economy and an economic driver for the region. 
The University contributes to a diverse economy, 
a relatively younger average population compared 
to other areas across the New England region, 
and maintains strong connections to agricultural 
industries and research.
Guyra provides a smaller regional centre that serves 
the surrounding rural area and retains a strong 
community identity that also promotes its role as a 
hub for outdoor adventure and nature activities. 
The natural setting of the Armidale Region provides 
the backdrop for a thriving visitor economy that 
benefits from a favourable climate and location, 
being mid-way between Sydney and Brisbane with 
easy access to the coast. 
Uralla Shire 
Within the Shire, the Uralla township is supported 
by the localities of Abington, Arding, Bakers Creek, 
Balala, Boorolong, Briarbrook, Bundarra, Camerons 
Creek, Dangarsleigh, Dumaresq, Enmore, Gostwyck, 
Invergowrie, Kentucky, Kentucky South, Kingstown, 
Mihi, Rocky River, Salisbury Plains, Saumarez, 
Saumarez Ponds, Torryburn, Wollun and Yarrowyck.
The Shire experiences cooler temperatures and high 
elevation that provides a suitable climate for a range 
of primary production activities. The geological 
history of the area has endowed it with fertile basalt 
soils, making it ideal for agriculture including sheep 
and wool, viticulture and fruit production.
Uralla’s country character and attractive natural 
environment underpins the town’s growing tourism 
sector. With a breadth of history reflected in the 
heritage listed buildings, the town is a popular 
destination for the surrounding region and 
those travelling through, benefiting from popular 
commercial offerings within the Uralla township. 
The Shire is rich in natural and cultural heritage, 
with 1,262 hectares of national parks and two nature 
reserves. Bulagaranda (Mount Yarrowyck) Aboriginal 
Area protects an Aboriginal cave painting site and a 
significant natural environment, while Stony Batter 
Creek Nature Reserve is home to over 280 native 
plant species.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
10

NSW Aboriginal Water Strategy 
The Department of Climate Change, 
Energy, the Environment and Water is in the 
process of developing the NSW Aboriginal 
Water Strategy and Action Plan: increasing 
rights and access to water for cultural and 
economic purposes. The strategy aims to 
recognise Aboriginal peoples water rights 
and values. It aims to increase access and 
ownership of water for cultural and economic 
purposes. The strategy supports the 
inherent need for Aboriginal people to have 
appropriate involvement in water governance 
and responsibility in managing waterways 
and cultural sites.
Water holds deep cultural significance across 
Australia, as reflected in Dreamtime stories 
and local knowledge passed down through 
generations. These stories highlight how 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
have integrated water sources, their supply, 
and management into both their Dreamtime 
narratives and land stewardship practices. 
The strategy’s intent is to not work in 
isolation but coincide with exciting plans and 
strategies throughout the state and Australia 
wide. Four major objectives are drafted, 
with a range of actions to be finalised to 
support implementation:
water Strengthen the role of Aboriginal 
people in water planning and 
management. 
handshake-simple Provide Aboriginal ownership and 
access to water for cultural and 
economic purposes.
book Work with Aboriginal people to 
improve shared water knowledge 
and capacity.
image-landscape Work with Aboriginal people 
to maintain and preserve 
water-related cultural sites 
and landscapes.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
11

How this plan was prepared 
This plan adopts a systems-based approach to address the complex challenges of drought, recognising how 
these challenges can intensify when they interact. It builds an understanding of local context and drought 
impacts by considering economic, environmental, and social factors, while acknowledging that these impacts 
are not experienced in isolation. 
Underpinning Process
Figure 3 — Components of the plan
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Drought impacts
Historical & projected date
Our drought resilience
Action Plan
Implementation
Next Step process 
planning & engagement
Community capacity 
& partnerships
Project Control Group 
(PCG) oversight
Resilience Assessment
Technical evidence based for the plan
Community & stakeholder engagement
Local input & guidance
Next Steps
Plan Components
12
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

A stakeholder-driven approach
The stakeholder and community consultation program involved a number of approaches which allowed 
the project to reach a diverse range of the population. Stakeholder input was used to develop a shared 
understanding of local drought resilience strengths and opportunities for continuous improvement both on-
farm and off farm. 
Being an agriculturally rich and productive community, capturing on-farm sentiment and support is an 
important component of the plan. However, it was also recognised that through drought, broader flow on 
impacts are felt across local towns, smaller centres and across local businesses and community groups. 
To address these areas targeted engagement was undertaken with stakeholders with knowledge across 
economic development, community support and services, and environmental management and advocacy.
Having these discussions at an individual and community level seeks to build more community ownership and 
direction to the plan and broaden its use beyond local government to all affected by drought. 
people
Community workshops in 
Armidale and Uralla which 
provided a forum for facilitated 
discussion and detailed insights 
on the more localised impacts 
across the community. 
shop
Pop-up stalls at high visitation 
areas in other local centres 
across the region including 
Guyra and Bundarra. 
users
Targeted stakeholder 
meetings were conducted 
with key organisations and 
representatives who work 
across the economic, social and 
economic aspects of the region. 
list-check
Online survey promoted through 
councils and local groups to 
contribute to action planning. 
Continued engagement with stakeholders is essential for the effective implementation of this plan. Refining 
actions, building partnerships, and a focus on underrepresented groups will form the nature of the continued 
engagement. This ongoing focus is essential in building trust with existing organisations already operating in 
this space.
It is acknowledged that there are a range of existing engagement activities and initiatives outside the scope of 
this RDRP which can be leveraged and integrated into the plan. 
13
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Let’s Talk About Water: 
ZNet Uralla Community 
Consultation 
Following the severe drought of 2017-2019 in which immense pressures were 
placed on water security in the Uralla Shire, a number of response measures 
were initiated. ZNet Uralla Inc, a community-based group focused on broad 
sustainability initiatives, received funding to conduct informed community 
consultation that mapped community values and how these relate to possible 
responses to water scarcity.
The project was conducted in partnership 
with the University of NSW and in consultation 
with Uralla Shire Council. It involved 
sensitively unpacking the issues that occurred 
during the drought and application of 
community values and technical approaches.
ZNet Uralla produced the Let’s Talk About 
Water report which involved a robust 
community consultation process with surveys, 
stakeholder interviews and targeted focus 
groups. While developed outside of the 
local council and of the broader technical 
operations, it retains great value in the 
sentiment expressed through the report 
findings and the dialogue with the community. 
This is amplified by the fact it was conducted 
immediately after the drought, with the 
experience still fresh in mind.
The report framed a broad understanding on 
how community feels about different water 
security options for the shire. 
The options were considered with concerns 
about environmental impacts and resource 
competition in mind. Options like using 
recycled water for non-drinking purposes 
and rainwater tanks aligned strongly with 
community values, while increasing dam 
capacity had uncertain support.
Sinking bores and linking to a regional 
pipeline were seen to need careful 
consideration due to concerns regarding 
over-extraction risks and regional 
competition. Recycling water into Kentucky 
Creek Dam received mixed reactions, due to 
a limited experience with such technologies, 
however its potential in a resource-
constrained world was recognised. The 
community strongly opposed any inaction 
on securing future water supplies, reflecting 
the hardships from the drought and arsenic 
contamination on water supply in 2019. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
14

Engagement outcomes and key community 
insights informing the plan
sun-dust	 Being ready to capitalise on the 
productive times. With knowledge that 
drier periods lie ahead, there is importance 
on preparing to make the most of 
prosperous times. This readiness helps 
maintain a stable baseline of functioning. 
Success lies in managing the cycles of 
boom and bust. 
face-surprise	 ‘This doesn’t happen to us’. This was a 
feeling during 2019 given the usual high 
rainfall and cooler climates the community 
had become accustomed to. The severity 
of the recent drought was a shock to many.
group-arrows-rotate	 Strong community connections are built 
outside of drought times. During the 
drought the importance of community 
was clear with people, groups and 
organisations stepping up. To avoid 
tensions across these relationships, clear 
discussions are needed in advance of 
drought to provide clarity in decisions. 
hand-holding-droplet	 Behavioural change successes. 
During the previous drought a range 
of behavioural change initiatives were 
implemented regarding water efficiency 
and conservation. Since water restrictions 
were removed, there is evidence of 
reduced water usage compared to the pre-
drought baseline.
arrow-up-right-dots	 Economic growth discussions. There are 
broader economic ambitions and growth 
desires which may need to be managed 
and considered within the context of 
changing drought conditions. This forms 
part of water security discussions and 
integrated water management plans 
developed by councils.
network-wired	Ecosystem of partners and capacity 
building. There are existing community 
capacity and networking events delivered 
by well-regarded organisations. The region 
is home to a range of events that offer both 
learning based and social opportunities.
farm	 Spectrum of uptake across regenerative 
and sustainable agricultural practices. 
Holistic management is being facilitated 
by key organisations with high interest 
from the community. A crucial challenge is 
converting this interest to ongoing practice. 
message	 Communication during the last drought 
did not reach all in the community, 
particularly peri-urban land holders and 
smaller sized hobby farms (non-business). 
This also builds on local research and 
insights which are specific to the different 
impacts between peri-urban dwellers and 
other sections of the community.
computer	The speed of change for technology 
and farming practices can make it 
difficult for some to maintain pace. 
This is compounded by the rapid cycles 
of interlinked or cascading events and 
changing trends impacting operations. This 
results in challenges to plan with a feeling 
of being in a state of constant response 
or recovery.
brain	 There are other cumulative impacts to 
individual and community psychology 
during drought. This can be hard to 
measure but is noticeably felt across 
community. Adding to this, mental health 
assistance remains a struggle in regional 
areas. What is available, or becomes 
available during drought, is not enough. 
tractor	Drought relief and assistance is largely 
supportive of the agricultural sector. This 
sector is acutely affected, but there are 
other cohorts that are also affected and 
must likewise plan ahead and consider 
potential impacts. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
15

Plan framework linkages
The following displays the links between the  guiding principles presented at the plan framework and the key 
inputs whihc informed the plan. 
mountain-sun
Connected across 
the community
This is a feature of why people 
live in the region. An aspect of 
how the community stepped 
up during the last drought and 
the need for social cohesion 
to be maintained under future 
pressures. This principle is also 
evidenced through research on 
the vitality of rural communities 
and is a common thread across 
community strategies for the 
region. 
people-group
Acting together
The region has a strong 
ecosystem of actors supporting 
drought resilience and is built 
through existing partnerships in 
program delivery. This principle 
recognises these existing 
networks in the region and the 
strategic assets. 
list-check
Proactive governance 
and action
This reflects a feeling that 
during previous droughts 
some interventions were 
too late, or the interventions 
would have been more 
effective outside of drought. 
This also recognises that 
governance played an 
important role last drought 
through clear messaging 
and across sections of the 
community. 
sun-plant-wilt
Scenario ready
There was a feeling by some 
during the last drought that 
‘this doesn’t happen here’, 
based on the usual high 
rainfall averages associated 
with the region. There is a 
need to ensure readiness, 
particularly under changing 
conditions and recognising 
the historic droughts. 
droplet
Prepared for boom 
and bust
Research indicates the 
extent of historical droughts 
and projected changes in 
rainfall patterns under a 
changing climate. Community 
engagement highlighted a well-
developed understanding that 
conditions are changing and 
that there is a need to be ready 
to be productive in the good 
times to build contingency for 
lower rainfall periods. 
shield
Land stewardship
The region is already a hub for 
land management practices 
built on educational assets, 
organisations, and land 
holders who actively seek to 
evolve practices and engage 
with holistic management. 
This extends off-farm to the 
community values which are 
so closely linked to the natural 
environment of New England. 
16
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Strategic alignment
This plan aligns strategically with international-scale goals and commitments, including the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, as well as with 
national, state and local strategies include (but is not limited to):
›
NSW State Disaster Mitigation Plan 2024 – 2026
›
NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
›
New England North West Regional Plan 2041
›
Southern New England High Country Regional Economic Development Strategy (2023 update)
›
NSW water strategies (Gwydir Regional Water Strategy, North Coast Regional Water Strategy, NSW Water
Strategy, NSW Aboriginal Water Strategy, NSW Groundwater Strategy)
›
Southern QLD and Northern NSW Drought Hub research
›
NSW Government Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development DroughtHub
›
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development Drought Signals Dashboard
›
Commonwealth Government Drought Resilience Self-Assessment tool
›
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development Climate Vulnerability Assessment
›
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council strategies, plans and reports
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
17

How our region is impacted by 
drought
Discussions with stakeholders, along with review of local historical literature, research sources, and survey 
feedback, have identified the following major impacts resulting from previous drought events. Alongside other 
components of the plan, these impacts form a basis to direct actions. 
family
Social and community
› Social isolation due
to increased on-farm
responsibilities or
tendency for some
to withdraw
› Increased pressures on
mental health, through
impacts to individuals
and families, and
knowing personally those
significantly affected
› Family and
relationship breakdown
› Increased domestic
violence and
substance abuse
› Community tensions
over water conservation
and use
› Further strain on
preventative and
health support
› Highly valued vegetation
and landscapes degraded
› Use of remaining water
for fire-fighting during
times of drought
trees
Environmental
› Loss of vegetation and
greenery is a visual
gauge for the region
› Tension between
domestic, industry and
agricultural uses of water
› Groundcover loss
› Tree and vegetation
dieback, and associated
biodiversity impacts
› Groundwater availability
and recharge
› Reduced water levels and
associated impacts on
water quality
› Dust storms
› Increased risk of bush fire
and grass fire
› Animal / stock nutrition
› Biosecurity and pest
outbreaks
› Reduced root zone
soil moisture
› Inland wetlands (e.g.
Mother of Ducks
Lagoon) at greater risk of
increased frequency of
drought events, impacting
local biodiversity loss
› Risk of roadside death
of fauna seeking food
and associated personal
safety impacts
coin
Economic
› Reduced productivity,
outputs and income
› Business stress and
closures, and reduced 
access to services (or 
higher demand placed on 
existing services)
› Increasing costs of living
and farming inputs
› Reduced discretionary
spending in towns
and villages
› Pressures associated with
decisions on stocking and
cropping rates or changes
in commodity prices
› Reduced on-farm
production and
more reliance on off-
farm income
› Maintaining cash-flow and
debt servicing
› Fodder and water
availability, increases in
cost and lower quality
within competitive market
› Destocking and loss of
livestock bloodlines
18
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Interconnected nature of drought impacts
The interconnected nature of impacts from drought can expose new challenges and amplify existing 
vulnerabilities within the region. These impacts are closely tied to the health of the landscape and natural 
environment, which sustain agricultural production and economic strengths of the Armidale Region and Uralla 
Shire and are closely linked to the intrinsic values held by the community.
While this presents difficulties, it also provides an opportunity for actions under this plan to address multiple 
issues. Building an understanding of the system and interlinkages of drought is a first step in achieving this. 
Interlinkages and vulnerabilities
Drought, and the impacts from drought, occur in conjunction with broader systems. Previous drought events 
have had significant impacts on the region over recent years, and the rapid pace of dealing with each event 
as well as compounding events limits recovery windows. These events not only contribute to one another, 
impacting infrastructure and preparedness planning, but also play out within broader trends. 
The system components which frame resilience can be organised around economic, social, environmental and 
governance systems. Building resilience within each of these systems supports the whole due to interactions. 
Conversely, impacts within one area influences the function of others. 
Changing
ﬂash ﬂooding
TRENDS
SYSTEMS
EVENTS
Storms and
Fire
Drought
demographics
Housing availability
Rising costs
Climate
Governance
Environmental
Social
Economics
change
and aﬀordability
Figure 4 — Interlinkages of systems which influence drought impacts 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
19

Figure 4 — Interlinkages of systems which influence drought impacts 
Vulnerability to drought is equally complex, and equally dynamic. 
At the regional-wide scale, issues that can increase vulnerability to 
drought, as identified by existing strategies in place and community 
consultation, include:
check Water supply and water security
check Quality of transport connections and access to public transport
check Community wellbeing and health
check Housing availability and affordability
check Ageing workforce population
check Land and water degradation.
Other Regional Drought Resilience Plans within the New England region, 
including for Walcha and Tamworth, identify similar potential drought 
vulnerabilities which tend to exacerbate its affects.
20
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Trends, stressors and shocks
To strengthen preparedness for drought, we must also take into account other trends, stressors, and shocks 
beyond climate factors that could exacerbate the impacts of drought in the future. This can influence our 
resilience to different conditions, circumstances and scenarios. It is important to consider governance 
responses and strategic priorities, ensuring that broader actions are mindful of how they interact with drought 
in our communities. 
Key trends and stressors that may interact with drought resilience in Armidale Region and Uralla Shire include:
coin
Economic
›
Cost of farming with
rising inputs
›
Commodity prices,
market volatility and
interest rates
›
Fuel prices and
transport costs
›
Rapid pace of
technology and
efficiency improvements
›
Policy changes
between government,
and assurance of
certain funding
›
Growth pressures and
competition for water
›
Cost of living
pressures and local
discretionary spending
flower
Environmental 
›
Weed invasion and
invasive species
›
Soil erosion
›
Loss of significant flora
and fauna
›
Risk of
vegetation dieback
›
Domestic and
agricultural water
security
›
Water infrastructure
projects and
funding decisions
family
People 
and Community
›
Service availability,
particularly health and
community services
›
Access to health
professionals
›
Changing
demographics, including
an aging workforce
›
Housing availability and
affordability pressures
›
Funding certainty for
community programs
›
Declining
volunteerism rates
›
Urbanisation and
population mobility
trends
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
21

Drought history 
Droughts and its impacts vary based on different macro influences and local conditions of the time. 
Differences between drought are evident in intensity, duration and severity, with some shorter droughts still 
having significant impact with a rapid onset. What is common is that each drought has impacts and can expose 
vulnerabilities of the time.
Major droughts in Australia have affected the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire through periods of low rainfall, 
leading to low soil moisture. While these time periods are used to describe national droughts, the effects are 
not necessarily limited to these years as some drought impacts are experienced locally earlier and can last for 
many years following the droughts formal end date. 
1895 – 1902
Federation 
Drought
1937 – 1945
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009
Millennium 
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
The below timeline illustrates some of the localised impacts during the identified major drought periods. 
A more comprehensive assessment of drought history is provided at Appendix A and the supporting 
Resilience Assessment, drawn from historical climate data, as well as analysis of a variety of sources providing 
commentary on the drought of the time. 
What it illustrates is that the region, despite its high average annual rainfall, is not immune from the impacts of 
drought and this extends beyond the more recent 2017-2019 drought. 
Figure 6 — Drought timeline, regional impacts of note for each drought period
Figure 5 — Significant drought periods identified by the Bureau of Meteorology
— The longest period of 
rainfall deficit (of the 
past century)
— At the end of 1940 it was 
reported that Armidale was 
set to run out of water
— Armidale was exposed to 
heavy dust storms 
— One of the most severe 
droughts in the 20th century 
with major stock and crop 
losses throughout much 
of NSW
— One of the New England 
region’s most significant 
droughts 
— Required to truck in 
drinking water
— Increases for mental health 
support services for farmers
— Entire potato crops lost and 
other crops spoiled. Bush 
fires occurred throughout 
the region
— A period of overall rainfall 
deficit between 1915-1922
1915 ­— 1916
1937 — 1947
2017 — 2019
1982-1983
— Region suffered early (1994) 
but was affected by a 
period of low rainfall in the 
early 2000s
1997-2009
— Rapid onset drought
— Feed shortages and 
significant stock losses 
amplified given the 
preceding years increase in 
stock numbers
1965-1968
22
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

In Figure 7 and Figure 8, major droughts defined 
by the Bureau of Meteorology are considered 
against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022, 
with drought periods highlighted. 
The region experiences year-to-year fluctuations 
in soil moisture and precipitation with drier years 
often followed by significantly wet years.
The early 1950s featured significant rainfall as well 
as in the early 2020s. The early 1940s, during the 
World War II drought, as well as the late 1970s, 
early 80s and 90s display periods of dryness, with 
the recent events of 2017-2019 displaying distinct 
drying, particularly for soil moisture.
There is a noticeable trend for the Armidale 
Region and Uralla Shire of drier years in the 
preceding years of identified drought periods. 
A comprehensive synthesis of historic drought 
climate data specific to the region is included at 
Appendix A. 
Figure 7 — Precipitation anomaly (1910 to 2022), compared to baseline period of 2002-2022 (rolling 10 year average)
Figure 8 — Root zone soil moisture anomaly (1910 to 2022), compared to baseline period of 2002-2022
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
23

A focus on the 2017-2019 drought
The impacts of the 2017-2019 drought on the region were unprecedented on many fronts. Rainfall deficiencies, 
particularly through 2018 and 2019 and the root zone soil moisture level being the lowest ever recorded were 
significant features of the drought. As a result of this, it was reported that much of eastern Australia suffered 
from massive native tree canopy die back, including the eucalypt forests in the New England region. 
While environmental effects of drought can be observable, it is difficult to quantify the loss of biota within the 
region. Community engagement in the region highlighted how impacts on the vegetation provided a visual 
cue to the impacts of drought. This is linked to both the values of the community, and the rich landscapes 
which are so synonymous with the region. The economic aspects of this drought were endured by rural 
enterprises and businesses not directly linked to the agricultural supply chain, with reduced discretionary 
spending disrupting the local economy. 
There was also a markedly noticeable increase in the demand for mental health services at the University of 
New England’s psychology clinic. Whilst not a crisis service, it saw a major rise in demand for services. Both 
communities endured months of water restrictions on domestic water usage and low supply levels in local 
dams. This resulted in both Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council with day-zero scenarios where 
the water supply was nearly completely depleted.
Image - Photo credit Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
24

Uralla’s day-zero experience 
The Kentucky Creek Dam is the principal water source for Uralla’s town drinking water. While a 
previous Council assessment indicated water supply security into the medium term until 2044), 
demand exceeding supply in a dry year occurred much sooner during the 2017-2019 drought. As 
the dam fell below 30% it experienced toxicity issues resulting in the Council issuing a “Do Not 
Drink Alert”. Had the drought have continued at the time, the Dam would have been empty within 
a five-month period.
By mid-2019, Uralla Shire Council commenced trucking in drinking water. The impacts of this 
coincided with record temperatures and bush fires across Australia, building further anxieties 
across the community. Effects of the water security issues extended across families managing 
the day-to-day, town businesses impacted by availability of discretionary spending, and ongoing 
impacts of the drought hitting across the business and household of rural enterprises. 
While the Dam was refilled to capacity in February 2020, a “Do Not Drink Alert” remained in 
place for two months after significant rain was received. Emergency water restrictions did not 
ease until early June 2020.
In response to these events and through allocation of grant funding to improve water security 
in the Shire, Uralla Shire Council commenced the Uralla Groundwater Project to investigate the 
potential availability of a back-up water supply source for future emergencies such as drought. 
This forms one aspect of broader strategic work undertaken in regard to water security in Uralla 
Shire which remains a priority for the shire.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
25

Facing day-zero in the Armidale Region 
In 2019 the prolonged drought had rapidly reduced Armidale’s major town water supply in the Malpas 
Dam. In response Council introduced water restriction in both Guyra and Armidale.
Towards the end of 2019, Armidale Regional Council was facing the serious prospect of needing to 
cart in water should drought conditions not ease. The Malpas Dam to Guyra pipeline opened in 2019. 
Armidale Regional Council rolled out an effective waterwise campaign which delivered clear 
messaging around restriction levels, the types of activities restricted and recommended daily water 
usage. The community responded to these challenges with sharp decreases in water usage as new 
restriction triggers were introduced. 
Council contacted businesses to assist in implementing a Water Saving Action plan, with major 
water users offered audits, water saving promotional packs and access to business rebate schemes. 
A residential water saving rebate scheme was introduced as part of the move to level 5 water 
restrictions, with financial assistance to buy rainwater tanks and water efficient machines, toilets and 
shower heads.
The response from community across the Armidale region in the face of day-zero demonstrates their attitude 
during tough times and the lessons since learnt. Whilst water usage has increased since the drought broke as 
expected outside of water restrictions, there has been a notable decrease in the average water usage across 
the community. It has not returned to pre-drought consumption levels (based on data from Armidale Shire 
Council). This is linked to continuous improvement in water consumption and sustainable water usage, and 
highlights how certain measures have benefit outside of drought events (such as investment in water storage 
and efficiency) to be ready for dry times. 
Drivers of improved water usage
Behavioural
Smart devices
Tank investment
Water eﬃciency
1
2
4
Lower
consumption
Higher
consumption
Future drought
Current
Towards ‘Day
Pre-drought
Zero’
event
3
Figure 9 — Concept of continuous improvement of water consumption
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
26

Future drought
3 CSIRO n.d., ESCI Climate Data, Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources. Available at: https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/
projects/esci/esci-climate-data/ 
Future climate scenarios 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reporting, under all emissions scenarios 
considered global surface temperatures will continue to increase until at least the mid-century. Increasing 
global surface temperatures and energy within the climate system are projected to result in widespread 
changes to weather and climate patterns, including drought and all elements of the water cycle. Regional 
climate projections also display increasing temperatures and increases in frequency of very hot days across 
the Armidale and Uralla region. 
Current climate models do not account for global climate tipping points. This means that the effects of tipping 
points are typically not included in climate projections and impact assessments. Breaching global climate 
tipping points represents significant risks on top of the changes typically described in climate assessments.
The below section presents projections of drought and associated climate conditions which are assessed over 
two possible future climate scenarios using regional climate model ensembles. The IPCC’s Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5 are used. RCP 4.5 models mean global warming of between two to 
three degrees Celsius and is the most likely future scenario based on current climate commitments. RCP 8.5 is 
a mean global warming of four degrees Celsius or more. This is considered a worst-case scenario. 
Regional drought climate indicators
›
A decrease in annual rainfall and decrease in root zone soil moisture under both emission scenarios.
›
Increase in days above 35 degrees, being more severe under emissions scenario RCP 8.5. Increases
impacting evapotranspiration which can compound under reduced rainfall.
›
Other climate and weather-driven events like heatwaves and bushfires / grass fire may interlink with future
drought events.
Below projections of these indices use an ensemble of CSIRO’s Electricity Sector Climate Information (ESCI) 
datasets (days above 35ºC and days above an FFDI of 25).3
Armidale
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
38%#
↓ 0.032 mm^
↓ 0.039 mm^
↓ 0.035 mm^
↓ 0.042 mm^
Annual total precipitation
896 mm
↓ 19 mm
↓ 21 mm
↓ 22 mm
↓ 14 mm
Days above 35ºC
Less than 1
2 ↑ 2
4 ↑ 4
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
3
5 ↑ 2
7 ↑ 5
Uralla
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
28%#
↓ 0.024 mm^
↓ 0.040 mm^
↓ 0.025 mm^
↓ 0.026 mm^
Annual total precipitation
756 mm
↓ 19 mm
↓ 11 mm
↓ 16 mm
↓ 2 mm
Days above 35ºC
3
7 ↑ 5
10 ↑ 7
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
7
12 ↑ 5
15 ↑ 8
# Mean water content as a percentage of capacity.
^ Change (mm/yr) in relative soil water content of the 1976-2005 reference period’s relative soil water holding capacity.
27
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Annual precipitation 
Figure 10 presents the annual precipitation across the region using the reference periods of 1976-2005 
and then two timescales of 2036 to 2065 (2050) and 2056 to 2085 (2070) using the moderate emissions 
scenarios of RCP4.5. The region is coloured to represent annual precipitation changes from the baseline 
period. 
Figure 10 — Average annual precipitation changes across reference periods (2050 and 2070)
Root zone soil moisture 
Root zone soil moisture (RZSM) is presented as a percentage of total capacity during the baseline reference 
period and as a change of millimetres per year of the climate adjusted scenarios. During the reference period, 
the Armidale Region had a root zone soil moisture capacity of around 38%, while Uralla Shire was slightly 
lower at 28% capacity. Under a moderate emissions scenario, both Armidale Region and Uralla Shire will see 
a decrease in soil moisture in both the short term (2050) and long term (2070). The RCP 8.5 scenario shows a 
more significant decrease in moisture capacity each year for both LGAs. 
RZSM%
Climate model reference period 
1976-2005
2050 (RCP4.5)
2070 (RCP4.5)
(mm) - Reference Period
150 - 200
200 - 250
250 - 300
300 - 350
350 - 400
400 - 500
500 - 600
600 - 700
700 - 800
800+
Precipitation change (mm)
-100+
-50
-25
-10
-5
5
10
25
50
100+
Precipitation change (mm)
-100+
-50
-25
-10
-5
5
10
25
50
100+
Climate model reference period 
1976-2005
2050 (RCP4.5)
2070 (RCP4.5)
(%) - Reference Period
0
10
25
50
60
70
80
85
90
100
(mm/year) - Change from Reference Period
-0.02
-0.01
-0.003
-0.002
-0.001
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.01
0.02
(mm/year) - Change from Reference Period
-0.02
-0.01
-0.003
-0.002
-0.001
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.01
0.02
28
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

What does the climate data tell us?
While the region experiences relatively high average annual rainfall, past drought events have demonstrated 
this is not always guaranteed. Under climate projections for the region, typical drought indicators display 
reduced rainfall and increases in hot days per year, alongside increasing temperatures expected. 
Warm years and maximum temperatures can coincide with drought years affecting the severity. This was 
the case in 2019 which had the warmest year on record for both average temperatures and maximum 
temperatures. Under higher emission scenarios, the increase in average temperatures will be higher, and this 
increase is greater in the west of the region. 
The frequency of hot days (above 35ºC) will also increase and is more severe the further west of the RDRP 
region and beyond. The Armidale Region and Uralla Shire experiences limited hot days currently, however 
there is projected to be a notable increase under climate change projections4. While days above 35ºC or 
Forest Fire Danger Index (FFDI) are not direct indicators of drought, they describe weather conditions that 
often occur alongside drought or are exacerbated by. 
Review of multiple climate projection models indicates that trends of annual precipitation is anticipated to 
decrease in the medium term (2050). The level of decrease reducing slightly in the longer term. 
In addition to rainfall amounts, the timing of rain is critical to different stages of agricultural production. In the 
longer term, reduction in winter rainfall is expected to have the highest decrease. 
Generally, climate indicators that provide insight into drought indicators show more severe changes in the 
west of the RDRP region, and across the broader New England region. With agriculturally strong areas in 
surrounding areas also experiencing elevated stress, this may impact the role of Armidale as a regional hub 
that supports transformational change, currently positioned in the broader New England North West region.
4 AdaptNSW 2024, New England and North West Climate Change Snapshot, https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2024-08/
NARCliM2-Snapshot-NewEngland.pdf
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
29

trees
Agricultural commodities 
Changes to climate have inevitable risks to 
agriculture and its commodities. Of concern 
is the increased temperatures predicted and 
the heat stress this will incur on crops. Heat 
stress on crops impacts growth capabilities 
and presents cost limitations. Alongside this, 
heat stress affects soil composition and lead 
to soil erosion, organic carbon, nutrients and 
alkalinity. 
Climate change is also likely to impact 
livestock production, which is significant 
for the region given the contribution to 
the region’s Gross Value Product. Climatic 
changes may result in changes to pasture 
productivity which will ultimately alter carrying 
capacity on farms. Heat stress on animals can 
result in less productive reproduction periods, 
poor animal welfare and competition for food 
sources with wild animals encroaching on 
farmlands. 
An increased frequency of extreme weather 
events impacts supply chains and further 
increases the uncertainty of trade patterns. 
These impacts can place further pressures 
on decision making, emphasising a need for 
planning with key triggers and building of 
decision-making capabilities. 
coin
Economic
Agriculture is the key economic sector in the 
Armidale region and Uralla Shire, however 
given the impacts of climate change on 
agricultural production, there may be a 
need to diversify the range of agricultural 
products produced to support broader 
regional viability. The high-quality agricultural 
land supports a long-held sector strength 
with significant value-add in industries of 
education and manufacturing. 
Both council areas comprise of smaller 
landholders who run ‘hobby farms’, generally 
not intended for income-generating purposes. 
These are borne out of passion for the land 
and lifestyle decisions and contribute to the 
broader sense of community identity and 
through owners filling key workforce positions 
across industries. Pressures under a changing 
climate and impacts to capabilities to run 
smaller scale farms could impact the lifestyle 
attraction of these enterprises. 
The visitor economy is a growing sector 
within the region benefitted by collection 
of emerging artisan products. Risks arising 
from more prolonged droughts and fire 
weather can increase threats to tourism 
infrastructure, seasonal offerings and nature-
based offerings. Towns like Uralla support an 
emerging boutique food and tourism-based 
retail enterprise which will need to address 
threats to water supply to ensure business 
and investor confidence is maintained. This 
may be the case where there is intent to 
broaden the current offering as identified in 
several strategies. 
The region shall continue to benefit from 
a relatively cooler climate and seasonal 
variations, despite trends of increasing 
temperatures. There may be opportunity for 
towns within the region to offer farm-based 
experiences under more appealing conditions 
than those areas of NSW which are likely to 
experience higher temperatures increases.
Anticipated future climate impacts 
The following explores potential climate change impacts across the plan’s 
strategic pathways.
Image - Photo by Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
30

cloud
Environmental connectivity
The region comprises diverse landscapes 
including National Parks and State Forests. 
A changing climate will have repercussions 
on the local ecosystem and correlate with 
increased pressures on local biodiversity. 
Changes to rainfall not only impact water 
supply but are likely to impact inland 
wetlands. 
Native eucalyptus trees that become drought 
stressed are at a high risk of mortality and 
placed under greater threat from insect 
infestation. Existing threats to flora and 
fauna can become exacerbated and regular 
shortages of water may increase competition 
between native fauna and livestock during 
drier times. 
Large-scale tree dieback in the region is a 
historical occurrence, which bares intrinsic 
impacts for biodiversity and ecosystem health, 
as well as impacts on community values. 
Continued research into these diebacks in 
this region is essential to avoid or mitigate 
future occurrences under a changing climate.
As regional towns and cities grow in 
population, increased domestic water 
supplies will be required. Average 
temperature rises in the region are predicted 
to exacerbate the impacts of droughts and 
bushfires. In addition to changes in rainfall 
patterns, changes in rates of evaporation are 
expected in future, reducing the overall water 
availability and affecting water quality in some 
parts of Regional NSW.
family
Social and community
Social vulnerabilities under a changing 
climate include education and employment, 
with a potential decrease in demand for 
agricultural employment types during drought. 
Additionally, the gaps in service provision 
can be widened between major and smaller 
centres for community service requirements, 
access and delivery. 
Community members employed in the 
agricultural sector (or those in associated 
sectors/roles) may be forced to relocate to 
areas as a result of either direct or indirect 
effects due to climate change on economic 
and environmental systems.
The likely increase in the frequency and 
severity of natural hazards may also strain the 
community and place pressures on existing 
vulnerabilities of individuals.
Impacts will be felt on those smaller land 
holders and properties operating hobby 
farms, which compete under the same market 
for inputs but with a much smaller scale. For 
the region, the role of this group within the 
community shouldn’t be underestimated 
for the broader contributions to grassroots 
initiatives and community connectedness 
which are reflective of the region’s values.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
31

Drought resilience in the region
The community of Armidale Region and Uralla Shire demonstrate resilience and strong levels of self-reliance 
that have been demonstrated in past drought events. These responses have been supported by targeted 
governance initiatives and ongoing efforts from community organisations delivering programs across the 
economic, environmental and social characteristics of the community. 
While resilience is a key trait of the region and its people, it is important to define the factors of drought 
resilience to ensure that our planning and response strategies address all aspects of the system. It also 
supports identifying priorities to focus on in strengthening preparedness. 
Drought resilience can be considered against three macro indicators, each with their own respective factors 
contributing to the broader system of resilience. Considering how this plan can address all these factors 
ensures we can address all aspects of the system. 
money-bill
Economic
Continuity
Employment
Diversity
flower-daffodil
Environmental 
Infrastructure and built assets
Natural processes
Land management
face-smile
Social 
Personal wellbeing
Decision making capacity
Community wellbeing
A snapshot of vulnerability and resilience to drought 
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences’ (ABARES) has developed an 
index that ranks remote, rural, and regional agriculturally dependent communities (at the LGA level) according 
to their potential to be adversely affected by drought. The Community Vulnerability and Resilience to Drought 
Index (CVRDI) is the first stage of a comprehensive body of work with the indicators informing the index 
accounting for both agriculture industry exposure and sensitivity, and community sensitivity. 
The result is a snapshot based on drought exposure and drought sensitivity at the farm level (farm sensitivity), 
the reliance on employment in agricultural production industries (community sensitivity), the adaptive capacity 
of an LGA to drought based on economic diversity, and a final combination of these indexes through the 
potential drought impact. 
The data comprises variables and indicators which have been combined and ranked. Scores are not 
necessarily representative of the magnitude of impact, rather it positions the sensitivity with respect to other 
LGAs assessed. There is a strong link to employment in agricultural production, particularly for community 
sensitivity which may not be representative of broader community sensitivity detailed through this plan. 
32
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ABARES CVRDI scores — (based on data from ABS Census 2021)
measured from 0 [lowest] to 1 [highest]
LGA
Farm
sensitivity
Community
sensitivity
Economic
diversity
Potential 
drought impact
Armidale Regional 
Council 
0.33
0.17
0.66
0.34
Uralla Shire Council
0.52
0.24
0.54
0.51
The ABARES CVRDI scores indicate the following for the region:
›
Lower to moderate farm-based exposure, which is linked to both exposure to climate variability and the
effects this has on farm outcomes.
›
A relatively lower level of community dependence on agriculture, supported by established strengths in
other sectors.
›
A moderate level of economic diversity, linked to strengths in education and training, and health care and
social assistance.
›
A low to moderate potential drought impact, particularly within Uralla Shire, due to both farm and
community sensitivity ranking higher. This higher score for Uralla may be due to specific sensitivities from
particular farm characteristics, but also indicates the higher level of economic diversity within Armidale due
to its role as a regional city.
The region remains susceptible to future drought impacts due to its agricultural strengths, however the 
moderate levels of economic diversity demonstrate the adaptive capacity of the region. Levels of community 
connection and social capital, along with diversified economic development opportunities offer key 
opportunities to aid immediate and long-term drought resilience. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
33

Connected communities and 
partnerships
While land management and infrastructure are 
important components to mitigate drought impacts, 
local community strengths are equally important 
for disaster preparedness. The Foundation for 
Rural Regional Renewal (FRRR) supports long 
term vitality of rural Australia and provides funding 
and capacity building support at the hyper-local 
level. The organisation has previously focused on 
this concept of connected communities and the 
associated capabilities of enduring future droughts. 
For the sustainability of agriculture-dependent 
communities in the longer-term, it is crucial to 
equipped to withstand pressures of dryer periods. 
This requires social connections and established 
support networks. 
The resourcefulness of the Armidale Region and 
Uralla Shire communities is a key component of 
existing resilience and highlights the strength of 
social connections and support networks which 
have been called upon in previous events. 
These networks promote a sense of belonging, 
support proactive mental health outcomes and 
recognise the need for local solutions. Previous 
programs under funding through the Future 
Drought Fund have identified that these connected 
communities show a higher sense of resilience and 
preparedness for the impacts of climate change 
(including drought) and increases in community 
understanding of drought and how both skills can 
support preparedness.
To address enduring future droughts, particularly 
within the context of interlinkages of other trends, 
it is essential to foster principles which rely on 
coordination and collaboration across local groups 
and organisations, and acting together. 
list-check
Preparing communities 
for drought 
Through the FRRR’s Community Impact 
Program – Preparing Communities for 
Drought project, funding was provided to 
enable Southern New England Landcare 
(SNEL) to deliver a range of local events 
to share local knowledge on drought 
preparation activities and strengthen local 
networks. The program aims to increase the 
capacity of those in the community driving 
action on drought resilience. 
The program, occurring outside of drought, 
demonstrates the focus of connected 
communities and utilising locally led 
champions within the community who 
maintain strong connections across. These 
connections are built through on-the ground 
connection and in this instance supported 
through the organisational capabilities 
of SNEL which demonstrates the value 
of partnerships in delivery. The current 
program is funded over two years, until June 
2025. 
Image - Photo by Michael Hull
34
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ho
me
Sustainable 
Living Armidale 
The region benefits from an engaged 
and educated community, reflective of 
its broader educational strengths in the 
economy. Sustainable Living Armidale is a 
volunteer organisation committed to raising 
awareness of the implications of climate 
change and depletion of natural resources, 
and building community networks focused 
on a more resilient and sustainable future. 
The group organises events, workshops and 
discussions both to build connections within 
the community and support communication 
of messaging across members and 
interested parties. The groups also 
supported delivery of reporting outcomes 
from the Climate Emergency Working Group, 
established in 2020. Similar joint reporting 
has been undertaken alongside SNEL on 
per-urban dwellers and climate risk.. Again, 
a focus was on education and capacity 
building through a participatory workshop 
series to better understand impacts to peri-
urban property owners.
While volunteer led, the group is 
active across a range of advocacy 
and communications front, presenting 
connections to engagement community 
members with local knowledge and local 
motivation for resilience.
tractor
A focus on land 
management practices - 
Southern New England 
Landcare
A range of organisations are supporting the 
uptake of regenerative farming and holistic 
management practices across the region. 
Broadly, the practice seeks to improve 
the resources it uses and encourages 
continual innovation. Southern New England 
Landcare plays a key role in implementation, 
leveraging the established connection to 
landholders with its broader partnerships in 
research such as that with the University of 
New England.
This includes delivery of the Resilient 
Pasture Landscapes program forming 
part of a 2-year free program to assist 
local farmers in managing productive and 
drought resilient pastures. The program 
included group learning sessions, training 
in online software, and freshwater quality 
monitoring of participants properties. 
Additional knowledge sharing and peer 
to peer group learning sessions operate 
across the seasons, to share information on 
approaches to evolving land management 
practices. 
Beyond land management, Southern New 
England Landcare also actively delivers 
programs targeting drought resilience 
through community impact and supports the 
rollout of mental health first aid workshops 
in the region. 
Image - Photo by Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
35

University of New England 
The University of New England (UNE) is a mainstay of 
the region, acting as a major employer, strengthening 
regional economic activity and influencing 
characteristics on the community make-up. 
UNE specialises across a range of disciplines and 
has expertise in agricultural and rural sciences 
through extensive links to the farming sectors 
in Australia as well as strengths in international 
agricultural research and development. Within the 
broader region, supporting and partnering with 
existing and future activities is important to driving 
transformational change across the broader region. 
The University has previously secured a range of 
funding under the Future Drought Fund and other 
streams to support a focus on future-proofing 
regional Australia. This includes programs delivered 
alongside other institutions such as the Decide and 
Thrive project alongside CQUniversiy and CSIRO, 
and the Overcoming Knowledge Gaps alongside 
Agrimix, James Cook University and CSIRO. A future 
focus on capacity building has also been supported 
through Empowering Gen Z, a project ensuring 
students are well-equipped to develop, monitor and 
manage a drought resilient farming system.
Currently, UNE also leads the Armidale Node of 
the Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hub (Drought Hub). The Armidale node is part of 
a wider initiative under the Southern Queensland 
and Northern NSW Drought Hub. Results from 
research conducted from the node is embedded 
back into teaching to enhance the ability of the next 
generation of farmers and business owners to deal 
with drought and climatic variability. Demonstrating 
the value of partnerships as expressed through 
this plan, there are a range of industry partners 
involved alongside UNE to deliver training and other 
resources. 
UNE can also play into the future in leveraging 
advancements in technology to strengthen drought 
preparedness. Already such fields like earth 
observation sciences are making big leaps with 
increased satellite coverage supported by increasing 
efficiencies and expertise in converting observations 
of environmental systems to practical outcomes. 
Investment remains a priority to ensure critical 
research capabilities and infrastructure is available to 
be on front foot to utilise the technologies. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
36

Clark’s Farm
Alongside UNE’s SMART Farms (Sustainable, Manageable, 
Accessible, Rural Technologies) which provide for problem-
based experiential learning, the more recent initiative 
of the Clark’s Farm redevelopment provides students 
with a purpose-built location for learning about resilient 
and sustainable farming systems. The specific focus on 
equipping future land managers with the knowledge to deal 
with the impacts of future droughts is an existing action 
towards drought resilience. 
The farm utilises evolving technologies, including that 
developed through UNE like Ag360 which provides a 
software tool to support land management decisions. 
Clark’s Farm forms a component of the broader funding 
through the Empowering Gen Z project between UNE and 
Charles Sturt University, again demonstrating the value of 
partnerships, knowledge building and the existing focus the 
region has on strengthening future drought resilience.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
37

Capacity building and engagement program
To enable effective implementation ongoing engagement remains a priority, the method of engagement 
moving forward may differ from that undertaken as part of plan preparation and instead, focus on refining the 
detail of selected actions under the plan, sequencing of actions and strengthening partnerships.
Continued and sustained local engagement across processes empowers more proactive actions towards 
drought resilience, aligning with the need for focus efforts to strengthen preparedness outside of drought. 
To support implementation of the plan, future engagement has the following objectives:
›
Build support and buy-in from key stakeholders to the ongoing efforts under the plan
›
Provide ongoing inputs for PCG consideration in the implementation
›
Ensuring implementation is appropriately informed by those working directly with community and industry
›
Utilise knowledge, activities and program evolutions from the broader ecosystem of organisations focused
on drought resilience initiatives
›
Continue to capture views of often underrepresented groups in drought discussions, such as First Nations
groups and non-agricultural community
Future engagement may focus on three key resilience components to allow for focused feedback and 
targeting of action areas. Broadly, these align with strategic pathways and priority areas presented under the 
drought resilience action plan. 
Economic
Social and community
Environment
Diversifying
products
Incentivising 
new 
and ongoing 
business
Community 
connections 
Linkages 
to services
Research
Connection 
to land holders
Business 
continuity and 
planning 
Decision-
making 
capacity
Mental health 
and wellbeing
Underrepresented
groups
Knowledge
sharing
Land 
management 
Example programs and projects
New England Renewable Energy Zone 
(Mix) – leveraging investment in legacy 
projects and diversifying economic 
development mix
Connecting to drought assistance and 
family support (New England Family 
Support Services)
The Clark’s Farm redevelopment (UNE) 
- providing students with a purpose-built
location for learning about resilient and
sustainable farming systems.
Figure 11 — Future engagement focus with example projects
38
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought resilience action plan
The drought resilience action plan for the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire incorporates:
›
Priorities for drought resilience across:
›
functional systems and sectors
›
levels of intervention
›
Discernible and pragmatic actions that:
›
are drawn from science, research and local
knowledge insights
›
provide the basis for anticipating, acting
and advocating for drought resilience needs
across contexts
›
An architecture which supports different
stakeholders to identify priority actions relevant
to them.
Figure 12 (right) — Resilience ‘theory of change’ intervention 
pathways and implementation
Immediate
Opportunity
Absorb
Adapt
Transform
1—2
Years
2—5
years
Many of the actions included were 
identified directly by stakeholders 
and community members as 
part of the engagement and 
consultation process to inform 
this plan.
A program logic approach was 
used to match the drought 
resilience needs identified by 
the engagement feedback with 
pragmatic actions. The actions 
ensure progression along the 
resilience ‘theory of change’ 
journey by focusing on absorbing 
impacts, adapting to impacts, or 
transforming to increase resilience 
to drought effects. More detailed 
information on this process 
is included in the separate 
Resilience Assessment document.
The ‘theory of change’ scale 
also helps us to understand the 
level of effort and the timeframes 
associated with each action. 
Implementation of actions across 
stakeholders is dependent on 
resourcing and funding availability. 
The plan is a ten-year plan to be 
reviewed after five years.
Assumptions and influences across the 
theory of change process
Shorter term 
›
Stakeholders and key
partners have the capacity
to participate in activities
through the plan.
›
Existing partnerships and
focused engagement
with underrepresented
groups continues to ensure
these aspects of the plan
are developed.
›
The PCG is broadened with
active participants and is
resourced to deliver on
implementation activities
and ongoing adaptive
learning processes.
›
Programming and project
plans provide opportunity
for stakeholders to
identify emerging drought
resilience needs or
priorities.
›
Longer term
›
Strategic planning for the
region, and across LGAs
aligns with the focus of
this plan.
›
There is continuity of
funding to ensure partners
and local capabilities
remain active and
connected to the project
and can see demonstrated
benefits from input of time.
›
Ongoing review and
lessons learned informs
updates to the plan to
ensure implementation
meets practicalities. The
foundational nature of this
plan is built upon with a
focus on transformational
actions in future years.
39
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought resilience 
pathways and actions
This drought action plan establishes 
a framework to guide focus and 
efforts in response to priorities 
established through stakeholder and 
community engagement.
The action plan spans four strategic 
pathways, each of which interact with 
one another with respect to drought 
resilience for Armidale Region and Uralla 
Shire. These strategic pathways include:
Pathway 1 
Economics
Pathway 2
Social and community
Pathway 3 
Environmental connectivity
Pathway 4 
Governance 
These strategic pathways and their 
associated actions seek to provide 
implementable activities to drive toward 
enhanced drought resilience. 
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan – Top 5 
priority actions
1. Drought concierge
liaison officer
2. Continue the delivery of
the UNE Drought Resilient
Pastures Landscape project
/ Drought Resilient Soils and
Landscapes project / other
programs which focuses
on preparing drought and
estimating and managing
pasture during dry periods
3. Joint prepared drought
communications strategy for
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire
4. Mental health first aid
training for Council staff and
community organisations
5. Connect to Culture program
with the Keeping Centre
and educational program
on Indigenous water
management principles.
Image - Photo by Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
40

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 1 – Economics
The Southern New England High Country Regional Economic Development 
Strategy (2023) highlights the four key economic drivers of the region to include 
agriculture, education and training, tourism and renewable energy. Given this 
existing and expanding economic diversity, there is benefit in a focus on the 
areas of:
›
Collaboration and partnerships
›
Sustainable enterprise investment
›
Rural business planning
›
Leveraging expanding economic diversification
›
Support for local business
›
Leveraging the region’s existing strengths as an education hub.
Community consultation identified that ensuring continuity and expansion of 
existing partnerships with the University of New England and supporting programs 
is a central opportunity across different aspects including agricultural research, 
programs and projects. These benefit through building up local knowledge 
capabilities and leveraging local industry linkages, and are well positioned 
from an established focus on enhancing  drought resilience.. Anticipated future 
climate impacts note the need to build on educational strengths to not only adapt 
practices on-farm, but drive towards transformational changes. 
Stakeholders also identified growing education around innovative and sustainable 
agriculture practices to offer considerable long-term advantages both from 
economic and environmental perspectives. 
Off-farm, the region boasts many economic development opportunities. 
Renewable energy and education and training are established and growing 
strengths. The emerging visitor economy is supported by boutique tourism 
offerings and artisan products. Activities under this pathway may seek to reinforce 
these strengths and navigate potential pressures placed on diverse sectors during 
drought. 
Image - Photo by Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
41

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PRIORITY 
SPECIFIC ACTIONS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
INVOLVED
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAYS
PLAN 
OUTCOMES
E1
Harnessing
collaboration
E1.1	
Utilise existing council community benefit policies from REZ projects in the region to maximise investment in legacy 
community opportunities that can aid drought relief and support the community during dry times.
E1.2	
Maximise cascading benefits and value-add industries from the region’s location within the New England REZ.
E1.3	
Ensure renewable energy projects within the region encompass appropriate water management, quality and 
efficiency measures at the planning and design phase.
E1.4	
Ensure the water needs and efficiency measure of any workers accommodation activities is appropriately considered 
at planning and design phase.
E1.5	
Partner with industry to seek to attract renewable energy headquarters or regional offices to establish in the region.
E1.6	
Explore opportunities for energy cost subsidies from REZ activity in the region.
E1.7	
Support and expand First Nations economic enterprise within the region.
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Renewable energy industry
›
First Nations
business operators
›
Industry and tourism
›
Chambers of Commerce
Adapt – through planning for 
changing economic drivers
Transform – the long-term 
economic stability of the region 
through catalyst approaches
›
O5
›
O6
E2
Sustainable
enterprise
investment
E2.1 
Investigate land use planning opportunities to incentivise ancillary on-farm income generation (e.g. ag-tourism, 
ecotourism, materials processing).
E2.2 
Collaborate to enhance implementation of regenerative agriculture practices on-farm, including financial subsidies to 
incentivise investment.
E2.3 
Invest in farm dam fencing on a rolling basis, including opportunities to reduce evaporation such as wind breaks and 
shade provision.
E2.4 
Explore heat and drought-adaptive herds and crops, taking into account the temperate climate of the New 
England region.
E2.5 
Continue to invest in Ag-tech for on-farm monitoring to inform decision-making.
E2.6 
Advocate for greater longitudinal indicator-based reporting by State government and other sectors to build locally-
specific data sets regarding drought trends across social, economic and environmental sectors. 
E2.6 
Invest in research and capabilities to support monitoring solutions for drought indicators and take advantage of new 
satellite availability and earth observation advancements. 
E2.7 
Deliver business continuity planning workshops for town and village-based businesses to assist with pre-planning to 
proactively alleviate potential drought impacts.
›
Landowners and
associated stakeholders
›
Community and
interest groups
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Relevant
government agencies
›
Locally represented
universities, researchers,
institutes, research facilities
Absorb – using priority actions 
to change business models for 
future readiness 
Adapt – through leveraging 
existing resources for 
different outcomes
›
O6
›
O7
›
O8
›
O10
E3
Rural
business
planning
E3.1 
Increase take-up of on-property water monitoring including quality, storage volumes and overland flow.
E3.2 
Promote access to drought preparedness tools and resources to support business decision-making processes and 
trigger points.
E3.3 
Continue to invest in fodder and stock water storage options on-property.
E3.4 
Invest in succession planning processes for family-owned rural enterprises and landholdings.
E3.5 
Invest in whole-of-farm water management plans and drought plans which incorporate indicators and triggers for 
decision-making to inform business decisions when dry periods arise.
E3.6 
Investigate agistment networks and trigger points for transporting stock based on animal nutrition. This will assist in 
maintaining herds and genetics for enterprises which must maintain these assets and where considered feasible.
E3.7 
Advocate for support mechanisms for businesses directly impacted by agricultural downturn (who are not 
landowners) through drought such as contractors and farm staff.
›
Landowners and
associated stakeholders
›
Business owners
and operators
›
Rural Financial
Counselling Services
›
Relevant
government agencies
Absorb – using priority actions 
to change business models for 
future readiness 
Adapt – through leveraging 
existing resources for 
different outcomes
›
O6
›
O7
›
O10
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
42

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PRIORITY 
SPECIFIC ACTIONS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
INVOLVED
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAYS
PLAN 
OUTCOMES
E4
Economic
diversification
E4.1 
Explore water recycling, broader waste recycling and circular economy opportunities to diversify industry and 
manage waste during drought periods. For example when more plastics may be used and discarded for water 
storage. Investigate a staged implementation approach.
E4.2 
Explore opportunities for renewable energy tourism.
E4.3 
Explore opportunities to expand Aboriginal cultural tourism opportunities in partnership with First Nation 
business operators.
E4.4 
Continue to grow the unique hospitality and tourism offering of both Armidale and Uralla, including as destination for 
boutique food and drink. Continue to develop and implement local tourism strategies.
E4.5 
Work towards implementation of the key strategies and enablers identified by the Southern New England High 
Country Regional Economic Development Strategy (2023).
E4.6 
Prepare a joint (or broader New England) regional investment prospectus to attract new business.
E4.7 
Invest in training programs to support accreditation of farmers and farm workers to enhance opportunities for 
supplementary work during drought periods and to build capacity (i.e. machinery accreditation, etc.).
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Business owners
and operators
›
First Nations
business operators
›
Industry and tourism
›
Chambers of Commerce
Adapt – through planning for 
changing economic drivers
Transform – the long-term 
economic stability of the region 
through catalyst approaches
›
O5
›
O6
›
O7
›
O8
E5
Supporting
local
business
E5.1 
Maintain existing ‘buy local’ schemes which support businesses across the districts.
E5.2 
Ensure assistance information (for example, how to stretch feed and carcass disposal) is available to support industry.
E5.3 
Work with town-based commercial landholders to introduce rainwater harvesting or smart water devices and water 
efficiency measures for existing commercial and industrial buildings. Councils to consider adding similar provisions 
for commercial and industrial development into Development Control Plans into the future.
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Business owners
and operators
›
Industry and tourism
›
Chambers of Commerce
Absorb – using priority actions 
to change business models for 
future readiness 
Adapt – through leveraging
existing resources for 
different outcomes
›
O6
›
O7
›
O8
E6
Leveraging
the region’s
strengths as an 
education hub
E6.1 
Support training and research opportunities with the University of New England including short courses in 
agribusiness and agricultural science.
E6.2 
Explore university partnerships in ag-tech and research to expand new ways to adapt to changing conditions. 
E6.3 
Continue the delivery of the University of New England Drought Resilient Pasture Landscape project which focuses 
on preparing drought and estimating and managing pasture during dry periods
E6.4 
Leverage existing governance arrangements to foster expanded partnerships with University of New England across 
the areas of research, ag-tech and agri-business, facilities, projects and programs and student wellbeing.
E6.5 
Advocate for the continuity of funding for the Armidale Node of the Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub 
(Drought Hub).
E6.6 
Work synergistically to grow local renewable energy skills and training, as this industry represents a new source of 
employment in the region.
›
University of New England
›
Locally represented
universities, researchers,
institutes, research facilities
›
Industry
›
Community interest groups
Adapt – through leveraging 
existing resources for 
different outcomes
Transform – the long-term 
economic stability of the region 
through catalyst approaches
›
O6
›
O8
›
O9
›
011
›
O12
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
43

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 2 – Social and community 
Social and community impacts, particularly in relation to mental health and 
wellbeing is one of the most critical impacts stemming from drought. This was one 
of the clearest priorities identified by community through the plan engagement 
process, recognising that community connection, cohesion, participation and 
identity are already strong resilience attributes of the region that need to be 
maintained and fostered. This includes when the pressures of drought amplify 
differences between values and practices. 
This pathway seeks to focus on strengthening social and community support 
programs to maintain strong networks to endure during drought periods. Having 
a plan in place to guide options, with flexibility to take advantage of emerging 
ideas and opportunities is key to support and guide investment when funding 
programs are released to support drought-affected communities during dry 
times. This minimises ad-hoc spending and maximises funding directed to locally 
identified needs.
There is a continued focus to ensure the needs of more vulnerable members 
of the community are supported through the plan and its implementation. A 
community engagement program to support implementation and broadening 
of the PCG also seeks to build in these feedback processes, recognising the 
need for ongoing communication to build trust. Key partner organisations also 
demonstrate reach across these more vulnerable groups of the community and 
are key stakeholder to support through the action plan.
To mitigate impacts of future drought on characteristics of social and community 
resilience, the plan has a focus on:
›
Strengthening community wellbeing
›
Investing in partnerships
›
Building capability and continuous improvement
›
A water-wise community.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
44

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PRIORITY 
SPECIFIC ACTIONS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
INVOLVED
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAYS
PLAN 
OUTCOMES
S1
Strengthening
community
wellbeing
S1.1 
Establish or support delivery of mental health first aid training for staff and groups who are involved in drought 
assistance and relief.
S1.2 
Continue to invest in the delivery of community resilience programs which build capability and capacity to adapt to 
changing circumstances.
S1.3 
Continue to invest in community events and network opportunities for various cohorts before, during and after 
drought to strengthen relationships. Leverage these opportunities to increase awareness of local services that are 
available for support.
S1.4 
Support for agricultural networks including farm field days, small engine workshops, butcher days to share skills and 
knowledge and build networks.
S1.5 
Work collaboratively to understand the locally-specific decline in volunteerism and develop pathways to more 
flexible volunteer programs.
S1.6 
Increase programs and support for children and youth during drought, and a focus on personal resilience outside of 
drought periods.
S1.7 
Continue to advocate for greater mental health service support within the New England region.
S1.8 
Continue to support the work of local Community Neighbourhood Centres in Uralla Shire and Armidale Region.
S1.9 
Establish a ‘living alone’ register in Uralla Shire to ensure support reaches those who live alone.
S1.10	
Pre-plan for drought relief opportunities to support the agricultural sector including laundromats and shower facilities 
in towns.
S1.11	
Identify public assets which serve to bring people together during drought times and identify facility upgrades, 
additions and equipment needed. Leverage grant funding for such upgrades where available.
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Support services
›
Relevant
government agencies
›
Not-for-profits
›
Community interest groups
Absorb – through recognition 
of existing strengths
Adapt – through 
targeted strengthening of 
existing networks
›
O1
›
O2
›
O3
›
O4
S2 
Investing
in partnerships
S2.1 
Invest in collaborative partnerships to coordinate local and regional mental health support options and distribute 
information during drought periods to aid access and referrals.
S2.2 
Establish communities of practice across the agricultural sector relative to different knowledge areas to boost local 
knowledge sharing and collaboration.
S2.3 
Continue to support the Armidale Aboriginal Cultural Centre and Keeping Place.
S2.4 
Work with local schools to bolster existing wellbeing programs and community outreach during drought.
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Support services
›
Relevant
government agencies
›
Not-for-profits
›
Community interest groups
›
Schools and
educational institutions
Absorb – through recognition 
of existing strengths
Adapt – through 
targeted strengthening of 
existing networks
›
O3
›
O12
S3
Building
capability
and continuous
improvement 
S3.1 
Focus on opportunities for inter-generational and family-based learning. Explore using this RDRP as part of school-
based curriculum materials.
S3.2 
Ensure support networks are in place at organisational, industry and sector levels for those who providing a 
supporting role for others during drought (i.e. ‘supporting the supporters’).
S3.3 
Implement campaigns which focus on water literacy to build capacity and capability to inform decision-making at 
all scales.
S3.4 
Ensure hobby farm-scale activities and landholders are supported as a ‘missing middle’ between town and 
agricultural activities of scale.
›
Support services
›
Relevant
government agencies
›
Not-for-profits
›
Community interest groups
›
Schools and
educational institutions
Absorb – through recognition 
of existing strengths
Adapt – through 
targeted strengthening of 
existing networks
›
O2
›
O4
›
O13
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
45

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PRIORITY 
SPECIFIC ACTIONS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
INVOLVED
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAYS
PLAN 
OUTCOMES
S4
A water-wise
community
S4.1 
Continue to invest in water saving devices across community, business and industry storage (e.g. rainwater tanks). 
Focus promotion before and during drought to contribute toward water saving and water restrictions.
S4.2 
Invest in water efficiencies, storage and smart devices to maintain ground cover on sporting fields and for priority 
open spaces to support community wellbeing.
S4.3 
Provide and display signage on properties where tank water is in use on gardens.
S4.4 
Uralla Shire Council to explore the provision of water collection points (mirroring that available in Armidale Region) 
where residents can pay a fee to access water for domestic and stock purposes.
S4.5 
Expand the consideration and incorporation of Indigenous knowledge in water management, including regard 
to the reverse triple bottom-line approach and care for the environment as a central element that underpins all 
other functions.
›
Community members
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Industry
›
Community interest groups
›
First Nations organisations
and representatives
Absorb – through recognition 
of existing strengths
Adapt – through improved 
processes and efficiencies
›
O4
›
O10
›
O13
›
O15
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
46

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 3 – Environmental connectivity
The health of the landscape and waterways supports almost every facet of our 
economic and community wellbeing, noting the role of water as a pre-requisite 
for life and survival. Community stakeholders noted the relevance of this principal 
throughout engagement.
Groundcover management, retaining soil moisture in the landscape and topsoil 
retention are clear drought impact reduction pursuits. These approaches assist to 
mitigate erosion, protect soil health, maintain pasture and prevent other events 
like dust storms. This plan has touched on the strengths of the region in adopting 
sustainable agricultural practices. However, through community engagement it 
was shared that this remains a spectrum, with potential uptake of a range of tools 
based on the outcomes sought from each land holder. The role of this plan is to 
support the existing knowledge sharing and the ability to implement practices. 
Pest and weed management as well as restoration activities offer further 
opportunities to stem landscape degradation.
Local communities, and visitors alike, value the natural assets and landscapes 
of the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire, citing significant concern at previous 
vegetation diebacks in the area caused by drought in the 1970s and 1980s and 
again more recently as an impact of the 2017-2019 drought. Through consultation 
a sentiment shared was the feeling of the drought breaking and ‘finally looking up’ 
only to see the impacts the drought had on the valued vegetation. 
To further bolster environmental connectivity opportunities relating to drought 
preparedness, the priority areas are:
›
Community awareness
›
Landscape restoration
›
A focus on biosecurity
›
Research.
Image: Pallamallawa Hotel
Image - Photo by Michael Hull
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
47

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PRIORITY 
SPECIFIC ACTIONS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
INVOLVED
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAYS
PLAN 
OUTCOMES
ENV1
Community
awareness
ENV1.1 
Create drought resilient gardens through the use of mulch and drought tolerant plants.
ENV1.2	
Support the adopt a tree program across each local government area.
ENV1.3	
Investigate installation of drought resilient plants and tree planting programs in public spaces which generate 
shade during drought times.
›
Community members
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
Absorb – through previous 
experience to generate change
Adapt – to 
enhance preparedness
›
O2
›
O4
›
O10
›
O13
ENV2
Landscape
restoration
ENV2.1 
Support the continued uptake of regenerative agriculture across all scales. Establish drought lots or smaller 
fenced paddocks to manage stock rotation and readily cater for de-stocking.
ENV2.2 	 Expand existing landscape rehydration activities.
ENV2.3 	 Support landscape reforestation measures as part of broader ecosystem health restoration as a result of die-back 
from drought, and aiding urban heat, in a fire-resilient manner.
ENV2.4 	 Expand and continue to invest in riparian restoration projects.
ENV2.5 	 Invest in water points for wildlife as a pilot in the region, which could include externally crowd funded options.
ENV2.6 	 Implement groundcover management initiatives to reduce top soil loss, alleviate impacts of dust storms and flow-
on health effects and heatwave mitigation, both on-farm and in communities.
›
Landowners and
associated stakeholders
›
Business owners
and operators
›
Community interest groups
›
Relevant
government agencies
Adapt – to 
enhance preparedness
Transform – the longevity 
of landscape health 
during drought
›
O9
›
O10
›
O11
ENV3
A focus 
on biosecurity
ENV3.1 	 Undertake a region-wide investigation on wash down bay needs to improve biosecurity (weed) management.
ENV3.2 	 Prepare a picture book of weeds and weed seedbank to aid their identification and outline their relative 
treatment measures.
ENV3.3 	 Work with New England Weeds Authority to implement its crown land project at Burial Ground Gully in Uralla Shire 
to eradicate weed infestation, adopting a collaborative approach include school-based project partnerships, as 
well as its ‘1000 casuarinas’ project and continued weed management and replanting programs in Bundarra and 
across the region
›
Community interest groups
›
Relevant
government agencies
Absorb – through previous 
experience to generate change
Adapt – to 
enhance preparedness
›
O9
›
O11
›
O13
›
O12
ENV4
Build upon research
ENV4.1 	 Invest in local and regional partnerships in areas such as soil moisture education, research, drought and water 
efficiency, regenerative agriculture, ag-tech, pasture management and budgeting, biosecurity and ecology 
and biodiversity.
ENV4.2 	 Undertake groundwater and aquifer studies to better understand the characteristics of groundwater resources 
and connectedness with surface waters, noting the presence of relic groundwater in the area.
ENV4.3 	 Participate in Local Land Service, and Drought Resilience and Innovation Hub tactical workshops.
›
University of New England
›
Locally represented
universities, researchers,
institutes, research facilities
›
Industry
›
Community interest groups
Adapt – to 
enhance preparedness
Transform – the longevity 
of landscape health 
during drought
›
O12
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
48

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 4 – Governance
Across all sectors within the region, sustained support for grass-roots drought 
resilience, capacity building and advocacy is needed. A range of actions exist 
which require coordinated effort. These actions provide a work plan for dedicated 
drought concierge position to assist specific elements of plan implementation, 
and to meet community and industry needs. 
The engagement program that informed the development of this plan heard that 
a critical role of local government during drought is in increased and expanded 
communications and engagement across social, economic and environmental 
spheres. 
Embedding drought resilience considerations across all aspects of Council’s 
integrated planning and reporting (IP&R) framework sets in place the opportunity 
for focus of service delivery which has regard to the cyclical nature of dry and wet 
periods and bringing drought preparedness into business as usual activities of 
each Council. 
To underpin existing governance approaches, there is benefit in advancing:
›
Communications and engagement during drought
›
Leveraging IP&R framework processes
›
Continuous improvement in water management.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
49

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PRIORITY 
SPECIFIC ACTIONS 
STAKEHOLDERS 
INVOLVED
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAYS
PLAN 
OUTCOMES
G1
Expanding 
communications 
and engagement 
during drought
G1.1	
Continue to utilise water management strategies as a vehicle to reduce the speed of consumption of water.
G1.2 
Invest in drought concierge liaison officer to connect people and business with relief and assistance opportunities.
G1.3 
Utilise the project control group to expand into a drought working group during dry periods to coordinate across 
sectors, and to share knowledge.
G1.4 
Increase local government community-focused communications on water-related matters, including a joint 
proactively prepared drought communications strategy. 
G1.5 
Councils to invest in water restriction signage program across the region.
G1.6 
DPIRD to consider establishing a network of local governments in NSW that have run out of water in previous 
droughts to share knowledge and advancements and contribute to continuous improvement for other areas likely 
to face this issue into the future.
G1.7 
Issue more frequent Council newsletters and communication, and enhance engagement focus during 
drought, with important information and updates to all landholders during drought. Promote access to drought 
preparedness tools and resources to support business decision-making processes and trigger points.
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
›
Relevant
government agencies
Absorb – through previous 
experience to generate change
›
O1
›
O4
›
O7
›
O13
›
O15
G2
Leveraging
IP&R
framework
processes
G2.1 
Ensure water availability and consumption, in conjunction with growth, is considered as part of major projects in 
the region including as part of future Local Planning Strategic Statements (LSPS) and Local Environmental Plans 
(LEPs) processes and other local government strategic activities.
G2.2 
Explore opportunities for recycled water usage on public and private properties and potential inclusion in DCP.
G2.3 
Councils and others to investigate water-saving device rebates
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
Absorb – through previous 
experience to generate change
Adapt – through improved 
processes and efficiencies
›
O4
›
O10
›
O14
›
O15
G3
Supporting 
continuous 
improvement in 
water management
G3.1 
Re-examine triggers for water restrictions and measures continued in local water management strategies to take 
account of contemporary intelligence built since the last drought, and reflecting the capacity points of water 
storages where they become unusable for domestic water usage. 
G3.2 
Consider suitable region-wide approaches to coordinate the transition into and between water restriction levels 
and aid in consistency of messaging to community (this may include the broader New England region where 
western LGAs are often the first to enter drought).
G3.3 
Increase transparency of water-related data, intelligence and decision-making for community benefit and to 
aid increased consideration of cumulative impacts. This action also forms part of the neighbouring Walcha and 
Tamworth RDRP, demonstrating potential opportunity for a whole-of-New England approach.
›
Armidale Region and Uralla
Shire Councils
Absorb – through previous 
experience to generate change
Adapt – through improved 
processes and efficiencies
›
O4
›
O10
›
O13
›
O14
›
O15
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
50

Implementation 
The Armidale Regional Council and 
Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan relies on collaborative 
implementation approaches. 
The action plan for drought resilience 
spans different functions of government, 
and guides stakeholders with actions 
that can make a difference. This 
includes short, medium, and long 
term opportunities.
Governance structure 
Implementation of the regional drought resilience 
plan is to be driven by a collaborative and multi-
disciplined drought resilience project control group 
(PCG). Membership will be deliberately broad to 
provide an integrated and coordinated approach to 
drought resilience efforts. 
Representatives from across community and 
industry will form part of the PCG. The composition 
of the PCG may evolve as the project matures. The 
evolution of the PCG forms a focus on ongoing 
stakeholder management, illustrated through the 
capacity building and ongoing engagement planned 
to occur. 
The NSW Government’s ‘Drought Signals’, BoM, 
Farming Forecaster or other tools / indicators should 
be contemplated in terms of drought or below 
average rainfall projections, to influence the PCG’s 
direction with regard to implementation at any given 
point in time during the lifespan of this plan. 
This will enable the PCG to adopt agile approaches 
and change priorities as needed depending on 
changing circumstances. Despite this, all actions 
remain relevant in terms of maximising funding 
opportunities. This status-based approach simply 
enables the PCG to consider those actions 
which will generate more immediate outcomes, 
when needed.
Both Councils will co-chair the PCG. PCG meetings 
should be held in different localities across the 
region over time. 
ROLES DESCRIPTION 
Advocate: An advocate actively supports a 
position, action or policy. The task is outside 
the advocate’s jurisdiction, capacity or 
resourcing and advocacy is required to engage 
with those parties with capacity to deliver. For 
example, telecommunications advocacy.
Partner: A partner joins others in a common 
cause or action where roles and responsibilities 
are shared across areas of expertise. Each 
partner brings an element to the action for 
joint delivery. For example, region-wide 
strategic initiatives.
Lead: A lead is in control of an action. The 
action may still involve partners or other roles, 
but the action is reliant upon a lead party 
due to their technical or other expertise. For 
example, Health or counselling matters.
Owner: An owner is the only party that can 
undertake or permit the action. For example, 
local government as public asset owners.
Supporter: A supporter is united with others 
in the need or benefits of the action but 
potentially does not have a major role. The 
action is led or owned by others. For example, 
a supporter may provide assistance in kind, 
technical advice or donations to action leaders.
Stakeholder: A stakeholder is anyone who has 
an interest in the project, program or action. 
Stakeholders will have varying degrees of 
involvement from owner to advocate and all 
points between.
Deliverer: A deliverer is responsible for 
implementation and outcomes of an action 
or funded program. For example, community 
agency delivering social aid programs.
Funder: A funder provides the funding 
arrangements. The party is not involved with 
scoping, executing or delivering the program 
but may require some outcome reporting or 
evidence. For example, the government grant 
funding for a pest control program delivered 
by others.
51
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

A PCG Terms of Reference is to be prepared for its 
membership to guide its function. A Memorandum of 
Understanding may also be required. The terms of 
reference may include:
›
Role and purpose and connection to the RDRP,
including a focus on approaches to facilitating
structured learning processes
›
Stakeholder and membership lists
›
Meeting arrangements, (potentially quarterly) and
responsibilities of attendees
›
The circumstances of a quorum and decision-
making protocols
›
The election or rotation of a chair person
›
An action plan for the first 60 days or 12 months
including delivery of the priority actions with the
implementation funding; and
›
A process for reflection and nominating next
priority actions. This includes consideration of
how stakeholders across and beyond the PCG
play a role in determining the priority actions.
This may align with existing consultation and
strategic planning work.
Monitoring, evaluation and learning 
framework
Whilst the drought action plan incorporates a large 
suite of projects, activities and actions, some offer 
immediate opportunity, some are medium-term 
items and others are longer-term transformational 
opportunities. Not all actions can be focused on or 
delivered at once. The suite of actions identified 
shall guide the PCG in terms of its implementation 
and coordination of activities and funding pursuits, 
will enable a flexible and agile approach as 
drought conditions change, guiding the focus. This 
system will:
›
Provide regular opportunities to define when
conditions are changing locally
›
Catalyse a change in focus to respond to the
needs of the changing conditions.
This ensures a level of agility is adopted with regard 
to the implementation approach.
In addition to PCG implementation, it is critical to 
note the role of the broader community groups 
and industry organisations which may also utilise 
this plan to seek funding from a variety of different 
funding bodies. This plan enables stakeholders to 
work towards and contribute to regional drought 
resilience outcomes, including those at the local and 
property level, using this plan as an evidence base.
The drought resilience action plan also requires that 
a ‘lessons learned’ culture is adopted, ensuring new 
information, knowledge, approaches and science 
is rolled into implementation delivery as a guiding 
principle. This will mean that over time the drought 
resilience action plan may be adapted to reflect 
new learnings, and the adjustment of intervention 
pathways as required. The PCG is responsible to 
conduct an annual lessons learned review with 
changes to inform action moving forward. This forms 
one component of broader structured learning 
processes which should feature as part of the plan 
and as partnerships evolve. 
The drought resilience action plan has been 
thoughtfully designed to not only guide collective 
effort and action but to enable adaptation through 
ongoing monitoring, evaluation and learning. 
The regional drought resilience plan is a ten-year 
plan, to be reviewed after five years. An annual 
monitoring program to inform adaptive learning 
is outlined below. Addendums to this plan can 
be made, to reflect these learnings over time 
and ensure the document maintains pace with 
changing circumstances and maturation of drought 
preparedness activities.
Tracking progress and reporting
Action-based project tracking against the drought 
resilience action plan, the principles and objectives 
of the plan should be undertaken on an annual 
basis. This tracking and reporting shall be the 
responsibility of the implementation PCG chair, 
unless otherwise delegated. 
Likewise, an annual evaluation process will be 
conducted by the PCG, guided by the evaluation 
questions that follow.
Key evaluation and learning questions
These key evaluation questions are high level 
questions designed to frame the analysis of 
progress and performance of the Armidale Regional 
Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan against the above framework. These 
key evaluation questions may help to structure 
annual tracking and reporting.
Effectiveness and outcomes:
›
What have been the outcomes (intended,
unintended, positive and negative) of the plan
implementation process and progress?
›
To what extent has progress contributed to or
furthered the principles and objectives of the
regional drought resilience plan?
52
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

›
Has the plan been used for or otherwise supported successful funding and grant applications?
›
Have any barriers or challenges been identified throughout the implementation of plan, and what solutions
to address these have been identified?
Drought resilience maturation:
To what extent has efforts in implementing the plan contributed to:
›
Creating stronger connectedness and greater social capital within our communities, contributing to well-
being and security?
›
Empowering our communities and businesses to implement activities that improve their resilience
to drought?
›
Supporting more primary producers and land managers to adopt whole-of-system approaches to
natural resource management to improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and
landscape health?
Ongoing stakeholder engagement:
›
In what ways are the PCG and other stakeholders collaborating and collectively contributing to efforts
outlined by the action plan?
›
In what ways has the plan provided inclusive involvement across sectors, disciplines and communities?
›
In what ways has the plan been able to support individual stakeholder goals, objectives and aspirations
with regard to drought resilience?
The reporting may be undertaken using a range of tools to capture experiences and perspectives from across 
the PCG, allied stakeholders as well as the communities of the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire more broadly. 
These tools may include:
›
Meetings and event data capture
›
Targeted meeting / interviews with stakeholders
›
Survey data
›
Case studies and data from the PCG
›
Media, including social media
›
Funding and grant applications.
The above capture of information may be used to inform checkpoint as to whether priority focus areas are 
changing and whether action linked in the theory of change require review where greater action is needed, or 
transformational focus is prioritised. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
53

Achieving the plan’s outcomes
A further opportunity for the PCG to measure the contribution to or achievement of the plan’s outcomes is 
by using local data to assess specific outcomes. The data sources / indicators will need to be selected by 
the PCG and can provide insights as to how the plan is tracking against the resilience theory of change. 
Outcomes include:
THEME
OUTCOME
Social and community
O1 
Community connection and wellbeing is maintained
O2 
	Capacity and capability of community groups and 
organisations is strengthened
O3 
	Mental health services are available and are accessible 
across the community
O4 
	Sustainable water management practices are routinely 
being used
Economic
O5 
	Further diversification of the local economy is achieved
O6 
	Cross-industry and cross-sector partnerships are 
leveraged to invest in innovative agri-business solutions 
and sustainable practices to prepare for drought
O7 
	Local enterprise resilience to economic disruption 
is strengthened
O8 
	Value-add industries are expanded
Environment 
O9 
	Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways 
is reduced through investment in landscape rehydration, 
re-forestation, riparian restoration and groundcover 
management 
O10 
	Innovative projects for water efficiency are delivered
O11 
	Biosecurity outcomes are made easier to achieve through 
tools that grow capacity of individuals, businesses 
and organisations
O12 
	Regionally-specific research is being leveraged through 
landholder and community organisation projects 
Governance 
O13 
	Communications and engagement action is increased 
during drought periods
O14 
	Drought resilience priorities are embedded across 
Council’s Integrated Planning and Reporting Framework 
and informs the plans, strategies and efforts of 
allied stakeholders
O15 
	Transparency of information and knowledge regarding 
water use is available
54
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Learning
Regular (annual) monitoring provides the ability for reflection and learning. The progress tracking and 
reporting methodology, using key evaluation questions, will present specific insights in terms of those 
opportunities to build in ‘lessons learned’ through engagement across stakeholders with a role in drought 
resilience. 
These lessons should, on an annual basis, be contemplated with regard to the drought action plan to 
determine any relevant updates, new insights, intelligence and technologies that can be integrated to ensure 
the action plan keeps pace with a growing drought resilience maturation across systems and sectors.
This process will ensure the action plan remains a ‘living document’ that appropriately supports and services 
the needs of all stakeholders and importantly, the communities of the Armidale Region and Uralla Shire, in 
preparation for, endurance of, and recovery from drought.
Concepts to guide adaptive learning as part of plan implementation are included at Appendix B. These items 
will help navigate maturation of this plan over time.
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
55

Appendix A — Drought history 
Precipitation and root zone soil moisture are considered as indicators of drought according to the Bureau of 
Meteorology’s Australian Water Resources Assessment Landscape (AWRA-L) service. Root zone soil moisture 
is a calculation of the upper and lower soil layers in the AWRA-L, which represents the water-holding capacity 
of the top one metre of soil. Root zone soil moisture and precipitation rates are each useful indicators of future 
drought potential.
Past records for the region demonstrate a year-to-year fluctuation in precipitation and soil moisture across 
the region. The late 1980s and 2010-2011 feature significant rain, whereas, 1944, 1982, 2006 are some of the 
periods of unusual dryness, with the most recent events of, 2017-2019 displaying distinct drying, particularly 
for soil moisture.
In all cases these drought events were characterised by protracted periods of low rainfall, leading to low soil 
moisture as illustrated below.
*Note that the data does not go back to the Federation drought of 1890-1902
Figure 13 — Australian drought history timeline
In the below figures, these historic droughts are considered against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022.
1895 – 1902
Federation 
Drought
1937 – 1945
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009
Millennium 
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
56

1914 to 1915
Nationally, this drought was short but notable, primarily due to the failure of national wheat crop. It was driven 
strongly by an El Niño, with drought conditions first becoming evident in 1914. However, unlike surrounding 
regions and despite only being considered a year-long per the Bureau of Meteorology’s reporting, data 
suggests that the drought period in Armidale and Uralla tailed into the 1920s. Periods of reprieve came in 
1916-1917 and 1920-21.
Figure 14 — Yearly precipitation (compared to baseline), by LGA (1910 to 1930)
In the New England region, by March 1915, the drought had caused anxiety amongst residents and reports 
of the grass being so dry along railway lines that sparks from passing steam engines were setting it alight. In 
November 1915, it was reported that the whole of the New England region was drought affected, whilst some 
rains were reported in early-Spring they were not sufficient to break the drought. Reports indicate entire 
potato crops being lost, other crops being spoiled by frosts and pastures being burnt off due to bushfires. 
The breaking of the drought came in the New England region in early-December 1915, which was met with 
much relief from locals, with grave fears mounting for remaining stock in the region’s welfare. 
It is also of note that different areas of the region experienced different conditions. As shown below, the root 
soil moisture levels are significantly higher in the south and east regions of Armidale than Uralla Shire. This is 
potentially linked to the density of National parks and state forests that accompany these areas. 
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
57

Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2+
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2+
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan
58

1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
This drought period was characterised by several fluctuations of intensity and only some small periods of relief 
for Uralla (1941-1943) through otherwise significant periods of dryness. Although the World War II drought is 
dated 1937 to 1945, the data shows that this region suffered from as early as 1935. 
From 1935 to 1944, the Armidale Region saw its most notable drought period to date. The region suffered little 
to no rainfall for consecutive years and intense periods of drought in 1935 and 1940.
Figure 15 — Yearly precipitation (compared to baseline), by LGA (1934 to 1948)
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2+
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2+
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
59
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1965 to 1968
The 1960s were generally dry across the continent. 
Drought developed in 1964 in northern New South 
Wales and had extended across most of the country 
by the following year. This was evident across the 
region, with lower rainfall and lower soil moisture 
across both council areas, with the northwest of 
each region seeing the most severe affects. 
As shown in the data below, 1965 was the harshest 
drought year of this period. Both Armidale Region 
and Uralla Shire saw extremely low rainfall levels. 
Although the drought intensity saw little relief in the 
preceding two years, rainfall levels did not increase 
and stayed extremely low.
In the New England Region, it was reported that 
in the leadup to the 1965 drought there was a 
significant increase in sheep numbers between 1960 
and 1964. Much of the pasture being established by 
aerial application of seed and fertiliser (leading to 
a clover dominance, which do not handle drought 
conditions). Many farmers had relied on sown crops 
to feed their stock, but when these had failed it 
resulted on stockfeed shortages.
It was reported that the drought was unique in NSW 
in that it arrived suddenly with several productive 
excellent agricultural seasons in the years priors. 
Due to the drought, millions of sheep and hundreds 
of thousands of cattle had reportedly perished 
causing significant impact to famers.
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
Figure 16 — Yearly precipitation (compared to baseline), by LGA (1962 to 1971)
-300+
-250
-200
150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2+
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2+
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
60
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1982 to 1983
Despite only being recorded by the Bureau of Meteorology as a year-long and only affecting some regions 
for a year, the data shows that this was a 4-year drought period for the Armidale and Uralla region. This period 
became one of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th century and was caused by a very strong El Niño. 
Both Council areas experienced the most intense phase in 1980, two years before the recorded timeframe. 
Around NSW, the impact of the drought was felt most in farming areas with massive crop and livestock losses.
Figure 17 — Yearly precipitation (compared to baseline), by LGA (1977 to 1986)
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2+
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2+
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
61
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
The Millenium drought was a long-lasting period of dryness, most severe in densely populated areas of the 
south-east and south-west of the country. As for Armidale and Uralla, this region saw an intense drought 
period in 1994, three years prior to the recorded start date. However, the region then saw relief and periods of 
fluctuating rainfall from 1996-2001. 2002 was the most severe dry period for both areas, with little to no rainfall 
tailing into 2003. 2004 onwards saw more fluctuating periods of rainfall and less intense drought conditions. 
The Murray–Darling Basin and virtually all the southern cropping zones were severely affected. 
Editor’s note: The maps for this period show significant rainfall and higher soil moisture over this period, despite it being identified 
as a drought. This discrepancy is likely due to the reference period used to produce these maps (2002 – 2022) and that there was 
significant dryness in the latter half of that period. This result is then compounded by the short-lasting periods of rainfall decline during 
this long drought period (1997 – 2009). Therefore, leading to the appearance of increased rainfall and soil moisture compared to the 
reference period.
Figure 18 — Yearly precipitation (compared to baseline), by LGA (1977 to 1986)
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2+
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2+
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
62
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

2017 to 2019
Similar to other drought periods, the 2017-2019 drought started earlier for Armidale Region and Uralla Shire. 
The data below indicates that conditions for drought began to emerge in 2014 and peaked in 2019 before 
being relieved by La Niña conditions. There was a small window of relief in 2017 for Armidale and 2017-2018 
for Uralla, where the regions saw a reduction in drought conditions and some, though notably small, periods 
of rainfall. Much like other regions, the year of 2019 was the most intense dry period. The 2019/2020 bushfire 
season was a significant contributor to these dry conditions, as well as widespread low rainfall and low soil 
moisture. 
As outlined in the main body of this plan, the drought led to significant water security issues across the region 
requiring emergency water infrastructure programs to be delivered. 
Figure 19 — Yearly precipitation (compared to baseline), by LGA (2014 to 2022)
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2+
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2+
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
63
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Appendix B — Concepts to guide 
adaptive learning
As part of learning processes through the implementation, this appendix provides key 
considerations to guide further iterations and amendments to this RDRP. As drought 
resilience processes mature, the ability for further robust adaptation pathways to be 
implemented will emerge. 
The table below captures specific items identified for integration as part of future plan iterations. 
NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Expansion of drought resilience relative to diverse stakeholder groups
1
Future plan updates could build on the work of establishing partnerships to further build in 
perspectives from different community segments that would allow exploration of cause-and-effect 
relationships. This would allow the plan to address feedback loops understood through the plan 
and already a focus of a range of organisations. This may also support co-design approaches 
to generate and incorporate additional innovative intervention options to address future 
drought scenarios.
2
Future plan updates should continue to seek engagement across the community, and build in and 
on top of existing processes to engage with less represented groups through implementation of 
the plan (including non-agricultural sectors and First Nations groups). 
Stakeholder engagement could be expanded to include direct participation of different drought 
vulnerable groups including gauging their capacity to participate and how best to engage with 
these groups moving forward. This information could be used to better target vulnerable residents 
and ensure adequate supports are in place to involve different community segments.
3
Expand on the interrelationships between economic, social and environmental factors across 
existing and updated documents, plans and strategies, and their implications for understanding 
and contributing to the region’s resilience. There could be opportunity to link actions within the 
plan to these interrelationships to demonstrate multiple benefits from singular actions.
Expansion of resilience adaptation pathways
4
Further develop the theory of change to aligns the plan’s objectives and actions towards reaching 
its intended outcomes, including the degree to which the proposed actions contribute to adaptive 
and transformative actions. Subsequent plans may focus on opportunities that address adaption 
and transformation.
5
Expand on the interrelationships between economic, social and environmental factors across 
existing and updated documents, plans and strategies, and describe how these relationships 
influence potential cascading impacts of drought. There could be opportunity to link actions within 
the plan to these interrelationships to demonstrate multiple benefits from singular actions. 
64
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Expansion of resilience adaptation pathways (cont)
6
Future plan updates could develop a suite of plausible future scenarios through a participatory 
process and based on climate, drought and other drivers of change. The development of future 
scenarios could consider how trends, shocks or stresses (including drought) will interact with and 
likely affect the region’s economic, social and environmental characteristics, and the implications 
for diverse stakeholder groups. Consideration of a mix of livelihoods and sectors, including 
those that rely less on agriculture and water, such as education and tourism may be beneficial in 
directing initial steps. 
Resilience action planning
7
Future updates of the plan could identify potential interactions or interdependencies between 
actions to provide more guidance for sequencing actions. The focus should be on prioritising, 
sequencing and linking actions into alternative and complementary pathways with potential 
triggers for when each action occurs. 
8
Future plan updates could focus more on incorporating the concepts of transition and 
transformation and their practical application in resilience planning. Emphasising these concepts 
can enhance preparedness for various future scenarios, especially for those where maintaining 
the current state of economic, social, community, environmental, and governance systems may no 
longer be viable.
Implementation
9
As implementation advances, expand the implementation content of the plan with respect to its 
governance arrangements and the function / operation of the PCG. Future updates of the plan 
could provide further detail on roles and responsibilities under working partnerships. 
Future updates may also provide direction on the main purpose of each partnership which may 
be tracked to identify ways to enhance existing relationships among groups and for determining 
where new collaborations and partnerships are potentially required
10
Future plan updates could further define and build upon established structured learning processes 
and utilise monitoring and reporting to inform any changes to priorities. A focus on building up 
adaptive governance principles may inform the plan, including checkpoints to understand how the 
PCG is operating in accordance with resilience principles. 
65
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
11
Further develop structured approaches to capture lessons from performance measures, linked 
with monitoring in addition to lessons from annual evaluations currently identified in the MEL. 
Integrate lessons learned from the plan’s existing evaluation questions back into the plan’s actions.
Continue to enhance and mature the plan’s MEL processes over time as the plan transitions from 
foundational into a performance posture.
12
Further develop performance indicators tied to actions in the plan’s MEL plan. This will improve 
accountability by showing the degree to which proposed priorities and actions contribute to the 
plan’s articulated vision and outcomes. This could include an expanded set of MEL indicators, 
including drawing on those suggested by the Future Drought Fund’s MEL framework, that could be 
tracked with Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) census data. For effective implementation these 
may be tied to other ongoing monitoring processes. 
13
Future plan updates could develop key decision criteria to support action prioritisation. This may 
align within the MEL framework and evaluations on how plan performance occurs. 
Resilience assessment
14
With a focus on more transformative actions, future plan updates could be supported by an 
updated resilience assessment which provides further detail on resilience in different sectors, 
supply chains and segments of the community. This could build on the existing drought resilience 
assessment to place more focus on identifying the barriers and enablers of adaptive and 
transformative capacities identified as needed for drought resilience.
15
Ensure future iterations of the plan are qualified by a review of the Resilience Assessment 
components to identify key circumstantial changes which have occurred.
66
Armidale Regional Council and Uralla Shire Council Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ARMID1!,LE 
Regional Council