CENTRAL 
HIGHLANDS 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We Acknowledge the Wadawurrung People, 
Dja Dja Wurrung, Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung, 
Wotjobaluk and Eastern Maar Peoples as the 
Traditional Owners of the land, water, and sky. 
We pay our respects to their Elders of the Past, 
Present and those Emerging. We Acknowledge 
the Wadawurrung People and the connection 
they share with our Lands and Waters and pay 
our respects to all First Nation Peoples.
We acknowledge that Aboriginal self-
determination is a human right enshrined in 
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples, and we are committed to 
working towards social, economic, and cultural 
equity for Aboriginal Victorians.

1
Preface
Drought causes significant financial, social and 
environmental impact on people, communities  
and the region. Communities in the Central 
Highlands region are committed to taking steps 
now to ensure well considered strategies are in 
place to prepare for and manage through future 
dry periods.
The Central Highlands Drought Resilience Plan 
(the Plan) is one of nine regional drought plans 
developed in Victoria under the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning (RDRP) Program, which forms 
part of Future Drought Fund. The RDRP Program 
is supporting the development of regional drought 
resilience plans throughout Australia over the 
years 2021 to 2025.
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought resilience initiatives to help 
Australian farms and communities prepare for 
the impacts of drought. These are implemented 
through a suite of programs under four focus areas:
•	Better climate information
•	Better planning
•	Better practices
•	Better prepared communities
The RDRP program is included under ‘better 
planning’. Regional drought resilience includes 
elements that cover all focal areas. The Central 
Highlands Drought Resilience Plan therefore 
bridges all Future Drought Fund categories and 
identifies actions the community proposed to  
build drought resilience.
This Plan aims to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify and address 
their needs to be better prepared for and able 
to manage future dry seasonal conditions and 
droughts. The Plan informs future investments 
and actions towards regional drought resilience 
through clearly identified actions, grouped into 
themes, that are supported by the regional 
community to achieve the overall outcome.
This Plan is founded on historic and recent 
experiences of drought within the region as well 
as relevant existing regional strategies, programs 
and activities that aim to manage, mitigate or 
adapt to a drier climate. Nine regional Plans have 
been developed for Victoria. All nine Plans were 
developed using a consistent methodology  
across Victoria:
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify and  
collate issues and develop actions to build 
drought resilience.

Photos: David Marland

Contents
Preface	 	
1
Collaboration	
4
Summary	
5
Introduction	
6
Regional Vision	
8
Mission	 	
8
Regional principles, drivers of change and goals	
9
A snapshot of the Central Highlands	
10
Environment	
10
Climate trends	
10
Communities	
12
Industry and employment trends	
12
Drought impacts in the region	
14
Resilience in the region	
17
Themes, outcomes and actions for a drought resilient community	
18
Theme 1:	 Collaboration, coordination, networking	
20
Theme 2:	People and communities	
22
Theme 3:	Farm enterprises	
24
Theme 4:	Industry, businesses, and agencies	
26
Theme 5:	Infrastructure	
28
Theme 6:	Landscapes	
30
Theme 7:	Education and learning	
32
Case Studies	
34
Lake Wendouree	
35
Irrigation efficiency: Turning water into wine	
36
Caring for Country	
37
Green-Blue Infrastructure	
38
Natte Yallock	
39
Next steps for the Central Highlands	
41
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning	
42
Appendices	
46
Appendix 1:	 Drought resilience insights from the Central Highlands	
46
Appendix 2:	Existing actions and strategies in the Central Highlands	
48
References	
55
3

Development of the Plan was facilitated by Agriculture Victoria and jointly funded 
by the Victorian and Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Collaboration
The Plan is the culmination of a co-design process 
led by the Central Highlands Regional Reference 
Group with wider community engagement 
sought through stakeholder interviews and the 
open online platform, Engage Victoria. Members 
of the Regional Reference Group and other 
stakeholders were drawn from a broad range of 
organisations and sectors within the region that 
have responsibilities for, or interests in agriculture, 
water, liveability, regional and local communities, 
and regional development. Consultation with a broad 
range of regional stakeholders was critical to the  
development and aggregation of themes and actions 
that will achieve the overall vision for the region.
Organisational members of the Reference Group:
Agriculture Victoria
Artisan Producers in Hepburn Shire
Australian Red Cross Society
Central Highland Water
Central Highlands Regional Partnership
City of Ballarat
Commerce Ballarat
Committee for Ballarat
Corangamite Catchment Management  
Authority (CMA)
Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action (DEECA)
Dept Families, Fairness and Housing (DFFH)
Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal  
Corporation (Djaara)
Federation University Australia
Golden Plains Shire Council
Hepburn Shire Council
Moorabool Shire Council
North Central CMA
Pyrenees Grape Growers  
and Winemakers Association
Pyrenees Shire Council
Regional Development Victoria (RDV)
Rural City of Ararat
Rural Financial Counselling Service
Victorian Farmers Federation (VFF)
Victorian Fisheries Authority (VFA)
Wadawurrung Traditional Owners  
Aboriginal Corporation (WTOAC)
4

Summary
The long-term objectives of the Plan are to build regional, community and 
individual resilience to drought through recognising risks, mitigating risks, 
strengthening preparedness, and recognising opportunities for change 
that will improve the economic, environmental and social opportunities in 
the Central Highlands region.
A list of actions was developed and agreed by the 
Reference Group for the Central Highlands Plan. 
The actions were grouped in themes and contribute 
to specific outcomes that together build regional 
drought resilience.
The key themes that emerged through the Plan’s 
development process are:
•	Collaboration, coordination, networking
•	People and communities
•	Farm enterprises
•	Industry, businesses, and agencies
•	Infrastructure
•	Landscapes
•	Education and learning
The set of outcomes for building regional 
drought resilience cover the broad areas of 
people, environment and economic development. 
Achieving these outcomes through the underlying 
action lists will make the Central Highlands 
stronger through preparation, response and 
recovery of drought impacts. The outcomes in this 
Plan are:
•	Sectors, institutions and individuals working 
together in a holistic, whole picture, approach to 
maximise the regional, community and individual 
resilience to climate shocks.
•	Communities and people in the Central 
Highlands have social resilience to drought 
events. Communities remain vibrant and have the 
ability to bounce back from droughts. Individuals 
maintain physical and mental wellbeing and have 
access to formal and informal support systems.
•	Farms and other agriculture related businesses 
are financially sound and contribute to a strong 
economy that is well prepared for and more 
resilient to the effects of future droughts. Jobs 
on farms and in the agricultural sector are 
attractive, accessible and reliable, especially to 
youth. The agricultural sector is productive and 
integrated in the regional landscape.
•	Industry, business and agencies are prepared 
for the impact of drought on people, the 
environment and the economy. Preparedness 
supports resilience within industry, businesses 
and agencies by ensuring contingency plans are 
in place and resources are available.
•	Central Highlands has an infrastructure network 
that supports water access reliability and 
security, a (renewable) energy infrastructure 
that is distributed and supports peak demand 
in droughts, and a digital network that allows 
remote access to services and peer-support to 
increase drought resilience.
•	A landscape that is diverse, healthy and resilient 
and adaptive to drought.  An environment that 
supports nature, people, communities and 
industry through climate shocks.
•	A community that is aware of the impacts of 
drought, has the knowledge to prepare, respond 
and recover from drought, and has the ability to 
build stronger resilience to droughts.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

Drought is a recurring feature in the Australian 
landscape, and has been for thousands of years. 
However, the impacts of climate change are 
increasing the frequency and severity of drought. 
The Australian and Victorian Governments have 
partnered to support regional areas to ensure they 
are better prepared to manage and build resilience 
to future droughts, with an increasing focus on 
adaption and change. The Commonwealth Drought 
Response, Resilience and Preparedness Program’s 
vision is to have farm businesses and rural 
communities that are prepared for, and capable  
of managing, drought in pursuit of a prosperous 
and sustainable future.
This Central Highlands Drought Resilience Plan 
(the Plan) seeks to facilitate a cohesive and 
coordinated approach to building community 
drought resilience. The Plan includes a collectively 
agreed approach that aims to build:
•	economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector
•	environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of landscapes
•	social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities
Given the amount of existing work related to 
drought and water management in the region, 
one of the main objectives of the Plan is to align, 
strengthen and coordinate existing drought-
related strategies, plans, actions and aspirations  
to increase overall drought resilience in the region.
The Plan was developed through engagement with 
regional organisational stakeholders and local 
community groups. The Plan aligns with Victorian 
and Commonwealth government principles 
and approaches to drought preparedness and 
response. The Plan supports communities of the 
INTRODUCTION
6

Central Highlands region to be better prepared 
and be more responsive to future drought events. 
Regional Drought Resilience Plans leverage 
regional strengths and address vulnerabilities in 
the region’s ability to prosper during dry seasons 
and droughts.
Agriculture Victoria coordinated the development 
of the Plan, with extensive guidance by a Reference 
Group consisting of Traditional Owners and 
representatives from community organisations, 
industry and government. The Reference Group 
members and their affiliated organisations guided 
drought resilience thinking and ensured that the 
Plan can respond to change through adaptive 
planning and community engagement processes. 
The Reference Group held workshop-style meetings 
to guide the plan content and develop actions. 
The Group also provided access to local reports, 
regional priorities, organisational strategies and 
ensured coordination of place-based strategies. 
Other regional stakeholders were also consulted 
to inform development of the Plan and the action 
framework of this Plan was shared on the Engage 
Victoria digital platform for feedback from the 
broader community.
A strong focus of the Plan is agriculture and 
allied industries; however, the initial workshop 
highlighted that there is a strong interconnection 
in Central Highlands between urban, peri-urban 
and rural communities. Consequently, this 
Plan considers the broad need for the regional 
community, environment and economy to be 
resilient to drought.
Photo: Central Highlands Water
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

Regional Vision
Central Highlands communities are prepared to manage and mitigate 
detrimental impacts of future droughts on the regional economy, 
communities, and environment.
Mission
Central Highlands communities have the skills and resources to 
manage and mitigate the impacts of drought within this region by 
actively supporting local and regional agreed actions to absorb 
extreme weather events and gradual climatic changes, adaptation, 
modification, transition, transformation.
Photo: David Marland
8

Regional principles and drivers of change
The Central Highlands Plan to build drought 
resilience is based on a set of guiding principles. 
The principles guide the actions for the Central 
Highlands and include:
•	Self-reliance and risk mitigation: drought is 
not an exceptional circumstance, but a risk 
to be managed along with other business 
threats. Primary producers and other small 
businesses mitigate the impacts of drought by 
understanding and reducing risk and impacts.
•	Encourage preparedness: investment should 
focus on encouraging preparedness in good 
years and support community connectedness 
and wellbeing in times of drought.
•	Collaboration and co-design: drought 
preparedness programs should be co-designed 
with Local Government Authorities and other 
relevant stakeholders to ensure they effectively 
address local community priorities.
•	Improved decision-making: business skills and 
improved access to timely drought-related 
information is essential to support evidence-based 
decision-making for businesses and communities.
•	Integration: Foster collaboration between 
organisations to deliver timely, place-based, 
integrated services which simplifies processes 
for, and access by, users and reduces stress.
•	Leadership and community networks: Central 
Highlands has a strong record of collaboration 
and community leadership. Drought programs 
should be designed and delivered in partnership 
with established networks and Traditional 
Owners/First Peoples.
•	Traditional Owner Self-Determination:  
Work with Traditional Owners to provide 
opportunities for them to be involved in, and 
have their self-determined goals reflected in, 
implementation of drought preparedness and 
resilience activities.
The Central Highlands is a region in constant flux 
and development. Drivers of change identified for 
the region include:
•	Next generation of farmers have higher education 
levels and greater environmental awareness
•	Big farms are getting larger in dryland areas, 
as well in in irrigated areas around Daylesford, 
Ballarat and Waubra
•	A change towards more corporate farms
•	Emergence of new industries, such as solar  
and wind farms
•	Increased needs for off-farm income and 
increased opportunity and requirement for 
diversification on farm
•	Vertical integration with direct-to-consumer 
communication and marketing as alternative 
supply chains
•	More lifestyle and hobby farms with an influx  
of new population
•	Expansion of the major urban centres
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

A SNAPSHOT  
OF THE CENTRAL 
HIGHLANDS
For the purpose of this Plan, the Central Highlands 
region of Victoria is defined by the six Local 
Government Authorities (LGAs) that constitute 
Central Highlands Regional Partnership. The LGAs 
are: Rural City of Ararat, Pyrenees Shire Council, 
City of Ballarat, Golden Plains Shire Council, 
Hepburn Shire Council and Moorabool Shire Council.
The region overlays an intersection of several 
traditional lands and distinct environments that is 
reflected in the areas managed by four Catchment 
Management Authorities (CMAs), four water 
authorities that are in the region and recognised 
Traditional Owners.
Environment
Most land use in the region is agricultural, however, 
there are a sizeable number of parks, forests and  
natural reserves, some of which are jointly managed 
 by Traditional Owners and the State Government. 
Parks that are widely recognised are: Grampians 
(Gariwerd) National Park (part thereof), Langi-Ghiran 
State Park, Ararat Hills Regional Park, Enfield State 
Park, Brisbane Ranges National Park, Wombat 
State Forest, Mount Buangor State Park and 
Lerderderg State Park. The parks are a haven for 
biodiversity and serve as a recreational and cultural 
asset to the regional community and visitors.
The northern part of the region is within the 
Murray-Darling Basin; below the Great Dividing 
Range there are several river catchments that 
drain to Victoria’s coast. Parts of the Avoca, 
Barwon, Campaspe, Glenelg, Hopkins, Loddon, 
Maribyrnong, Moorabool, Werribee and Wimmera-
Avon river catchments, and the Lake Corangamite 
catchment are within the region. There are 
numerous wetlands and wetland complexes 
throughout the region that support the natural 
environment. Several larger lakes are important 
recreational and tourism assets, including Lake 
Wendouree, Lake Learmonth, Lake Beaufort, 
Lake Burrumbeet and Lake Calembeen. As with 
land management, Traditional Owners play a 
significant role in managing water and catchments 
in the region under the Water for Victoria Plan; 
a plan containing 69 actions for better water 
management in the State.
Climate trends
Central Highlands has a relatively reliable high 
rainfall and cool summers compared with much  
of western Victoria. Climate modelling indicates 
that the region is likely to experience changes, 
with conditions anticipated to include:
•	increased maximum and minimum temperatures
•	more days over 35°C (from around 5 days  
up to 9–17 days each year)
•	harsher fire weather and longer fire seasons
•	less days with temperatures under 0°C  
(from 9–20 days down to 2–11 days each year)
•	continued variability of rainfall with an overall 
decline in winter and spring of 24%–31%
•	greater intensity of extreme rainfall events
These climate scenarios will have implications  
for agriculture in the region. However, overall,  
the agricultural sector in Central Highlands 
appears to be resilient, with a biophysical 
environment that will enable the sector to adapt 
through practical and attainable actions, and 
possibly take advantage of new opportunities.
10

18.1%
POPULATION 
(2020)
POPULATION GROWTH 
(2011–20)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
207,300
$10.2
billion
ARARAT
PYRENEES
HEPBURN
MOORABOOL
GOLDEN PLAINS
BALLARAT
Source: Central Highlands Regional 
Economic Development Strategy (2022)
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Communities
The region covers the traditional lands of the 
Eastern Maar, Wadawarrung, Dja Dja Wurrung and 
Wurundjeri Peoples and the Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, 
Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupagulk Nations, as 
well as other Traditional Owner groups in Victoria 
who are yet to receive formal recognition. The 
Traditional Owners have lived, worked, and cared 
for their Country and its resources for many 
thousands of years. Today, Traditional Owners, 
with the whole community, care for Country 
through plans such as Paleert Tjaara Dja “Healthy 
Country Plan” by Wadawurrung Traditional Owners 
Aboriginal Corporation, “Dhelkunya Dja (Healing 
Country) Country Plan” by Dja Dja Wurrung Clans 
Aboriginal Corporation and the “Country Plan: 
Growing what is Good” by the Wotjobaluk Nations.
The region is experiencing high rates of population 
growth particularly in the peri-urban areas and in 
the townships with closer proximity to Melbourne. 
Population growth is resulting in an increased 
urban footprint in the region as agricultural areas 
are re-classified as urban growth areas. Regional 
population is projected to grow by over 25% in 
15 years mainly in the City of Ballarat, Moorabool 
Shire and Golden Plains Shire. 
Major population centres in the region are the 
regional cities of Ballarat and Ararat and the 
townships of Bacchus Marsh, Ballan, Bannockburn, 
Daylesford and Beaufort, Avoca and Creswick. 
Demand for water in these population centres 
and rural communities is being managed through 
regional and local water management plans  
and strategies.
These growing communities access a diversity  
of water sources depending on location and local 
infrastructure. These include dams managed  
by water authorities, storm water, ground water, 
private dams and the Murray-Darling Basin. 
Groundwater is used directly by farmers, other 
industries or as a water supply redundancy option 
for some rural communities. The groundwater in 
the region is generally highly saline and therefore 
has limited usability on crops and in domestic 
supply. However, potato growing regions between 
Waubra and Ballan have access to low salinity 
groundwater.
Industry and employment trends
Movement of people into the region’s urban 
centres align to the region’s main industries for 
employment and economic activity: healthcare, 
retail, construction, education/training, and 
manufacturing. These diverse industries are 
supported by the regional workforce having higher 
levels of education than most regional areas of 
Victoria and local access to four universities. 
In addition to the region’s growing urban economic 
diversity, it remains a major food producer 
for Victoria with a broad range of agricultural 
commodities, farm sizes, farm types and farming 
communities. Major agricultural commodities of 
note include chicken meat, sheep meat, grains 
and eggs. Other commodities in the region are 
beef production, horticulture and dairy. The region 
is recognised as a grape, wine and beverage 
producing area and is known for niche produce 
such as organic meats and vegetables, goat meat 
and cheeses and various herbs. Production of 
these high-value commodities also encourages 
visitation to the region through agri-tourism.
The majority of the area in the Central Highlands  
is classified as grazing and dryland cropping.  
The region contains several nature conservation 
areas. Small areas of irrigated pastures, horticulture 
and cropping are identified in the Pyrenees 
(Waubra), Ballarat (Tourello, Ascot, Blowhard), 
Hepburn and Moorabool (Millbrook, Bungaree, 
Wallace, Gordon) LGAs.
Most of the broadacre farms in the region are 
dryland, however irrigation is an important 
resource for potato production north of Ballarat 
and horticultural crop production around Bacchus 
Marsh for commodities such as turf, salad 
vegetables and pome fruits (apples, pears, etc.). 
12

Water is also used on farm for livestock and 
agricultural activities such as crop protection,  
and as a product in itself with the mineral waters  
in Hepburn Shire and Bungaree bottled or used  
in the local visitor economy. 
Overall, the agricultural sector in the region  
makes a significant direct economic contribution 
through production (Gross Value Production:  
$1.4 billion in 2020/21) and accounts for about 
4.5% of the region’s employment with the western 
municipalities continuing to be more dependent on 
agriculture than the eastern municipalities.
In addition to on-farm production, the Central 
Highlands is home to some well recognised food 
processors, agricultural equipment manufacturers, 
abattoirs, meat processors and an agri-tourism 
industry. Exports of agricultural produce (including 
forestry and fishing) along with food product 
manufacturing was valued at $695.9 million in 
2020. Development of these types of industries 
is supported by State and Local Governments 
allocating land for new industrial developments, 
for instance Ballarat West Employment Zone 
(BWEZ), the Golden Plains Food Precinct, and the 
Parwan Employment Precinct (Moorabool Shire).
	 Nature conservation
	 Managed resource protection
	 Other minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Grazing modified pastures
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Dryland cropping
	 Dryland horticulture
	 Land in transition
	 Irrigated pastures
	 Irrigated cropping
	 Irrigated horticulture
	 Urban intensive uses
	 Intensive horticulture  
and animal production
	 Rural residential and  
farm infrastructure
	 Mining and waste
	 Water
Catchment Scale Land Use of the Central Highlands
(ABARES 2021)
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Drought impacts in the region
Many definitions of drought exist, generally 
depending on what indicators are used to 
describe it. Meteorological drought relates to the 
lack of rainfall, at least below expected rainfall. 
Hydrological drought relates to the lack of runoff, 
measured by river and creek flow volumes, a lack 
of groundwater availability, and a lack of water 
storage in catchments. Agricultural drought 
can be defined by reduced productivity on-farm 
resulting from a lack of water. Other definitions 
include institutional drought, where decisions on 
water allocation have induced a water shortage, 
economic drought, which is defined by an 
economic downturn resulting from a lack of water 
availability. Green droughts exist where limited 
rainfall shows the appearance of green paddocks, 
but insufficient water is available for agricultural 
crop production.
Definitions of drought are important because they 
help define the issues to be addressed. For this 
Plan no single definition will be used, since the 
Plan aims to build regional resilience to drought. 
Every individual, business, organisation and 
community will have their own unique drought 
experience. For example, the impact of drought 
is felt differently in broadacre cropping than 
in livestock farming and the health care sector 
requires a different approach to the educational 
sector to cope with drought.
Droughts also pose a key threat for Traditional 
Owners, impacting the health of Country, and 
affecting their rights and responsibilities in caring 
for Country. For Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
Victorians, caring for Country extends beyond 
physical landscapes and involves the natural 
14

waters, animals and resources and how they 
influence and impact each other. Healing Country 
in the wake of drought events is essential to 
ensuring positive health and wellbeing outcomes 
for Aboriginal Victorians.
It is important to note that duration and intensity 
of drought have an impact on how resilient 
a community can be. While on-farm drought 
management can be effective for a seasonal 
drought, it may be less effective for a 5-year 
drought. A meteorological drought with ‘only’ low 
rainfall may have less impact than a hydrological 
drought combined with heatwaves, dust storms 
and fires.
In the development of this Plan organisations and  
individuals came together to discuss drought and  
chart a course for a smarter, more resilient future. 
The Plan was not developed to deal with an 
emergency, or an acute drought. It was developed 
to assist the Central Highlands community to 
proactively prepare for drought. The Plan proposes 
actions that individuals, communities, industry  
and government can take to be better prepared  
for future droughts.
A partnership approach will be needed with 
Traditional Owners to support their self-
determined goals and aspirations. This is in 
line with the Government’s policy and legal 
commitments, including the Victorian Aboriginal 
Affairs Framework and the Department of Energy, 
Environment and Climate Action’s Pupangarli 
Marnmarnepu ‘Owning Our Future’ 2020–2025  
self-determination reform strategy.
Photo: Golden Plains Shire Council
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

16

Resilience in the region
For the purpose of this Plan, drought resilience in 
the Central Highlands is described as communities 
that can adapt, modify and transform their 
practices, knowledge and attitude to overcome 
climatic adversity or the ‘new normal’ that is a  
drier climate.
This definition informs intended outcomes and 
actions with an understanding that resilience 
to climatic challenges and uncertainties is an 
opportunity to strengthen communities rather  
than just being able to maintain systems, 
processes and culture.
There is no one-size-fits-all route to becoming a 
resilient community. However, certain community 
characteristics are known to contribute to 
resilience. These characteristics have been 
used to build the suite of outcomes and actions 
documented in the Plan.
Resilient regions have:
•	common vision and goals
•	cooperative and interconnected leadership  
and governance
•	strong connections and relationships  
through formal and informal networks
•	genuine collaboration
Resilient communities have:
•	local leadership and initiative
•	governance that embraces change
•	willingness to work together in the pursuit  
of common goals
•	drive for self-responsibility
•	a willingness to be adaptable and learn  
lessons from change
•	the skills needed to anticipate issues and 
effectively manage risk
•	foresight to consider different perspectives  
and options to solve complex problems
Photo: David Marland
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

THEMES, OUTCOMES 
AND ACTIONS FOR  
A DROUGHT RESILIENT 
COMMUNITY
The themes and outcomes were 
designed and agreed by the 
Reference Group that represented 
the regional community. Themes are 
used to provide the broad areas of 
interest to the regional stakeholders 
related to building drought 
resilience. The outcome for each 
theme reflects the overall goal for 
a set of actions that have a common 
purpose, beneficiary or instigator.
The actions listed under each theme should not 
be seen in isolation. Each action is designed to 
create a coordinated impact that drives this region 
towards its overall vision of being prepared to 
manage and mitigate detrimental impacts of future 
droughts. Some actions are the responsibility of an 
individual agency or organisation, however, most 
actions will require a collaborative approach by 
several organisations, businesses and community 
groups or members.
The outcomes and actions in the Plan draw on 
the local experiences of people who live in the 
community as well as the relevant sections of 
existing plans and strategies that drive the actions 
and priorities of the organisational members of the 
Reference Group. 
The seven themes for the RDRP in the Central 
Highlands are:
•	Collaboration, coordination, networking
•	People and communities
•	Farm enterprises
•	Industry, businesses, and agencies
•	Infrastructure
•	Landscapes
•	Education and learning
18

Photo: City of Ballarat
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

COLLABORATION, 
COORDINATION, 
NETWORKING
Theme 1
The Central Highlands is part of the upper 
catchment, with water running into the Murray 
Darling basin in the north, and to the coastal 
regions in the south. The supply, allocation and 
management of water is an important aspect  
of the region’s drought resilience strengthening. 
Being in the upper catchment does not necessarily 
result in sufficient water supply, and water can be 
imported into the region through the Goldfields 
Superpipe to augment domestic water for Ballarat. 
With the many organisations and agencies 
responsible for water allocation, delivery and 
demand management, as well as a broad and 
diverse number of water users, collaboration, 
coordination and networking is essential for  
the region.
Existing forums on water management can be used 
to prepare for drought event responses, but also to 
transform towards a more drought resilient region. 
The same applies to participative development of 
water strategies in the Central Highlands, where 
long-term drought resilience building can be 
included in the discussion and planning.
Outcome:  
Sectors, institutions and individuals working together in a holistic, whole 
picture, approach to maximise the regional, community and individual 
resilience to climate shocks.
20

Actions
1.1
Review relevant regional and urban water strategies and drought response plans  
and share key information with the region
1.2
Communicate and support region-specific actions in the Sustainable Water Strategies
1.3
Promote Sustainable Water Strategy actions related to water sharing with the environment 
and Traditional Owners
1.4
Support the Central Highlands Integrated Water Management Forum
1.5
Partner and collaborate with Traditional Owner groups (Registered Aboriginal Parties  
and non-Registered Aboriginal Parties) in the Central Highlands to co-design activities  
that continue to care for Country in ways that uphold their Cultural values
1.6
Continue consultation with regional industry groups including horticulture and viticulture
1.7
Continue collaboration between organisations on large-scale, multi-agency projects  
that improve water security and drought resilience
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

PEOPLE AND 
COMMUNITIES
Theme 2
Regional drought resilience cannot be achieved by 
organisations and agencies alone. Residents and 
communities in the region have responsibilities in 
resilience building and strengthening. The actions  
in this Plan are intended to guide how the region 
can move forward. Grassroots initiatives are 
strongly encouraged, and existing community  
led processes are welcomed. Community groups 
can provide leadership to transform the region 
towards climate adaptation and drought resilience. 
A holistic approach to drought resilience is needed, 
and can be adopted through a “Connection to 
Country” approach. Adapting to a “new normal”, 
under expected future climate conditions, will be 
required. To address mental health during droughts, 
green spaces and maintaining ovals for recreational 
activities have been identified as important. This 
requires pre-drought planning and prioritisation. 
Connectedness has proven important for people 
during Covid isolations, similar to isolation felt 
by households and businesses during previous 
droughts. Accessible and stable communication 
infrastructure (phone, text and internet) have been  
shown to alleviate the stresses of physical isolation.
Outcome:  
Communities and people in the Central Highlands have social resilience  
to drought events. Communities remain vibrant and have the ability  
to bounce back from droughts. Individuals maintain physical and mental 
wellbeing and have access to formal and informal support systems.
22

Actions
2.1
Engage and empower community groups to build drought resilience
2.2
Engage the community in drought resilience planning
2.3
Ensure resilience building focuses on communities as well as individuals
2.4
Empower and strengthen the ‘Connection to Country’ approach for people and landscapes
2.5
Adopt, communicate and facilitate participation in “new normal” thinking
2.6
Review priorities of water use during droughts to support mental health in communities
2.7
Create and maintain green and recreational spaces
2.8
Promote the installation and use of rainwater tanks in urban and rural dwellings
2.9
Engage with telecom providers to optimise digital access and digital literacy in the region
2.10
Map and share what actions exist in the area of digital connectivity
Photo: Golden Plains Shire Council
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

FARM  
ENTERPRISES
Theme 3
Farming businesses are impacted by drought in 
many ways. Crop yields, livestock and other farm 
related productivities decline, resulting in financial 
impacts. Additional stresses and uncertainties 
affect personal health and farming families.  
Building and strengthening drought resilience 
focuses on being prepared for these impacts. 
Actions that can be undertaken include suitable 
infrastructure, optimised financial management, and 
maintaining a healthy, long-term farming system.
Outcome:  
Farms and other agriculture related businesses are financially sound 
and contribute to a strong economy that is well prepared for, and more 
resilient to, the effects of future droughts. Jobs on farms and in the 
agricultural sector are attractive, accessible and reliable, especially 
to youth. The agricultural sector is productive and integrated in the 
regional landscape.
24

Actions
3.1
Review and improve on-farm water management, including the options for pressurised 
water conveyance
3.2
Address impacts of climate change and water security for farming enterprises  
through infrastructure development supported by existing water strategies
3.3
Review incentives for farm infrastructure investments
3.4
Review and improve on-farm infrastructure to build drought resilience  
(livestock, water, transport)
3.5
Review existing farming practices through a drought lens and adjust as appropriate
3.6
Ensure farm business plans include drought and climate shock preparedness
3.7
Strengthen financial management incorporating seasonally fluctuating income  
and expenses
3.8
Explore opportunities for income diversification
3.9
Investigate opportunities for crop diversification, either to reduce risk of  
mono-culture income, or to apply risk-spreading by using multiple varieties  
with different weather responses
3.10
Improve soil health to increase water infiltration and retention, resulting in improved  
crop productivity
3.11
Consider opportunities for regenerative farming practices as a long-term strategy  
to improve soil health and mitigate climate shocks
3.12
Balance livestock management between climatic conditions, land carrying capacity  
and market opportunity
3.13
Improve data collection and data-based decision making through applying digital 
technologies and methodologies
3.14
Compile and use commodity-specific data, knowledge and information to maximise  
the information available for decision-making during droughts
3.15
Promote the re-use and recycling of water on-farm
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

INDUSTRY, 
BUSINESSES, 
AND AGENCIES
Theme 4
In addition to farm enterprises, other local 
industries, businesses and agencies are impacted 
by drought and have a role to play in making 
the Central Highlands region more drought 
resilient. This impacts essential, social and 
financial services, and the performance of rural 
economies at several scales. Resilience building 
actions include the availability of communication, 
collaboration and support networks for businesses 
and agencies, and having individual business plans 
that include drought preparedness.
Outcome:  
Industry, business and agencies are prepared for the impact of 
drought on people, the environment and the economy. Preparedness 
supports resilience within industry, businesses and agencies by 
ensuring contingency plans are in place and resources are available.
26

Actions
4.1
Consider the actions in existing industry, business and agency plans and strategies  
through a drought resilience lens
4.2
Promote efficient water use and irrigation systems in cities and urban industry
4.3
Investigate the use of incentives for improved water delivery systems
4.4
Identify water as a key tool to support mental health in communities
4.5
Explore the use of diverse water sources to provide reliable water supply during droughts
4.6
Promote innovative water usage by manufacturers
4.7
Support opportunities to use ‘waste’ water
4.8
Identify agencies, industries and businesses that have impact on agricultural sector 
resilience building and include them in collaboration and networking forums
Photo: David Marland
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

INFRASTRUCTURE
Theme 5
Hardware, the built environment, can have a 
supportive role in better management, operation 
and preparation for droughts. Thus, infrastructure 
supports the resilience building efforts in 
the Central Highlands. This includes water 
infrastructure, but also communication networks, 
and infrastructure required to support a growing 
population.
Outcome:  
Central Highlands has an infrastructure network that supports water 
access reliability and security, a (renewable) energy infrastructure  
that is distributed and supports peak demand in droughts, and a digital 
network that allows remote access to services and peer-support to 
increase drought resilience.
28

Actions
5.1
Address impacts of climate change and regional population growth on water demand  
in townships through infrastructure development supported by existing water strategies
5.2
Promote good on-farm infrastructure to allow ‘best management practices’ for a variety  
of agricultural production systems
5.3
Strengthen and expand water pipelines where possible to reduce evaporative losses  
and improve delivery control and reliability
5.4
Expand infrastructure to support water re-use, recycled water and stormwater use
5.5
Highlight and expand tourism assets to promote alternative sources of income during 
climate shocks
5.6
Support the implementation of drought response plans for urban water supplies  
and recycled water system
5.7
Review opportunities for alternative use of existing water infrastructure
5.8
Adapt and improve infrastructure to accommodate population and economic growth
5.9
Review infrastructure requirements to ensure acceptable water quality can be delivered 
under a variety of seasonal conditions
5.10
Create a business case and promote the Southern Wimmera and Northeast –  
Pyrenees Rural Water Supply pipeline
5.11
Continue completion of the East Grampians Rural pipeline
Photo: Golden Plains Shire Council
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

LANDSCAPES
Theme 6
Natural and human-supported landscapes are 
impacted by droughts. Resilient landscapes 
include those that have a diverse natural 
vegetation, contains drought resilient species, 
and can recover from droughts. Landscape 
management can improve this resilience through 
shrub and tree planting, controlled cultural 
burning, and bushfire prevention.
Outcome:  
A landscape that is diverse, healthy and resilient and adaptive to drought.  
An environment that supports nature, people, communities and industry 
through climate shocks.
30

Actions
6.1
Advocate for high priority actions contained in current management plans for lakes  
and waterways within the region
6.2
Maximise water quality across the landscape zones following Catchment Management 
Authority (CMA) strategies
6.3
Communicate and support region-specific actions in CMA plans and strategies
6.4
Ensure biodiversity is maintained, strengthened, and supported, especially in relation  
to climate shocks
6.5
Support landscape design for climate proofing
6.6
Improve sustainable land and water management practices through collaboration  
and partnership with Traditional Owners and First Peoples, in line with Government’s  
legal and policy obligations
Photo: Golden Plains Shire Council
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

EDUCATION  
AND LEARNING
Theme 7
One of the principles of resilience building is 
to encourage learning. Learning is encouraged 
through many of the activities described 
previously. In addition, the Central Highlands 
region has many formal education opportunities, 
including university and vocational training. 
Drought experience and resilience could be 
included in specialised curricula, contributing  
to drought resilience building in the region.
Outcome:  
A community that is aware of the impacts of drought, has the knowledge 
to prepare, respond and recover from drought, and has the ability to build 
stronger resilience to droughts.
32

Actions
7.1
Promote community learning from past experiences, improved fact-based knowledge  
and insights, and proven actions to build drought resilience
7.2
Expand water-wise education in the context of drought, water saving opportunities,  
and impact of water savings on environment, economy and people
7.3
Strengthen community messaging about current conditions, expected future conditions,  
and opportunities for collective drought resilience building
7.4
Proactively communicate region-specific elements from policies and strategies  
applicable to the Central Highlands
7.5
Develop and use communication products that explain the roles and responsibilities  
for water management by different agencies (e.g. river water, rural and urban water, 
irrigation water)
7.6
Identify, in partnership with Traditional Owners, opportunities to use traditional knowledge, 
and culturally appropriate tools to heal and care for Country
Photo: Tracey McRae
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

CASE STUDIES
Photo: City of Ballarat
34

Lake Wendouree
Lake Wendouree was turned from a swamp into a 
shallow lake in the 1860’s. It provides recreational 
services, is a source for irrigation water and has an 
important role for wildlife in the area. The canoe 
and rowing events of the 1956 Olympics were 
held on Lake Wendouree. Due to its shallow depth, 
droughts have reduced the surface area of the 
lake, at times only a dry lake bed remaining, most 
recently in 2006.
Although rainfall aided in recovering the lake, 
additional measures were taken to avoid the 
lake from completely drying again. This included 
diverting ‘Paul’s Drain’ from the outfall of Paul’s 
Wetland in the suburb of Wendouree and 
delivering it to Lake Wendouree via a 1.7km pipe, 
implemented by the City of Ballarat in 2006. 
Additional harvested stormwater diversions were 
created from Redan Wetland and the Ring Road in 
later years. Direct stormwater recharges the lake 
from the North Gardens wetland and Wendouree 
Parade. Central Highlands Water supplies Class A 
recycled water from the Ballarat North Treatment 
Plant to Lake Wendouree to help maintain water 
levels in the lake.
In 2017, the City of Ballarat and Urban Initiative 
developed the Lake Wendouree Master Plan. 
It describes plans to maintain water levels and 
water quality, supporting recreation on and 
around the lake by maintaining and constructing 
infrastructure like bicycle paths and public toilets, 
diversifying the surrounding biodiversity through 
additional tree and shrub planting, and maintaining 
and improving access to the lake.
Having multiple sources of water to maintain the 
lake will ensure that, even in drought, visitors and 
residents can enjoy the water, wildlife has a refuge, 
and biodiversity remains supported.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

Irrigation efficiency: Turning water into wine
Jillian Henderson and winemaker Peter Bicknell 
own and operate their vineyard and winery ‘Bigibila’ 
in the foothills of the Pyrenees Ranges on Dja Dja 
Wurrung Country. The 12.5 hectare vineyard  
enjoys near perfect growing conditions with warm 
dry days and cool clear nights. The vines are 
tended using sustainable farming practices that 
include using large volumes of animal manure and 
ground limestone instead of artificial fertilisers. 
The cornerstone of the business is production of 
four grape varieties that are processed on site into 
wines and sold direct from the vineyard.
Water is limited at the 60 hectare property. Farms 
and households in the area are not connected  
to a piped water supply and ground water under 
the property is too saline to be used for irrigation. 
In addition, the whole agribusiness is in the Murray 
Darling Basin catchment which places limits on 
water harvesting and water transfer between 
landholders. The vineyard, winery and other 
aspects of the business are therefore reliant on 
direct rainfall and the limited rainwater stored in 
existing dams within their property. Limitations  
to water capture and water storage coupled  
with their experience of dry seasons make  
many seasons a challenge but has also led to 
drought resilience being an inherent part of  
their business success.
The vineyard has four different varieties, Shiraz, 
Cabernet Sauvignon, Cabernet Franc and Merlot. 
The diversity of varieties helps accommodate the 
different seasonal conditions experienced each 
year. The vines are watered using highly efficient 
drip irrigation, unlike the overhead irrigation 
commonly used throughout the district 15–20 
years ago. Grape yields are higher in some years 
than others depending on seasonal conditions 
including rainfall. However, Peter and Jillian buffer 
the seasonal variations by selling wines from 
several years production through their cellar door 
and through their online marketplace. Further, 
diversification of the business into agritourism  
and innovative sales techniques supports the 
whole agribusiness through the drier seasons.
Photo: Bigibila Wines
36

Photo: Golden Plains Shire Council
Caring for Country
The Wadawurrung Traditional Owners Aboriginal 
Corporation has a Whole of Country approach to 
drought resilience building. Drought is listed as  
a threat to several building blocks that underpin 
the Wadawurrung objectives and metrics in the 
Paleert Tjaara Dja Plan. Wadawurrung Peoples  
are innately connected to Country and rely on  
its health to protect our people and Culture. 
Without healthy Country, there can’t be healthy 
people. Our waterways are the lifeblood of 
Country and through the Central and Gippsland 
Sustainable Water Strategy (Department of 
Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2022) 
water is being reallocated to Wadarurrung for their 
self-determined needs. Additional environmental 
entitlement is also being allocated to provide 
flows to our significant waterways protecting 
the biocultural landscapes and strengthening 
their drought resilience. Water may also be used 
for native revegetation projects being delivered 
by our natural resource management team in 
collaboration with other agencies and partners.
In addition to revegetation, cultural burning 
regimes are applied to activate dormant seed 
banks. Wadawurrung works on cultural burning  
implementation with Corangamite CMA, private 
landholders and other agencies. Cultural burning 
regimes are applied to heal and rehabilitate 
cultural landscapes by activating dormant seed 
banks and managing weed biomass. For certain 
native vegetation species, seeds require the right 
fire to activate and grow into shrubs and trees. 
Diverse vegetation, native and adjusted to the 
climatic conditions of the Central Highlands, 
strengthens the environmental resilience to 
droughts. Healthy vegetation increases rainfall 
infiltration rates into the soil, thus increasing water 
availability for further vegetation development and 
growth. On the steeper slopes, vegetative cover 
reduces erosion caused by excessive runoff during 
heavy rain events, while during droughts, healthy 
vegetation reduces the risk of wind induced soil 
erosion. With this combined approach, the Caring 
for Country team not only improves the landscape 
for average years, but also strengthens its ability 
to remain healthy during droughts, and bounce 
back when the rains return.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

Green-Blue Infrastructure
Green-Blue Infrastructure (GBI) is an approach 
to integrate nature into urban landscapes. 
Green-Blue Infrastructure intends to make cities 
‘nature positive’, for example through managing 
stormwater runoff using natural or constructed 
wetlands, ensuring healthy urban catchments,  
and using permeable pavements. Trees and green  
areas reduce the urban heat effect, green corridors 
provide habitat for wildlife, and provide spaces 
for people to relax. An increased integration, and 
co-design of urban and Green-Blue Infrastructure 
contributes to a strengthened drought resilience 
through increasing short-term water availability, 
reducing urban heat during heatwaves, and 
providing green spaces to relieve or lighten stress.
While the benefits of Green-Blue Infrastructure 
can be easily listed, achieving and implementing 
this approach requires multiple considerations.  
The Grampians region has developed a guide  
for small towns to support the decision making.  
It provides an insight into the added value of GBI and 
breaks down the process to reach the objectives. 
Stakeholder engagement, corporate planning 
and community-led planning are processes that 
help to maximise the benefits of GBI. Statutory 
and infrastructure planning provide the tools to 
enable implementation of GBI, and infrastructure 
design and procurement, and its operation and 
maintenance ensures that the infrastructure can 
be supported in construction and operation.
The Central Highlands Strategic Directions 
Statement (DELWP, 2018) recognises the activities 
leading to implementation of the GBI, and adds 
that many towns and localities in the region  
act as community hubs, tourism centres and 
regional attractions; functions that benefit from 
this approach.
The “Greening Ballarat – A Green Blue City Action 
Plan” project is highlighted. The City of Ballarat 
has a target for 40% tree canopy cover for the 
city which outlines its ambition. Other councils 
in the region have similar plans and recognise 
greening as a key strategy to underpin economic 
activity and wellbeing outcomes. One action of the 
Strategic Directions Statement is to provide seed 
funding for collaborative planning with the shires 
in the Central Highlands to define Green Blue 
Infrastructure activities. The Statement envisions 
opportunities in small towns including:
•	Urban water alternative supply schemes  
for ovals, parks and local industry
•	Street tree and urban greening projects 
supported by water
•	Urban waterway restoration and improvement
•	Water-sensitive urban design and stormwater 
management projects
•	Planning controls and policies to influence 
developments in greenfield and infill areas.
Photo: Katherine Howard, Emerge Associates
38

Natte Yallock
The Natte Yallock area is used mainly for cropping 
and grazing of improved pastures. Most of the soils 
are well suited to agriculture, however, gilgai clays 
with their adverse physical characteristics are 
challenging. Terraces have been formed at several 
levels and dominate the landscape, resulting in a 
variety of soils, among which red calcareous sodic 
duplex soils are the most widespread.
Anthony and Sam Streeter are wool and prime 
lamb producers in the Natte Yallock region 
of the Pyrenees Shire. The Streeter’s farm of 
approximately 1000 hectares has about 1500 
sheep comprising a mix of breeding merino ewes 
and wethers. The annual rainfall averages between 
420mm to 500mm. Temperatures are less than 10°C 
during the winter months. The rainfall is less than 
evapotranspiration from September to April.
To support a resilient livestock farming system, 
the Streeter’s share-crop for the purpose of 
growing hay and grain to complement established 
perennial pastures. Importantly, the supplementary 
feed provides a feed reserve to build resilience 
into the farming system for when drier months 
and seasons occur. Further strategies adopted for 
droughts include making early decisions to reduce 
livestock numbers, establishing stock containment 
areas, and focusing on water security via careful 
management of water levels on the farm. The farm  
is fortunate to have a spring fed dam which becomes 
a critical asset during the worst of droughts.
Photo: Anthony Streeter
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

Photo: Tracey McCrae
40

This Plan identifies and communicates the actions and outcomes needed 
for communities, businesses and people in the region to be resilient to 
future droughts and the gradual change to a drier climate. 
A handful of actions in the Plan can be 
implemented by individual entities. However,  
most actions, related outcomes and the regional 
vision will only be realised through concerted  
and continuous collaboration that is driven  
by communities and organisations within this 
region. The communities and organisations  
within the region therefore have a critical role  
in implementing this Plan.
Some actions in the Plan will need regional 
stakeholders to reach out for broader cooperation 
or collaboration with other governments, agencies, 
statutory bodies, non-profit organisations, and the 
private sector. 
Partnerships with Traditional Owners/First Peoples 
of the Central Highlands region will ensure  
their unique rights and responsibilities, and self-
determined goals and aspirations for Country, are 
reflected during implementation of Plan actions.
The actions in this Plan represent a point in time. 
As economic, social and environment conditions 
change, the community will need to adapt the 
actions in this Plan and introduce new actions to 
maintain the path towards the desired outcomes  
and vision for the region.
This Plan provides the pathway for the region  
to move towards drought resilience with: 
•	an understanding of the regional impacts  
of drought
•	a common regional vision and common goals
•	desired outcomes and actions agreed by  
the community
•	a common picture of how existing and new 
investments are related to each other
•	a basis for developing new actions and programs 
to achieve the regional vision
•	a framework to monitor progress towards 
building resilience to future droughts
Next steps to support implementation of the  
Plan include:
•	identifying a lead organisation to oversee and 
coordinate the delivery of activities that align 
with the region’s Plan 
•	establishing a fit-for-purpose Advisory Group to 
guide delivery and ensure regional representation
•	detailing priority actions, budgets and timelines
•	monitoring and evaluation
•	reviewing the progress of the Plan and making 
necessary updates
NEXT STEPS 
FOR THE 
CENTRAL 
HIGHLANDS
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

The collaborative effort and shared expertise used 
to prepare the Plan is the important first step in  
building drought resilience in the Central Highlands. 
Work was done by the region to articulate the 
actions needed to achieve desired regional 
outcomes. The next step is for the actions and 
activities identified in the Plan to be implemented, 
evaluated and adapted as needed to achieve  
the longer-term outcomes for drought resilience. 
Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) is a 
key element of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning program. Program objectives, outcomes 
and measures of success are clearly articulated at 
all levels of program delivery (national, state and 
regional) and are over a range of short, medium 
and long timeframes.
MONITORING, 
EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING
Pathway of program delivery through discovery, engagement, 
development, implementation and evaluation
1
Understand 
the context
Past, current 
and future 
understanding 
of drought 
in the region
2
Gather 
momentum
Bring together 
the experiences 
and perspectives 
to develop a 
regional Plan
3
Articulate the 
desired steps 
for change
Work together 
to determine 
desired outcomes 
and actions
4
Take the steps 
and actions
Implement the 
actions and activities 
to acheive change 
and build resilience
5
Determine 
next steps
Evaluate regional 
outcomes and 
identify learnings 
and gaps for 
future progress
We are here
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
42

Measuring success
The outcomes identified in this Plan are community 
and region wide, and dependent on the fourth step 
of implementation identified in the pathway of 
program delivery. Given the long-term outcomes 
of the Plan, the framework below outlines how 
progress toward success will be measured. 
Management and reporting
The organisation awarded as the lead organisation 
to coordinate delivery of the Plan will work with 
Agriculture Victoria to provide up-to-date data and 
information to support program implementation 
and planning. Monitoring and reporting will enable: 
key learnings to be identified, effective reporting, 
and adaptive program management. 
A range of assessment tools may be used to 
indicate progress including, but not limited to, 
surveys, case studies, stakeholder interviews and 
engagement data analysis. Data and information 
will be collected at various intervals across 
implementation planning, and during and after 
activities are implemented.
Assumptions underpinning 
success of the Plan
Measuring success and reporting on progress 
toward regionally specific outcomes is dependent 
on several key assumptions.
Key assumptions affecting short-term  
outcomes (1–2 years)
•	Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning
•	Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other for regional planning
•	Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs
•	Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them
•	There are sufficient learnings to continuously 
improve program implementation
Key assumptions affecting medium-term 
outcomes (2–4 years)
•	Supporting regional stakeholders through 
program implementation will result in change in 
practice in the Central Highlands
•	There are sufficient opportunities and funding 
for the region to implement elements of the Plan
•	Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience
•	The Central Highlands Plan Coordinator and 
regional stakeholders continue to review and 
implement the Plan
MEL Framework
Key regional themes and outcomes are matched 
with relevant Future Drought Fund (the Fund) 
strategic priorities, regional progress measures 
(2–4 years) and indicators.
The Framework is aligned to existing MEL plans at 
the Program and Fund level to ensure consistency 
and to ensure the data collection tools provide 
information across a range of learning and 
reporting requirements.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Collaboration, coordination and networking
Sectors, institutions and individuals working together in a holistic, whole picture, approach  
to maximise the regional, community and individual resilience to climate shocks.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Improved collaboration and coordination 
between governments, industry, 
community, Traditional Owners and 
primary producers.
Communities are communicating regional 
drought resilience needs and priorities to 
inform investment.
Communities are coming together to 
prepare for and respond to drought.
Plan actions and opportunities are 
incorporated into other strategic planning 
across the region.
Implementation/planning groups 
and networks function well 
together.
Communities have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver 
actions across the region.
People and communities
Communities and people in the Central Highlands have social resilience to drought events. 
Communities remain vibrant and have the ability to bounce back from droughts. Individuals maintain 
physical and mental wellbeing and have access to formal and informal support systems.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities are learning and building 
capability, capacity, expertise, and sharing 
innovative ways to build social resilience.
Community preparedness to drought has 
increased.
Community awareness of and access 
to support systems and services has 
increased.
Traditional Owners are engaged in  
regional drought preparedness activities, 
and those activities reflect Traditional 
Owners’ priorities
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
Leaders in the region are more 
confident to implement strategic 
actions.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver 
actions across the region.
Traditional Owners are 
increasingly involved in drought 
programs and activities.
Farm enterprises
Farms and other agriculture related businesses are financially sound and contribute to  
a strong economy that is well prepared for, and more resilient to, the effects of future droughts.  
Jobs on farms and in the agricultural sector are attractive, accessible and reliable,  
especially to youth. The agricultural sector is productive and integrated in the regional landscape.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Primary producers are better able to 
identify business risk and make timely 
decisions.
New technologies and practices are 
being adopted to better prepare primary 
producers and agricultural businesses for 
drought.
Farmers are learning about and 
implementing new business 
strategies and practices.
Farmers and agricultural 
industries have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
MEL Framework for the Central Highlands
1. Future Drought Fund
44

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Industry, business and agencies
Industry, business and agencies are prepared for the impact of drought on people,  
the environment and the economy. Preparedness supports resilience within industry, businesses  
and agencies by ensuring contingency plans are in place and resources are available.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience for an 
innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector
Impacts of drought on the economic, 
environmental and social parts of the 
region are known and prepared for.
Innovative pathways and opportunities 
for water usage in the region are being 
actioned.
Increased community 
understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic, 
environmental and social 
characteristics.
Innovative pathways and 
opportunities for water usage  
in the region are identified.
Infrastructure
Central Highlands has an infrastructure network that supports water access reliability and security, 
a (renewable) energy infrastructure that is distributed and supports peak demand in droughts, and a 
digital network that allows remote access to services and peer-support to increase drought resilience.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Innovative pathways and opportunities 
for water availability and reliability in the 
region are being actioned.
New technologies and digital systems 
are being adopted to support primary 
producers and communities to adapt.
Organisations and corporations responsible 
for infrastructure have drought plans.
Best practice approaches 
are being used to identify 
opportunities to build drought 
resilience in the region.
Stakeholders are learning 
about and implementing new 
technologies.
Landscapes
A landscape that is diverse, healthy and resilient and adaptive to drought. An environment  
that supports nature, people, communities and industry through climate shocks.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Managing natural resource to build 
resilience to climate shocks is improving 
across region. 
Partnerships, networks and 
organisations are working 
together to manage natural 
resources.
Stakeholders have increased 
understanding of natural 
resource management to build 
drought resilience.
Education and learning
A community that is aware of the impacts of drought, has the knowledge to prepare, respond  
and recover from drought, and has the ability to build stronger resilience to droughts.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities are communicating regional 
drought resilience needs and priorities to 
inform investment.
Regions are monitoring their resilience to 
drought in accordance with the Plan.
Increased community 
understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the region’s 
unique economic, environmental 
and social characteristics.
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

Influx of residents
The Central Highlands region has large urban 
centres and many rural communities. The region 
has a considerable influx of new residents, 
strengthened by many moving away from 
Melbourne throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Lifestyle and hobby farms have increased with 
regional population growth. Several of these  
new residents have not been in the area during 
previous droughts and may be less prepared  
for future droughts than long-term residents.
Water storage
From a farm perspective, an increase in water 
storage, either through dams or groundwater 
banking, is considered an option to improve the 
drought resilience of the business. As part of water 
catchments, increased storage in one location  
may impact water availability at other locations. 
Water managers at federal, state, regional and 
catchment level have developed strategies and 
management plans balancing water availability 
with water demand.
Grassroots initiatives
Feedback gathered via the Engage Victoria 
platform emphasised that the Central Highlands 
Drought Resilience Plan should encourage 
regional initiatives, without government 
regulations taking over from communities.
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is designed 
to promote bottom-up, community and region-led 
approaches, and encourage regionally relevant 
actions to support building the region’s resilience to 
the next drought periods. This Plan aims to enable 
regional initiatives with government support –  
where it is beneficial. Building resilience to drought 
requires collaboration between many actors and 
across sectors - hence actions listed in this Plan 
have a broad range of owners and implementers. 
Once the Regional Drought Resilience Plan is 
developed, an organisation from the region will 
become the Coordinator of the Plan and will 
support the implementation of actions noted, 
working collaboratively with regional partners and 
funders, including the Australian and Victorian 
Governments.
A Regional Drought Resilience Plan will never  
be finalised. Building resilience is a continuous 
effort which requires adjustments and flexibility  
to changing conditions over time.
Drought and climate change
While this Plan focuses on building and 
strengthening regional drought resilience, 
feedback through the Engage Victoria platform 
emphasised drought is one of a range of climate 
hazards , and that frosts, floods, heatwaves and  
other changes are forecast to occur. This Drought 
Resilience Plan builds upon, and includes plans  
and strategies developed for the Central Highlands 
in the context of climate change. These on-going  
climate change adaptation and mitigation processes 
have been included in this Plan where appropriate.
Farm management
Building drought resilience in farming systems 
requires a long-term approach. While there 
are short-term actions that help to reduce 
the impact of the next drought on crop and 
livestock management, finances and mental 
and physical health, these impacts will occur in 
every subsequent drought. Feedback through the 
Engage Victoria platform included suggestions for 
transformative agricultural systems, for example 
through the promotion of regenerative agriculture. 
Upskilling service providers to understand the 
implications of variability, volatility and shocks 
to the biophysical and financial performance of 
farming systems will be essential.
Appendix 1 
Drought resilience insights  
from the Central Highlands
46

Food security
Depending on the intensity and duration of 
drought, food security in the region can be 
impacted. Food security is not only related to  
local production, but is also dependent on  
regional, national and international trade,  
logistics and availability. For regional drought 
resilience, through a food security lens, focus  
on drought resilient local production systems,  
crop diversification, livestock management 
according to carrying capacity of drought 
impacted grazing properties, and regional 
business resilience are important.
Information and knowledge
Data collection and monitoring were identified 
as important tools to determine drought impacts, 
temporary drought solutions, and management  
of drought impacted areas. Monitoring of regional 
water resources, soil moisture at farm level and 
livestock movements and efficiencies through 
industry-based GPS linked apps are examples 
where data collection and analysis can aid in 
drought resilience building.
Awareness
Awareness of individuals, communities, agencies 
and businesses has been identified as important 
for drought resilience building in the Central 
Highlands. Awareness of existing plans and 
strategies on water management, climate change, 
physical and digital infrastructure and resilience 
building are themes emerging from feedback. 
Awareness raising is not only important for 
plans that organisations and agencies create, 
but also for responsibilities that individuals and 
communities have. 
Water savings
A large part of the discussions related to the 
Drought Resilience Plan in the Central Highlands 
have focused on water management. A broad 
range of water savings options were suggested, 
including reduction of evaporation from water 
surfaces like farm dams, improved water 
use efficiencies on farm and in landscaping 
and improved urban water delivery systems. 
Discussions also focused on reduced water use, 
through improved awareness on limited water 
resources and the use of water restrictions. 
Although water in urban settings has an important 
role in maintaining green spaces, recreation and 
cooling areas, suggestions for water efficient 
urban features were suggested, like splash pads 
instead of water features.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

Several region-specific actions, plans and strategies exist for the 
Central Highlands. The review in this appendix does not attempt to 
be a complete overview. However, a select number of documents are 
reviewed to support the thematic framework and actions listed in  
the main part of the drought resilience plan for the Central Highlands. 
The reviews in this appendix are ordered by year of publication,  
with the most recent documents listed first.
Appendix 2 
Existing actions and strategies 
in the Central Highlands
Drought 
Preparedness 
Plans
Plans for 
Local Lakes and 
Waterways
Local Drought 
Knowledge and 
Experiences
Water 
Plans and 
Strategies
Climate 
Adaption Plans 
and Pledges
Traditional 
Owner Country 
Plans
Water 
Catchment 
Regulatory 
Frameworks
Planned 
Strategic Water 
Investments
Established 
Regional 
Networks
Regional Drought Actions
48

Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. Turning ‘wrong way’ climate 
‘right way’ – Dja Dja Wurrung Climate Change 
Strategy 2023–2034
The Climate Change Strategy published by Djaara 
assesses the actions required to reverse negative 
climate impacts on Djaara Country. It includes 
a comprehensive review of existing plans and 
strategies that come together in the Climate 
Change Strategy. The strategy focuses on 6 
themes, Country, Fire, Water, Trees, Peoples and 
Sky Country. The strategy includes indicators of 
success and stresses the need for integration of 
cultural heritage and joint management practises. 
The strategy also includes the need to work 
together, and identifies partners.
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. Dhelkunyangu Gatjin — 
Working together to heal water.  
Djaara Gatjin Strategy
A water economy has evolved that is worth billions 
of dollars annually, produces food and fibre for 
Australia and the world, provides drinking water 
and underpins local and regional communities. 
This water system is governed by the State 
resulting in water on Djandak — Djaara’s water 
— being fully allocated to water users. Djaara 
are excluded from participating and benefiting 
in these water arrangements. Djaara knowledge 
is not central to informing sustainable water 
management. Djaara currently own very little water 
resources and have very little say on how the water 
is managed on Djandak. 
The Strategy outlines three key outcomes which 
have been summarised here: 
1  Make decisions for Gatjin; To meet obligations 
to heal and manage Djandak and enjoy traditional 
rights, Djaara Culture and Lore must be at the 
heart of water policy, planning and management.
2  Secure a growing share of water rights and 
entitlements; Increased water entitlement is some 
restitution of stolen water rights, enables the 
determination for the best use of water for cultural 
purposes, and allows direct involvement in the 
water economy.
3  A Djaara Gatjin Authority; A Djaara water 
authority is required to manage water and water 
interests and acknowledges that neighbouring 
mobs have authority for water on their Country.
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, Victoria State, 2022. Central and 
Gippsland Region Sustainable Water Strategy
The role of the Central and Gippsland Region 
Sustainable Water Strategy (the Strategy) is to 
secure the region’s long-term water supplies to 
protect jobs, farms, ecosystems, communities, 
and the cultural values of Traditional Owners in 
the region. The Central and Gippsland Region 
covers the waterways and catchments south of the 
Great Divide down to the coast – from the Otways 
to Mallacoota. This Strategy is needed to help us 
prepare for the region’s water future. With forecast 
drier conditions and a growing population, the 
region’s water supplies will need to double in the 
next 50 years. The Strategy supports investment in 
water efficiency for homes, businesses and farms 
and increasing the region’s water supplies over the 
next 50 years. Key actions include:
4.3b  Securing additional water for Geelong and 
the Moorabool Yulluk (Moorabool River) transfer 
a long-term average equivalent of 3 gigalitres per 
year of Barwon Water’s Lal Lal bulk entitlement 
15 and 0.7 gigalitres per year of Barwon Water’s 
Upper East Moorabool bulk entitlement in the 
Bostock Reservoir to the Wadawurrung and to the 
Victorian Environmental Water Holder by 2025.
4.4  Determine how water returned to the 
Moorabool Yulluk (Moorabool River) will be shared 
between Wadawurrung and the environment.
Central Highlands Water, 2022.  
Drought Preparedness Plan
This Plan focuses on short-term actions to prepare 
for drought and describes four major focus areas: 
1  Monitoring program; All aspects important 
to service delivery are monitored by Central 
Highlands Water, including surface water storage 
and flow, groundwater extraction, and weather 
data including rain and evaporation values.
2  A set of drought response actions; Integrated 
Water Resources Management – overall 
improvement of water management through 
recycling and using alternative water resources 
for specific uses. Demand management actions 
like community awareness, permanent water 
saving rules and water restrictions, as well as 
improved operation and water losses reductions. 
On the supply side, the supply yield and associated 
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
49

levels of service are set out. The Plan notes that 
the ability to re-prioritize supply to essential 
human requirements should not be relied on as a 
drought response action, and is only for short-term 
emergency operation.
3  System augmentation triggers; Indicators that 
trigger the planning of expansion of infrastructure 
and operations to supply sufficient water in areas 
of growth or where demand is shifting. Central 
Highlands Water notes that they have access to 
the water market via the Goldfields pipeline for 
Ballarat and this provides much opportunity to 
purchase additional water entitlements. Similarly 
many of the groundwater supplied systems 
could be effectively augmented by purchase of 
additional groundwater licence. The plan also 
notes that water quality and water volumes are 
closely related, and that additional treatment of 
water could provide additional water resources  
for domestic use. 
4  Post-drought actions; Focusing on evaluation and 
implementing lessons learned during a drought.
Actions and responses for specific geographical 
locations in th eregions are outlined in this Plan’s 
appendices. A subsequent Urban Water Strategy 
focuses on long-term planning. A third annual 
report, Water Outlooks, provides a statistical 
analysis of how the system might track under 
various climatic scenarios in the years ahead.
Adapt Grampians, 2021. Grampians Region 
Climate Adaptation Strategy 2021–2025
The Grampians Climate Adaptation Strategy 
identifies opportunities and barriers around 
several themes: agriculture, biodiversity, economy, 
fire, health and wellbeing, heat, storms and 
flooding, and water. It identifies actions already 
underway, and the lead agencies on those actions. 
Goals are defined for each of the themes, linked 
to outcomes and indicators. The goals are defined 
as: Our regional responses to climate change are 
coordinated, resourced and evidence-based; Our 
Region’s biodiversity and natural ecosystems are 
protected and resilient; The Grampians economy is 
sustainable and climate-ready; Regional farming 
is well-adapted to the changing climate; Our 
built environment is more resistant to weather 
extremes; Individuals and communities proactively 
reduce their climate-related risk; Our vulnerable 
people are supported to adapt to climate change.
Golden Plains, Central Goldfields, Pyrenees 
and Morabool Shires, Central Highlands Water, 
and the Department of Water, Environment and 
Planning, 2021. Green Blue Infrastructure Guide 
– A guide for small towns in Victoria’s Central 
Highlands Region
‘Green’ infrastructure refers to living vegetation 
such as gardens, nature strips, trees, parks and 
green open spaces. ‘Blue’ infrastructure are the 
assets associated with managing stormwater, such 
as gutters, pits, pipes and drains, ponds, wetland 
and waterways. Green-blue infrastructure (GBI) is 
a term designed to help explain that these green 
and blue infrastructure assets are as critical to 
a town’s liveability and resilience as are roads, 
buildings and carparks. GBI techniques aim to 
protect and enhance a town’s natural assets, 
combined with better retention, treatment and use 
of rainwater where it falls. By improving the way 
urban stormwater is conveyed, stored and used it 
can make the most of the water that falls in a town. 
The combination of green and blue infrastructure 
provides the space to retain stormwater close to 
where it falls and use it to irrigate the living assets 
valued for liveability while improving downstream 
water quality. This in turn supports strengthening 
drought resilience.
Techniques of GBI can be applied at four scales: 
lot, streetscape, precinct and township. At the lot 
scale, these techniques include gardens, green 
roofs, green walls, water tanks and raingardens.  
At the streetscape scale, techniques include nature 
strips, footpaths, roadside raingardens, street trees 
and swales, shallow channels that convey and 
treat stormwater. Techniques at the precinct scale 
include parks, green links, open drains, wetlands, 
detention basins and sport grounds. The township 
scale techniques include urban forests, expansive 
open spaces, waterways and lakes.
Social, environmental and economic benefits 
include improving township amenities and 
liveability, reducing urban heat for cooler streets, 
and contributing to improved community physical 
and mental health. GBI also enhances urban and 
aquatic biodiversity, increases tree canopy and 
decreases air pollution, and increases stormwater 
and rainwater infiltration and improves soil water 
retention. The economic benefits include an 
improved township entrance to make it attractive 
for visitors, better and more significant use of open 
spaces, and increased use of alternative water, 
freeing up domestic water.
50

Corangamite CMA, 2021. Corangamite Regional 
Catchment Strategy 2021–2027
The Corangamite Regional Catchment Strategy 
(RCS) is a high level blueprint for catchment 
health. It provides a strategic, integrated 
framework for natural resource management 
in the Corangamite Catchment Management 
Authority’s region of Victoria. Climate change 
presents the greatest long-term challenge for 
the Corangamite region. The future climate of 
the region is expected to be hotter and drier than 
today with a higher frequency of extreme weather 
events such as bushfires and floods.
Drivers of change in the Corangamite area include 
increase in urbanisation, especially around major 
centres such as Geelong and Ballarat. Areas that 
were previously used for primary production are 
utilised for urban and peri-urban settlements. 
Demand for coastal real estate has also placed a 
heavy burden on our marine and coastal areas.  
The need for water has increased as the population 
of the region continues to grow. For agriculture 
across the region, emerging trends include fewer 
farmers, enterprise changes, smaller properties, 
less income from agriculture, older farmers. 
More than 70% of land in the region is privately 
owned, presenting significant challenges in 
engaging with landowners and managers. There 
is concern about the viability of rural communities 
with socio-economic issues related to an ageing 
population, the loss of important services and 
reduced employment opportunities becoming 
more relevant.
The strategy uses several themes. Under water, 
it provides outcomes for waterways, wetlands, 
estuaries and groundwater. For biodiversity, the 
strategy identifies native vegetation and habitats 
and native fauna. Land includes sections on 
land use changes, soil health and sustainable 
agriculture. Communities, coast and marine 
environments are the remaining themes.
Wadawurrung Tradional Owners Aboriginal 
Corporation, 2019. Paleert Tjaara Dja –  
Let’s make Country good together 2020–2030. 
Wadawurrung Country Plan
In 2019, the Wadawurrung Traditional Owners 
Aboriginal Corporation published a Country Plan 
to articulate how Country needs to be cared 
for and managed over the decade from 2020 to 
20230. The Plan includes collaboration goals 
with federal, state and local government and 
other key stakeholders to ensure a sustainable 
Wadawurrung managed investment in Country. 
The Plan describes the history of the Wadawurrung 
Peoples and the interlinkages with neighbouring 
Traditional Owner groups, especially those that are 
linked in similar languages, creation stories and 
cultural ceremonies and events (Kulin Nations). 
The Vision of the Plan is that all people work 
together to make Wadawurrung Country and 
Culture strong.
Wadawurrung Country covers approximately 1 
million hectares, of which 20% is Crown land, and 
80% freehold. The area contains an interconnected 
cultural landscape with several culturally 
significant places. The landscape varies from 
hill ranges to grassland plains, coastal forests, 
heathlands and ocean. Changes of the landscape 
are driven by agricultural land use, urban land 
use, population expansion, increasing pressure 
on natural resources; water, land, introduction 
of pests. These add to the difficulties of Country 
management.
The Plan presents 18 strategies supporting three 
themes: Taking care of Country and waters; 
Us supporting us – Cultural Strengthening and 
Strengthening the Wadawurrung Corporation.  
It describes nine building blocks, or values, including 
amongst these waterways, native animals, cultural 
sites and places and enterprise and employment. 
It includes 16 threats to these values, including 
drought, sea level rise, rising sea temperatures, 
bushfires, water extraction and lack of coordination 
between land managers. In sections describing 
each building block, a value of the current state 
is presented. A goal is defined on how that state 
can be improved or maintained, and indicators are 
listed how the strategic goals can be evaluated. 
The Plan continuous with an analysis of how the 
different threats impact the building blocks. 
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
51

Drought was specifically listed as a threat to the  
building blocks. The summary threat rating for 
drought is “high”, like 11 other threats. Five of the 
threats have been identified as “very high”, and 
include urban development, lack of coordination, 
lack of recognition, sea level rise and water 
extraction. Drought is identified to have three 
“high” impacts on specific building blocks, namely  
the Wadawurrung cultural sites and places, 
Wadawurrung culture and Peoples, and Bushtucker, 
medicines and resources. Medium impact of 
drought is listed for the building blocks of Sea, 
Inland and Coastal Country, Rivers, estuaries and 
wetlands, and native animals. Drought is described 
as a driver to increased water extraction, a threat 
that received the “very high” impact level.
Central Highlands Water, City of Ballarat, 
Corangamite CMA, 2018. Ballarat City Integrated 
Water Management Plan
The Ballarat City Integrated Water Management 
(IWM) Plan (the Plan) explores and sets out 
recommendations for future water management in 
the City of Ballarat. The plan will deliver on broader 
liveability and community benefits by considering 
the whole urban water cycle, including management 
of stormwater, wastewater, water supplies (surface 
water and groundwater) and waterways.
The eight guiding IWM objectives are to: Support 
river health priorities and mitigate flooding risks; 
Optimise the use of local water sources; Maintain 
and influence water efficiency; Support a safe 
and secure urban water supply and demand 
future; Generate improved liveability outcomes, 
recreational opportunities and increase green 
infrastructure; Support a sustainable and 
productive economy; Deliver strategic direction 
to enhance IWM outcomes within land use 
planning; Develop a plan that reflects community 
and stakeholder values and outlines clear 
implementation pathways.
The recommendations fall into three categories: 
Targeted Moves: Projects which are deliverable in the 
immediate term (over the 5 year horizon); Planning 
for Growth: Projects that will support planning for 
growth and improved outcomes in new developments 
(over the 15 year horizon); Strategic Investigations 
and Options: Options that may be required (over the 
50 year horizon) which require active planning and 
further investigations in the short term.
One of the actions listed in the Plan is the Green 
Blue Infrastructure initiative for Ballarat.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2016. North Central Victoria Regional 
Sustainable Agriculture Strategy
In 2016 the North Central Victoria Regional 
Sustainable Agriculture Strategy was published 
with the aim of productive farming while protecting 
the natural resources base. Two farming zones are 
identified that overlap with the Central Highlands 
region: a mixed farming zone in the west covering 
Marnoo, St Arnaud, Avoca and Clunes, and a 
diverse farming zone around Creswick, Daylesford, 
Kyneton and Woodend. The characteristics of 
each zone are presented. Three scenarios for 
sustainable agriculture are discussed; a paradigm 
shift, where agriculture is shifted to fully adapted 
to Australian conditions, e.g. moving towards a 
low input grazing system based on native grasses; 
a mid-level change where farming aims towards 
sustainability, e.g. increasing soil carbon through 
sub-soil manuring; and an incremental change, 
making small changes and allowing for adaptation 
to uncontrollable influences, without fully 
eliminating the risks to sustainable agriculture.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2015. North Central Climate Change 
and Mitigation Plan
In 2015, the North Central CMA published a 
Climate Change and Mitigation Plan. The process 
to develop this plan followed climate projections, 
followed by a vulnerability assessment, community 
workshops, and the development of a mitigation 
plan. Mitigation options focus on the topics of 
vegetation, soil, carbon farming and carbon 
sequestration options for multiple land uses. 
Community concerns related to climate change 
and related to the drought resilience plan include 
increased fire risk, declining water availability, 
water quality water security and water pricing,  
and the impact of extreme heat on human and 
animal health. The capacity for the community to 
respond to events is listed as a concern, especially 
related to service provision, social cohesion  
and issues faced by smaller rural communities. 
A specific set of strategic goals is listed for the 
Goldfields region, covering the Central Highlands, 
with focus on natural re-vegetation, monitoring 
of biodiversity, and implementing a large scale 
carbon sequestration action across the landscape 
in the goldfields area.
52

Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2014. Dhelkunya Dja Country  
Plan 2014–2034
The Dhelkunya Dja - Dja Dja Wurrung Country 
Plan 2014-2034 describes nine goals the Djaara 
aspires to. The Plan provides Country and cultural 
background, and provides an approach for the 
implementation of the Plan. The nine goals and 
themes are framed around Djaara (our Peoples), 
Cultural Practises and Customs, Cultural Heritage, 
Bush Tucker (edible and medicinal plants and 
animals), River and Waterways, Land, Self-
determination, Traditional Owner Economy and 
Joint management.
Eighty seven percent of the Dja Dja Wurrung 
Country is privately owned; 65% of land is used 
for agriculture. The other 13% is a combination 
of parks, forests and reserves. A historical 
transformation of the natural landscape has been 
driven by agriculture, urban settlement and mining. 
The transformation is continuing, both driven by 
natural and human caused factors. The Vision for 
Country described in the Plan includes a strong 
health and wellbeing of Dja Dja Wurrung Peoples, 
underpinned by a living culture; Lands and water 
that are in good conditions and actively managed to 
protect Dja Dja Wurrung values; Laws, culture and 
rights of all Dja Dja Wurrung Peoples are promoted.
While there is no specific reference to drought, the 
themes of Rivers and Waterways, and Land, are 
related to drought management. The aspirations 
in the Plan for Rivers and Waterways are to 
ensure that rivers and waterways are healthy and 
meet the needs of our people and land. Actions 
defined under this theme include the assurance 
of a meaningful role in the development of water 
policy frameworks in Victoria and the Murray 
Darling Basin; the establishment of a formal role in 
regional water management through participation 
in development and implementation of Regional 
Water Strategies. Actions under the Land theme 
focus on remediation and restoration of mined 
land, with the objective that our upside-down 
Country is healthy again.
Urban Water Cycle Solutions, 2014. Systems 
Analysis of Water Cycle Systems – Analysis of 
base case scenarios for the Living Ballarat project
This report is focused on the base case behaviour 
of the Ballarat and Maryborough water districts 
from the context of the performance of the entire 
region. A Systems Framework of the Ballarat 
region was developed as part of the Living Ballarat 
Project to assist in understanding the whole 
of water cycle challenges and opportunities 
across the region. The Systems Framework has 
demonstrated capability to understand local 
versus regional trade-offs for water sources 
and operating decisions. This process has the 
necessary capability to support development of 
policies for water operations and allocations for 
the Ballarat region. The framework can be utilised 
to optimise planned system behaviours including 
water restrictions, operating rules, allocations 
and reservoirs. This includes prioritising and 
optimising of operating rules and allocations 
throughout the system. The Systems Framework 
can be used to develop strategies and policies for 
management of waterways from the perspective 
of the entire water cycle – including a necessary 
governance structure for managing regimes for 
stormwater harvesting and use of aquifers. The 
Systems Framework has successfully replicated 
the observed changes in water use behaviour 
over the last decade as behaviour change, water 
efficient appliances and behaviours, and rainwater 
harvesting. Nevertheless, the mix of these actions 
is not well understood. For example, the changes 
in water use could be dominated by behaviour 
changes. The behaviour of the water systems and 
the required structure of operating rules have 
changed by inclusion of the Goldfields Pipe that 
conveys allocations to Ballarat from the Campaspe 
and Goulburn River basins. This analysis has 
revealed some interesting paradoxes including 
understanding that replacement of agricultural 
land uses with urban development results in 
the decreased loads of nutrients in waterways. 
However this waterway health impact is countered 
by increased nutrient loads from wastewater 
discharges and increased frequent flows in 
waterways. There is an outstanding opportunity to 
include local water resources of urban stormwater 
runoff, wastewater discharges to treatment plants, 
groundwater and rainwater harvesting in future 
water strategies.
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
53

North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2013. Caring for Country –  
A sustainable land management guide for  
rural living in north central Victoria
The North Central CMA (2013) published a 
document for new and existing landholders to 
support sustainable choices with the available 
resources. It contains suggestions for land 
planning, efficient irrigation and sustainable 
water sourcing. In the section on water savings, 
it is suggested to install and use rainwater tanks 
for domestic water use, as well as several other 
domestic water savings tips. For gardens, it is 
suggested to use grey water for irrigation, reduce 
lawn areas, use native, climate adapted plants,  
and use mulching to reduce evaporative losses.  
It is followed by a section on how to recycle water, 
and the best practices to manage recycled water. 
The chapter on biodiversity includes the benefits 
of native vegetation, and suggestions on how to 
manage native vegetation on rural properties.  
A large section on soils explains the different 
types of soils landholders may encounter, and the 
most sustainable ways to use the different soil 
systems. The plant and animal sections suggest 
best management practices for different land 
uses. These are followed by a climate section, 
explaining the drivers of weather systems and 
climate. A summary table shows the impact 
of a changing climate on the environment, the 
community, primary production, and water. This is  
concluded by a heading to prepare for weather 
emergencies, starting with risk assessment, then 
risk management, and preparation for specific 
weather-related events like fire, floods and 
thunderstorms. This document ends with a chapter 
on the community, and how to be good neighbours 
to each other.
Victorian Auditor-General, 2008.  
Goldfields Superpipe
For some years now the Victorian Government’s 
delivery and management of its water resources 
have been undertaken in unprecedented drought 
conditions. In the key regional centres of Bendigo 
and Ballarat the drought has reduced the volume 
of water in storages to approximately 10 per cent 
of capacity, their lowest level ever recorded. 
Despite the severe water restrictions introduced 
by the Coliban Water Authority and the Central 
Highlands Water Authority, Bendigo and Ballarat 
almost exhausted their drinking water supplies  
in 2007.
In response to the extreme conditions, the State 
Government, in conjunction with Coliban and 
Central Highlands, is constructing a major water 
pipeline, called the ‘Goldfields Superpipe’ that 
connects Ballarat and Bendigo to the Goulburn 
River system. This was finalised in 2008. The 
Superpipe aims to improve the security of water 
supplies in the region by allowing both water 
authorities to access the more reliable supplies  
in the Goulburn River.
The Superpipe has three components: a Bendigo 
pipeline that will draw water from the Waranga 
Western Channel and deliver it to Bendigo via 
the Eppalock to Sandhurst pipeline, and supply 
Lake Eppalock; a Ballarat pipeline, from Bendigo’s 
Sandhurst Reservoir to Ballarat; an augmentation 
of the existing Eppalock to Sandhurst pipeline.  
The 46.5km Bendigo pipeline is being managed  
by Coliban. The 87km Ballarat pipeline is being  
managed by Central Highlands. The Commonwealth 
and State Governments are part-funding the 
Bendigo and Ballarat pipelines.
54

Acid Allen Consulting, 2019. “Report to 
Infrastructure Victoria – Central Highlands Industry 
Profile. Final”. https://www.infrastructurevictoria.
com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Comparative-
Advantage_Central-Highlands-Profile.pdf  
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Adapt Grampians, 2021. Grampians Region 
Climate Adaptation Strategy 2021-2025. 
https://www.climatechange.vic.gov.au/__data/
assets/file/0032/549815/Grampians-Regional-
Adaptation-Strategy-Accessible.pdf (last accessed 
2023-07-07)
Central Highlands Water, 2022. Urban Water 
Strategy 2022. https://www.chw.net.au/mvc/
k12webapi/media/community/future%20water%20
planning/2023-chw-urban-water-strategy-report.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Central Highlands Water, 2022. Drought 
Preparedness Plan. https://www.chw.net.au/mvc/
k12webapi/media/community/future%20water%20
planning/central-highlands-water-drought-
preparedness-plan-final.pdf (last accessed  
2023-07-06)
Central Highlands Water, City of Ballarat, 
Corangamite CMA, 2018. Ballarat City Integrated 
Water Management Plan. https://www.chw.net.au/
mvc/k12webapi/media/education_sustainability/
integrated%20water%20management/ballarat_
iwm_plan_full_report_final_v5-3_feb_2018_web_
version.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-12)
City of Ballarat and Urban Initiatives, 2017. Lake 
Wenouree Master Plan. https://www.ballarat.
vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-04/Lake%20
Wendouree%20Master%20Plan.pdf (last accessed 
2023-08-14)
Corangamite CMA, 2021. Corangamite Regional 
Catchment Strategy 2021-2027. https://
corangamite.rcs.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/
print/rcs-3-all.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-12)
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, Victoria State, 2016. Water for Victoria 
- Water Plan. https://www.water.vic.gov.au/__data/
assets/pdf_file/0030/58827/Water-Plan-
strategy2.pdf (last accessed 2023-08-14)
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, Victoria State, 2019. Victoria’s Climate 
Science. Report 2019. https://www.climatechange.
vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0029/442964/
Victorias-Climate-Science-Report-2019.pdf  
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, Victoria State, 2022. Central and 
Gippsland Region Sustainable Water Strategy. 
https://www.water.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/ 
0031/595813/20220912_CRGSWS_Final-Web.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-07-05)
Department of Economic Development, Jobs, 
Transport and Resources. Why invest in Central 
Highlands’ agriculture and food processing? 
https://invest.agriculture.vic.gov.au/#/region/ceh 
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Department of Jobs, Precints and Regions, Victoria 
State, 2022. Central Highlands Regional Economic 
Development Strategy. https://www.rdv.vic.gov.au/ 
__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/2063908/Central-
Highlands-REDS-2022.pdf (last accessed  
2023-08-14)
Department of Justice and Community Services, 
2020. Environmental Scan Report: Grampians 
Region. https://files.emv.vic.gov.au/2021-05/
Environmental%20Scan%20Grampians%20V2.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2014. Dhelkunya Dja Country 
Plan 2014-2034. https://djadjawurrung.com.au/
wp-content/uploads/2023/05/DJA46.-Climate-
Change-Strategy-230523.pdf (last accessed 
2023-06-14)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. Turning ‘wrong way’ climate 
‘right way’ - Dja Dja Wurrung Climate Change 
Strategy 2023-2034. https://djadjawurrung.com.
au/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/DJA46.-Climate-
Change-Strategy-230523.pdf (last accessed 
2023-06-14)
References
CENTRAL HIGHLANDS DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
55

Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. Dhelkunyangu Gatjin - Working 
together to heal water. Djaara Gatjin Strategy. 
https://djadjawurrung.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2023/06/Dhelkunyangu-Gatjin-Working-
together-to-heal-water-Gatjin-Strategy-2023.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-07-05)
Golden Plains, Central Goldfields, Pyrenees 
and Morabool Shires, Central Highlands Water, 
and the Department of Water, Environment and 
Planning, 2021. Green Blue Infrastructure Guide 
- A guide for small towns in Victoria’s Central 
Highlands Region. https://adaptgrampians.com.au/
wp-content/uploads/2022/11/21470_Green-and-
Blue-Infrastructure_final_10Jan.pdf (last accessed 
2023-07-07)
Grampians Regional Emergency Management 
Planning Committee, 2020. Grampians Regional 
Emergency Management Plan. https://files.emv.
vic.gov.au/2021-05/Grampians%20Regional%20
Emergency%20Management%20Plan_Redacted.
pdf (last accessed 2023-08-14)
North Central CMA, 2013. Caring for Country – A 
sustainable land management guide for rural living 
in north central Victoria. https://www.nccma.vic.
gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/caring_for_
country_sustainable_land_management_guide_-_
final_web_version.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
North Central CMA, 2015. North Central Climate 
Change and Mitigation Plan. https://www.nccma.
vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/nccma_
final_climate_change_mitigation_plan_2015.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-07-05)
North Central CMA, 2016. North Central Victoria 
Regional Sustainable Agriculture Strategy 
https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/
publications/nccma_sustainable_agriculture_
strategy_2016_final_web.pdf (last accessed  
2023-07-05)
SouthWest Climate Change Portal. Future 
Landscapes - Central Highlands of Victoria. https://
www.swclimatechange.com.au/cb_pages/future_
landscapes_chv.php (last accessed 2023
TC&A and Frontier Economics. Social and 
economic impacts of the Basin Plan in Victoria. 
https://www.water.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/ 
0021/600609/Frontier_TC-and-A_SEI_Report.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Urban Water Cycle Solutions, 2014. Systems 
Analysis of Water Cycle Systems - Analysis of base 
case scenarios for the Living Ballarat project. 
https://urbanwatercyclesolutions.com/wp-content/
uploads/2016/03/LivingBallaratSystemsAnalysis.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-07-12)
Victorian Auditor-General, 2008. Goldfields 
Superpipe. https://www.audit.vic.gov.au/sites/
default/files/20080528-Goldfields-Pipeline-
Summary.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-20)
Victoria State, 2014. Central Highlands Regional 
Growth Plan. https://www.planning.vic.gov.au/ 
__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/639115/Central-
Highlands-Regional-Growth-Plan-May-2014.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-08-14)
Wadawurrung Tradional Owners Aboriginal 
Corporation, 2019. Paleert Tjaara Dja – Let’s make  
Country good together 2020-2030. Wadawurrung  
Country Plan. https://www.wadawurrung.org.au/ 
_files/ugd/d96c4e_72611327c6a54d3198c0499ac 
5c26e54.pdf (last accessed 2023-01-31)
56

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the Central 
Highlands Region
Information to support the Central Highlands Regional Drought Resilience Plan
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
November 2022

Melbourne is driving population growth with Ballarat the fastest 
growing regional centre in the region. Comparatively the western 
area of Central Highlands has many smaller towns and lower 
population growth. 
The Central Highlands region includes the traditional lands of the 
Wadawurrung, Dja Dja Wurrung and Eastern Marr People and 
Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupgalk Nations as 
well as other Traditional Owner groups in Victoria who are not 
formally recognised. 
The Central Highlands region is a diverse economy with a heavy 
reliance on agriculture in the west, and a high reliance on 
manufacturing and services in the eastern side of the region. The 
main regional centre is Ballarat where the economy is based on 
services (health and education) and manufacturing. In terms of 
agriculture, sheep and lambs play a large role in output; other 
outputs include wheat, poultry and horticultural products.
The Central Highlands region contributed $1.4 billion in gross value 
of agricultural production (GVAP) in 2020 to 2021. 
The region recently experienced drought and dry seasonal 
conditions during the Millennium drought, 2014 and 2015 (notably 
in the western parts of the region), and in 2017 to 2019.
Campaspe
Goulburn
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
Gippsland
Ararat
Golden Plains
Hepburn
Moorabool
Ballarat
Pyrenees
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund.
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was a key factor to the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may  
change in  
the future
The Central 
Highlands region 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness  
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls  
on surface or subsurface  
water supply
Regional summary
The diverse Central Highlands region borders the western fringes of 
Melbourne and western Victoria, with an array of tourist attractions 
and growing cities. The region has a population of 207,300 and a 
Gross Regional Product of $10.225 billion (2020). The proximity to 
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Central Highlands Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These 
on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets 
(e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of 
drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market 
impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions  
+ 
Changes in the Central Highlands region
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for  
ag farm services  
(but could increase  
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands  
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation  
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from  
green space
Drought in the Central Highlands Region
Frontier Economics
3

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its regional 
severity and distribution. The last 25 years has seen Central Highlands 
experience extensive drought periods, starting with the Millennium 
drought from 1997 to 2009, the 2014 to 2015 drought periods and 
the dry conditions experienced from 2017 to 2019.
The historical rainfall and temperature charts in Figure 3, provides 
evidence of the severity of these recent drought events. 2014 and 
2015 were particularly bad with rainfall below the 10th percentile, 
coupled with mean maximum temperatures over the 90th 
percentile in 2014.  
Agricultural impacts and 
implications of drought  
+ Non-agricultural impacts  
and implications
The variance of agricultural employment in the region, and the 
range of agricultural enterprises (from vegetable crops to extensive 
grazing and dryland cropping), means that communities within 
Central Highlands will be impacted differently. Furthermore there 
is a large reliance on secondary agricultural industries which are 
likely to experience the flow on impacts of drought. There is a high 
proportion of agricultural employment in the Pyrenees and Ararat 
Local Government Areas (LGA) which make them highly susceptible 
to drought impacts. Although somewhat more diverse employment 
opportunities, the LGAs of Hepburn and Golden Plains also have a 
reliance on agriculture for direct employment.
Of note however, is the reliance on secondary agriculture industries 
across the entire Central Highlands region. One insight into this 
is looking at value add across the region - agriculture, fishery and 
forestry is the third largest contributor to gross value add with 
$664 million, and manufacturing is the fifth largest contributor with 
$655 million (2020). The Regional Economic Development Strategy 
(2022) identified the largest exporter in the region is manufacturing 
($508.6 million), of which food product manufacturing in the largest 
component ($327.4 million). Agriculture, forestry and fishing is the 
second largest industry export ($368.5m). Stakeholders raised this as 
a major implication of drought in the region. 
01
02
Additionally, from 2001 to 2009, and in 2017 to 2019, the region 
experienced consecutive years of well below median rainfall and 
above median temperatures.
Agriculture in the region relies on rainfall and groundwater. The 
above charts show an annual average rainfall, however the success 
of dryland cropping and grazing is dependent on the timing of rainfall 
throughout the year. More intensive agricultural land uses (i.e. poultry 
and piggeries) are growing in the eastern parts of the region. 
There are climatic differences across the breadth of the region 
meaning impacts of drought will not be the same across the  
Central Highlands.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Rainfall (mm)
Annual
10th %ile
Median
15.5
16
16.5
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Annual
90th %ile
Median
01
02
03
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Recently experienced droughts in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2014 and 2015 
•	 2017 to 2019
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Ballarat
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Drought in the Central Highlands Region
Frontier Economics
4

The Central Highlands region contributed $1.4 billion in gross value of 
agricultural production (GVAP) in 2020 to 2021. Agriculture production 
is dominated by livestock and livestock products (57%) comprising 
mostly of sheep and wool. Broadacre cropping is another large 
contributor to agriculture production (30%) with mostly wheat and 
canola grown in the region.
The high reliance on livestock means there are drought preparedness 
and operation practices that can be introduced to reduce the impacts 
of drought. For example, buying more fodder to replace pastures and 
on farm dam storages can be used to feed and water livestock.
The impacts of the 2017 to 2019 drought were mitigated somewhat 
due to experience and lessons farmers learnt from the Millennium 
drought. For example, livestock producers have honed drought 
preparedness and operation practices that can reduce the impacts of 
drought, such as buying more fodder to replace pastures and on farm 
dam storages can be used to water and feed livestock. We note that 
the timing of rainfall has a significant impact on fodder growth. 
Stakeholder consultation noted that those agriculture producers in 
the Central Highlands that did not have access to alternative water 
supplies or drought response measures suffered extensively during 
the 2014 to 2015 dry period. 
Town water 
Severe and enduring water restrictions were required during the 
Millennium drought. 
Both the Ballarat (Ballarat, Ballan, Bungaree, Buninyong, Creswick, 
Gordon, Linton, Rokewood, Smythesdale, Skipton, Wallace) and 
Maryborough (Adelaide Lead, Alma/Moonlight, Carisbrook, Daisy 
Hill, Havelock, Majorca, Maryborough, Rodborough, Simson/Bet 
Bet, Talbot, Timor/Bowenvale) systems were restricted to Stage 4 
restrictions from 2006 to 2009. Stage 4 water restrictions prohibit the 
watering of any outdoor space, amongst other restrictions, which had 
profound impacts on the community’s liveability.
The Goldfields Superpipe was a crucial to maintaining a water 
supply during the Millennium drought. Just before the Superpipe 
was commissioned, Ballarat’s major storages reached an all-time 
low of about 7% capacity (4,376 ML). More than 22,000 ML of water 
was delivered to Ballarat in the two years after the Superpipe was 
commissioned in May 2008. Stakeholder consultation raised that the 
water from this pipe is saline and costly to pump and treat.
To mitigate community impacts of the Millennium drought, Central 
Highlands Water purchased water entitlements and allocations. They also 
facilitated trade by their customers – at May 2009, customers of Central 
Highlands Water, including car washes, sporting grounds and bowling 
clubs, had purchased 135 ML of water on the allocation market.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism in the region is both water dependent and non-water 
dependent. Increasing temperatures and less rainfall is likely to affect 
tourist’s amenity benefit from visiting the towns and landscapes in the 
region.
Environment 
The Central Highlands are home to three National Parks, nine state 
forests/ state parks and other reserves that support nature based 
tourism. Lack of rainfall causes serious problems for native animals 
as they move closer to human life in search of water. For example, 
a wildlife shelter in Hepburn Springs was inundated with emaciated 
kangaroos, koalas and bird life in 2017 to 2019.
Lake Wendouree was essentially dry for six years during the 
Millennium drought. More broadly, the natural environment in the 
region includes a number of ecologically and recreationally important 
wetlands, including sites of international importance established by 
the UNESCO Ramsar Convention.
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites, particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable 
to damage. Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the 
community. Consultation identified a loss of important species, for 
example the Eastern Bar Bandicoot, during previous drought periods. 
The strong connect to Country leads to mental health impacts in 
traditional owners during drought periods.
03
Community outcomes  
in past droughts
Farming communities are severely impacted during 
periods of drought, due to:
•	
Financial pressures resulting from reduced on-farm income and 
increased costs
•	
On-farm issues mostly relating to lack of water and feed for stock, 
and poor yields or failed crops
•	
Pressures from invasive native and pest animals on farms
•	
Physical and mental health and wellbeing impacts on individuals 
and families
•	
Flow on financial pressures being experienced by supporting 
businesses in the community.
The impacts of drought on agricultural production in the Central 
Highlands also affect the range of agricultural farm service providers and 
down-stream processing facilities in the region, including stock agents, 
Goldacres machinery and McCain Foods. This in turn affects spending 
and business activity across the broader communities. 
Although not a prominent industry, the wild eel fishery is an example 
where environmental impacts of drought (to reduce fish movement and 
breeding) mean that commercial practices and recreational fishing is put 
under strain during drought periods. 
Overall, the cumulation of impacts on production, regional economies, 
and liveability from drought led to significant impacts on the regional 
communities. An increase demand for mental health services and Rural 
Financial Counselling Services was also evident.
Drought in the Central Highlands Region
Frontier Economics
5

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Central Highlands region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Central Highlands region with future 
droughts expected to be longer, more frequent and more severe. 
Climate projections show that by 2050 the Central Highlands region 
on average will be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number 
of fire danger days. Similar to the past, the region and sub-regions 
will continue to face variable conditions within and across seasons — 
however in the future this variability will be around a lower average 
rainfall and higher average temperature than previously experienced. 
This means that, compared to current conditions, it is likely that parts 
of Central Highlands will face some seasons with rainfall significantly 
below and temperatures significantly above current averages.
The significant prevalence of dryland agriculture, which relies on timing 
and quantity of rainfall, does not offer resilience options that irrigated 
agriculture has access to (as they have continued access to water that 
can be drawn upon during dry periods).
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural impacts 
and implications
In response to the future increase in the likelihood and severity of 
drought (given expected increasing temperatures and decreasing 
rainfall), agricultural production in livestock and cropping farming 
operations will be most exposed. The adaptiveness of these 
producers, with farmers already having many strategies to manage 
drought, and their ability to maintain sufficient reserves will be critical 
to their farm profitability. The prevailing circumstances of a future 
drought — such as commodity prices, interest rates and fuel and 
fertiliser costs — will also play a role in resultant impacts.  
Although, stakeholders raised concerns that when the sources of feed 
and fodder are in drought, the region will be at risk. 
Viticulture production generally relies on on-farm water only. Given 
climate expectations there is a change that this industry could also be 
greatly exposed. The horticulture / vegetables in the region’s east are 
high value production generating wealth for the region. It is important 
that this region continues to consider options for ongoing access to 
water/ water management. 
Agri-food supply chain is considered a specialisation of the region.  
The flow on impacts of drought may put this sector at risk in the future.
Changes in the Central Highlands region
There have been a number of changes in the Central Highlands that 
will alter the impacts of drought in the future, including:
•	
Town water security planning and investment has increased in 
the region, including Goldfields Superpipe (connecting the Ballarat 
system’s White Swan Reservoir to Lake Eppalock and the Goulburn 
Murray system).
•	
Population changes (including an increase in sea/tree-changers  
due to Covid19) bringing additional water demand to the region.
•	
Increase in peri-urban development and number of lifestyle/hobby 
farmers which will change the water demands in the region.
•	
Water investments in community assets, for example Lake 
Wendouree water supply project now provides the option of 
supply of a combination of Class A recycled water and stormwater 
to the lake, due to construction of works and agreements.
•	 Continuing diversification of the region’s economy.
It is noteworthy that limited opportunities for water trade and 
irrigation distribution mean the Central Highlands region is less 
exposed to broader ‘system level’ responses to drought and a 
changing climate (as compared, for example, to the neighbouring 
Loddon Campaspe region) – including interregional water trade 
and Basin Plan water recovery.
01
02
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions  
+ 
Changes in the  
Central Highlands region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures are expected to 
increase by 1.6 to 2.1°C.Number of days over 35°C 
in Ballarat are expected to increase from 5.2 days to 
9.17 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable.
Average rainfall expected to decrease by  
4 to 10%.
4-10%
68%
Number of very high fire 
danger days expected 
increase by 12.4 per year. 
8 days per year
1.6 to  
2.1 °C 
Figure 4 Climate projections for the Central Highlands region
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Central Highlands Region

Future implications of drought are likely to continue to impact the 
wellbeing and mental health of the local communities. Farmers and 
community businesses are likely to continue to rely on financial 
counselling services and the broader community will continue to rely 
on mental health services. The Rural Financial Counselling Service 
(RFCS) now has a wellbeing arm that will work to support farmers 
before, during and after droughts.
Stakeholder consultation raised the greater recognition of mental 
health impacts in the community will continue forward in the future.
Town water  
Town water security planning has improved building on lessons from 
past drought. Likewise, Urban Water Strategies are now required 
to incorporate future impacts of climate change (including potential 
droughts). For example, Central Highlands Water (CHW) has used 
the Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning’s 2020 
‘Guidelines for Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Availability in Victoria’ to undertake water demand system forecasts 
and identify a range of climate scenarios to assess potential impacts 
on water supply and customer demand. The water corporation is 
planning investment across a number of systems to maintain water 
supply security and treatment services in the coming decades. Actions 
from the 2022 Urban Water Strategy include:
•	
Extending CHW’s interconnection to the State water grid — 
including connection of Goldfields Superpipe to Daylesford.
•	
Delivery of the Avoca bore upgrade project to improve reliability 
and security of supply.
•	
Completion of the Learmonth Tank Upgrade program to improve 
reliability and water quality.
•	
Design work for the major upgrade of the Waubra Water 
Treatment Plant to meet community water quality expectations
The Urban Water Strategy also notes: “during drought sequences, 
such as the Millennium drought, the system relies on being able to 
purchase allocation on the temporary market in northern Victoria to 
provide water for the [Goldfields Superpipe]”.
There are also interactions between town water supply security and 
actions to improve environmental and cultural outcomes. For example, 
actions are being considered to provide 7,200 ML more water for the 
environment and for Aboriginal cultural purposes on the Moorabool River.
Recreation and Tourism  
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought and dry conditions. Initiatives that are not 
dependent on water availability could boost visitors to the region. 
COVID-19 has provided a boost to regional travel and relocation.
Environment 
Inland lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during 
times of drought which will impact the native biodiversity living in and 
relying on these water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food and 
drinking water for wild animals living in the region.
Traditional owners:
Culturally significant sites particularly those that are dependent on 
water will increasingly be exposed to damage. Damage to these sites 
can lead to distress within the community.
Figure 5 Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modelling for a future drought
03
Community outcomes  
in future droughts
Economic modelling of potential future drought in Victoria, undertaken 
by Victoria University’s Centre of Policy Studies, found the Central 
Highlands would be affected with GDP falling by 5.1% and a reduction of 
almost 300 jobs in the region (see Figure 5). The modelled three-year 
drought, while prolonged, is not equivalent to the most severe recorded 
in Victoria.
Flow through impacts  
from ag to the community
The increased likelihood and severity of 
drought in the future and the increased 
competition for water under these 
conditions will mean that the drought 
impacts on the community from 
agricultural consequences of drought are 
expected to be larger than have been 
historically observed.
Impacts on GDP
Economic modelling of potential future 
drought in Victoria found the Central 
Highlands to be significantly affected, with:
•	 GDP impact: 
– Direct agriculture impact -3.57%
– Regional impact -5.1%
•	 A fall in employment of more than  
300 jobs.
•	 This flowed through the region reducing 
consumption/spending by 4%.
Employment and  
value add impacts
The effects on employment will not be 
distributed equally across the regions, 
with the more agriculturally dependent 
regions likely to experience larger 
decrease in employment. 
The economic modelling finds that the 
large impact of drought on value-added 
output of agricultural primary production 
has significant impacts on the value-
added output of the livestock sector.
5.1%
GDP
300
jobs
Drought in the Central Highlands Region
Frontier Economics
7

Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought conditions 
become more prevalent. Not only are mental health services important 
during times of drought, but improved mental health increase a 
person’s ability to adapt. This can improve drought resilience by 
allowing people to effectively plan for future drought conditions.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of community 
spirit and liveability within local communities in the region. Water 
Corporations and Councils now have a strong understanding of the 
importance of greenspace for their communities. However, should 
town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will have a mental 
health toll on residents.
The proximity to Melbourne and diversity of economy will provide 
resilience to future droughts in the eastern parts of the region. 
However, the western parts and those highly exposed to agriculture 
and agricultural dependent industries are a risk of impacts. Smaller 
communities that are highly dependent on agriculture and more 
geographically isolated will be most exposed. Population growth 
in Ararat and Golden Plains provides an opportunity for economic 
diversification. The region is also encouraging secondary growth in 
manufacturing. 
Groundwater could come under pressure as an increasing number of 
lifestyle farmers are installing a bore to access groundwater. 
Overall the Central Highlands region’s exposure to agriculture and 
agricultural dependent industries creates the potential for significant 
community impacts from future drought.
Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness
The diverse Central Highlands region already has many drought 
resilience measures in place or in development. Agricultural research, 
innovation and extension will remain important to support ongoing 
adaptation in agriculture and will aid preparedness to future drought. 
There is also a wide range in the capacity of farmers, in terms of the 
skills to maintain more adaptive farming practices and in the ability to 
maintain buffers of financial assets or feed stocks to manage drought 
conditions when they arise.
A significant vulnerability of the region includes the growing number 
of lifestyle properties. These owners may not have been exposed to 
a drought before so may not respond effectively when one happens. 
Furthermore, the growing number of bores from these properties 
could be putting pressure on ground water and there is a growth in 
the number of stock and domestic water licenses. 
It was raised in consultation to vulnerabilities to water sharing across 
competing users and ensure the Traditional Owners are included in 
decision making on land management and water sharing. 
Although the social resilience of the community to drought has 
increased, such as through urban water investments in pipelines and 
water transfers, the environmental/ecological resilience in the region 
has not increased. Now and looking forward, there is less connectivity 
in landscapes, and a high reliance on certain refugia.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. Towns 
throughout the Central Highlands region have varying degrees of 
diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The major regional centre Ballarat will provide a buffer to these 
drought impacts as it is diverse economy. Townships near 
Ballarat can also benefit from some of this buffering in the face of 
less agricultural activity because of drought. Townships within an 
approximately 50 km radius provide people with the attraction 
of living in a smaller community, lower cost of housing but having 
employment opportunities in the larger centre.
•	
Smaller communities are still likely to feel impacts of drought. 
The tight knit social aspect and limited alternatives that can 
replace the economic activity provided by agriculture. 
However, even Ballarat is exposed to the flow-through impacts 
of drought given the prevalence of agricultural support services, 
agriculture-related manufacturing, as well as logistics. The 
specialisation of food product manufacturing makes the region 
exposed to drought both in and outside of the regions boundaries. 
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These kinds 
of health services have long wait times in the region, even outside of 
times of drought. Following the onset of a drought there is a general 
lag in the provision of additional health services. This means that 
individuals unable to access these services are having to make drought 
management decisions under significant stress.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the Central Highlands Region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our  
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions and Visit Victoria.
CGE Modelling credits: Centre of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from the BOM, ABS and ARM online.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.