Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan 
Central West Region
Blayney Shire, Cabonne, Cowra, Orange City, 
and Weddin Shire Councils 
September 2024

ii
Abbreviations 
Term
Definition
ABARES
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
AIHW
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
BoM
Bureau of Meteorology
CASP
Country Arts Support Program
CBD
Central Business District
CDI
Combined Drought Indicator
CEF
Country Education Foundation
CENTROC
Central NSW Region of Councils
COAG
CS
Community Sensitivity
CSEP
Community and Stakeholder Engagement Plan
CTLX
Central Tablelands Livestock Exchange
CTW
Central Tablelands Water
CNSWJO
Central New South Wales Joint Organisation
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
CWA
Country Women’s Association
CWELC
Central West Equestrian and Livestock Centre
CWIW
Central West Inspired Women
DAFF
DAWE
DPE
Department of Planning and Environment
DPIE
Department of Planning, Industry and Environment
DDI
Drought Direction Index 
DCCEEW 
(NSW)
Department of Climate Change, the Environment, Energy and Water New South 
Wales; formerly Department of Planning and Environment
DRAMP
Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy
DPIRD
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (previously known 
as Department of Regional NSW and The Department of Primary Industries)
EDI
Economic Diversity Index 
EDIS
Enhanced Drought Information System
FS
Farm Sensitivity
Term
Definition
FDF
Future Drought Fund
GVA
gross value added
HSE
Health, Safety, and Education
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRSAD
Index of Socio-Economic Advantage and Disadvantage
LLS
Local Land Services (forms part of Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development)
LGA
Local Government Area
LEP
Local Environmental Plan
LUTN
Light Up the Night
PDI
Potential Drought Impact
MEL
Monitoring, Evaluation Learning
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
nbn
National Broadband Network
NHPC
Newell Highway Promotions Committee
NRM
Natural Resource Management
PCG
Project Control Group
POW
Prisoner of War
RDA
Regional Development Australia
REDS
Regional Economic Development Strategies
REZ
Renewable Energy Zone
RFCS
Rural Financial Counselling Service
RFS
Rural Fire Service
RDC
Rural Development Corporation
RDRP
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
RCP
Representative Concentration Pathway
RAA
Rural Assistance Authority
SEIFA
Socio-Economic Indexes for Australia
SPI
Standardised Precipitation Index
SRG
Stakeholder Reference Group
SSMI
Standardised Soil Moisture Index

iii
Key Terms  
Term
Definition
Absorptive 
capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to maintain key functions and 
structures without adapting or changing their behaviour, in response to 
environmental and socioeconomic changes (Béné et. al., 2012).
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response 
to actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce 
vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
Adaptive capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to 
environmental and socioeconomic changes.
Adaptive 
governance
Coordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between 
systems when designing interventions and for their implementation and 
evaluation.
Co-design
The process of partnership to develop and formulate project delivery and 
agreed objectives and needs, using participatory methods. A process of 
working together utilising generative and explorative processes.
Climate Change
Global, long-term shifts in average weather conditions, such as becoming 
warmer, wetter, or drier over several decades or longer.
Drought
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, 
abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient 
to meet our normal use (BoM, 2024a). Drought is complex and multi-
dimensional and impacts society, the environment and the economy. 
There are many types of drought including meteorological, agricultural, 
hydrological and socioeconomic. Definitions are provided within the 
report.
Economic 
resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb or adapt to the economic impact 
of shocks and stressors without changing the economic status or 
outcomes.
Environmental 
resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope with (absorb) a diverse 
range of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural processes and 
ecosystem services. Adaptation and transformational change can be 
slow-moving in natural systems.
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups 
and agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be 
formally institutionalised, or informal.
Intervention 
options
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, 
initiatives and investments that are planned to bring about change in the 
system (Maru et. al., 2018).
Local knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of 
lived experience within a landscape, bearing witness to the operation of 
systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture; how people 
interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
Term
Definition
Preparation
Action taken to reduce the impact of an event that occurs and accelerate 
the recovery period.
Recovery
A return to longer term viability. Recovery may be a return to business as 
usual or require transformational change.
Resilience
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as 
to maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacks (Walker 
et. al., 2004). Also see economic resilience, environmental resilience 
and social resilience, Absorptive capacity, adaptation, adaptive 
capacity, transformation. Resilience also encompasses adaptive and 
transformational change. This is further expanded within the report. 
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological 
systems, recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated 
with such systems (Reisinger et. al, 2020). Drought risk refers to the 
difference in farm outcomes (e.g., profits) between ‘normal’ and ‘drought’ 
conditions. 
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples 
include: major storms, floods, bush fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, 
terrorism and cyber-attacks’ (City of Sydney, 2018).
Social resilience
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks 
and stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions. 
Regarding climate change, social resilience may only be possible after 
adaptive or transformational change.
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse 
effect, e.g. drought, climate change.
Systems
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a 
complex ‘whole’. 
Theory of change
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain 
how and why outcomes and impacts will be achieved through use, 
implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities and 
outputs (Maru et. al., 2018).
Trends
A trend is a general direction or movement towards change or a new 
development. It refers to a prevailing tendency or pattern that is 
emerging or becoming more popular over time.
Transformation
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different 
structure, functions, feedbacks and identity (Folke et al., 2010).
Trigger point
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management 
intervention. Trigger points are usually defined in the planning phase 
(Wise et. al., 2014).

iv
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the Wiradjuri people as the Traditional Custodians of the land throughout Central West NSW. We 
pay our respects to their Elders, past, present and emerging, and recognise their ongoing connection to the land and 
waterways, particularly the Lachlan, Macquarie, and Murrumbidgee rivers.
The Wiradjuri people have thrived in this region for over 40,000 years. Their culture is rich with traditions, stories, and 
a deep understanding of the land's delicate balance. Droughts pose a significant threat to their way of life, impacting 
their ability to connect with their land and maintain their cultural practices.
We recognise the significant impact droughts have on Wiradjuri cultural practices, traditional food sources, and 
social issues. Unresolved issues like Aboriginal Water Entitlements further compound these challenges.
A successful approach to drought resilience requires the full participation of Aboriginal communities. Their 
involvement is crucial for advocating for positive cultural, environmental, and economic outcomes.
Drought Fund. This program focuses on developing innovative strategies to build regional resilience against 
droughts. By planning ahead, we can lessen the impact of future droughts on our region.

v
A note from the Mayors
We are delighted to announce our collaboration with 
future challenges, particularly droughts. Proactivity is 
key in initiatives of this nature, and we are very pleased 
about our joint efforts.
The $220,000 grant allocated for the development of a 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan is absolutely essential 
in safeguarding our communities. Reflecting on past 
experiences, which remain deeply impactful for many 
members of our community, reinforces the necessity of 
this Plan.
We are truly pleased that we have taken this important 
step in formulating a Regional Drought Resilience Plan.
This significant collaborative effort among our five 
Central West Councils—Blayney, Cabonne, Cowra, 
Orange, and Weddin alongside the NSW and Australian 
Governments, will enable us to be stronger together 
when facing uncontrollable weather conditions.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
signifies our commitment to proactive measures, 
recognising the imperative of preparing our communities 
and businesses for the inevitable challenges of reduced 
rainfall. 
Through the development of a comprehensive Central 
West Regional Drought Resilience Plan, we aim to fortify 
our preparedness, response capabilities, and recovery 
strategies. This funding will enable us to craft tailored 
strategies that address the unique needs of our region, 
empowering us to confront drought challenges with 
resilience and foresight.
With this Regional Drought Resilience Plan, we are 
setting ourselves up for success, equipped with locally 
informed strategies that resonate with the realities of 
our area.
This program prioritises community engagement, 
offering opportunities for consultation to ensure that 
our resilience Plan reflects the diverse needs and 
perspectives of our residents and the residents of the 
different communities. 
Let’s utilise the strength of our community as we 
navigate the challenges of drought and emerge 
stronger and more resilient than ever before.

vi
Orange
Bathurst
Parkes
Cowra
Forbes
Wellington
Blayney
Carcoar
Lyndhurst
Grenfell
Molong
Canowindra
Pullabooka
Bribbaree
Burraga
Peak Hill
Eugowra
Manildra
Woodstock
Cudal
Cumnock
Yeoval
Weddin Shire 
Weddin Shire 
Cabonne
Cabonne
Blayney Shire
Blayney Shire
Orange City
Orange City
Cowra
Cowra

vii
Quick Guide
Regional Drought 
Resilience 
1
2
Region and 
Communities
3
Drought, climate 
and impacts
4
Listening 
to Local 
Experience
5
Drought 
Resilience 
Actions
6
Conclusion

viii
Contents
Acknowledgements 	
iv
A note from the Mayors	
v
1.	
Regional Drought Resilience 	
2
1.1.	
Background 	
2
1.2.	
Purpose of this Plan	
2 
1.3.	
Vision for the region 	
3 
1.4.	
Key inputs to the Plan	
3
1.5.	
A Plan for drought resilience	
3 
1.6.	
Drought resilience at a glance	
4 
1.7.	
Drought resilience framework	
5
1.8.	
Plan development 	
9
2.	
Region and Communities	
14
2.1.	
Introduction to the region 	
14
2.2.	 First Nations People	
26
2.3.	 Agriculture	
26
2.4.	 The region’s infrastructure	
27
2.5.	 The region’s services	
29
2.6.	 Digital Inclusion 	
32
2.7.	 Land use 	
32
2.8.	 The Region’s water	
35
3.	
Drought, climate and impacts 	
41
3.1.	
What is drought?	
41
3.2.	 Historical drought in Central West	
43
3.3.	 Regional weather and climate	
47
3.4.	 Future drought projections	
49
3.5.	 Future climate scenario	
53
3.6.	 Future scenarios	
53
3.7.	 Summary of drought related impacts	
54
4.	
Listening to local experience	
 57
4.1.	
Local stories of resilience 	
57
4.2.	 What we heard	
86
4.3.	 Key themes 	
93
4.4.	 Initiatives refinement	
94
5.	
Drought Resilience Actions	
96
5.1.	
What has already been done to build drought resilience 	96
5.2.	 Opportunities tested	
96
5.3.	 Priority actions	
98
5.4.	 Theory of Change 	
98
5.5.	 Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 	
127
6.	
Conclusion	
137

1
01
Regional Drought Resilience

2
1.	 Regional Drought 
Resilience 
1.1.	 Background 
Drought affects all aspects of the community, resulting 
in major social, economic, and environmental impacts 
(Abunyewah et al., 2023). The National Drought 
Agreement (signed in 2018) commits the Australian, 
State and Territory Governments to prioritise objectives 
and outcomes that enhance long-term preparedness, 
sustainability, resilience and risk management for 
farming businesses and farming communities in 
includes establishing and operating a Future Drought 
Fund (FDF). The new National Drought Agreement is 
expected to come into effect in July 2024.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) 
Program is part of the FDF (co-funded by the 
and Forestry (DAFF) and the Department of Regional 
NSW (DRNSW)), which has the aim of supporting local 
governments to work together to proactively plan for 
drought resilience (DAFF and ABARES, 2023). The 
RDRP’s aim to:
•	 Identify ways for Councils to support their region’s 
resilience to future droughts.
•	 Devise actions communities can undertake to build 
their drought resilience across regions.
•	 Following development of RDRP’s, implementation 
funding will be available to the participating 
consortium of Councils across Australia under the 
The FDF seeks to enhance the public good by building 
drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural sector, the 
agricultural landscape and communities. The intent of 
its eight interrelated foundational programs is to have an 
innovative and profitable farming sector, a sustainable 
natural environment and adaptable rural, regional 
and remote communities, all with increased resilience 
to the impacts of drought and climate change (DAFF, 
2024a). This intent is an outcome from the 2009 Inquiry 
into Government Drought Support which advocated 
for communities and farmers to become more self-
reliant and refocus on the broader issue of climate 
variability (resulting from climate change) (Productivity 
Commission, 2009). The eight FDF programs include: 
Climate Services for Agriculture Platform, Drought 
Resilience Self-Assessment Tool, Farm Business 
Resilience, Regional Drought Resilience Planning, 
Drought Resilience Innovation and Adoption Hubs, 
Four grant programs, Drought Resilience Leaders and 
Networks to Build Drought Resilience.
The FDF is intended to deliver against three inter-
connected strategic priorities:
•	 economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector.
•	 environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscapes.
•	 social resilience for resourceful and 
adaptable communities.
1.2.	 Purpose of this Plan
The Central West RDRP (consisting of Blayney Shire, 
Cabonne, Cowra, Orange City and Weddin Shire 
Councils) provides guidance to help our region better 
plan for and become more resilient to the impacts of 
drought over time. Resilience is important in rural and 
regional communities. It reinforces the connectedness 
of its members, their ability to manage through seasonal 
conditions (that create uncertainty and present a 
challenge to their businesses and way of life). 
This Plan provides an opportunity to identify actions 
that will directly assist the region to strengthen social, 
economic and environmental resilience, supporting 
communities in future droughts. It builds on the wealth 
of effort, research and planning, that has been, and 
continues to be delivered in drought. 
The purpose of this Plan is:
•	 Creating stronger connectedness and greater social 
capital within the communities of Central West, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
•	 Increasing self-reliance and improving risk mitigation 
by building on the local and regional resilience 
initiatives already been undertaken. 
•	 Supporting leadership and community networks 
to thrive. 
•	 Improving timely and evidence-based decision 
making that meets the needs of Central West. 
•	 Empowering communities to implement 
transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	 Supporting more primary producers to adopt 
whole-of-system approaches to Natural Resource 
Management to improve the natural resource base, 
for long-term productivity and landscape health.
This Plan has been developed between the five Councils 
and their respective communities in a collaborative 
approach that has drawn on the experience and input of 
those who live and work in our region.

3
It is intended for this Plan to be a living document and to 
be considered and factored into a range of other plans 
and strategies by local government, state government, 
non-government organisations, not-for-profits, 
businesses and others.
1.5.	 A Plan for drought resilience
Drought is a defining feature of the climatic cycle of the 
In a large part this owes to our geography. Our continent 
spans the latitudes of the subtropical high-pressure belt 
(BoM, 2024a). This is an area of sinking, dry, stable air 
and usually clear skies. The far north and south of the 
country come under the influence of reasonably regular 
rain-bearing systems for at least part of the year (BoM, 
2024a). The east coast is normally well watered by 
moisture from weather driven by the Tasman and Coral 
Seas. However, over most of the country rainfall is low 
and erratic. Even in the wetter areas, very dry years can 
disrupt normal activities and lead to water shortages 
(BoM, 2024a). 
As such, droughts will come again, and they are 
anticipated to get worse in parts of the country as a 
result of a changing climate. The costs of drought are 
far-reaching, impacting not just at the farm gate, but 
across the entire community and natural landscape. To 
minimise the costs of drought, an effective response for 
greater resilience is to plan, learn, innovate and develop 
skills that can be applied to recover and respond 
quicker to more disasters (COAG, 2011). Striving to be 
a more resilient community will protect the regions 
natural assets, build sustainable community resilience 
and generate economic opportunities in social and 
infrastructure domains (DAWE, 2021). It is important that 
communities are well-prepared and resilient in the face 
of climate change and drought.
•	 Resilience Principles: Infrastructure Australia’s 
approach to resilience
•	 QLD Government: Investment Logic Mapping Guide
•	 CSU Southern NSW Innovation Hub Baselining 
Drought - Developing a baseline understanding of 
farmer and community perceptions of drought
•	 Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management 
Policy (DRAMP) Framework 2018
•	 CSIRO Drought Resilience mission (2022)
•	 NSW Government: Central West and Orana 
Regional Plan 2041
•	 Government organisation publications including 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics and Sciences (ABARES), Australian 
Bureau of Statistics (ABS), Bureau of Meteorology 
(BoM), Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation (CSIRO), Infrastructure 
Australia, Productivity Commission, Rural Industries 
Research and Development Corporation, Grains 
Research and Development Corporation and others.
•	 Government department publications including 
•	 Academic publications.
The Regional NSW Investment Attraction Strategy 2022 
– 2027 (DRNSW, 2022b) sets out the NSW Government’s 
priorities and plans to achieve long-term social and 
economic success for regional communities across 
the state.
Additionally, contributions from a broad range of 
community and stakeholders - including community 
organisations, First Nations Peoples, businesses, 
regional industries, primary producers, volunteers and 
Local and State Government agencies with a regional 
focus- were instrumental in the co-design of this Plan.
1.3.	 Vision for the region 
The vision was created via an iterative process across 
the stakeholder workshops that were held across the 
five Local Government Areas (LGAs). Following inputs 
from the first workshops, a vision statement was drafted 
and feedback sought during the second workshops. The 
final vision statement was tested through the Project 
Control Group which consisted of members from each of 
the Councils. 
Our vision is to create resilient, healthy, 
and prosperous communities who thrive 
through the challenges of drought. We wish 
to be a liveable, connected, and inclusive 
rural region. We look to prioritise innovation 
that helps secure our natural resources and 
leads to assured and flexible employment 
opportunities.
1.4.	 Key inputs to the Plan
The following documents were considered through 
the development of this Plan and incorporated into 
the stakeholder engagement activities. Please note 
this is not a comprehensive list of the literature that 
was reviewed to inform the Plan. Regional documents 
including: 
•	 Council strategic planning documents
•	 Local economic development strategies
•	 NSW Regional Water Strategies 
(Macquarie-Castlereagh, Lachlan)
•	 Regional Water Strategies 
•	 Regional Economic Development Strategies 
(Orange, Blayney and Cabonne, Cowra Regional, 
South West Slopes)

4
erode the community’s resilience to deal with another 
stress such as drought. The impacts of drought are also 
dependent on the timing, duration and the area over 
which the drought occurs. These factors can affect 
how the community is able to respond. No two 
droughts are the same and this in itself presents 
a challenge to communities.
Drought resilience goes beyond water management; it’s 
a holistic approach aimed at safeguarding the fabric of 
our communities. The lasting effects of past droughts, 
including the Millennium Drought, serve as reminders 
for the need of forward-thinking and strategic planning.
The journey for developing this Plan for the Central 
West is illustrated in Figure 1. The process recognises 
communities in the region have been consulted about 
drought previously, with this plan aiming to build on 
this work.
1.6.	 Drought resilience at a glance
When it comes to drought, “our best defence against 
the shocks of drought is to prepare. Planning for greater 
drought resilience across all aspects of regional and 
remote communities, not just for primary producers, will 
have the greatest impact. Resilience can be achieved by 
building sustainable and diverse regional economies, 
reducing the vulnerability of communities to changing 
economic conditions, accelerating recovery, and 
enhancing the natural environment” (DRNSW, 2022a). 
It is also important to consider and understand when 
adaptation and/ or transformational change is required 
to build resilience. 
The impact of multiple disaster events such as the 
Black Summer bushfires, floods of 2021 and 2022, mice 
plagues, and COVID-19 related supply chain and labour 
force disruptions, compound any existing issues and 
The costs of drought are spread across economic, social 
and environmental factors. The toll taken on regions and 
their communities has been enormous and the impacts 
often linger for decades (Southern NSW Innovation 
Hub, 2022).
The most effective response to rising uncertainty is to 
plan for greater drought resilience. This can be achieved 
by building sustainable and diverse regional economies, 
reducing the vulnerability of communities to changing 
economic conditions and accelerating recovery, as well 
as enhancing thriving natural environments.
Project Inception
Project Control Group
Engagement Planning
2
4
3
Literature Review
and data collection
Demographics
Historical droughts
Weather
Future droughts
Climate change
Community and
Stakeholder
engagement
Survey
In person
Interviews
Stakeholder Reference
Group Workshops
Reporting
Regional Drought
Resilience Plan
Action Plan
1
Figure 1 -The Drought resilience journey

5
Social cohesion within communities can also be 
affected. Drought may foster mistrust in government 
and institutions, particularly if responses to the crisis are 
perceived as inadequate. This erosion of trust can hinder 
community resilience and complicate recovery efforts. 
Furthermore, social networks that provide support 
during crises can be strained, leading to increased 
isolation and vulnerability among affected individuals.
Drought has significant environmental consequences, 
impacting ecosystems and biodiversity. Water scarcity 
can lead to habitat degradation, reduced agricultural 
productivity, and increased susceptibility to wildfires, 
which can further exacerbate environmental stress and 
lead to loss of biodiversity. The degradation of natural 
resources not only affects the environment but also 
diminishes the livelihoods of communities that depend 
on these resources for their survival.
The relationship between environmental factors 
and drought is cyclical; for instance, environmental 
degradation can increase the severity of drought 
impacts, while drought can lead to further 
environmental degradation, such as desertification 
and loss of arable land. This creates a feedback loop 
where each factor exacerbates the others, complicating 
recovery efforts and increasing the overall vulnerability 
of affected communities.
The interplay between economic, social, and 
environmental factors creates cascading impacts that 
can be devastating. For instance, a drought that reduces 
agricultural output can lead to economic decline, which 
in turn can increase social tensions and health issues, 
further straining community resilience. These cascading 
effects highlight the need for integrated approaches 
that consider the interconnectedness of these factors.
Drought significantly impacts economic activities, 
particularly in agriculture, which is often the most 
affected sector. Reduced precipitation leads to lower 
crop yields and livestock productivity, which in turn 
affects food security and income for farming families. 
This economic strain can lead to unemployment, 
decreased local business revenues, and increased 
costs for food and water, exacerbating poverty levels in 
vulnerable communities.
Moreover, the economic consequences of drought 
extend beyond immediate agricultural losses. They 
can trigger a series of indirect effects, such as 
increased migration as families leave drought-stricken 
areas in search of better opportunities, which can 
destabilise local economies and social structures. The 
interconnectedness of the food-water-energy nexus 
means that economic impacts can ripple through various 
sectors, affecting everything from energy prices to 
urban development.
The social impacts of drought are profound and 
multifaceted. Drought can lead to significant health 
issues, including mental health challenges due to 
stress and anxiety related to economic instability 
and food insecurity. Vulnerable populations, 
particularly women and children, often bear the 
brunt of these social impacts, as they are typically 
assuming greater responsibilities for on and off-
farm labour. This burden can limit their access 
to education and economic opportunities.
1.7.	 Drought resilience framework
Defining resilience
Resilience is a broad concept that encompasses a 
range of interconnected factors and conditions. For 
a system to be resilient it must have the ability to 
absorb a disturbance (sometimes referred to as shocks 
and stresses) and reorganise to maintain the existing 
function’s structure (Walker et al., 2004). However, it is 
important that the system maintains options to develop 
and remains open to transformative and non-linear 
change (Nelson, 2011). 
Shocks and stresses 
Shocks and stresses in the context of this Plan refers to 
the following:
1. Episodic shocks are sudden, large-scale disasters 
that disrupt and threaten communities. In the context of 
drought, some significant shocks may include:
•	 Sudden water shortages 
•	 Extreme weather events (storms, bushfires, 
landslides, earthquakes, heatwaves)
•	 Agricultural supply chain disruption. 
2. Chronic stressors can be thought of as slow-moving 
disasters that affect the community. In the context of 
drought, stressors may include:
•	 Food and water shortages 
•	 Climate change
•	 Aging infrastructure.

6
Resilience thinking
Resilience thinking incorporates the notions of 
absorption, adaptation, and transformation into a 
unified approach. It investigates how multiple systems, 
including people and environmental systems, can still 
operate when there are disruptions and uncertainty 
(Simonsen et al, n.d.). It offers a structured framework 
and principles for developing plans and strategies 
aimed at enhancing resilience across all levels, 
from national, regional and local (Folke et. al., 2010; 
Greet et al., 2021). These different capacities are 
vital components of building resilience, and this 
holistic perspective acknowledges resilience is not 
a one-size-fits-all concept and tailored approaches 
are necessary to address the diverse and dynamic 
challenges communities, ecosystems, and organisations 
/ businesses face. 
Resilience capacity
This Plan focusses on three types of resilience 
capacity (see Figure 2). Absorptive capacity is often 
described in traditional resilience terms as the ability 
to absorb shocks or to ‘bounce-back’ (Haider and 
Cleaver, 2023). Adaptive capacity is often the next 
step on the resilience journey and entails having the 
necessary resources to learn and adapt the system 
(Haider and Cleaver, 2023). However, it is increasingly 
being recognised that adaptation is insufficient to deal 
with large-scale environmental issues like climate 
change. Transformation, which is the shift to a new 
system including change in priorities and leading to 
changes across multiple scales, is sometimes the 
best way to deal with large scale issues. However, 
transformation is not always needed or ‘good’ and in 
certain circumstances adaptation is the best course of 
action (Haider and Cleaver, 2023). These three concepts 
are used in Section 5 to indicate how the proposed 
resilience action may contribute to resilience building 
in the region.
Types of resilience
To establish a holistic approach towards resilience, a 
broad range of systems must be considered, including 
social resilience, economic resilience and environmental 
resilience. Each of these dimensions is relevant in its 
own way and they are all strongly interconnected, 
allowing there to be coordinated adaption in building 
resilience.
•	 Economic – focuses on the ability of local economies 
to adapt to and recover from the economic shocks 
caused by drought. This may include diversifying 
the local economy, supporting businesses that are 
drought-resistant, and providing financial resources 
to mitigate economic losses during drought events 
(DPIE, 2021).
•	 Social – the ability of individuals and communities 
to withstand the psychological and social impacts of 
drought. It involves fostering strong social networks, 
community cohesion, and mental health support 
systems to help people cope with the stress and 
challenges associated with water scarcity. 
•	 Environment – centres on the capacity of natural 
ecosystems and water resources to endure and 
recover from the ecological impacts of drought. 
This may involve protecting and restoring habitats, 
improving water conservation practices, and 
preserving biodiversity to maintain ecosystem 
services during and after drought.
For radically changing the 
system or building a new 
system if maintaining and 
modifying the existing 
system won’t work.
For modifying 
the system 
when needed.
For maintaining of 
key functions and 
structures of a 
system in the face 
of shocks.
Absorptive 
capacity
Adaptive 
capacity
Transformative 
capacity
Figure 2	
Types of resilience capacity as outlined by Haider and Cleaver, 2023

7
Within the Farm Sensitivity measure there is drought 
exposure and drought sensitivity. Drought exposure 
represents the amount of external stress farm 
enterprises experience due to the climate variability 
they are exposed to at their location (ABARES, 2022). 
Drought sensitivity represents the effects that climate 
variability has on farm outcomes, reflecting the 
responsiveness of farm production systems to short-
term climate variability and short-term management 
responses (ABARES, 2022). Currently, only broadacre 
farms are represented by this indicator. 
sensitivity (agricultural dependence of a community), 
to initially produce an index of ‘Potential drought 
impact’ (PDI). This PDI index can be applied consistently 
across LGAs. Whether the PDI will cause lasting loss or 
harm depends on the community‘s adaptive capacity 
(ABARES, 2022). The project is ongoing and the next 
step is to include indicators of potential adaptive 
capacity of communities, to better understand the 
likely resilience of a community to drought (ABARES, 
2022). Consequently, the output of the framework would 
be a measure of drought vulnerability and resilience, 
describing the degree to which Australian agriculturally 
dependent communities are likely to be adversely 
affected by a drought and their ability to withstand 
those impacts. 
Creating a resilient community demands there to be 
an awareness of the nature of disasters in the region, 
acknowledge where the community is vulnerable 
to allow for growth, and not be afraid to probe the 
boundaries of a resilience system (Greet et al., 2021). 
The components integrated in resilience thinking are 
vital if a region, community or business are to thrive, but 
building resilience cannot be achievable if it isn’t an ‘all 
hands-on deck approach’ (Greet et al., 2021). 
Resilience measures should assist with (Walker, 2020): 
•	 building intentional redundancy to create reserves 
and spare capacity
•	 creating response diversity – that is having multiple 
options to achieve a given need or fulfill a particular 
function (so if one becomes unviable, or doesn’t work, 
there are back-up options)
•	 fostering an appropriate level of connectivity such 
that a region is not over- or under-connected, and not 
overly dependent on external support
•	 enabling preparedness, flexibility and quick and 
effective responses to stresses and shocks
•	 building absorptive, adaptive and transformative 
agency and capacities
•	 managing the key variables and feedback loops 
central to the manifestation and effect of drought 
and associated shocks in the region.
 Resilience assessment
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics and Sciences (ABARES) developed a national 
index to rank rural or regional communities by their 
potential to be adversely affected by drought (ABARES, 
2022). As shown in Figure 3, this index combines 
drought exposure and drought sensitivity (at the farm 
enterprise level), and data representing community 
Farm sensitivity
Potential drought impact
Change in farm outcomes 
(e.g. proﬁt, household income) 
and community sensitivity
Drought vulnerability and resilience
Ability to absorb, respond and recover from drought
Drought exposure
• Rainfall volume
• Soil moisture
• Min and max temperature
Drought sensitivity
• Technology
• Management practices
• Farm ﬁxed inputs (e.g. 
land, livestock, 
equipment
• Farm and farmer 
characteristics
Community sensitivity
• Agricultural employment
• % working in agriculture
• Ratio of agriculture and 
agri-industry downstream 
employment to total 
employment
Adaptive capacity
• Physical capital
• Natural capital
• Finacial capital
• Human capital
• Social capital
• Economic diversity
Figure 3	
Drought Indicator Framework (Source: ABARES 2022)

8
and Disadvantage (IRSAD). The IRSAD is one of the 
socio-economic indexes for Australia (SEIFA). The 
IRSAD summarises information about the economic 
and social conditions of people and households. SEIFA 
indexes orders areas from lowest to highest, with decile 
1 representing the most disadvantaged areas relative 
to other areas, and 10 representing the most 
advantaged areas. 
The bold numbers in Table 1 highlight Weddin LGA as 
the most vulnerable of the five LGAs for all except the 
SEIFA indicator. Weddin has low economic diversity and 
a high PDI indicating a high potential for drought impact 
due to high farm drought risk and high community 
dependence on agriculture. Comparatively, Orange has 
high economic diversity and very low PDI, reflective of 
the fact that there is less agriculture (or land) within 
the LGA and therefore they are less contingent on 
agricultural productivity. Blayney’s economic diversity 
and PDI echo their relative diversification away from an 
agricultural base with Cadia mine and the Nestle factory 
situated within the LGA (see section 2.1 for further 
details). Cabonne and Cowra LGAs are reasonably 
similar in both economic diversity and PDI however the 
SEIFA decile highlights other areas of vulnerability for 
Cowra. Weddin also has a lower SEIFA score. Cowra has 
The ABARES technical report (2022) lists five forms of 
capital, or resources, which are positively related to the 
communities ability to manage or cope with impacts. 
These are:
•	 human capital—labour and influences on the 
productivity of labour, including education, skills 
and health
•	 social capital—claims on others by virtue of 
social relationship
•	 natural capital—land, water, and biological resources
•	 physical capital—produced by economic activity, 
including infrastructure, equipment and technology
•	 financial capital— savings and credit.
A Tableau© dashboard generates an ordinal (0 to 1) 
PDI ranking of agriculturally dependent communities 
based on their potential to be impacted by drought. The 
most sensitive LGAs (with both high farm sensitivity and 
high agricultural dependence/ community sensitivity) 
receive a ranking near 1 and the least (with both low 
farm drought risk and low agricultural dependence) 
receive a rating near 0 (ABARES, 2022). Table 1 provides 
the data contained in the Tableau© dashboard as well 
as including the Index of Socio-Economic Advantage 
The community sensitivity measure represents the 
reliance of a LGA on employment in agricultural 
production industries (broadacre and irrigated) and 
related downstream food and beverage manufacturing 
(for example, meat processing, dairy product 
manufacturing and fruit and vegetable processing) 
(ABARES, 2022). Community sensitivity is measured 
as the proportion of people employed in those agri-
industries compared to total employment in the LGA. 
The PDI index highlights the need for drought resilience 
Plans to consider the risk and exposure of a region to 
drought (such as considering the PDI ranking) and how 
that can be minimised, as well as how a community 
can build in adaptive capacity to manage the impact of 
droughts (overall drought vulnerability and resilience). 
While the adaptive capacity measure is yet to be fully 
developed, the economic diversity index (EDI) has been 
calculated for all LGAs. The EDI reflects the composition 
of the local economy across all industry of employment 
sectors compared to the Australian economy with a low 
score representing a less diverse economy (ABARES, 
2022). This index also correlates with population density 
and access to services, as communities that exhibit 
the highest levels of economic diversity are usually the 
larger population centres (ABARES, 2022).
Local Government 
Area (LGA)
Economic 
Diversity
Farm 
Sensitivity (FS)
Community 
Sensitivity (CS)
Potential Drought 
Impact (FS+CS)
Socio-economic 
advantage / disadvantage 
(SEIFA decile)
Blayney
0.62
0.04
0.22
0.17
6
Cabonne
0.48
0.23
0.30
0.35
8
Cowra
0.51
0.11
0.27
0.26
2
Orange 
0.85
-no rating
0.05
0.03
7
Weddin
0.19
0.59
0.52
0.75
5
(Data source: ABS, 2021b; ABARES 2022).
Table 1  Drought indicator framework outputs and SEIFA decile by LGA

9
Phase 2: Community and stakeholder 
engagement to identify, test and 
understand the regional opportunities
Phase 2 comprised the delivery of the engagement 
approach. A review of Councils’ Community Strategic 
Plans resulted in the development of five initial 
common themes. These themes were tested with the 
stakeholders through the workshops and with the PCG 
to make sure they were a sound representation of the 
region’s key areas of focus. These themes were then 
used for categorising and analysing the actions and 
initiatives identified during the Phase 1 review and in the 
series of resilience workshops (Stakeholder Reference 
Group (SRG) meetings). 
Originally, two in-person workshops per LGA alongside 
a series of targeted interviews with other agencies and 
community members were proposed. Due to challenges 
with availability and engagement fatigue, especially in 
Cabonne LGA who had been focussed on flood recovery 
planning, alternative arrangements were required for 
Blayney and Cabonne LGAs. For these LGAs, one-
on-one interviews and small group online workshops 
were held instead of the initial workshop. This reduced 
the richness of the information gleaned as there was 
little ability to interact with each other and build and/
or test ideas. Given the time restraints of the project, 
adequate engagement with a broad section of the 
community was not necessarily obtained. An in-depth 
stakeholder mapping exercise that identifies the small 
and hard to engage with segments of the community 
such that inputs from these community members could 
be pursued would be beneficial for the future update of 
the plan. Learning from this plan and Councils regarding 
constraints to engagement is required. 
State and local government stakeholders were 
engaged through both the SRG and through one-to-one 
interviews to provide input to actions and provide insight 
into existing resilience pathways.
Phase 1: Understanding the community 
profile, what is known about drought in the 
region, the lessons learnt and the region’s 
greatest risks
Phase 1 involved the formation of a PCG which consisted 
of members of the five Councils, Department of Regional 
NSW, and consultants. The PCG provided inputs and 
guided the development of the Plan. They also assisted 
with arrangements for community and stakeholder 
engagement activities. This phase of the project also 
included a review of literature to better understand 
the community profile, what we currently know about 
drought in the region, the lessons learnt from previous 
droughts and where the greatest risks lie. Some of the 
sources utilised are outlined in Section 1.4. The literature 
review informed future phases of the project including 
identification of plan themes and ensures the plan is 
built on past work and programs. This also included 
looking at resilience frameworks and bringing together 
ideas for what may be most relevant to the region, to 
test with the stakeholder groups. A Project Plan and 
Community and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (CSEP) 
were developed to help guide the project and to identify 
key groups to attempt to engage with. This included 
some stakeholder mapping and started conversations 
between the Councils and the consultants to identify 
key stakeholders within the community who should be 
involved in workshops and/or one-on-one interviews.
the highest unemployment rate of the five LGAs (see 
Table 1), followed by Weddin. Both Cowra and Weddin 
have around a 51% labour force participation rate, 
10% lower than the other LGAs, and have the lowest 
median household income of the five LGAs. They both 
have a higher median age compared to the other LGAs. 
Additional vulnerability indicators that may reflect the 
community’s adaptive capacity are provided in Section 
2.1. Additionally, further information relating to climate 
vulnerability is provided in Section 3.
1.8.	 Plan development 
The development of this Plan has been overseen by a 
Project Control Group (PCG) comprising representatives 
from Blayney Shire, Cabonne, Cowra, Orange City, 
Weddin Shire Councils, DPIRD and consultants. A three 
phased approach was used, focussed on community-led 
development of themes, vision and actions. 
At the inception of the development of the Plan. 
Each Local Council provided a list of stakeholders 
that were representative of the demographic of their 
communities. This mix of stakeholders was dependent 
on the individual characteristics of each LGA and 
included representatives from the business community 
and business chambers, tourism operators, health 
services, agriculture and agricultural service industries, 
community groups, progress associations, training 
organisations, environmental groups and first nations 
representatives. These stakeholders were invited to 
provide input on key aspects of developing the vision 
and actions for the Plan through the formation of the 
Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) for each LGA.

10
Phase 3: Prioritise and develop the Plan
Phase 3 consisted of prioritising the opportunities 
(through the second SRG and PCG) and documenting 
each in this plan. These actions are organised using the 
thematic framework shown in Figure 5. The investment 
logic framework (Section 5) was applied to the long list 
of actions to better identify priority actions. The Plan 
identifies actions that can be progressed now that align 
with the consortium of Councils’ ability to influence and 
will improve outcomes for the community. 
The communities of the Central West have initiated 
several actions within their communities developed 
through successive droughts. Those actions have been 
built on in this plan in an effort to improve the region’s 
drought resilience. These actions include continuing to 
support water infrastructure improvements, advocating 
for increased services to support the health and well-
being of the community, diversifying the region’s 
economy through business and tourism attraction 
and protecting landscape health and natural resource 
management. The PCG provided final review of the plan 
before it was sent to CSIRO for review. The PCG was 
also involved in the final updates before the plan was 
published and publicly available.
high. Initial ideas for actions were encouraged from the 
stakeholders and developed through discussion within 
the group. The second workshop focussed on further 
developing the actions and starting the process 
of prioritisation. 
Simultaneous to the workshops, targeted interviews 
were conducted with a number of organisations and 
agencies. These included:
•	 Central NSW Joint Organisation
•	 Central Tablelands Water
•	 NSW Department of Climate Change, Energy, the 
Environment and Water (DCCEEW)
•	 Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development (DPIRD)
•	 Destination NSW
•	 Local Land Services (LLS)
•	 WaterNSW.
Additional to the workshops and targeted interviews, 
a community survey was promoted by each of the 
Councils to ensure those who were unable to attend 
workshops or be invited to interviews were able to 
express their views and input into the plan.
Community engagement was designed with the 
communities’ diverse needs and perspectives in mind. 
The engagement activities were designed to encourage 
meaningful conversations and insights from the broad 
range of community. Engagement allowed people to 
express information in their own words so that local 
voices and needs were highlighted. The engagement 
combined the use of in-person and digital methods, 
ensuring inclusivity and transparency throughout the 
process. An overview of the engagement activities is 
provided in Figure 4.
The SRGs were held with targeted regional stakeholders 
to test the findings from Phase 1 and identify strategic 
opportunities. A range of community members were 
invited to participate. These included but are not 
limited to:
•	 Local businesses/ business chambers
•	 Retailers
•	 Manufacturers
•	 Primary producers/agribusinesses and agricultural 
suppliers
•	 Primary producers
•	 Progress associations/ community committees 
•	 Educational providers (schools, Technical 
and Further Education (TAFE), Universities)
•	 Health providers (GPs, Hospital and health 
district staff)
•	 Tourism operators/corporations
•	 Volunteer groups (Rotary, Lion’s Club, Country 
Womens Association, etc)
•	 Sporting clubs/associations
•	 Councillors
•	 Agencies (Regional Development Australia (RDA), 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development DPIRD, Local Land Service (LLS)).
The Local Aboriginal groups and/or Elders or 
representatives were invited to participate in the Plan’s 
development . This engagement was limited as the plan 
timeframes were not conducive to deep engagement 
with First Nation’s people. 
During the first workshop, key drought related impacts 
(Section 4.3) were discussed and identified for each of 
the themes, with major impacts rated as low, medium or

11
Email Communication
Employing email outreach provided an additional channel for engaging with stakeholders. It enabled targeted stakeholders, in remote areas, to share their 
insights in a convenient manner. This approach not only facilitated the collection of valuable data but also allowed for a thoughtful, well-documented 
exchange of ideas and feedback. Around 90 stakeholder speciﬁc emails were sent and over 400 email communications sent.
Online Meetings and phone calls
A total of 10 PCG and meetings with individual councils were held.
Online Survey
Using digital tools and publishing a survey enabled engagement of a broader audience and made participation more convenient for community members.
52 survey responses were received and formed part of the feedback that informed the recommendations included within this Plan. 
Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) Meetings
8 SRG sessions were held between April 2024 and June 2024. They comprised of representatives from the local government areas, community subject matter experts, 
project team members, and other stakeholders. Over 200 stakeholders were invited to participate in the SRG’s, 76 members provided ideas, insights and feedback. The 
majority of these members attended both workshops to offer their contribution.
Targeted interviews with stakeholders
Targeted interviews with over 30 industry and community members to obtain more detailed input on experiences of drought, the drought work already 
undertaken in the region and additional actions to build resilience. Additionally, two online workshops were held, providing the opportunity to bridge 
geographical gaps, ensuring a wider array of stakeholders could provide insights without the constraints of location.
Figure 4 – Summary of Engagement activities

12
Through undertaking extensive community and stakeholder engagement, GHD uncovered these five key themes that encompass the insights and feedback received from the 
communities of the Central West. 
The Economy – Diverse 
and resilient agricultural 
businesses and regional 
economies
The Environment – Protection 
of the Natural and Built 
Environment
Governance – Leadership and 
Collaboration
Community – Vibrant, 
connected, and supported 
communities
Infrastructure – built assets 
and technology
Diversify the economy 
and continue to attract 
investment in education, 
medical services, mining, 
local food, wine, tourism, 
agriculture, agribusiness, 
transport and logistics to allow 
for sustainable growth and 
increased employment. Ensure 
infrastructure exists to support 
local businesses and innovative 
industries.
Protect and conserve the 
natural environment and 
heritage infrastructure 
and ensure land use is well 
planned. Support sustainable 
practices and diversification 
in agriculture. Manage 
natural hazard impacts and 
promote the renewable energy 
industry and climate change 
adaptation. Improve water 
security – secure, reliable, and 
healthy water that is equitably 
allocated.
Strong, transparent, and 
accountable leadership is 
a cornerstone of a thriving 
community. Community 
involvement and engagement 
in the decision-making 
process and investing in the 
development of future leaders 
will improve community 
ownership and cohesion.
Strong community bonds are 
a focal point, showcasing 
the importance of enhanced 
support/service networks 
(e.g. health and education) 
and community infrastructure 
transport, and recreation 
infrastructure). Vibrant and 
inclusive communities as well 
as diverse housing choices that 
fit the needs of community will 
improve quality of life.
Infrastructure and facilities 
play an important role in 
promoting and supporting 
our areas as a place to live, 
work, and invest. Road and 
rail infrastructure, digital 
connectivity, and water 
infrastructure is essential 
for economic prosperity, 
environmental management, 
and community liveability and 
resilience.
Figure 5  Five key themes of the Plan

13
02
Region and communities

14
2.	Region and 
Communities
2.1.	 Introduction to the region 
The RDRP for the Central West comprises the LGAs of 
Blayney Shire Council, Cabonne Council, Cowra Council, 
Orange City Council, and Weddin Shire Council. The five 
LGAs cover approximately 1.2 million hectares and are 
home to over 80,000 people (ABS, 2021a). Orange is the 
largest town within the region, serving as the primary 
location for health care, education, and retail services 
(Section 2.6). 
First Nations Peoples within the Central West Region 
are the Wiradjuri Peoples, with strong connections and 
responsibilities to Country for over 60,000 years, and 
making up 6.4% of the region’s population (ABS, 2021c). 
The region’s water resources and river systems – 
including the Lachlan River (Wiradjuri: Kalari, Galari) 
– underpin the health of the natural environment and 
are important parts of the broader Murray Darling Basin 
(NSW Government, 2022). The water systems support 
agriculture, recreation, tourism, and have a cultural 
significance for the Wiradjuri Peoples. Significant rivers 
and creeks include the Abercrombie River, Belubula 
River, Macquarie River, Cudgegong River, and Molong 
Creek (NSW Government, 2022). 
In recent years, the Central West has experienced 
many natural disasters including most recently severe 
flooding in the LGA of Cabonne through both the 
townships of Canowindra, Cudal, Manildra, Molong and 
Eugowra (NSW Government, 2022).
Local economy 
The Central West region has a diverse economy, and 
is renowned for its agricultural produce, food, wine 
and gastrotourism industry (Infrastructure Australia, 
2022). Water security challenges have promoted the 
diversification of agricultural products and the growth 
of mining, healthcare, and tourism (ABS, 2022a; 
Infrastructure Australia, 2022). However, water security 
and the competition for water can impact the expansion 
of new businesses and attraction of new people. Orange, 
Blayney, and Cabonne have focused on economic 
diversification through tourism, launching Orange360 – 
a joint committee that works with local groups, events 
and providers to market the region and drive visitor 
numbers (Think.Orange Region, 2019). 
Figure 6 illustrates a shift in the diversity of industries, 
livelihoods and employment opportunities across 
the five LGAs. Using a time series analysis from the 
2011, 2016 and 2021 Census’, it shows the incline in 
non-agricultural industries, health care and social 
assistance, across all LGAs and education and training 
in Orange LGA. The agriculture, forestry and fishing 
industry was in the top 3 industries for all LGAs, except 
for Orange. The data showed a decline for Cabonne 
LGA and Weddin LGA, with a contrasting increase from 
Cowra and Blayney LGAs. The diversity in the industries 
and indicators shows a future ability for LGAs to weather 
droughts in the future.
Figure 6  Time series data by Top 3 industry per LGA 2011 – 2021
Education and Training
Retail trade
Manufacturing
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
Health care and social assistance
Mining

15
•	 Central West LGAs covers 1.2 million 
hectares and is home to 80,000 people
•	 Largest economic sector is agriculture 
in four of the five LGAs valued at $769 
million for 2020-21 (ABS, 2022a)
•	 The average unemployment rate was 
1.36% (September 2023 ) lower than rate 
for NSW (3.3%) 
•	 The size of the economy in Orange, 
Blayney, and Cabonne, was 
approximately $4.34b / Cowra was 
approximately $685 million
Cowra’s industries of ‘tourism’, ‘healthcare’ and 
‘agriculture’ all experienced positive Year-on-Year 
growth between 2011 to 2020, with agriculture the 
highest gross value adding industry in 2020 
($118 million). 
The South West Slopes’ Regional Economic 
Development Strategy encompasses the LGAs of 
Weddin, Bland, Temora, Hilltop, and Cootamundra-
Gundagai, and therefore is only partially representative 
of Weddin’s industry trends. The South West Slopes 
region experienced Year-on-Year growth between 
2011 to 2020 in ‘agriculture’, ‘tourism’, and ‘energy 
generation’ - highlighting the emerging opportunities in 
the renewable energy sector (Table 2) (DRNSW, 2023c). 
The region is recognised as a nationally significant 
focal point for road and rail freight, supporting 
productive and diversified agribusiness, mining 
and manufacturing industries and enabling 
distribution of products domestically and around 
the world, including organics and free-range 
produce, raw fruits, seeds, vegetables, meats, and 
dairy products (Infrastructure Australia, 2022). 
Despite this, Infrastructure Australia (2022) notes that 
there are still gaps in the region’s transport and water 
infrastructure. In 2016, more than 43 million tonnes of 
freight were moved out of the broader Central West and 
Orana region, including coal, agricultural commodities, 
construction materials, and forestry. It is expected that 
coal transportation will decrease, while grain and other 
quarry materials will increase (Infrastructure Australia, 
2022). Increased investment in transport and freight 
infrastructure will be necessary to grow industries, 
with a particular focus on access to Sydney. 
In 2020, the size of the economy in Orange, Blayney, 
and Cabonne, was estimated to be $4.34 billion and in 
Cowra it was estimated to be $685 million (DRNSW, 
2023a; DRNSW, 2023b). 
In Orange, Blayney, and Cabonne, industries that 
experienced Year-on-Year growth between 2011 to 
2020 included ‘agriculture, forestry and fishing’ 
and ‘healthcare and social assistance’ (Table 
2). The ‘mining’ industry’s Year-on-Year growth 
was -5.7% across the same period, however it 
still constituted the highest gross value added 
(GVA) compared to other industries (Table 2). 
Industry 
Year-on-Year growth 2011–2020
Goss Value Added (GVA) 2020 ($m)
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
+6.1%
$262 
Mining
-5.7%
$572
Healthcare and social assistance
+4.9%
$463
Manufacturing
-1.9%
$312
Table 2  Orange, Blayney, Cabonne growth of key industries and value added (DRNSW, 2023a)

16
Nestle is a multi-national company which opened its 
Blayney factory in 1989 to produce wet and dry pet 
foods (DRNSW, 2022b). Over the last 10 years, more than 
$200 million has been invested into the site (DRNSW, 
2022b). In 2022, the most recent $90 million upgrade 
was completed, allowing for increased production 
capacity, export growth, and 20 new jobs on site 
(Nestle, 2022). Today, it employs more than 300 people 
(Nestle, 2022). The factory supports more than 60 local 
businesses and contractors within NSW, with Nestle 
stating that following the upgrade, more than 85% of 
raw materials will be sourced locally, including meats 
and grains (Nestle, 2022). 
Blayney Shire also has one of the most advanced 
livestock facilities in Australia, with Carcoar housing one 
of the largest livestock exchanges in NSW, the Central 
Tablelands Livestock Exchange (CTLX) (Blayney Shire 
Council, n.d.). 
Additional to the already existing industry in Blayney, Regis 
Resources Ltd has been granted development consent 
by the NSW Independent Planning Commission for the 
McPhillamys Gold Project, with a final feasibility study 
and funding strategy now in development. The proposed 
open-cut mine in Blayney will generate approximately 480 
jobs during the initial 12-18 month construction period and 
260 jobs once operational, with local recruitment a priority 
(McPhillamys Gold Project, n.d.).
A demographic and socio-economic summary of the 
Blayney LGA is provided in Figure 7.
The ‘agriculture, forestry and fishing’ industry is the 
largest industry of employment, with the gross value 
of agricultural commodities totalling over $63 million 
in 2020-21, with 51% of value generating from cattle 
(ABS, 2022a). Whilst agriculture, forestry and fishing 
may be the largest employer, Table 2 shows that mining 
represents the largest income source for the region.
Industry summary
Across Blayney, mining, manufacturing, agriculture, 
construction, education and training constitute the main 
industries. The geographical position of Blayney allows 
it to serve as a strategic transport centre, with close 
proximity to both Orange and Bathurst city centres, a 
rail terminal, direct road access to Melbourne, Sydney, 
and Adelaide, and easily accessible to the Mid-Western 
Highway and the Great Western Highway (Think.Orange 
Region, 2019). Prominent businesses include Newmont 
Corporation, Nestle, Blayney SeaLink (major cold 
storage operation), Blayney Crane Services (family-
owned crane hire and lifting services), and Australian 
Native Landscapes. 
Newmont Corporation owns and operates Cadia Mine 
in Blayney (Newmont Corporation, 2023). The gold 
mine is another significant employer and economic 
contributor to the local region. The mine’s water supply 
is sourced from the Belubula River, Cadiangullong Dam, 
on-site groundwater bores, Upper Rodds Creek Dam, 
Flyers Creek Weir, Cadia Creek Weir, Orange Sewage 
Treatment Plant treated effluent, Blayney Sewerage 
Treatment Plant treated effluent, Cadia Extended open 
pit, and site runoff (Newmont Corporation, 2023).
2.1.1.	Blayney 
Snapshot
The Blayney Shire Council covers an area of 
approximately 152,464 hectares and has a population 
of 7,497 (ABS, 2021a; ABS, 2021c). In 1815, Surveyor 
George Evans explored the country to the south of 
Bathurst and into the lands that eventually became 
part of the Blayney Shire (Blayney Shire Council, n.d.). 
Land grants were made to European settlers in Blayney 
around 1843. 
Today, the Blayney LGA is made up of a number of 
historic and picturesque villages, including: Blayney, 
Millthorpe, Carcoar, Mandurama, Lyndhurst, Neville, 
Newbridge, Hobby’s Yards, and Barry (Blayney Shire 
Council, n.d.). 
The town of Carcoar remains a historic town, serving 
as the major town centre during the gold rushes of 
the 1850s (Blayney Shire Council, n.d.). In 1876, rail 
came to the town of Blayney, and it has been the main 
centre since (Blayney Shire Council, n.d.). Blayney has 
a population of 3,448 and sits 850m above sea level on 
the Central Tablelands of NSW (ABS, 2021c).
The area is popular for bushwalking, cycling and horse 
riding. The Shire annually hosts Sculptures by the Bush. 
Carcoar Dam hosts water sports enthusiasts, and a 
number of streams and waterways allow for recreational 
fishing. Millthorpe hosts a market twice a year in autumn 
and Christmas and is recognised as one of the best in 
NSW (Blayney Shire Council, n.d.). Milthorpe has also 
been a set for numerous historical film and TV series.

17
Figure  7	 Socio-economic summary of the Blayney LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)
BLANEY

18
In 2021 Cabonne Council produced a Cabonne Economic 
Development and Visitor Economy Strategy. The 
strategy focuses on leveraging agriculture, population 
attraction and retention, tourism, and agri-tourism. 
As part of the strategy, Council has launched the 
Cabonne Collective to assist local businesses, and 
has undertaken projects to activate the Molong and 
Canowindra CBDs (Cabonne Council, 2023).
A demographic and socio-economic summary of the 
Cabonne LGA is provided in Figure 8.
Visitors can tour several museums to learn about the 
history of Cabonne, including its bushranger history and 
Australia’s first gold rush. Cabonne hosts several events, 
including the Eugowra Mandagery Cup, Banjo Paterson 
Festival, Orange Wine Month, and Eugowra High Tea 
(Cabonne Council, 2023). 
Industry summary
Cabonne’s economy was founded on agriculture, 
however mining has started to play an increasing role, 
as well as manufacturing for food and wine products. 
Cabonne has many large manufacturers, including 
the Manildra Group, an Australian family-owned 
agribusiness established in 1952 (Manildra Group, n.d.). 
The company manufactures food and industrial products 
in Australia and the United States, and exports to every 
continent. They own and operate Manildra Flour Mill, 
Australia’s largest flour mill (Manildra Group, n.d.). In 
conjunction with their three other mills in regional NSW, 
more than 1 million tonnes of wheat per annum is milled 
(close to one-sixth of NSW’s total wheat production) and 
more than 1,000 regional people are employed (Manildra 
Group, n.d.). 
Manildra Group also owns and operates MSM 
Stockfeeds and MSM Milling. The MSM Milling facility 
in Manildra processes oilseeds and is a partnership 
with local farming brothers Bob and Pete Mac Smtih. 
Manildra Group also operate four state-of-the-art grain 
storage facilities, with one located in Manildra (Manildra 
Group, n.d.). Other businesses located in the Cabonne 
region include Canobolas Eggs, Bryton Wool and 
Gundamain Pastoral Co (Think.Orange Region, 2019). 
2.1.2.	 Cabonne
Snapshot
The Cabonne LGA is the largest geographically of 
the five LGAs, covering an area of 602,235 hectares 
and hosting a population of 13,877 (ABS, 2021a; ABS, 
2021c). It is made up of 11 towns, villages, and localities, 
including Borenore, Canowindra, Cargo, Cudal, 
Cumnock, Eugowra, Manildra, Molong, Mullion Creek, 
Nashdale and Yeoval. The largest towns are Canowindra 
and Molong, each with approximately 2,500 residents. 
The area is known as ‘Australia’s Food Basket’ and is 
largely under agricultural production (427,438 hectares 
or 71%), producing an array of food including dairy 
products, beef, lamb, venison, apples, berries, canola 
oil, wine, flour, eggs, honey, and gourmet products (ABS, 
2022b). The gross value of agricultural commodities 
in 2021 totalled over $286 million, with livestock 
products accounting for 20% of the value produced, 
closely followed by cattle meat (16%) (ABS, 2022a). 
The Cabonne area contains two different wine regions, 
generating over $2.7 million in gross value from wine 
production (ABS, 2022a). Nearer to Orange is the cool-
climate wine region that produces red varieties, and 
nearer to Cowra is the hot climate wine region which is 
famous for its chardonnays (Cabonne Council, n.d.). 
The region also boasts stunning natural scenery 
and National Parks, including Gaanha Bula (Mount 
Canobolas) and Borenore Caves. In Eugowra lies Escort 
Rock - the site of Australia’s biggest and most famous 
gold robbery by Frank Gardiner (Cabonne Council, n.d.). 
Yeoval village is the childhood home of Banjo Paterson, 
one of Australia’s most famous poets. Cabonne hosts 
several events including the Canowindra International 
Balloon Festival, Eugowra Canola Cup Carnival, and the 
Australian National Field Days (Cabonne Council, n.d.).

19
Figure  8	 Socio-economic summary of the Cabonne LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)
CABONNE

20
The Cowra Agricultural Research and Advisory Station 
as part of DPIRD is known for its impressive research to 
improve the Australian sheep meat industry and plant 
breeding (DPI, n.d.a). 
Industry
Year-
on-Year 
growth 
2011 - 
2020
Goss 
Value 
Added 
(GVA) 
2020 ($m)
Visitor 
spend in 
2020 ($m)
Tourism
+3.4%
NA
$43
Healthcare
+4.6%
$63
NA
Agriculture
+8.6%
$118
NA
Manufacturing
-1.6%
$49
NA
Table 3  Cowra industry growth, industry value add, and visitor spend 
(DRNSW, 2023b)
A demographic and socio-economic summary of the 
Cowra LGA is provided in Figure 9.
Industry summary
Cowra’s position, two-hours from Canberra and 
four hours from Sydney, provides a great base for 
manufacturing and retail providers with increased 
transportation and distribution needs. Cowra’s retail, 
business services, agricultural services, manufacturing, 
wholesale trade, education, health, and hospitality 
services has expanded significantly in recent years 
(Cowra Council, n.d.). In 2020, the agricultural industry 
contributed to the highest gross value added in the 
Cowra LGA ($118 million), followed by healthcare ($43 
million), and manufacturing ($49 million) (Reference 
Table 3.) (DRNSW, 2023b). 
Main businesses include Breakout River Meats, an 
agricultural enterprise that processes high quality lamb, 
pork, and beef products for the Australian domestic 
market (Breakout River, 2014). Brumby Aircraft Australia 
is another notably Cowra-based business. They design 
and manufacture aircraft, as well as install hard-to-
source aircraft parts (Brumby Aircrafts Australia, 2024). 
Brumby Aviation has plans to expand its manufacturing 
plant and develop an international pilot training 
academy in Cowra (Cowra Council, n.d.). Cowra airport 
continues to grow, with the Council constructed 21 
lot subdivision almost sold out to a variety of general 
aviation operators. FlyOz has expanded its pilot training 
operation and the NSW Rural Fire Service has located 
its regional office operations at the Cowra airport. 
Other businesses within the Cowra LGA includes JGW 
Harvesting, Fred Fahey Aerial Services, Beecher Wool 
Services, Cowra Concrete Products, K-Line Agriculture, 
and Geronimo Farm Equipment, who produce high 
quality farm equipment. 
2.1.3.	 Cowra
Snapshot
The Cowra Council LGA is in Central NSW, 
approximately one hour drive from Orange. It has a total 
population of 12,705 and an area of 280,878 hectares 
(ABS, 2021a; ABS, 2021c). The Cowra LGA includes the 
township of Cowra (the main centre) and the villages 
of Darby’s Fall, Wyangala, Woodstock, Wattamondara, 
Gooloogong, Noonbinna, Billimari, and Morongla. 
The Cowra Prisoner of War (POW) Camp site is a top 
heritage site in NSW (Cowra Council, n.d.). It was 
constructed in 1941-43 to house Italian POWs captured 
by allied forces during WWII. By December 1942, 
over 2,000 prisoners (mainly Italian) were housed in 
the camp, and in 1943 and 1944, over one thousand 
Japanese prisoners arrived. A mass breakout of over 
1,000 Japanese occurred in 1944, the biggest in British 
and Australian War History (Cowra Council, n.d.)
As a result, Cowra has historical ties to Japan and 
Italy, represented through the Avenue of Cherry Trees, 
the Cowra Japanese Garden, War Cemetery, and the 
Sakura Matsuri Festival. Cowra also prides itself on 
its accepting community and celebration of different 
cultures, annually hosting the Festival of International 
Understanding. Cowra also celebrates different cultures 
through the Cowra Regional Art Gallery which offers 
exhibitions, events, and educational activities to engage 
the community and visitors (Cowra Council, n.d.)
The ‘agriculture, forestry, and fishing’ industry accounts 
for 16.3% of Cowra’s employment (ABS, 2021a), with 
agricultural commodities in Cowra generating over $217 
million in gross value (ABS, 2022a). These commodities 
include horticulture, sheep and lamb, cattle, grains and 
other crops.

21
Figure  9  Socio-economic summary of the Cowra LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)
COWRA

22
As a regional hub, there are several government 
departments, and government-funded businesses that 
provide employment and drive industry growth. The 
head office of DPIRD is located in Orange; along with 
the Orange Agricultural Institute of Research and an 
office of the Orange Rural Assistance Authority (RAA) 
(DPI, n.d.b). Orange also hosts a regional office for NSW 
Department of Education and Service NSW.  
Orange hosts Charles Sturt University who among 
other disciplines provide tertiary education in 
health, dentistry, and agriculture. The University 
of Sydney’s School of Rural Health and NSW TAFE 
also have campuses in Orange (TAFE NSW, 2024). 
These education institutions leverage expertise 
through industry collaborations, attract students 
from surrounding areas, and help to retain young 
people in the region. Other businesses include 
LiveBetter (NDIS and aged care provider), Catholic 
Healthcare, Green Homes, Uniting (aged care), and 
Ron Finemore Transport (Think.Orange Region, 2019). 
A demographic and socio-economic summary 
of the Orange LGA is provided in Figure 10.
Orange’s already successful and growing gourmet 
restaurant and café culture and internationally 
recognised wine industry has fostered the city’s 
reputation as a ‘food capital’. Orange’s value of 
agricultural commodities produced in 2020-21 totalled 
over $15 million, with fruit and nuts, wine, and nurseries 
accounting for $3.9 million (26% of the value of all 
agricultural commodities produced in Orange) (ABS, 
2022a). Other attractions and events include the Orange 
Regional Museum, the Orange Harmony Festival, its 
numerous parks such as Cook and Robertson Parks, 
F.O.O.D. Week, the Orange farmers market, and the 
Botanic Gardens (Orange City Council, n.d.a).
Industry summary
Orange businesses are diverse in nature, and benefit 
from sizeable facilities and business premises, a skilled 
workforce, and a large catchment area. Orange’s 
economy is stimulated from mining in neighbouring 
Blayney Shire (Cadia Mine), gastrotourism from its and 
Cabonne’s food and wine production, healthcare, public 
administration, manufacturing, education, and training 
(Think.Orange Region, 2019). 
Orange has a significant healthcare industry and 
provides services to many parts of the Central and 
Western parts of NSW. Orange Health Service is the 
regional trauma centre for the mid-west and the largest 
hospital in the Western NSW Local Health District (NSW 
Government, 2024b). The hospital has five operating 
theatres, 12 beds in the critical care unit, and provides 
education through its affiliation with the University of 
Sydney, Charles Sturt University, and the University 
of Wollongong (NSW Government, 2024b; Hospitals 
Accommodation, 2024).). Also located on its campus 
is the Central West Cancer Care Centre, a Ronald 
McDonald House, and the Bloomfield Hospital that 
provides inpatient and outpatient treatment for mental 
health, drugs, and alcohol (NSW Government, 2024b). 
2.1.4.	 Orange
Snapshot
Orange City Council is part of the Central West and 
is almost entirely surrounded by the Cabonne LGA. 
The Orange LGA covers 28,422 hectares and has a 
population of 43,512 people; the smallest land size of 
the five LGAs but the largest population (ABS, 2021a; 
ABS, 2021c). 
The area surrounding Orange has a rich mining past; 
in 1851 William Tom found the first payable gold in 
Australia at Ophir (Orange City Council, n.d.a). The 
mining of gold in and around the region brought great 
wealth to the area. The fertile land in the area coupled 
with its reliable rainfall allowed Orange’s development 
to continue beyond the goldrush. By the 1860s, the 
Orange area was well known as the granary of the 
west. Today, Orange’s largest industries of employment 
include health care and social assistance (20.8%), 
education and training (9.6%), and retail trade (9.6%) 
(ABS, 2021a). 
Orange serves as a regional city and a strategic 
centre that provides people in the surrounding rural 
communities’ access to quality health, aged care, and 
community services and facilities. Orange markets 
itself as a family-friendly community that is affordable 
and convenient (Orange City Council, n.d.a). Orange 
City Council is currently in the process of re-vitalising 
its Central Business District (CBD) with the FutureCity 
project. The three-year plan will attract visitors and new 
businesses into the CBD and bolster its role as a key 
service provider of central NSW (Orange City Council, 
n.d.a). Orange’s population is growing, with a 7.9% 
increase between 2016 and 2021 (ABS, 2021c).

23
Figure  10	 Socio-economic summary of the Orange LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)
ORANGE

24
Stockcrete, 2024). Grenfell Commodities is a locally 
owned, family operated business employing 9 people 
(Grenfell Commodities, 2024). They provide milling 
operations and are a supplier of stockfeed. Additionally, 
they commissioned a muralist in 2018 to transform 
the four silos on the corner of West Street and South 
Street which are part of the Silo Art Trail (Grenfell 
Commodities, 2024).
There are numerous business services and mining 
engineering and construction businesses in the LGA, 
including those working at or delivering services for 
the Lake Cowall open pit gold mine in the neighbouring 
LGA of Bland (Evolution Mining, 2024). The main 
industries apart from agriculture are health care and 
social assistance, education and training, construction 
and manufacturing (RDA Central West, 2021). The 
Newell Highway connects Victoria and QLD. Grenfell 
is approximately midway between Melbourne and 
Brisbane, just east of the Newell Highway, and is a 
popular stop for caravan, campervan and motorhome 
communities (NHPC, 2024). 
Year-on-
Year growth 
2011–2020
Gross Value 
Added 
(GVA) 
2020 ($m)
Visitor 
spend 
in 2020 
($m)
Agriculture
+7.8%
$594
NA
Mining
-2.8%
$159
NA
Tourism
+1.8%
NA
$72
Energy generation 
(including renewables)
+4%
$159
NA
Table 4  South West Slopes (includes Weddin LGA) industry growth, 
industry value add, and visitor spend (DRNSW, 2023c) 
A demographic and socio-economic summary of the 
Weddin LGA is provided in Figure 11.
in 2020-21 totalled over $186 million, with wheat the 
dominant commodity produced, accounting for 44% of 
gross value (ABS, 2022a). Further detail is provided in 
Table 4.
Weddin has low unemployment rate of 1.4%, but a 
decreasing population with a -1.5% change between 2016 
combat its decreasing population, Weddin Shire Council 
is attempting to adjust its 2011 Local Environmental 
Plan (LEP) to increase opportunities for more residential 
development (Weddin Shire Council, 2023). 
Industry summary
Of the five LGAs, Weddin had the smallest population in 
2021 at just 3,601 people (ABS, 2021a). According to the 
Weddin Shire Council’s Community Strategic Plan, the 
community wants to grow the total resident population 
to more than 4,700 people by 2027 to support local 
employment and business (Weddin Shire Council, 
n.d.b). Specifically, Weddin wishes to expand specialist 
retailers, manufacturing, agri and eco-tourism (farm 
stays and tours), and see the region promoted as a place 
to live, work, and invest (Weddin Shire Council, n.d.b). 
The Shire has a strong gold mining history, boasting that 
the Grenfell goldfields were the richest gold fields in 
NSW during the late 1860s (Weddin Shire Council, n.d.a). 
Presently, there are a number of agribusinesses 
including Delta Agribusiness who have an office in 
Grenfell and employ 60 full-time agronomists across 
NSW and Victoria (Delta Agriculture, n.d.). Bromar 
Engineering is a family owned and operated business 
established in 1990 which employs 30 local people 
(Bromar Engineering, n.d.). They provide farming 
products and equipment. Conron Stockcrete are another 
local family-owned business who have a state-of-the-art 
manufacturing facility in Grenfell, delivering precast 
concrete products for agricultural use across NSW, 
Victoria, South Australia and Southern QLD (Conron 
2.1.5.	 Weddin 
Snapshot
The Weddin LGA is in the mid Central West and is 
bordered to the east with the Cowra LGA. The Shire is at 
the crossroads of the major thoroughfares from Sydney 
to Adelaide and Brisbane to Melbourne, and thus 
can play a strategic role in attracting people passing 
through. The Weddin LGA covers 341,486 hectares 
and has a population of 3,608 (ABS, 2021a; ABS, 
2021c). This includes the towns and villages of Grenfell, 
Greenthorpe, Caragabal, Bimbi, and Quandialla. 
Weddin is centred around and derives its name from the 
Weddin Mountains. The mountain is of great significance 
to the Wiradjuri people and local residents and reaches 
400 metres above the surrounding landscape. The 
Weddin Mountains National Park receives over 25,000 
visitors annually, making it the most popular tourist 
attraction in Weddin (Weddin Shire Council, n.d.b). 
In recent years there has been investment in community 
facilities such as the Grenfell Main Street Renewal 
project, Weddin Shire entry signs, major upgrades to the 
New Forbes Road and Pullabooka Road, Library, Aquatic 
Centre, Taylor Park, and sporting amenities that all 
residents can access and enjoy (Weddin Shire Council, 
n.d.a). It is a culturally rich, vibrant, and inclusive 
community. The area hosts a number of events including 
the Henry Lawson Festival of Arts, Weddin Mountain 
Muster, and the Light up the Night festival (see case 
the community, with the Council improving its social 
media presence, introducing Council Mobile Hubs, and 
offering ‘reducing social isolation’ grants (Weddin Shire 
Council, n.d.a).
The region’s largest employer is the ‘agriculture, 
forestry, and fishing’ industry (32.7%) (ABS, 2021a). 
The gross value of agricultural commodities produced

25
Figure  11	 Socio-economic summary of the Weddin LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)
WEDDIN

26
The ‘agriculture, forestry, and fishing’ industry also 
contributes to the economy by serving as the largest 
industry of employment for four of the five LGAs (ABS, 
2021a). In Weddin, it accounts for 32.7% of employment, 
and Cabonne 17.3% (ABS, 2021a). 
The Central West region lies within the Murray Darling 
Basin. The topography is diverse and characterised by 
wide valleys, floodplains, and numerous Darling River 
tributaries (NSW Government, 2021). Rainfall across the 
region is fairly uniform throughout a year (see Figure 
25).
The diversity of production includes wheat, canola, hay, 
barley, vegetables, fruit and nuts, wine and nurseries 
(ABS, 2022a). Livestock production also constitutes a 
significant portion of agricultural production (16% of 
gross value). A large portion of land is used for livestock 
grazing (802,532 hectares), with Blayney having a total 
of 179,150 sheep and lamb and 52,085 cattle (around 
2,000 of those were used for dairy) (ABS, 2022a). Cereal 
crops including wheat and canola are the dominant 
crops produced in the region followed by other grazing 
crops for cattle and sheep. Improved grazing accounted 
people locally (Culture maps for Central NSW, 2023). 
In addition, situated beneath the Lachlan River Bridge 
in the Cowra area are the Cowra Bridge Pylons. These 
pylons are adorned with Aboriginal Murals, which depict 
the historical significance and cultural heritage of the 
Wiradjuri inhabitants of this region (Culture maps for 
Central NSW, 2023). These spaces serve as windows 
into the deep-rooted history and cultural significance 
of the Wiradjuri people, embodying their continued 
presence and contributions to the region.
2.3.	Agriculture
The area’s climatic conditions coupled with 
improvements in research and technology, has made 
the Central West region a considerable contributor 
to Australia’s agricultural production. The 2021 ABS 
census valued the region’s gross agricultural production 
at $769 million for 2020-21 (ABS, 2022a). Figure 12 
provides a detailed breakdown of this production 
by commodity.
2.2.	First Nations People
The Central West LGAs are steeped in the history of the 
Wiradjuri people, who are the Traditional Custodians 
of the land, water, and sky. Spanning from Central 
Tablelands on the western side of the blue mountains 
to the semi-arid Central West Plains, Wiradjuri Country 
holds stories and connections that transcend time. 
Wiradjuri people continue to care for Country in 
 this area. 
Despite social and cultural challenges prevalent today, 
Wiradjuri culture has continued to thrive. The resilience 
of these First Nations people is evident in their ongoing 
connection to the lands, waters, and sky. Over the years, 
much knowledge about Wiradjuri heritage has been 
passed down, researched, and recorded, providing a 
glimpse into their enduring culture.
Today, several locations around Orange and 
neighbouring LGAs offer valuable insights into 
Wiradjuri heritage, culture, and Country. Visitors can 
pay homage at the gravesite of Yuranigh, a Wiradjuri 
figure recognised for his exemplary courage, honesty, 
and unwavering loyalty (Culture maps for Central 
NSW, 2023). Educational opportunities are available 
through Aboriginal Culture Tours and Education 
Services, located within the central regions of the 
Orange, Blayney, and Cabonne Shires. These tours, 
guided by Wiradjuri knowledge keepers, offer a deeper 
understanding of traditional practices, tools, and 
narratives loyalty (Culture maps for Central NSW, 2023).
Visual displays are a focus of expression for the 
Wiradjuri people in this area. A collaborative project 
within the Orange City Centre has resulted in the 
establishment of a Gathering Space. This space features 
eleven distinct animal totems, each representing the 
diverse language groups of the region. The Gathering 
Space serves as a testament to the significance of 
community and interconnectedness for the Wiradjuri 
$769.1
m
Wheat 
157.9m
Canola 
65.6m
Other crops 
48.7m
Hay 
64.8m
Vegetables 
33.6m
Livestock products 
121.4m
Cattle and Calves slaughtered 
109.9m
Sheep and lambs slaughtered 
89.7m
Other slaughtered (pigs, poultry) 
14.2m
Other (fruit and nut, nurseries, wine) 
63.3m
Total 
769.1m
2%
8%
12%
14%
9%
21%
6%
8%
4%
16%
Figure 12: Gross value of agricultural commodities produced within the 
LGAs of Blayney, Cabonne, Cowra, Orange, and Weddin 2020-21 (ABS, 
2022a).

27
The region’s current railway infrastructure includes the 
Orange Broken Hill Railway line that links Sydney to 
Orange Railway Station via Blayney, Milthorpe, Spring 
Hill, and Lucknow Railway Stations (Transport for 
NSW, 2023). At Orange, the railway network splits and 
heads either northwest to Dubbo, or west to Parkes. 
These railway networks service both passenger and 
freight trains (DRNSW, 2023a). Many of the other 
towns within the five LGAs were previously part of the 
railway network, with stations at Grenfell, Carcoar, 
Mandurama, Borenore, Molong, Cumnock, and Eugowra 
(NationalMap, n.d.). Today, they are no longer in use, with 
some serving as a base for local community groups, 
motor clubs, and as tourist trains. Between 2018-2023, 
$1.1 million was invested on Milthorpe Railway station 
upgrade (DRNSW2023a). The inland rail corridor passes 
through the western side of the Weddin LGA.There are 
also private railway operators such as the Manildra 
Group who operate their own rail yards and rolling stock 
and transport produce to port (Manildra Group, n.d.). 
The region stands to benefit from new energy 
transmission infrastructure as part of the Central-West 
Orana Renewable Energy Zone (REZ) (Infrastructure 
Australia, 2022). Additionally, the Flyers Creek Wind 
Farm is in the Blayney and Cabonne LGAs (Iberdrola 
Australia n.d.). Construction began in April 2022, and it 
is expected to be operational in 2024. It comprises 38 
wind turbines, access tracks, local road infrastructure 
upgrades, electrical connections, and powerlines. Once 
operational, it will generate approximately 450 gigawatt 
hours of electricity per year and provide 6-8 permanent 
jobs. (Iberdrola Australia n.d.).
2.4.	The region’s infrastructure
Infrastructure including road, rail, air, and 
telecommunications can influence a community’s 
ability to thrive. The services available contribute to the 
attraction of industry to the region.  
The Mid-Western Highway serves as a key road in and 
out of the region. It stretches between Bathurst (NSW), 
and Hay (NSW), passing through Blayney, Carcoar, 
Cowra, and Grenfell. The Mitchell Highway spans the 
south western regions of Queensland and terminates 
in Bathurst. It passes through Molong and Orange City 
Centre, with a heavy-vehicle diversion around the town. 
Bathurst is connected to Sydney through the Great 
Western Highway. The road network serves as critical 
infrastructure for the regions’ connectivity. For example, 
in Cabonne, out of 6,525 employed persons aged 15 
years and over, only 20 used at least one form of public 
transport to commute to work (bus, train, tram, ferry) 
compared to 4,461 people who travelled to work by 
car (ABS, 2021a). The road network also enables the 
movement of freight, connecting the region to major 
markets in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane. 
The region is connected via regional airfields near Cowra 
and Orange. Orange Regional Airport accommodates the 
movement of air freight and provides daily passenger 
connections with Sydney. Between 2018-2023 over $2.5 
million has been invested in Orange Airport upgrades 
and $0.1 million on Cowra airport entrance upgrades 
(DRNSW, 2023a; DRNSW, 2023b).
for the highest land-use type within the region. 
Agricultural commodity prices and profit can affect 
drought sensitivity. In years of high crop prices, drought 
risk tends to increase as farmers plant more crops and 
apply more inputs in order to maximise potential profits. 
This can however expose farms to higher drought risk 
(ABARES, 2020). 
Previous research has shown that larger agricultural 
farms tend to be less sensitive to drought than smaller 
farmers, and farms with managers less than 50 years 
of age are also generally less sensitive to drought 
(ABARES, 2022).
Water security has been at the forefront of challenges 
faced by the agricultural sector in Central West. It 
is recognised that there is a growing need to build 
resilience through improved water management and 
infrastructure. Significant and on-going investigation 
into water security projects for the Central West 
continues with agencies across all levels of government 
working together. In early 2024 funding was announced 
to complete a Final Business Case for the augmentation 
of Lake Rowlands. Without increased water security, the 
greater Central West region would be unable to fulfil its 
full agricultural production potential and could face an 
average loss in economic uplift of $167 million each year 
(Infrastructure Australia, 2022).

28
Digital connectivity and mobile coverage within the 
five LGAs rely on telecommunications infrastructure. 
Geographic features such as hills or mountains can 
affect coverage (Telstra, n.d.a). In recognition of 
the importance of digital connectivity, the Federal 
Government’s Mobile Black Spot Program was launched 
in 2015 (Telstra,n.d.b). The Program’s goal was to expand 
mobile coverage in regional and remote Australia. 
Across the five LGAs, 18 projects have been funded 
and completed through the Black Spots Program 
(NationalMap, n.d.). 
Telstra is the main mobile network service provider 
across the region, with Figure 13 displaying the 
predicted likely areas of outdoor 4G coverage (Telstra, 
n.d.a). Figure 13 shows that Telstra’s 4G mobile network 
covers a significant portion of the Central West region, 
however some gaps still exist. Telstra’s newest mobile 
network technology ‘5G’ covers the towns of Orange, 
Cowra, Canowindra, and Grenfell, and their older mobile 
network technology ‘3G’ is set to be discontinued mid-
2024 (Telstra, n.d.a). 
 Figure 13  Central West Telstra 4G mobile map network coverage (Telstra, n.d.a).

29
The region has 7 public hospitals: Blayney District 
Hospital, Canowindra Soldiers Memorial Hospital, 
Eugowra Memorial Multipurpose Service, Molong 
Health Service, Cowra Health Service, Orange Health 
Service (Hospital) and Grenfell Multi Purpose Service 
(AIHW, 2024a) that offer varying levels of service to 
their communities. There are also two private hospitals 
in Orange: Orange Private Centre and Dudley Private 
Hospital (AIHW, 2024a). Additionally, located on the 
same campus as Orange Health Service are Bloomfield 
Hospital which provides specialised psychiatric services, 
the Central West Cancer Care Centre and a Ronald 
McDonald House which provides accommodation and 
support for seriously ill children.
Recent investments (since 2018) to further increase 
health services within the region include the Cowra 
Hospital redevelopment (over $110 million), the Molong 
Multipurpose Health Service ($15 million) and the 
Canowindra HealthOne Facility ($5.5 million) (DRNSW, 
2023a; DRNSW, 2023b).
As shown in Section 2.1.5, nearly 30% of Weddin’s 
population is over the age of 65. In all other LGAs, with 
the exception of Orange, over 20% of their population 
is over the age of 65%. The average for NSW is 17.7%. 
All LGAs have a range of aged care services however, 
in most cases demand for services outstrips supply. 
A number of the LGAs note this as a challenge for 
retaining residents in the area (where there are not 
appropriate health and aged care services available). 
Project 
Estimated 
project value (m)
Charles Sturt University Rural 
Medical School and Regional 
Health Institute (Orange)
$40
Glasshouse facilities at the 
Cowra Agricultural Research 
Station
$2.3
Country Universities Centre 
Cowra
$1.27
Milthorpe Primary School 
upgrade (Blayney)
$20
Bletchington Primary School 
upgrade (Orange)
$25
Orange Anglican School 
expansion
$5.2
Grenfell TAFE Connected 
Learning Centre
$4
Table 5  Education investments in the region between 2018- February 
2023. Source: DRNSW, 2023a; DRNSW, 2023b; DRNSW, 2023c
2.5.2.	 Health and aged care
The region is facing significant challenges to deliver 
healthcare services, including workforce attraction and 
retention, a growing and aging population, and an overall 
increased demand for high quality healthcare services 
(Infrastructure Australia, 2022; DRNSW, 2023a). 
2.5.	The region’s services
2.5.1.	 Education
The LGAs within this plan are home to a range of 
services for the benefit of their individual communities. 
The following provides a summary of these services. 
Education is one of the key services offered within the 
region; the Regional Economic Development Strategy 
identified Orange, Blayney, and Cabonne as having a 
comparative advantage in education service delivery 
based on employment numbers in the sector (DRNSW, 
2023a). Across the five LGAs, there are over 50 primary 
and high schools (Australian Schools Directory, 2024). 
There are three NSW Tafe Campus’s in Orange and 
one campus each in Cowra and Grenfell (TAFE NSW, 
2024). Orange also hosts Charles Sturt University and 
a University of Sydney campus (Rural Medical School) 
in Orange (TAFE NSW, 2024). Additionally, several 
not-for-profit organisations and charity’s support 
education pathways. For example, Verto is a Registered 
Training Organisation and provider of the Australian 
Government’s Australian Apprenticeship Support 
Network Program. Their support extends to 15,721 
participants across Australia (Verto, 2024). Verto are 
located in Blayney, Cowra and Orange. 
With the region experiencing accelerated population 
growth and a higher number of young people compared 
to the NSW average, there is a growing demand for 
education services (DRNSW, 2023a; DRNSW, 2023b). 
Since 2018, the region has received significant private, 
commonwealth, state, and local funding as detailed 
in Table 5.

30
2.5.3.	 Housing
Housing availability and affordability is another factor that can indicate a community’s resilience. The region is 
argued to have affordable housing (cost advantage) compared to NSW. Table 6 depicts indicators of mortgage 
and rent affordability across the five LGAs (ABS, 2021a). Compared to NSW, each LGA has a lower percentage of 
households with mortgage repayments more than 30% of household income, and each LGA has a lower percentage 
of households with rent payments more than 30% of household income (Table 6). Moreover, Blayney, Cabonne, 
Cowra, and Weddin exhibit higher rates of dwellings that are owned outright (40%, 45%, 44%, 51% respectively) 
compared to only 32% in NSW (Table 7). This may indicate that the region experiences better housing affordability 
compared to broader NSW. 
Blayney
Cabonne
Cowra
Orange
Weddin
NSW
Mortgage repayments more than or 
30% of imputed household income (%)
10.8%
12.4%
9.4%
10.0%
9.2%
17.3%
Rent payment more than 30% of 
imputed household income (%)
26.3%
23.3%
30.3%
29.4%
24.5%
35.5%
Table 6  Mortgage and rent affordability indicators for occupied private dwellings (2021 Census) (ABS, 2021a)
Blayney
Cabonne
Cowra
Orange
Weddin
NSW
Total occupied private dwellings (2021) 2,763
4,913
5,081
16,183
1,500
2,900,468
Dwellings owned outright
1,108 (40%) 2,187 
(45%)
2,225 
(44%)
4,983 
(31%)
769 (51%)
914,537 
(32%)
Dwellings owned with a mortgage
959 (35%)
1,693 
(34%)
1,355 
(27%)
5,454 
(34%)
369 (25%)
942,804 
(33%)
Dwelling rented
600 (22%)
767 (16%)
1,274 (25%) 5,269 
(33%)
274 (18%)
944,585 
(33%)
Table 7  Total number and tenure type (owned outright, owned with a mortgage, and rented) of occupied private dwellings 2021 (ABS. 2021a).

31
Despite this observed cost advantage, housing availability within the region has decreased due to population growth, 
increased demand for housing, and residential building approvals not keeping pace with demand (DRNSW, 2023a). 
Table 8. displays the number of buildings approved and their value, with Orange exhibiting the highest number of 
approvals.
Blayney
Cabonne
Cowra
Orange
Weddin
NSW
Total dwelling units (no.)
32
73
44
222
3
54,636
Total value of private sector 
dwelling units ($m)
15
38
20
102
3
24,521
Table 8  Building approvals and values (year ended 30 June 2022) (ABS, 2021a).
The decreased housing availability has reduced housing affordability within the region (DRNSW, 2023a). The median 
house price between June 2018 and June 2022 increased by 73% in Orange, 67% in Blayney, 26% in Cabonne, and 
45% in Cowra (DRNSW, 2023a; DRNSW, 2023b) with the residential vacancy rate in the region for Cabonne, Blayney 
and Orange reducing from 2.7% March 2020 to 0.7% in August 2022 (Figure 14). Moreover, the region also has a lower 
estimated price-to-income ratio than the average for NSW. This means that continuous increases in housing prices 
will place pressure on housing affordability and pose challenges in attracting and retaining workers. 
Figure 14  Orange, Blayney and Cabonne residential vacancy rates and residential building approvals, 2018-2022 
(Reproduced from DRNSW, 2023a, pg21)

32
2.7.	 Land use 
Land use is largely determined by climate. The Central 
West broadly experiences a temperate climate with 
warm/mild summers and cool/cold winters. The region 
has four distinct seasons throughout the year. The 
summer climate is ideal, with warm days and cool nights. 
Winters are cold with frosts and occasional snow. 
Table 10 shows that the consortium of Blayney, Cabonne, 
Cowra, and Weddin LGAs have a total land holdings 
area of 1,192,000 hectares, with land use dominated 
by agricultural production (94%) (ABS, 2022b). The 
land use is reflective of dryland agriculture, with the 
2020-21 census finding that 67% (803,000 hectares) 
of the region was used for grazing and 27% (322,000 
hectares) was used for cropping (ABS, 2022b). Of land 
used for grazing, 581,000 hectares was used for grazing 
on improved pastures and 221,000 hectares for other 
grazing. Land used for cropping was dominated by 
wheat (148,000 hectares), canola (52,200 hectares), and 
hay production (40,100 hectares) 
(ABS, 2022b). 
LGA
ADII score
Difference 
Blayney
70.5
-2.7
Cabonne
70.3
-2.9
Cowra
66.6
-6.6
Orange 
72.4
-0.8
Weddin
64.4
-8.8
Table 9  Digital inclusion index by LGA
All the LGA’s are in deemed digitally included based on 
scoring between 61-80. When considering the national 
data and considering age, disability and income levels 
and employment there are also noticeable differences in 
the data highlighting the need to consider these groups 
when considering interventions. 
Interrogating this data and over the last couple of years 
and it can be observed that these scores are improving 
and the ability to access, afford and digital abilities are 
improving over time. 
2.6.	Digital Inclusion 
Connected digital technologies have changed the way 
we live, learn, and work. In such a context, being able to 
access, afford, and effectively use digital technologies 
had never been more important to participating fully 
in society. While digital transformation is generating 
social, cultural, and economic benefits for many 
Australians, these benefits are not shared equally. The 
premise of digital inclusion is that everyone should 
be able to make full use of digital technologies and 
the benefits they bring, while avoiding their potential 
negative consequences. Participation in an increasingly 
digital economy and society requires a combination of 
technical and financial resources and specific skills and 
knowledge. To understand the distribution of digital 
inequalities across the country, the Australian Digital 
Inclusion Index brings together measures of our access 
to the internet and digital technologies, our capacity 
to pay for these things, and our ability to use digital 
technologies skilfully.
Table 9 presents the digital inclusion index for each of 
the LGA’s in the Plan. 
The higher the score, the greater the level of 
digital inclusion. ADII scores are relative: they allow 
comparisons across different social groups, different 
geographic areas, and over time. Each of the Index 
dimensions – Access, Affordability and Digital Ability 
– are equally weighted to derive the total Index score 
(National Digital Inclusion Index, 2020).

33
Land use (hectares, main land use)
Blayney 
Cabonne
Cowra
Orange
Weddin
Region Total
Total area of holding
155,368
456,989
251,844
21,784
306,226
1,192,210.9
Agriculture
151,758
427,438
238,008
19,885
282,127
1,119,215.8
Grazing (all)
140,486
335,012
170,033
17,866
139,136
802,532.6
Grazing improved
121,156
232,317
143,334
13,553
70,865
581,225.4
Grazing other*
19,330
102,695
26,699
4,312
68,271
221,307.3
Cropping (all)
12,575
84,997
77,832
2,954
143,231
321,587.8
Cropping wheat
3,033
35,549
32,147
674
76,343
147,745.8
Cropping Canola
2,119
10,385
12,156
182
27,316
52,158.4
Cropping Hay
3,935
13,420
14,711
1,488
6,550
40,104.3
Cropping Other 
3,487
25,643
18,817
610
33,022
81,579.24
Not agriculture
4,682
23,691
6,677
1,027
10,848
46,925.4
Conservation/protection purposes
2,470
15,756
3,106
706
6,426
28,464
Other areas not used for agriculture
2,212
7,935
3,571
321
4,422
18,461
*’Grazing other’ refers to land used for grazing on native pastures or unimproved land, whereas ‘grazing improved’ refers to land used for grazing on pastures that have been improved, such as the use of non-native grass species. 
Table 10  Land use for Blayney, Cabonne, Cowra, Orange, and Wedding LGA (ABS, 2022b).

34
Agricultural production in the region is largely dryland. 
Blayney has 155,368 hectares of agricultural land, 
almost exclusively dryland (ABS, 2021a). Cowra has 
251,844 hectares of agricultural land, with only 4,775 
hectares irrigated (ABS, 2021a). Cabonne has an area of 
456,989 hectares of land under agricultural use, and 
Weddin has 306,226 hectares of land used mainly for 
agriculture (ABS, 2022b). 
Farm drought risk varies significantly across agricultural 
commodities, with cropping farms more sensitive to 
drought than livestock farms (ABARES, 2020). This 
is because crop yields are directly linked to weather 
conditions, whereas livestock producers can smooth 
impacts over multiple years through increased turn-off 
(sales) of livestock in drought years (ABARES, 2020). 
As a result, the percentage of land devoted to crops is 
a key driver of drought sensitivity and risk. Cropping 
constitutes 321,587 hectares of land across the five 
LGAs in the Central West, accounting for 28.73% of 
the agricultural land use - a significant allocation that 
contributes to drought sensitivity and risk for the region 
(ABS, 2022b). 
The area also contains protected lands that are used for 
recreation, culture, and ecological conservation. Blayney 
has a total of five protected land areas, covering a total 
of 238 hectares (ABS, 2021a). Cabonne has a total of 
nine protected land areas, including four national parks 
and four nature reserves, with a total protected area of 
43,828 hectares (ABS, 2021a). Cowra has one national 
park, one nature reserve, and ten other protected land 
areas, covering a total of 7,245 hectares (ABS, 2021a). 
Weddin is comprised of three national parks, and nine 
other protected land areas for a total of 11,494 hectares 
protected (ABS, 2021a).

35
•	 A $10 million investment for the Cowra region for the 
Billimari Bores and Pipeline project to enhance water 
security (DRNSW, 2023b). Further information on this 
project can be found in section 4 – Local stories of 
resilience.
•	 The NSW Government invested $577,500 for 
Cabonne Shire Council to accelerate important 
investigative works that will determine the best 
infrastructure options to help build drought resilience 
for its residents (Barker, 2023). 
The above-named water security investments highlight 
the criticality of water security for the region further 
supported by the what we heard information in Appendix 
A which captures some of the sentiment from the most 
recent drought. 
The following dams are the major water storages in 
the Plan area Wyangala Dam has a capacity of 1,217 
GL Carcoar Dam has a capacity of 36 gigalitres (GL) 
and Lake Rowlands 4500 megalitres (ML), Suma Park, 
Spring Creek and Gosling Creek Dams Blackmans 
Swamp Creek and Ploughmans Creek stormwater 
harvesting schemes.  
During the 2017-2020 drought most communities in the 
region were on the highest levels of water restrictions 
and water sharing plans governing water management 
for the Macquarie, Belubula and Lachlan Rivers were 
restricted under certain circumstances Recycled water.
In recognising the impact of the most recent drought 
and the importance of water security across the region, 
several investments have been made across the LGA 
to investigate and progress action to increase drought 
resilience. These include:
•	 The Central West Water Security Project helped 
ensure availability of water for Cabonne and 
Orange via a pipeline from Molong to Orange 
(DRNSW, 2023a).
•	 The NSW Government has invested $5.5 million to 
connect Cowra and the CTW systems. This project 
includes the installation of new infrastructure – 
including a pump station at Woodstock, a reservoir 
at Carcoar Water Treatment Plant, and upgrading 
Cowra’s inlet system. It will deliver regional water 
infrastructure to connect major storage dams with 
communities across the region, enabling water to be 
shared when supplies hit critically low levels 
(Barker, 2023) 
2.8.	The Region’s water
Water resources within the Central West are supplied 
from a range of sources including the Macquarie and 
Lachlan Rivers, Council owned and operated dams, 
Central Tablelands Water (CTW) as well as groundwater 
networks across the region. These sources are used 
to meet the needs of communities, industry, the 
environment, and agriculture. 
The Lachlan and Belubula Rivers are some of the key 
water features that flow through the region. With 
the Lachlan passing through the town of Cowra. 
The Belubula joins further downstream just east of 
Goologoong. The Macquarie River also intersects the 
Plan area near the boundary Orange LGA. The Bell River 
intersects the town of Molong in the Cabonne LGA.
Crucial water infrastructure including the Wyangala 
Dam in the Cowra LGA, and the Carcoar Dam and 
Lake Rowlands in the Blayney LGA, supply water to 
towns, agriculture, the environment and industries 
(Infrastructure Australia, 2022). Central Tablelands 
Water (CTW) located in the Blayney LGA is the water 
utility provider for Blayney, parts of Cabonne and Cowra 
Shires and Weddin. CTW manage a large amount of 
the water supply for the region, however, a number of 
the local Councils within the region have responsibility 
for managing other town water supply dams within 
their LGA (CTW, 2019). Orange is able to access water 
from the Macquarie River via a pipeline under certain 
restricted circumstances. Along with a series of 
pipelines across the LGA which provide connection 
between most of the Councils included in this plan.

36
purposes (Conlon, 2021). Given the significant impact 
historic droughts have had on the region, not only its 
residents but also on agricultural industries, there has 
been a significant focus on water security for the region. 
As part of emergency response measures to drought in 
regional NSW, funding from the NSW government was 
awarded in late 2019. This $1 million was to complete 
a feasibility study for augmentation of Lake Rowlands 
capacity (CTW, 2019). In March 2024, $7.7 million in joint 
funding from the Federal and State governments was 
announced to complete the final business base that will 
consider (CTW, 2024):
•	 Raising the Lake Rowlands Dam wall to increase 
storage from 4.5 gigalitres to 8 gigalitres, securing 
water for CTW’s consumers and assisting Orange 
with their town water security needs.
•	 A new pipeline between Lake Rowlands Dam and 
Carcoar Dam which could transfer up to 2 gigalitres of 
water per year, capturing spills and boosting supply.
•	 Building a new dam 2.5 kilometres downstream of 
Lake Rowlands.
•	 Operational rules for an interregional pipeline 
connecting the Belubula and Macquarie Valleys.
The CTW system comprises two trunk mains which 
channel the water from Lake Rowlands to Carcoar Water 
Filtration Plant and Blayney Water Filtration Plant (CTW, 
2019). There are 306km of trunk mains and 267km of 
reticulated water mains through the region (Conlon, 
2021). In addition, there are seven bores that also service 
the region and provide an additional 7ML/day capacity 
(Conlon, 2021). In 2019, the total annual metered 
consumption for the region was 1667ML, with 784ML 
being used for residents, indicating that over 50% of 
the water usage in the region is for non-residential 
2.8.1.	 Central Tablelands Water
CTW is a major water supplier for the region. CTW has 
approximately 6,000 water connections and provides 
potable water for around 15,000 consumers across 
14 towns and villages (Blayney, Cudal, Mandurama, 
Canowindra, Eugowra, Millthorpe, Carcoar, Grenfell, 
Manildra, Cargo, Lyndhurst, Quandialla, Woodstock, 
Gooloogong) (CTW, 2019). CTW’s supply relies mainly 
on Lake Rowlands, which is situated in the Lachlan 
catchment (see Figure 16).
Figure 16  Central Tablelands Water area of operation. Source: reproduced from CTW, 2019

37
2.8.2.	 Groundwater 
The following maps depict the spread of groundwater 
water bores across the plan area. Noting much of this 
water is to supply agricultural needs from irrigation of 
grain and fodder crops, watering of stock and domestic 
supplies for households. 
Groundwater is used across the Plan area
CTW primarily utilises groundwater from the Lachlan 
and South Western Fractured Rock aquifer for its 
water supply, bores in Blayney, Gooloogong, Bangaroo, 
and Cudal drawing from this source (CTW, 2018). 
Figure 17  Lachlan Catchment Groundwater Vulnerability (NSW 
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, n.d.)
Figure 18 Macquarie Catchment Groundwater Vulnerability
Additionally, the Quandialla water supply system draws 
from the Lachlan inland alluvial aquifer, providing fresh 
water suitable for municipal use (CTW, 2018).
Within these groundwater areas there are certain 
areas of higher vulnerability due to characteristics of 
predominantly alluvial aquifers coupled with shallow 
water tables, high-moderate recharge potential and 
permeable soils which make them less reliable in the 
Lachlan Plan area these highly vulnerable sections are 
along the Lachlan River from Cowra through to Forbes 
and along the Belubula River as shown in Figure 17.
In the Macquarie catchment these highly vulnerable 
areas are located around Orange due to relatively 
high recharge potential and shallow water table in the 
fractured rock terrains (NSW Department of Climate 
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, n.d.), as 
shown in Figure 18.

38
Orange to Blayney and Carcoar via Millthorpe (P02) 
on the map) is an integral cog in the CTW Network. 
This pipeline, along with pumps, will enable the bi-
directional transfer of potable water. It will serve 
two operational components: regional water security 
and contingency. Water security will be ensured by 
sharing water resources between various sources, 
facilitating the transfer of water between Orange City 
Council and CTW as needed. Contingency measures 
will involve linking major water filtration plants to 
address plant failures or contamination within either 
water supply system. This pipeline is in its final 
stages of development, and will bolster Orange’s 
water supply, which has had issues historically. 
Forbes WTP to Parkes Reservoir pipeline already exists, 
but the pipeline connecting the WTP to Gooloogong 
(P06 on the map) is currently under development. 
The pipeline connecting Gooloogong to Grenfell was 
upgraded in 2019. 
Figure 19 outlines the major planned and existing 
water infrastructure in the region. Most of the Orange-
Molong-Cumnock-Yeoval pipeline connections (P01 on 
the map), have been developed, with the aim to connect 
the greater Lachlan system. The stretch from Molong 
to Manildra is still under development. The new pipeline 
would connect to the existing pipeline from Molong 
Creek Dam (Geolyse, 2016). 
2.8.3.	Water Infrastructure 
and key connections
The majority of the Local Councils within the plan 
area own and operate their own water infrastructure 
including water treatment plants, stormwater services 
and associated pipe infrastructure. CTW owns and 
operates the majority of existing infrastructure that 
connects various communities within the Plan area to a 
water service.   
Figure 19  Existing and planned water infrastructure pipelines (Geolyse, 2017).

39
To manage the severity of these events, the strategy 
identifies key focus points that should be targeted, 
these are:
•	 Reducing water supply risks for regional cities and 
rural and remote towns
•	 Supplying water to high priority needs in the west of 
the catchment and connected valleys
•	 Maintaining and improving river, floodplain and 
wetland health
•	 Addressing barriers to Aboriginal people’s water 
rights 
•	 Supporting a growing regional economy in a future of 
potentially reduced water availability.
Underpinning these focus areas are the priorities of 
ensure safe and reliable water supplies for growing 
regional cities and towns, reduce water security risks 
in the region’s west, support industry and community 
climate adaptation, and improve the health and 
resilience of natural systems.
To manage the severity of these events, the strategy 
identifies key focus areas, these are: 
•	 Improving water quality
•	 Sustaining the health and resilience of the region’s 
water dependent ecosystems
•	 Addressing barriers to Aboriginal water rights
•	 Supporting a sustainable and diverse 
regional economy
•	 Managing water resources during more extreme 
events for people, industry, and the environment
•	 Understanding flood risks to individuals, businesses 
and communities
Underpinning these focus areas are the priorities of 
building resilience to climate extremes, improving 
catchment health and supporting a strong and 
sustainable economy in a capped system. 
Macquarie–Castlereagh Regional Water 
Strategy (DPE, 2023b)
Future climate projections in the region suggest 
potentially lower average annual rainfall, but with 
less frequent yet more intense rainfall events. 
Evapotranspiration may increase by up to 5% by 2070, 
particularly in autumn and winter. Prolonged droughts 
could become more frequent, with a higher probability 
of extreme drought events. Median annual inflows into 
Burrendong Dam could decline significantly by 2070, 
particularly under the driest climate scenarios.
2.8.4.	 Regional Water Strategies
The Regional Water Strategies are designed to create a 
plan to manage the regions water needs for the next 20-
40 years. They set out a roadmap of actions to deliver 
five objectives: 
•	 Delivering and managing water for local communities
•	 Enabling economic prosperity
•	 Recognising and protecting Aboriginal water rights, 
interests, and access to water
•	 Protecting and enhancing the natural environment
•	 Affordability 
The five LGAs within this plan are covered largely by two 
regional water strategies, the Macquarie-Castlereagh 
(2023), and the (draft) Lachlan.
 Lachlan Regional Water Strategy (DPE, 2023a) 
The future climate in the Lachlan region could see a 
decrease in critical winter and spring rainfall with more 
rain in summer and autumn, leading to overall lower 
average annual rainfall. River flows may reduce, and 
evapotranspiration could increase by up to 5% by 2070. 
Inflows into major dams like Wyangala and Carcoar are 
expected to decline, resulting in lower storage levels. 
Additionally, droughts might become more frequent, 
and rainfall events could grow more intense.

40
Drought, climate and impacts
03

41
3.	Drought, climate 
and impacts 
Australia is the driest inhabited continent on Earth 
with one of the world’s most variable rainfall climates 
(AdaptNSW, 2024b; BoM, 2024a). This makes drought 
a defining feature of our history, with Australia 
experiencing severe drought on average once every 
18 years (NSW Government, 2024a). Around 90% of 
the rain that falls in Australia evaporates back into the 
atmosphere, and around 2% soaks into the ground to 
re-fill groundwater reserves (AdaptNSW, 2024b). That 
results in less than 10% as runoff which is NSW’s most 
important source of water for agriculture, urban water 
supplies and ecosystems (AdaptNSW, 2024b). Drought 
is set to have an increasing effect on the country as a 
result of climate change, with the frequency, intensity 
and duration of severe droughts expected to increase, 
particularly in inland areas of NSW (DAFF, 2024a).
3.1.	 What is drought?
Drought is defined as “a prolonged, abnormally dry 
period when the amount of available water is insufficient 
to meet our normal use” (BoM, 2024a). It is difficult 
to determine a start and end, or identify when the 
landscape has recovered. Droughts are difficult to 
predict or compare as they differ in the seasonality, 
location, geographic extent, and duration of the 
associated rainfall deficiencies. Both the Bureau of 
Meteorology and Kirono et al. (2020) define four types 
of drought: meteorological, agricultural, hydrological, 
or socioeconomic and town water supply drought as 
shown in Figure 20. 
Meteorological drought
A period of months to years of low rainfall. 
Agricultural drought
Short-term dryness in the surface soil layers
(root-zone) at a critical time in the growing season.
Hydrological drought
Prolonged moisture deﬁcits that affect surface or
subsurface water supply, reducing streamﬂow,
dam and lake levels.
Socio-economic drought
The effect of elements of the above droughts on supply
and demand of economic goods and human well-being.
Town water supply drought
A town water supply drought occurs when the supply
of water coming out of the taps is threatened or stops.
Figure 20  Types of drought (BoM, 2024a)

42
drought cycle provides protection from water and wind 
erosion, enabling water infiltration and soil carbon 
retention (DAFF and ABARES, 2023). Therefore, when 
ground cover is low, the environment is likely to be more 
sensitive to future drought events. According to DAFF 
and ABARES (2023), the LGAs of Blayney, Cabonne, 
Cowra, Orange, and Weddin struggled in severe drought 
years to maintain sufficient levels of ground cover, but 
otherwise typically met targets. 
3.1.2.	 Stages of drought
Used together, the indexes of the EDIS indicate the 
stage of drought (DPI, n.d.c). 
The six stages progress from a non-drought category 
where all indicators suggest good conditions for 
production, to recovery, through to a Drought Affected 
(weakening or intensifying) category, a Drought phase 
and into Intense Drought. The six stages are shown in 
Figure 21 below and current conditions for the LGAs are 
presented in Figure 22. 
Complementing the stages is detailed information on: 
•	 the technical and on-the-ground description of 
typical field conditions.
•	 a suggested on-farm response and
•	 a suggested advisory or policy response.
A key feature of EDIS is the development of DPIRD 
Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) (DPI, n.d.c). The CDI 
combines meteorological, hydrological and agronomic 
definitions of drought (above) using indexes for rainfall, 
soil water, and plant growth (DPI, n.d.c). From these, a 
fourth index, drought direction (DDI), is developed. EDIS 
is undergoing redevelopment to provide farmers with 
world-leading weather and climate data to enable better 
business decisions. It is important to recognise the CDI 
provides an aggregated view of NSW, and that on-
ground conditions can be different to those displayed 
in the maps. They provide an 'on average' view of a 
particular region only.
Figure 22 shows the current (May 2024) CDI across the 
five LGAs, and defines an area of NSW to be in a drought 
category if any of the indices (rainfall, soil moisture, 
modelled pasture/crop growth) fall below 30% when 
compared to historical records (DPI, n.d.c). Cabonne is 
predominantly considered drought affected, whereas 
Orange, Cowra, Blayney, and Weddin are largely not 
in drought. Each LGA contains small areas that are 
considered to be recovering from drought.  
Ground cover (total vegetation cover) is recognised 
as an important biophysical indicator of landscape 
health, function, and soil condition. Ground cover is 
influenced by historical weather conditions, a region’s 
natural resource management activities, and farming 
management practices (DAFF and ABARES, 2023). 
Higher levels of cover throughout every stage of the 
Drought affects all parts of the community; from 
agricultural producers and suppliers, to industry, First 
Nations People, and the broader community. Droughts 
are challenging times, with water intensive industries 
affected by a reduction in output and increased costs. 
The economic, social, and environmental impacts are 
not limited to these industries but extend to entire 
communities and regions. Local loss of production has 
flow on effects to the regional economy. Drought can 
also impact human and environmental health including 
impacts on nutrition, exacerbation of mental health 
issues, and ecological decline for flora and fauna 
(Steffen, 2015). 
3.1.1.	Drought monitoring in NSW
Drought monitoring over the years has become 
increasingly complex. The most common means of 
currently monitoring drought is through the Enhanced 
Drought Information System (EDIS) which is a publicly 
available drought monitoring tool that monitors seasonal 
conditions across NSW. The EDIS was launched in 
March 2018 with the second version launched in 
October 2022, and is used across government and 
farming stakeholders to build drought risk awareness, 
emphasise drought preparedness and improve 
confidence in drought monitoring and early warning 
(DPI, n.d.c).

43
3.2.	Historical drought in Central 
West
Climate anomalies, such as drought, are regularly 
observed occurrences in southern and inland Australia. 
NSW naturally goes through cycles of wet and dry 
conditions, however, over the past 40 years, average 
annual rainfall in NSW has decreased, leading to 
widespread droughts. This is due to climate change 
increasing temperatures and affecting rainfall and 
climate systems in NSW (AdaptNSW, 2024b; AdaptNSW, 
2024c). Throughout the years, Australia has experienced 
a range of droughts with differing durations and 
intensities, as outlined in Table 11.
Non drought phase
At least one indicator is above the 50th percentile.
1
Recovering phase
All indicators are below the 50th percentile but above
the 30th percentile.
2
Drought affected phases
Drought Affected Phases: one indicator is below the 30th
percentile and the rainfall is either negative or positive
over the past 90 days.
3
Drought phase
At least one indicator is below the 5th percentile.
4
Intense drought phase
All three indicators (rainfall, soil water, plant growth)
are below the 5th percentile.
5
Figure 21  Stages of drought in NSW (DPI, n.d.c)

44
Orange
Bathurst
Parkes
Cowra
Forbes
Wellington
Blayney
Carcoar
Lyndhurst
Grenfell
Molong
Canowindra
Pullabooka
Bribbaree
Burraga
Peak Hill
Eugowra
Manildra
Woodstock
Cudal
Cumnock
Yeoval
Weddin Shire 
Weddin Shire 
Cabonne
Cabonne
Blayney Shire
Blayney Shire
Orange City
Orange City
Cowra
Cowra
1
2
3
Legend
 Non Drought
 Recovering
 Drought affected
 Drought
 Intense Drought
Figure 22 The Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) for the Blayney, Cabonne, Cowra, 
Orange and Weddin LGAs in September 2024 (plus surrounding region) (DPI, n.d.c).

45
 Period
Duration
Characteristics
The Federation 
Drought
1895-1902
One of Australia's worst droughts. It had far-reaching implications for agriculture, water availability, and the economy, especially as the national wheat 
crop was lost. 
World War I 
Drought
1914-1915
Although relatively short, it had a significant impact because the severe drought conditions were occurring simultaneously in both southeastern and 
southwestern Australia. 
World War II 
Drought
1937-1945
Occurred frequently over eastern Australia, characterised by intense dry spells and breaks, similar to the Federation drought, but with more intermittent 
dryness. Isolated parts of NSW had record low rainfall, particularly the Central West. Major driver of the Black Friday bushfires in January 1939.
1965-1968 
Drought
1965-1968
Generally dry conditions for Australia, especially severe in NSW. 
1982-1983 
Drought
1982-1983
One of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th century, associated with a strong El Nino event. 
The Millennium 
Drought
1997-2009
The region experienced a prolonged dry period which led to water scarcity and agricultural challenges in the Central West. This drought event was 
particularly significant because of the contrast with a wet period in northern Australia and its absence of major wet episodes. Figure 22 displays this 
contrast. 
This may have been the first major Australian drought that was impacted by the changing climate, with temperatures higher than ever seen before. The 
Millennium drought ended with two of the wettest years on record for Australia in 2010–11 (Beard et al., 2011, National Climate Centre and BoM, 2012). 
The 2017-2020 
Drought
2017-2020
Following a wet period in 2016, this drought impacted the Central West as water restrictions had to be put in place, due to substantially below-average 
rainfall from 2017-2019. Suma Park dam fell to 27% capacity and Wyangala Dam fell to 8% capacity in February 2020 (DRNSW, 2023a; DRNSW, 2023b). 
Despite the falling dam levels, Cowra maintained high levels of water allocation, reflecting the regions resilience in drought periods (DRNSW, 2023b). Soil 
moisture levels in different regions hit unprecedented lows during this time. Overall, this drought led to disruptions in stock replenishments, low water 
supplies, increased food prices and led to many farmers being under significant financial pressure (DRNSW, 2023a). In June 2018, more than 99% of NSW 
was declared as affected by drought (AdaptNSW, 2024b). In 2019, Orange moved to Level 5 (Council Communications, 2019) water restrictions, in 2020 
the whole Central Tablelands Water Network was moved to Level 5 restrictions (CTW, 2020).
Table 11  Historical droughts which affected Central West (BoM,2024a)

46
(AdaptNSW, n.d.). In the Lachlan River, low water 
flows led to poor water oxygen levels and resulted in 
fish deaths (DRNSW, 2023b). Replenishment flows 
to rivers and creeks ceased and dam levels were 
extremely low, disconnecting water supplies to many 
small communities. This caused a massive disruption 
to agricultural supplies, including livestock and wheat. 
Alongside water supplies being restricted, prolonged 
hot days increased the incidence of illness and death 
among the vulnerable communities, including people 
who are older, have pre-existing medical conditions and 
those with a disability (AdaptNSW, n.d.).
The lasting effects of past droughts, including the 
Millennium Drought, serve as reminders for LGAs to 
have drought management plans in place and include 
the communities who are impacted to have a voice in 
future thinking and planning. It is important that these 
communities are well-prepared and resilient in the face 
of climate change and drought. Some of the initiatives 
and tools the region has been able to build and utilise 
in response to these past drought events and to help 
adapt and build resilience to future drought events are 
outlined in the case studies in Section 4.
In the Central West, 87.9% of businesses experienced a 
decrease in sales/revenue due to the drought conditions, 
with sales/revenue on average decreasing by 34%. 8.9% 
of businesses anticipated they would need to close or 
significantly scale back their business because of the 
drought, 56.9% reported that their business remained 
viable, and 34.1% reported that their business would 
be at risk if conditions deteriorated. (NSW Business 
Chamber, 2018). 9.4% of respondents in Central West 
felt that their business was very well equipped to 
mitigate risks associated with drought, 72.5% were 
moderately well equipped, and 18.1% were not well 
equipped (NSW Business Chamber, 2018).(Infographic to 
be created) 40.1% of businesses were ‘very concerned’ 
that the drought would affect their business in the long 
term, demonstrating the mental toll that drought causes 
businesses (NSW Business Chamber, 2018). 
Drought also impacts the natural environment in which 
people in drought-affected areas are heavily reliant on 
for their wellbeing and livelihoods. Water restrictions 
were introduced across all users of surface water 
in the Central West during the last drought, water 
restrictions were introduced due to the areas being 
declared at stages of emergency and severe drought 
Since the mid-1990s, southeast Australia has 
experienced a 15% decline in late autumn and early 
winter rainfall and a 25% decline in average rainfall 
in April and May (Whetton et al., 2015). The region 
has also experienced significant warming during the 
last 50 years (Timbal et al., 2015). This has led to the 
area experiencing a range of droughts throughout the 
years, with differing durations and intensities. The last 
two droughts have had a significant impact to Central 
West LGAs due to both the duration of the Millennium 
Drought (rainfall deciles shown in Figure 22) and the 
significant period of below average rainfall to the area 
during the 2017-2020 drought (shown in Figure 24) 
which placed the region in the very much below average 
rainfall range. It is estimated that total farm production 
in NSW contracted by 6% between 2017-2020 and that 
broadacre profits in 2020 were the lowest in 40 years 
(DRNSW, 2023b).
According to a 2018 survey by Business NSW (formerly 
the NSW Chamber of Business), 93.9% of businesses 
in Central NSW were impacted either directly or 
indirectly by 2017-2020 drought. 11.9% of businesses 
indicated they were only slightly exposed to drought 
conditions, 49.7% were moderately exposed, and 38.4% 
were highly exposed. Of those affected businesses, 
67.1% were affected due to the weakening of the local 
economy, 29.5% were a primary producer unable to 
sustain production, and 22.8% were impacted due to 
supplying directly to primary producers (NSW Business 
Chamber, 2018).

47
3.3.	Regional weather and climate
Australia’s natural climate is highly variable and experiences lower average 
rainfall and higher rainfall variability than most other nations (ABARES, n.d.b). 
Climate change refers to global, long-term shifts in average weather conditions, 
such as becoming warmer, wetter, or drier over several decades or longer. There 
is a growing body of evidence, driven by the work of CSIRO, BoM, DCCEEW 
NSW, that shows Australia’s climate has changed and continues to change 
significantly. Temperatures in Australia have risen by about an average of 1.47 
degrees (+ or - 0.24) (refer Figures 23 and 24) since national records began 
in 1910 and there is a high level of scientific confidence that anthropogenic 
greenhouse gas emissions are a major driver of this increase in temperature 
(CSIRO and BoM 2018; CSIRO and BoM, 2022). 
The distribution of rainfall throughout the year in the Central West is relatively 
consistent with an expected increase in rain in the winter months. The lowest 
temperatures are experienced in July with an average minimum temperature 
of 2°C. The highest temperatures are experienced in January with an average 
maximum temperature of 27°C, illustrated in Figure 25. 
Figure 24 Rainfall deciles in Australia during drought (2017 - 2019) (BoM, 2024a)
Figure 25  Average monthly rainfall and maximum and minimum temperature from January 1976 
to March 2024, Orange Agricultural Institute, Central West, NSW (BOM, 2024b). 
Figure 23  Rainfall deciles in Australia during the Millennium Drought (1997 - 2009) (BoM, 2024a)

48
As discussed in Section 3.1.1, DPIRD have established 
the CDI to aid in defining the various stages of drought. 
However, there are some meteorological trends that can 
be observed which can indicate drought and drought 
impacts. Lower than average rainfall coupled with 
higher than average maximum temperatures often over 
a prolonged period of time can result in drought. Figure 
26 and Figure 27 demonstrate this trend for some of the 
historical droughts that have occurred in the Central 
West Region. The figures have only been prepared 
for Grenfell and Orange LGAs as they have the most 
comprehensive set of meteorological data available.
Recent decades have seen trends towards lower 
average winter season rainfall in the southwest and 
southeast of Australia (Hughes et al., 2019). This 
reduced rainfall in the winter will have a direct impact 
on winter variety crop yields including Central West’s 
wheat, canola, and hay crops which form the three 
largest gross value cropping commodity products. 
Figure 27 illustrates the drying trend over 22 years in 
Southern Australia during April to October. 
Figure 27	 Historical trends in rainfall and temperature data from 1976 to 2023 for Orange (AWS Orange Agricultural Institute (063254)) 
(BoM, n.d.). Note: where there were gaps in available data, information was interpolated and graphed.	
Figure 26 	Historical trends in rainfall and temperature data from 1965 to 2023 for Grenfell (AWS Grenfell (Manganese Rd (073014)) 
(BoM, n.d.).  Note: where there were gaps in available data, information was interpolated and graphed.

49
3.4.	Future drought projections
Climate change is making drought conditions in southwest 
and southeast Australia worse. Climate change has 
contributed to a southward shift in weather systems that 
typically bring cool season rainfall to southern Australia. In 
addition to decreasing rainfall, climate change is driving an 
increase in the average temperature and in the intensity and 
frequency of hot days and heatwaves, leading to increased 
water losses and thus exacerbating drought conditions 
(Whetton et al., 2015). Figure 28 shows that due to the 
region’s agricultural dependence, the Central West will 
be highly sensitive to the impacts of a changing climate. 
Climate variability effects the Australian agricultural 
industries through variations in commodity prices, with 
trends of lower rainfall and drought related to lower farm 
profits (Hughes et al., 2019).
ABARES (2020) has assessed the drought risk by region. 
Figure 29 shows that the Central West region was at risk 
of a 141.8% (compared to the average of 51.3%) change in 
cropping farm profits between normal years to drought 
years (ABARES, 2020). This high drought risk is because 
the region has both a higher proportion of cropping activity 
(high sensitivity) and more variable climate (high exposure) 
(ABARES, 2020). 
Given the direct influence of drought on cropping activities 
and crop productivity many farms are financially impacted. 
Figure 30 shows farm profitability for the Central West 
Region from 1990 to the present. As can be seen the 
compounding impact of drought results in the greatest 
reduction in profitability towards the tail end of the drought 
period followed by a significant spike in profit. Given the 
regions strong agricultural industry it will be critical to 
continue monitoring the trends in farm profitability and the 
changing climate such that existing systems and services, 
including individual farmers, are financially prepared for the 
next drought.
Figure 28 	Southern Australia has 
experienced a drying trend during 
the growing season from 2000-2021 
(CSIRO and BoM, 2022).
Figure 29	 Estimated drought risk 
by region- farm profits. (source: 
ABARES, 2020)

50
The CSIRO’s My Climate View tool was used to analyse 
the impact of worsening climate change on temperature 
and rainfall for the Central West region. Through this 
tool, we can see how the region’s climate is predicted 
to evolve over time, using the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) representative concentration 
pathway (RCP) 8.5. Under this climate change scenario, 
three Central West LGAs have been chosen to represent 
the change in the number of heat damage days above 
35°C by 2030 and 2050. Orange LGA is predicted to 
have, on average, a 20% increase in days above 35°C 
by 2030, and a 50% increase by 2050, illustrated in 
Figure 31. Cabonne LGA is predicted to have on average 
a 33% increase by 2030, and an 89% increase by 2050, 
as shown in Figure 32. Cowra LGA is predicted to have 
a 33% increase by 2030, and a 74% increase by 2050, 
as illustrated in Figure 33. These figures also present 
two historical 30-year periods (in purple) to allow 
comparison across time. 
Warmer temperatures are contributing to longer 
droughts and harsher fire weather. This can make land 
unsuitable for agriculture, lead to crop stress and 
attract new pests (that thrive in warmer temperatures) 
(AdaptNSW, 2024a). This can impact the yield and 
quality of key agricultural commodities grown in the 
region, such as barley and grain. In addition to impacting 
grain yield, it adversely affects physical grain quality 
(weight and plumpness) and market value (AdaptNSW, 
2024a). The incidence of heat stress during grain filling 
is rising with global warming (Shirdelmoghanloo et 
al., 2022). Warmer temperatures and drought are also 
contributing to animal stress, decreasing production and 
increasing animal welfare issues (AdaptNSW, 2024a) 
in the area becomes more apparent, with less rain and 
higher evaporation rates, especially during the winter 
and spring months (Timbal et al., 2015). 
As part of the Climate Services for Agriculture FDF 
program, the CSIRO and BoM have developed My 
Climate View, a digital product designed to help 
Australian farmers understand what the future climate 
might mean for their location. My Climate View provides 
primary producers and their advisers with past climate 
data, seasonal forecasts and future climate projections, 
tailored to various agricultural commodities, from meat 
to grains to horticulture and many more (DAFF, 2024c). 
Primary producers can therefore more easily assess 
how climate factors that matter to their business could 
change into the future. For example, a wheat producer 
can see how the timing and intensity of seasonal rainfall 
in their region might change over time and how that 
might impact the way they farm (DAFF, 2024c). 
There is high confidence that global temperatures 
will continue to rise for many decades, mainly due to 
greenhouse gases produced by human activities (NASA, 
2024). This will exacerbate climate extremes already 
experienced and worsen the duration and effects of 
drought in Australia. A reduction in winter rainfall leads 
to a proportionately greater (1.5 to 4 times) reduction in 
surface water runoff and groundwater recharge (Walker 
et al., 2021). 
Time spent in drought is projected to increase in the 
future across Southern and Southeast Australia (Climate 
Council, 2018). The five LGAs are part of two climate 
clusters, Central Slopes and Murray Basin, the majority 
within the Murray Basin (Whetton et al., 2015). Future 
climate change projections suggest that the Central 
Slopes and Murray Basin will experience more time in 
drought and more intense drought, especially in the east 
(Kirono et al., 2020). In the Murray Basin there is high 
confidence that soil moisture will decline as drought 
Figure 30  Historical trends in farm profitability for the Central West Region. (ABARES, n.d.a).

51
Figure 31 Change in number of hot days across Orange City (source: My Climate View, 2023).
 Figure 33 Change in number of hot days across the Cowra Shire (source: My Climate View, 2023).
Figure 32 Change in number of hot days across the Cabonne Shire (source: My Climate View, 2023).

52
Utilising projections from Murray Basin Cluster report (Whetton et al., 2015), Central Slopes Cluster Report (Ekström et al., 2015), the My Climate View Tool (My Climate View, 
2023), and Drought Projections for Australia (Kirono et al., 2020), the following findings relating to critical drought indices are presented in Table 12 below. 
Critical variables 
Details 
Average temperature 
Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons (very high confidence). By late in the century (2090), for a high emission 
scenario (RCP8.5) the projected range of warming is 2.7 to 4.5 °C.
Extreme temperature
More hot days and warm spells are projected with very high confidence. Frost risk days (minimum temperatures under 2 °C) are 
projected to decrease across the cluster (high confidence) and could halve by late in the century.
Average rainfall 
Less rainfall is projected during the cool season, with high confidence in 2090.
There is medium confidence that rainfall will remain unchanged in the warm season. For the near future natural variability is projected 
to dominate any projected changes. 
The magnitude of projected changes for late in the century (2090) span approximately -40 to +5 percent in winter and -15 to +25 
percent in summer for a high emissions case (RCP8.5).
Intense rainfall events
High confidence that the intensity of heavy rainfall events will increase
Evapotranspiration
Projections for potential evapotranspiration indicate increases in all seasons, with largest absolute rates projected with high 
confidence in summer by 2090.
Standardised Soil Moisture Index (SSMI)
There is high confidence in decreasing soil moisture in the southern regions (particularly in winter and spring) driven by the projected 
decrease in rainfall and higher evaporative demand (Whetton et al., 2015). Changes are larger in 2090, with simulated decreases of up 
to 15 % in winter in Southern Australia. 
Percent time spent in drought and extreme drought 
(Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI) is less than -1) 
(calculated as the fraction of the time in drought over 
a given period)
There is medium confidence that the time spent in meteorological drought will increase. 
Within the drought metric the projected median percent time was a significant increase. In the south region, the ranges of uncertainty 
all tended to be above the baseline level, indicating a high model agreement on the increase.
Drought and extreme drought duration 
(defined as the number of events in a given period)
For drought duration, little change is projected in moderate and severe drought but an increase for duration in extreme drought.
Drought and extreme drought frequency (measures 
the average length (in months) of drought events 
in a given period)
There is medium confidence that the frequency of extreme drought will increase over the course of the century under RCP8.5.
Drought and extreme drought intensity (reflects the 
average of cumulative SPI or SSMI from all events. The 
more negative the value the more intense the event.)
The multi-model median indicated that under climate change, Australia will spend more time in intense drought, particularly across 
southern and eastern Australia.
Table 12  Climate projections for critical variables

53
These megatrends create the potential for 4 major 
scenarios in regional Australia in 2040 that can create 
either positive or negative impacts 
1. Global Niche 
Economic Impact: Communities may experience 
economic growth due to specialisation in high-demand 
industries. However, this could lead to job losses in 
traditional sectors due to automation.
Social Dynamics: Wealth may concentrate among 
industry leaders, leading to increased inequality. 
Communities could face challenges in retaining youth as 
they migrate to urban centres for diverse opportunities.
Infrastructure and Services: There may be heightened 
demand for advanced infrastructure and services to 
support the specialised industries, potentially straining 
local resources.
2. Fast and Flexible
Innovation and Employment: This scenario fosters 
a vibrant economy with diverse job opportunities, 
particularly in technology and services. Communities 
could become hubs of innovation, attracting talent and 
investment.
Cultural Vibrancy: Increased population and economic 
activity may enhance cultural and social life, leading to 
stronger community ties and engagement.
Challenges of Rapid Change: The fast pace of change 
could result in displacement of traditional industries and 
create challenges for those unable to adapt, leading to 
social tensions.
•	 Higher evapotranspiration, an increase of around 5% 
by 2070 (DPE, 2023a; DPE, 2023b). This has impacts 
on soil moisture, water availability and therefore crop 
growth. 
•	 Decrease in water inflows in the region, increasing the 
risk of dam levels falling below critical levels (DPE, 
2023a; DPE, 2023b). This has significant impacts on 
water security. 
This information is combined with the resilience 
framework and helps to inform the actions included in 
this plan, to ensure they are building resilience in the 
region.
3.6.	Future scenarios
Aside from future climate scenarios the strategic 
foresight for regional Australia: Megatrends, scenarios 
and implications illustrates 5 megatrends that are 
anticipated to impact regional communities in Australia. 
Aside from future climate scenarios the strategic 
foresight for regional Australia: Megatrends, scenarios 
and implications illustrates 5 megatrends that are 
anticipated to impact regional communities in Australia 
(Taylor, 2017) These include: 
•	 Disruptive automation which has the potential to alter 
job landscapes
•	 Growing significance of the Asia-Pacific market which 
influences trade and investment opportunities
•	 Increased demand for cleaner energy reflecting 
changing global priorities
•	 Higher educational attainment which is driving the 
growth or knowledge-based economies and 
•	 Technical advancements in communication 
and transportation. 
3.5.	Future climate scenario
The previous sections have highlighted the main factors 
that may affect the region, in terms of a changing 
climate, in the coming years, and some of the impacts 
of these challenges. To enable a more focussed 
approach to drought resilience planning, a summary 
of the predictions and the impacts these may have are 
provided below:
•	 An increase in the average temperature and in the 
intensity and frequency of hot days and heatwaves, 
leading to increased water losses and thus 
exacerbating drought conditions (Whetton et al., 
2015). Warmer temperatures also contribute to longer 
droughts and harsher fire weather as well as increase 
animal stress. This can make land unsuitable for 
agriculture, lead to crop stress and attract new pests.
•	 Changing rainfall patterns; by 2070 a reduction in 
average annual rainfall between 10-15% but with 
more intense rainfall events, with a decrease in winter 
and spring rainfall and an increase in summer and 
autumn rainfall (DPE, 2023a; DPE, 2023b). This may 
impact growth, ability to plant/harvest and increase 
erosion. 
•	 Increased rate, length and severity of droughts; there 
is increased potential for droughts that persist for 
more than 10 years and increased chance of events 
similar to the 2017-2020 drought going from a 1 in 
1,000-year event to a 1 in 50-year event (DPE, 2023b). 
Primary producers are usually able to weather a 
drought for 2-3 years, however long-term droughts 
and increased frequency will likely push more off 
the land.

54
3.7.	 Summary of drought 
related impacts
The impact of droughts and the magnitude of such 
impacts is a function of exposure to drought, the 
sensitivity of the community, and the adaptive 
capacity of the community (ABARES, 2022). Due to the 
interconnection and interaction between the community, 
economy, and environment, the impacts of drought 
can be both direct and indirect, with wide-reaching 
effects. Drought impacts were identified through 
the drought literature reviewed as a part of the plan 
development. This long list of drought impacts was 
then tested with members of the stakeholder reference 
group who were asked to add to this list and then rate 
each of the impacts in relation to the effect on their 
community which produced a priority ranking for each. 
This provided a customised view of the impacts that 
most greatly affect the communities within which the 
plan operates. Some of this prioritisation is provided in 
Section 5. Figure 34 shows that these impacts were then 
categorised into three components of social, economic 
and environmental. When considered together, these 
components form the foundations of drought resilience 
as they highlight vulnerabilities. It is important when 
considering impacts to note that droughts are difficult 
to predict in their duration and severity and due to these 
differences, impacts differ between drought events. 
Figure 34 details the impacts identified either through 
literature (and confirmed as relevant to the region by the 
stakeholders) or by the stakeholders. A key document 
for gaining an understanding of drought impacts in 
the region and generally was the 2022 Southern NSW 
Innovation Hub ‘Baselining Drought’ report. Other 
specific references are provided.
3. Natural Advantage
Resource Utilisation: Communities may benefit from 
sustainable practices that leverage local resources, 
potentially improving resilience against climate change.
Community Cohesion: A focus on local strengths can 
foster community pride and cohesion, as residents 
engage in sustainable practices and local governance.
Economic Vulnerability: Despite the advantages, 
communities might struggle with competitiveness and 
productivity, risking long-term economic viability if they 
cannot adapt to changing market demands.
4. Holding Ground
Stagnation and Decline: Communities may face 
economic stagnation as traditional industries decline, 
leading to job losses and reduced investment.
Population Challenges: Outmigration of youth could 
exacerbate demographic challenges, resulting in an 
aging population and reduced community vitality.
Social Issues: The lack of growth may lead to increased 
rural poverty and social isolation, with communities 
becoming more vulnerable to external shocks like 
climate change and economic downturns.
These megatrends will significantly impact the regions 
resilience to drought through economic, social and 
environmental factors. Understanding these interactions 
is key in developing effective actions to improve 
resilience to drought and will shape the capacity 
of each community to withstand and recover from 
drought. Suggesting that resilience measures should 
be considered not just alongside drought but also in the 
context of the potential future state.

55
Social
Economic
Environment
•	 Impacts on farmers’ mental health in rural communities during 
drought (Abunyewah et al., 2023). As drought becomes more 
severe, the risk of suicide can increase by up to 15% for rural 
males aged 30 to 49 years (AdaptNSW, 2024b). 
•	 Consequences of exposure to extreme or prolonged climatic 
events such as drought can lead to delayed disorders including 
posttraumatic stress or transmitted to later generations 
(Cianconi, Betro and Janiri, 2020). 
•	 Impacts on children’s mental health from observing the impact 
of drought on their families, declining animal welfare and 
reduced educational opportunities.
•	 Access to suitable mental health services and education to 
support the community.
•	 Changes in attendance at school.
•	 Impact to the social fabric of the community. 
•	 Reduction in volunteering numbers and fatigue amongst 
those existing volunteers. 
•	 A loss of local service provision including health care due to 
the reduction in population that underpin the community. This 
also impacts post-drought population and employment. 
•	 Government responses receive mixed support due to 
eligibility loopholes, arduous application processes, and 
perverse impacts.
•	 Positive social impacts of locally organised, government (or 
locally) funded community activities that rallied communities.
•	 Anxiety, distress, and unrest among First Nations Peoples 
communities from observing the deprived landscapes, 
perishing animals, and drying water systems.
•	 Women’s roles may be impacted by drought. For example, they 
may have to find other off-farm work to support farm incomes 
or forego other paid jobs to provide much needed cost-saving 
labour on farms (Lester, et al., 2022). 
•	 Drought impacts on human health, including dust storms 
affecting respiratory health. 
•	 Climate change exacerbating drought impacts on human 
health. Water storage facilities such as dams, necessary 
to manage droughts, at a higher risk of bacterial and algae 
growth given warmer waters. 
•	 Increased pressure on the local economy from reduced 
cashflow from the agricultural sector. 
•	 Reductions in discretionary spending on non-essential services.
•	 Loss of businesses, workers, and families from the community 
from prolonged drought.
•	 Reductions in tourism to retail and food businesses and 
smaller centres that don’t have large tourist attractions.
•	 Reduction in business and investor confidence.
•	 Financial stress on agricultural and regional businesses 
through decreased production, reduced incomes, increased 
expenditure, and increasing debt levels.
•	 Reduced business confidence for investors.
•	 Critical labour shortages post-drought in both agriculture and 
broader industries.
•	 The burden of financially recovering from previous droughts 
limits some businesses from taking advantage of non-drought 
conditions, restricting their ability to improve resilience 
for the future. 
•	 Droughts can affect domestic food prices and export earnings 
(Climate Council, 2018). 
•	 Reduced groundcover (tree die-back), pasture and topsoil 
which exacerbates wind and rain related soil erosion 
(LLS, n.d.). 
•	 Greater habitation of some animals into regional centres, for 
example, kangaroos.
•	 Reduced water availability to both agriculture and the 
community. Especially those businesses without a permanent 
water supply. 
•	 Concerns with the ability to gain access to water (equity).
•	 Water quality issues, for example, salinity.
•	 Threat of other natural disasters such as bushfires 
(Abunyewah et al., 2023) and dust storms.
•	 Reduced access to water for the environment.
•	 Impacts to culturally significant sites for First Nations Peoples.
•	 Reduction in bush tucker and medicine.
•	 Post-drought, farmers can be slow to restock due to the need 
to give pastures time to recover and limited access to capital.
•	 Post-drought, kangaroo numbers increase sharply.
•	 Decline in water bird, fish, and aquatic plant populations, as 
well as decreases in terrestrial plant and animal populations 
(Climate Council, 2018). 
•	 Drought has negative environmental changes that accumulate 
over time. Climate change exacerbates land degradation, 
creating a reinforcing feedback loop between climate change, 
land degradation and drought (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2019)
•	 Risks of parasites and worm infestations. A number of 
conditions occur more commonly when drought-feeding, 
especially when livestock are congregated on small areas due 
to drought-feeding situations. 
•	 Climate change is likely to make the environmental impacts 
of droughts more frequent and severe (DPE, 2023b). Warming 
temperatures are predicted to increase evaporation from 
waterbodies and evapotranspiration from plants, overall 
reducing the availability of surface water. Climate change, 
including changes in climate patterns such as El Nino and the 
Indian Ocean Dipole, will affect the frequency and magnitude 
of rainfall events over NSW. 
Figure 34 - Summary of the key social, economic and environmental impacts experienced in the Central West region during the past drought

56
04
Listening to local experience

57
4.	Listening to local experience
4.1.	 Local stories of resilience 
The communities of Central West have forged their own pathways to improve their resilience. 
The following case studies have been developed to showcase the activities and initiatives 
across the LGAs.

58
Case study – Blayney Men’s Shed Walk
The Blayney Men's Shed walk is not just a simple stroll, it helps towards building resilience within the community. The local men 
gather at the designated meeting point, sharing news and laughter, they forge connections that combat isolation, a common foe 
for men's wellbeing.
The walk itself is a leisurely exploration of Blayney's streets on Sunday morning. The slow pace allows for conversation, fostering 
camaraderie and trust. Men share experiences, offering support without judgment. This open dialogue promotes mental health 
awareness, creating a space to confront challenges and anxieties.
Along the way, local knowledge is exchanged as men point out sights of interest. This connection to place and history fosters 
a sense of belonging, a vital source of strength. The walk culminates in a barbecue breakfast back at the shed, where the 
conversations continue. But it is more than just food. It is a chance to showcase projects, seek advice, and build a supportive 
community. 
Each Tuesday and Friday the rhythmic clatter of saws mingles with laughter, a heartwarming symphony of collaboration. The 
Men's Shed transforms into a vibrant hub, not just of activity, but of resilience.
By weaving together physical activity, social connection, and a sense of community, the Blayney Men's Shed tackles a crucial 
aspect of resilience: the power of belonging. It fosters a supportive network, equipping men to face life's challenges with 
newfound strength.
Source: I. Tooke, personal communication. 
Blayney

59
Case study – Blayney Pilot Farm
Angullong, the Crossing family property, stands as an innovative example of the power of smart 
farming in building resilience against drought. Nestled near the Belubula River, this unique 
property pursues a diversified income stream by combing wine grapes with cattle grazing. 
Angullong served as a pilot smart farm in 2020-21 as part of the Farms of the Future Program. 
The Farms of the Future Program is being delivered by the NSW Department of Primary Industries 
and aims to facilitate tech-enabled production through improved connectivity and installation of 
sensor equipment. During the program, Angullong was a leader in how innovation can empower 
farmers to navigate the cyclical challenges of drought. 
The smart farm was powered by a robust network of agricultural technologies that improved 
water management. Water monitoring systems – the biggest labour-saving innovation according 
to James Crossing – tracked stock tank levels and river flow. This real-time data, especially crucial 
during dry seasons and times of drought, allowed for informed decisions to ensure water security 
for their cattle operations. Previously, manual monitoring of river levels in steep terrain was 
challenging and time-consuming. 
Furthermore, the pilot smart farm was able to monitor soil moisture, providing valuable insights for targeted water delivery to crops, while weather and crop data 
collection empowered proactive planning and resource allocation. The focus on precision agriculture optimised water usage and minimised waste, advancing Angullong’s 
resilience to drought. 
The benefits of the smart farm extended beyond water, with Wi-Fi connectivity across the property allowing for dependable data transfer and remote monitoring. This 
improved cattle tracking and well-being, while security and farm safety management systems provided an extra layer of protection. 
Angullong demonstrates how smart farming can empower agricultural businesses to build resilience against droughts and other challenges. However, since the pilot 
farm concluded and funding support withdrawn, Angullong has faced affordability and longevity challenges. With 3G set to be removed by mid-2024, weather station 
technology will be obsolete and require replacing (at a high cost). This highlights how technology must be designed to prioritise longevity, adaptability, reliability, and 
affordability to build long-term drought resilience. It also highlights the role that funding support can play in building on-farm drought resilience through technology 
adoption.   
Source: Baguley, 2021; DPI, n.d.d.; J. Crossing, farm owner, personal communication 
Blayney

60
Case study – Central West Equestrian and Livestock Centre Sports Facility Upgrade
The establishment of the Central West Equestrian and Livestock Centre (CWELC) has created 
a regional hub for equestrian and livestock events in the Blayney area in addition to a drought 
proofing opportunity.
In 2019, the facility had two major projects, being the construction of the Central West Equestrian 
and Livestock Centre and the Blayney Showground Drought Resilience Enhancement Project. 
The CWELC was a $2.2 million grant funded project to develop an undercover, 80m x 50m 
purpose-built facility for equestrian and livestock events. As the only undercover facility in the 
region, Blayney has the capacity to host large regional events in addition to User Groups normal 
training and club days. The facility and improvements have attracted a series of new large events 
to the Shire including the National All Breeds Junior Heifer Show, the Bucking Bulls Australia 
National Finals and Tom Curtain’s 'Nothin's Gonna Stop Us' Tour. These events have had continued 
flow on benefits to the Blayney Shire visitor economy and benefitted many of the town and 
surrounding village businesses. The facility also becomes a safe and secure hub during natural 
disasters including future droughts and bushfires. 
To take advantage of the large facility being built in 2019, the Blayney Showground Drought Resilience Enhancement Project was established. The Drought Resilience 
Project provided the capability to harvest water from the CWELC to the nearby Dam for storage. Water is reticulated via pipes and pump system and for top up storage of 
the large Bore Water Tank. This provides drought proofing measures for the showground main arena irrigation system, providing water for dust suppression on the new 
and existing sand arenas and livestock water via troughs in the Cattle Pavilion, Equestrian and general livestock handling areas.
A Blayney Showground MasterPlan has also been endorsed providing Council with a roadmap for future additions pending grant funding opportunities. Some of the 
ongoing projects include additional camping areas, permanent cattle yards, undercover day yards, outdoor fenced arena and a stable block complex. 
Source: Blayney Shire Council, 2020; B. Reynolds, personal communication; M. Rodd, personal communication
Blayney

61
Case study – Blayney Rotary Club
Blayney’s Rotary Club showcases the power of volunteers to support a region during times 
of drought. The Blayney Rotary Club meets every Wednesday at the Blayney Golf Club 
where members socialise and plan actions to serve the Blayney community. The most 
recent drought motivated the club to assist those doing it tough – utilising the Rotary 
network across Australia, the Blayney Club compiled pre-paid visa cards, petrol cards, and 
Christmas hampers that included basic supplies and toiletries. While this bolstered the 
resilience of individuals and their families to deal with the impacts of drought, recipients 
were also encouraged to spend visa cards locally. This meant that money was cycled 
through the community and strengthened broader economic resilience of the area. 
During the time of drought, the club also joined up with the local family-owned supermarket, 
Bernardi’s, to support relief to families who were facing hardship. The funding from Bernardi’s through their Building Stronger Communities Program for community 
groups occurs every six months and is decided through community voting. Every six months, three community groups - who are identified as in-need of financial support - 
are nominated. Shoppers can submit a vote for their preferred group every time they make a purchase. At the end of the six-month cycle, each community group receives 
a proportion of the funding through the supermarket. In addition to encouraging local spending, this initiative supports the resilience of other community groups who play 
a pivotal role in providing community connection and delivering services.
The Blayney Rotary Club demonstrates the critical assistance that charity and service organisations through their volunteers offer during a drought, highlighting how 
support networks are an essential component of resilience. 
Source: Rotary International, n.d.; I. Tooke, Secretary, Blayney Rotary Club, personal communication 
Blayney

62
Case study – Farmers Helping Our Own 
‘Farmers Helping Our Own’ empowers rural, regional and remote communities across Australia 
to create localised support networks during times of severe adversity. Core to the mission, is 
ensuring farmers and their families have the confidence and tools to check in on their mates and 
those in the wider community, to provide support when its needed most. It is driven by the very 
people within the community, who understand the challenges faced within the industry. 
At its essence, these workshops are about farmers helping their own, being proactive and 
mitigating the decision-making paralysis during adverse times. The initiators of this workshop 
are Stuart Austin and Gem Green, with logistics and planning support from House Paddock 
Consulting’s Bec Fing and Heidi Smith. 
The decision to put together a roadshow of mental health workshops was about being proactive 
at a time when everything can feel like it's out of our control. Historically and now, the farming 
industry has poor statistics with mental health issues such as anxiety, depression and suicide, 
fundamentally FHOO seeks to proactively ‘step ahead’ of this before the impacts became really significant. These workshops are designed for people living in rural and 
remote areas to develop practical strategies for decision making in challenging times, keeping communities together and building mental health resilience.
Each session is run to align with local needs and be guided by participant involvement. The workshops will be supportive and in an open space, to foster a sense of 
community and encourage individuals from all walks of life who regularly communicate with those in the farming community to come forward and have a seat. 
The workshops provide an opportunity for those who regularly engage with farmers and the rural community to listen and learn how to best support them when they need 
it most. There are unique challenges faced by farm businesses, particularly in the context of severe adversity, such as drought, floods and challenging trading conditions. 
More specifically, the sessions delve into identifying warning signs and asking important questions about how to facilitate better support with the community.
Driven by the community, ‘Farmers Helping Our Own’ is an effort to create lasting resilience. The program is hosted in collaboration with key mental health support 
organisations including Rural Adversity Mental Health Program and TIACS which is a free counselling service.
“TIACS is thrilled to facilitate support for our farmers and their communities on the ground, delivering these crucial rural workshops,” says Jason Banks Co-CEO of TIACS.
Source: Workshops for mental health resilience in the bush - The Farmer Magazine and Gem Green.
Blayney

63
Case study – Blayney Bore Network: A Sustainable Approach to Drought Resilience 
Blayney's innovative bore water system provides a crucial source of water during dry periods, 
alleviating pressure on strained surface water resources and household tanks. Residents can 
access water from strategically located bores across the LGA for a minimal fee. A key system is 
used to manage usage and restrict access with residents having to pay a deposit and annual fee to 
access the water source.
The bore water serves as a reliable backup during droughts. The network is not intended for 
potable, commercial, or agricultural operations, but rather small-scale use such as garden 
maintenance and to supplement stock water. This reduces reliance on often-restricted surface 
water sources and assists to maintain stock welfare.
Access to bore water empowers residents to maintain their gardens during droughts, preserving 
property values. It also reduces water bills – less water needs to be purchased and transport 
costs are minimised. Knowing they have a secondary water source fosters mental resilience 
among residents during droughts. The bore network contributes to a sense of community 
preparedness and self-sufficiency during drier conditions. 
The Blayney system prioritises responsible water management. Occasional water quality testing 
ensures the bore water remains suitable for its intended use. The Council monitors extraction 
rates to maintain aquifer health and implements sustainable management practices. The scheme 
was originally put in place in the 1980’s under a Commonwealth drought scheme, and some parts 
have recently been upgraded, including some new water tanks and piping. 
Source: Blayney Shire Council, 2021; B. Reynolds, personal communication
Blayney

64
Case study – Seeds for Success Podcast and Wongalee Farm
Seeds for Success is a podcast by the Central West Local Land Services to share stories of 
farmers from the region. The podcast has covered everything from how people got through 
droughts, to the pros and cons of corporate farms and managing lambing ewes and creep feeding 
cattle. Hear from farmers in the Central West area, battling the elements, making tough calls, and 
getting the job done. 
“The nature of farming means that producers are often working the land rather than getting 
together and sharing information. They are also modest in their own achievements and how 
they have managed to overcome challenges or improve production” says Brennan who hosts 
the podcast. 
One of the podcast episodes features the Morse’s who operate a family farm ‘Wongalee,’ near 
Molong, a 1,094-hectare cattle breeding and trading enterprise. In pursuing trading, they 
realised they can look after their country better. They talk about their whole farm system with 
sustainability in mind. Coming out of the 2019 drought, the Morse’s made the decision to destock 
and keep cattle off the grass to allow the ground cover to regenerate even though it meant losing 
3 years of production.
In pursing regenerative agriculture, they aim to have something that will grow all year around 
while also aiding production. They aim to remove undesirable ground cover and replace it with 
native species, noting that grasses help protect the soil surface. 
James believes whenever there is a problem there is an opportunity, you just need to change the 
way you look at it. 
Source: J. Morse and S. Morse, 2020; LLS, 2021
Cabonne

65
Case study – Recovery and Resilience Workshop
The Rural Financial Counselling Service NSW (RFCS NSW) presented a free workshop to the 
residents of Canowindra. The aim was to help farmers and small business owners with how to 
minimise the impacts of the loss of income due to natural disasters. The two-hour workshop 
was both interactive and practical and aimed to provide attendees with information both about 
financial and mental health resilience. The financial aspect of the workshop aimed to teach locals 
how to better plan and manage finances. 
“I have seen so many farmers struggle with their cash flow due to these ongoing impacts. I 
am excited to bring the workshop to Parkes and to have the chance to help address some of 
the issues with locals and provide them with contacts and support networks,” said local Rural 
Financial Counsellor, Danielle Davenport. 
Source: Canowindra Phoenix, 2024
Cabonne

66
Case study – Woodfired Eugowra 
Woodfired Eugowra is more than just an afternoon of merriment; it's a vibrant celebration of the 
Eugowra region itself. Stepping beyond entertainment, the event showcases the rich tapestry 
of the area's history, agriculture, and indigenous culture. Visitors and locals alike can immerse 
themselves in this unique heritage through captivating demonstrations and informative displays.
This spirit of community extends throughout the festivities. Live music fills the air, creating a 
backdrop for bustling markets brimming with regional crafts and local produce. Food vendors 
tempt taste buds with an array of delectable offerings, while toasty fire buckets provide a warm 
and inviting atmosphere for gathering and sharing stories. The aim, after all, is to provide a truly 
special afternoon for the people of Eugowra and its surrounding communities.
This celebration wouldn't be possible without the tireless efforts of Cabonne Council and 
Eugowra Events and Tourism. Their dedication ensures a smooth-running event filled with 
unforgettable experiences. A highlight each year is the awe-inspiring replica gold coach, a 
testament to the region's fascinating past and a guaranteed crowd-pleaser. Woodfired Eugowra 
also fosters a platform for regional artists and vendors, allowing them to showcase their talents 
and wares, further enriching the connections between community members and visitors.
Source:  Forbes Advocate, 2023
Cabonne

67
Case study – Cabonne Balloon Festival 
The Canowindra International Balloon Challenge, organised by Canowindra Challenge 
Incorporated, is a major event not just for Australia but for the entire Southern Hemisphere. It 
boasts the title of the biggest hot air balloon event in the region.
The festival's signature event, the Cabonne Community Glow, is a dazzling display of light and 
music. After inflating just after sunset, 15 hot air balloons transform into giant glowing orbs 20 
meters tall. These illuminated balloons then synchronise their lights to a soundtrack featuring the 
best music of the last two decades, creating a truly unforgettable spectacle.
Beyond the Cabonne Community Glow, the festival offers a variety of experiences for attendees. 
Participants can take sunrise balloon flights, soaring over the picturesque Canowindra 
countryside as the day begins. Local food trucks line the markets, providing delicious 
refreshments while also supporting the community's economy.
Source: Canowindra International Balloon Challenge. n.d.  
Cabonne

68
Case study – MSM Milling Mental Health First Aid Training
Local business MSM Milling (MSM) employs around 100 people and operates a fully integrated 
oilseed crushing, oil refining, packaging, and stockfeed manufacturing operation in Manildra, 
NSW. In addition to transforming canola seed into value added products, MSM has identified 
that mental health could be better supported in their company and community. MSM aspires to 
improve this support through increased access to mental health first aid training and increasing 
the number of people within their company, local council, high school, and broader community 
who are mental health trained. 
Within the company, mental health first aid training has been implemented for staff to attend, 
and they have organised ‘Are you Ok’ day events and education. Moreover, MSM are working 
towards becoming an accredited workplace provider of mental health first aid training and are 
collaborating with the Country Women’s Association and the Black Dog Institute to have one of 
their staff members qualified. 
MSM have collaborated with the Manildra Flour Mill to deliver mental health first aid training 
to the community. Their next ambition is to work with local schools to organise training tailored 
towards young people.
Guin Dickie, the dedicated Health, Safety, and Education (HSE) Advisor at MSM, notes that safety 
at the workplace is not just physical, but also mental. She encourages other companies and 
communities to talk to their existing HSE training providers to organise mental health first aid 
training or nominate an employee to get qualified.  
MSM Milling’s actions demonstrate that the workplace can be an important place to build 
resilience. There is a need for mental health support services, and collaboration between industry, 
community, and charity can be a powerful means to build mental resilience. 
Source: G., Dickie, MSM Milling, personal communication  
Cabonne

69
Case study – Cowra Business Resilience Forum 
The local businesses in the Cowra Shire have suffered the secondary effects of the impact of 
natural disasters on agriculture. To build the resilience of local business, a Business Resilience 
Forum was held at Club Cowra in 2023. The aim of the evening was to empower business owners 
and operators. The session shares the effective tools and knowledge needed to regain control and 
thrive in today’s business landscape. 
The event provided a platform for three guest speakers. Their specialties included business 
advisory, marketing strategy and workforce. Their talks centred around three key session topics: 
finance, marketing, and people. This event provided an opportunity for business owners in the 
Cowra Shire to connect, learn and share knowledge.
In particular, it allowed for attendees to better understand their respective CORE business drivers 
and learn what is important to them as business owners. The session addressed challenges 
faced by businesses and provided an opportunity for forward-thinking approaches to emerge 
through the guidance of specialists. Such an event is a step towards building resilience amongst 
businesses owners. 
Source: Cowra Council, 2023.
Cowra

70
Case study – Cowra Food Hall
The Cowra Uniting Church Food Hall is a service offered by the Cowra Uniting Church 
Congregation to provide low-cost fresh fruit vegetables and grocery items to registered clients 
in a warm and caring environment. 
The aim of the Cowra Food Hall is to provide weekly access to food and household goods at 
a reasonable cost in a caring and supportive environment and to reduce the anxiety of food 
insecurity for members of their community. By offering low-cost essentials, the Food Hall 
empowers individuals and families to meet their basic needs. This stability allows them to focus on 
other aspects of life, fostering a sense of security and control.
The food and households’ goods are sourced from two main sources: Foodbank NSW and local 
retailers. This means they offer a variety of items, potentially including non-perishables, canned 
goods, and fresh produce depending on availability. Sourcing from Foodbank NSW helps reduce 
food waste and allows the Food Hall to stretch their resources further. This promotes a culture of 
sustainability and empowers them to help more people.
This program is run by volunteers and aims to address food insecurity within the Cowra 
community. The welcoming environment and friendly volunteers go beyond just handing out food. 
They offer a sense of belonging and connection, which is crucial during challenging times. 
Sharing a cup of tea and conversation during morning tea can provide emotional support 
and combat isolation.
Source: Cowra Uniting Church. n.d.
Cowra

71
Case study – Billimari Bore Project
Cowra Council is delivering the ‘Cowra Drought Water Security - Billimari borefield and transfer 
pipeline’ project. The 2019/20 drought identified the need for additional water sources that could 
be utilised when Wyangala Dam is nearing a “cease to flow” scenario. 
The business case prepared for the project determined that an alternate emergency ground water 
supply could be established in Billimari to ensure that critical daily water needs in Cowra are met 
during prolonged dry seasons. The proposed site will have a number of boreholes, along with a 
“reservoir, pumps, and rising main infrastructure to deliver the water to Cowra.”
The Project entails construction of 3 bores at Billimari, at a 60m depth, and a 26km pipeline from 
the borefield to the inlet system at the Lachlan River in Cowra where the water is then piped to the 
Cowra water treatment plant. This drought security project is funded through the NSW Safe and 
Secure Program and is expected to be completed by 30 June 2024.
Completion of this project will provide Cowra with an alternative water source in times of drought 
when the Lachlan River is at critically low or cease to flow levels.
Source: Cowra Shire Council, 2021
Cowra

72
Case study – Central West Inspired Women Initiative Orange 
Launched in Orange in 2022 by Regional Development Australia Central West, the Central West 
Inspired Women (CWIW) initiative is not just about networking events. It is a strategic program 
designed to cultivate resilience among regional women by fostering collaboration across sectors.
CWIW tackles the challenges faced by many regional women, particularly feelings of isolation. 
Through initiatives like "ladies' lunches" and speed networking, it creates a supportive 
environment for connection, inspiration, and knowledge-sharing. This network acts as a crucial 
support system, empowering women to navigate challenges and build long-term resilience.
However, CWIW goes beyond social interaction. It provides valuable upskilling and capacity-
building workshops, equipping women with the tools and knowledge they need to excel in their 
careers and businesses. Moreover, the newfound confidence and competence allows them to 
adapt to change and overcome obstacles, fostering long-term resilience.
CWIW is not just about empowering women; it is about empowering the entire Central West 
region. Through fostering connections, providing valuable skills, and bridging communication 
gaps, CWIW equips women with the tools they need to be resilient, adaptable, and build a stronger 
future for themselves and their communities.
Source: Regional Development Australia, n.d.
Orange

73
Case study – Water Efficiency in Orange 
The Orange City Council acknowledges the critical importance of water security and has adopted 
a multifaceted approach to ensure its long-term sustainability. Recognizing that water security is 
a shared responsibility, the Council implements initiatives that not only secure water supplies but 
also promote responsible water use within the community.
The Council is committed to fostering a culture of water conservation within Orange. This is 
achieved through a multi-pronged strategy. Firstly, they offer programs that identify and address 
household water leaks, preventing unnecessary water loss. They may also install shower efficient 
shower heads and weights for older toilets to reduce water use. Furthermore, the Council provides 
water savings action plans for high water users that equip commercial users with the knowledge 
and resources to manage water effectively. These plans often include suggestions for utilizing 
alternative water sources, such as rainwater tanks, promoting a more sustainable approach to 
water consumption.
Effective signage and interactive platforms are utilised by the Council to raise awareness and 
educate residents on the importance of water conservation, more so during drought and water 
restrictions. This approach emphasises the value of water as a finite resource and encourages 
behavioural changes that contribute to a more water-conscious community. It also promotes positively in the community by highlighting how well the community as 
a whole is performing with reducing water usage. Leading by example, the Council irrigates parks and gardens with bore water, demonstrating its commitment to 
responsible water use in its own operations. Additionally, financial incentives are offered to encourage residents to install rainwater tanks, further diversifying water 
sources and reducing reliance on traditional supplies. 
These comprehensive strategies implemented by the Orange City Council are paving the way for a more resilient water future. Due to these measures, water usage in 
Orange is below 5,000 ML annually, a drop from a long-term average of around 7,000 ML. Their innovative approach to capturing urban water, diversifying water sources, 
and promoting water conservation fosters a strong community attitude towards water efficiency. 
Looking ahead, the Council's commitment to water security extends beyond current initiatives. Future water efficiency improvements, including advocating for upgrades 
to Lake Rowlands, underscore Orange's position as a leader in sustainable water management.
Source: Orange City Council, n.d.b.; W. Beatty – Manager (Water and Sewer) Orange City Council, personal communication 
Orange

74
Case study – Indigenous Cultural Adventures 
Gerald Powers created the Indigenous Cultural Adventure. Gerald Powers is Juru man from 
Bowen in Queensland near the Whitsundays but has learnt from Wiradjuri elders the local stories 
and traditions of the region. With their blessing and approval, Gerald runs cultural tours around 
Orange to share local Wiradjuri sites and stories. 
All cultural tours are hosted and guided by local Elders. Small to large groups can visit the 
Yuranigh’s burial site. The site features a cluster of carved trees to signify the burial ground of an 
important person. The cultural tours explore the rich vibrant culture of the Wiradjuri nation who 
have been deeply rooted in the Orange (and surrounding) region for over 50,000 years. 
A recent avenue of the Indigenous Cultural Adventures is the Bush Tucka. This venture made 
its debut at the 2016 Taste Orange. “We are giving our Australian Indigenous Bush Tucka food a 
21st century twist. The public have now grown to enjoy the health benefits of a low-fat product 
marinated with indigenous herbs and spices” says Gerald Power.
Source: Indigenous Cultural Adventures. n.d.; We are Explorers, 2023
Orange

75
Case study – Orange Hospital 
The unrelenting drought exposed a vulnerability in the lives of Orange Hospital staff. For those 
whose homes, relied solely on rainwater tanks, became battlegrounds against water scarcity. 
Yet, within the walls of the hospital, a different kind of strength emerged – the resilience of the 
institution itself.
In a stroke of pragmatic empathy, the hospital leadership unlocked a hidden wellspring of 
support. Staff, facing the indignity of limited water at home, were offered the haven of the on-call 
accommodation's showers. No intrusive questions, just the simple act of providing a cleansing 
respite before or during their shifts. This seemingly minor concession acknowledged the ripple 
effects of the drought, subtly alleviating a burden most likely carried in silence.
The hospital's washing machine, once solely for patients in need, became a shared resource. 
Staff, caught between the demands of work and dwindling home resources, could now tackle 
their laundry during their breaks. This wasn't just about clean clothes; it was a recognition of the 
emotional toll the drought inflicted. It was a bridge built between the professional and personal, 
a testament to the hospital's understanding that a well-supported staff translates to exceptional 
patient care.
The drought may have tested the Orange Hospital staff, but the response revealed a deeper 
truth. It showcased a community, both individual and institutional, that could bend but not break. 
It was a masterclass in quiet resilience, where small acts of kindness became the foundation for 
unwavering dedication.
Source: C. Nowland (Western NSW Local Health District), personal communication
Orange

76
Case study – ‘Let it Rain’ Fundraising Concert
The 2019/20 drought gripped Orange, NSW, leaving farmers struggling. But in the face of 
hardship, the community rallied. A "Let it Rain" concert, held on March 6, 2020, became a beacon 
of resilience.
Local musicians donated their time, from the Galumaay Indigenous Dance Troupe to established 
performers like Amy Viola and Robbie Mortimer. Businesses chipped in, offering everything 
from concert tickets to a tanker load of water for the silent auction. The event itself drew 400 
attendees, each one a testament to the community's unwavering support.
The impact was immediate. The $18,000 raised went directly to drought-affected farmers, 
distributed as $200 cash cards with assistance from nearby Country Women’s Association 
branches. This financial injection provided a lifeline, helping families weather the storm.
But the "Let it Rain" concert was more than just fundraising. It was a powerful symbol of 
community spirit. Local media helped spread the word, businesses provided resources, and 
musicians brought hope through their performances. This collaboration fostered a sense of unity, 
reminding everyone that they weren't alone in the fight against the drought.
The "Let it Rain" concert stands as a testament to the power of resilience. It's a story of how a 
community, facing a seemingly insurmountable challenge, came together to support one another. 
It's a story that serves as an inspiration for the community, that when facing hardship, even the 
driest times can be overcome through collaboration and a shared spirit. 
Source: G. Mickle, personal communication 
Orange

77
Case study – Light Up the Night in Grenfell
Grenfell came alive with live music whilst they awaited to be amazed by one hundred drones 
lighting up the skies above Grenfell for ‘Light Up the Night’ (LUTN).
Approximately 2,500 people attended event funded by Weddin Shire Council and the NSW 
Government through their Reconnecting Regional NSW -Community Events Program. Funding 
also came through the Create NSW initiative Country Arts Support Program (CASP) to assist with 
the Indigenous story telling component of the drone lightshow. Wiradjuri images and stories are 
included in the drone light show; these were put together from local Wiradjuri people alongside 
assistance from Dinawans Connection cultural group based in Dubbo. Through the drone show, 
dreamtime stories come to life in the sky.
LUTN featured live music by five acts, with the majority being locals, followed by the drone show 
featuring ten symbols choreographed to music, all chosen for their connection to the community. 
At the time it was the longest drone show on record in Australia. It was an event the locals will talk 
about for years to come! One that repaired local community cohesion and delivered positive social 
outcomes.
The vision of LUTN was to provide a fun, free community event, through live music, market and 
food stall, and a spectacular drone show. It was easily accessible, appealing to all ages, and 
family friendly. The event was staged in the off-peak time of year for Weddin Shire, maximising 
the proportion of the community who attended. In farming communities, it is important to avoid 
peak times of year such as sowing, haymaking and harvest. With very few barriers to attendance 
the focus on reconnecting the community was achieved.
Source: Arts Out West NSW, 2023
Weddin

78
Case study – Ooma Creek Tributary Riparian Restoration Project 
Ooma Creek catchment was identified as an issue in the local environment. Weddin Landcare, 
together with three local landowners, are working on the Ooma Creek Tributary Riparian 
Restoration project. The goal of this project is to provide protection for and creation of valuable 
riparian habitat, reduce streambank erosion and to help improve water quality. 
On the Mitton’s site initial fence work was required before revegetation work could begin. The 
local trees and shrubs for all three sites were grown by the Weddin Community Native Nursery in 
preparation for the revegetation field day. 
This field day on the Mitton’s property included a demonstration of tree planting techniques. It 
also brought together members of the community who volunteered to help on a real project and 
contribute positively to building resilience in the local environment. 
Landholders involved in the restoration project have completed the on-ground works associated 
with the project. The result of this project is the 30Ha of riparian land protected and restored and 
2700 trees and shrubs planted. These trees and shrubs specifically aimed to reduced streambank 
erosion, improve water quality and biodiversity. 
With an aim to stabilise the riparian area and improve the ecosystem, three sites on tributaries of the Ooma Creek have been key areas of focus. These sites have been 
fenced to control stock access to protect streambanks and allow native vegetation to establish and multiply. In collaboration with the Weddin Community Native Nursery, 
a mix of native trees and shrubs were propagated and planted at each site to improve the riparian corridor and further stabilise the banks. This included a demonstration 
of tree planting techniques and brought together members of the community to help on a real project and contribute positively to building resilience in the local 
environment. 
Collaboration as such propels, unique ideas to be built and formulated by the community and as such stimulate resilience in the area. 
Source: Weddin Landcare. n.d.; C. Diprose, personal communication
Weddin

79
Case study – Weddin Community Native Nursery 
The Weddin Community Native Nursery (WCNN) is an initiative of Weddin Landcare. The 
WCNN propagates plants of the Weddin Shire with the additional goal of preserving (for future 
generations) threatened species within the Shire. As the plants are grown from locally collected 
seeds, they are adapted to the growing conditions of the Central West. The seeds are cleaned and 
propagated. Propagation methods also include cuttings and divisions. 
The nursery is open to the public for retail sales and has a dedicated group of volunteers with 
whom most hold a TAFE Certificate 3 in Conservation and Land Management. The volunteers are 
responsible for seed collection and nursery tasks as well as the fundraising and promotion of the 
nursery. This includes holding street stalls, community education and information sessions. 
There was a recent community recycling and composting workshop where participants heard 
about national and local waste issues and solutions, as well as from a Council representative 
who informed the participants about the Cowra Materials Recycling Facility and the importance 
of recycling correctly. There was also the opportunity for some practical demonstrations. 
Conducting educational activities brings together community members and fosters support for 
taking care of the environment. 
The importance of this project is apparent due to numerous regenerative projects taking place 
through the Shire due to the considerable loss of flora in the region. Some of these plants have 
been identified and registered by the local native plant elder. The nursery provides a regular 
opportunity for social connectedness. WCNN supports landscape regeneration and local 
resilience focused initiatives.
Source: Weddin Community Native Nursery, n.d.; C. Diprose, personal communication
Weddin

80
Case study – KB5Fitness
KB5Fitness a personal training business owned by Kim Broomby. Growing up on a farm in Central 
West NSW, Kim knew the value of a strong, healthy, and balanced life. Her passion is exemplified 
through her adaptability to ensure exercise is accessible to all members of the community. 
Expanding her business to ensure the offering of fitness classes across the Weddin Shire, 
including the village communities, is an expression of this.
Kim varies her program to take advantage of local conditions with some planned activities taking 
place in local pools and local guide halls, to generate user group income to these local services. 
The classes create opportunities for regular social connectedness. 
“You have got me hooked! Your classes are now part of my weekly routine, and I never miss one by 
choice. I love the variety of workouts, and the leadership, dedication and respect you show to your 
clients. There is such a positive and inclusive feel to your business, and everyone is supported 
where they are at with exercise.” Kylie M
Kim was also one of the original providers of the ‘active farmers’ fitness program, a program 
designed especially for farmers with limited or no local access to fitness expertise and equipment. 
KB5Fitness is diverse and caters to diverse age groups and backgrounds. Kim has grown her 
business in recent years with the introduction of pilates and, because of COVID, she now provides 
group face to face classes as well as virtual classes. KB5Fitness is a source of off farm income for 
her family unit, who also run a family farm. Kim knows firsthand the struggles of farming which 
many community members also face. Kim’s work with KB5Fitness and the active farmers fitness 
program has revitalised Weddin’s sense of community and fostered perseverance in the face of 
environmental struggles including drought. 
Source: KB5Fitness. n.d.; K. Broomby, personal communication
Weddin

81
Case study – Grenfell Food Hall
The Grenfell Food Hall is an example of the unwavering spirit of the Weddin community. Run 
entirely by volunteers, it provides a lifeline for many, offering low-cost food staples through 
diverse channels like home deliveries, online ordering, and even Christmas hampers. With 
numbers on Fridays reaching between 90 to over 100 people. 
But the Food Hall goes beyond sustenance. It fosters connection, becoming a regular social 
outing for clients with its welcoming cafe. This focus on social interaction is even more poignant 
when considering the Food Hall's role during the Covid lockdown. When supermarket shelves 
were bare and social interaction dwindled, the Food Hall stood strong, ensuring both physical and 
emotional well-being through home deliveries and a safe space for connection. 
Moving on from Covid. The Food Hall is now addressing the rise in ‘cost of living’ expenses and 
attempting to lighten the burden by providing hampers and essential food to families, couples, 
and singles within the community. 
Grenfell Food Hall's story is one of resilience and unwavering commitment. It is a testament to the 
power of community, adapting to challenges, and finding innovative ways to provide not just food, 
but also a sense of connection and belonging. 
Source: J. Cations, personal communication
Weddin

82
Case study – The Criterion Hotel 
The Cri Hotel is not just a pub, it is a testament to the power of reinvention and community spirit. 
Once a traditional "sportsman pub," the Cri has transformed into a multifaceted space that caters 
to all. The key to their success? Diversification.
By utilising their function room for workshops on everything from local crafts to financial literacy, 
the Cri has become a hub for learning and connection. Their Christmas markets showcase local 
businesses, fostering a sense of community pride. They have even elevated their catering with a 
top-notch kitchen, attracting patrons beyond the pub scene.
But the Cri's impact goes further. Recognizing the economic importance of tourism, they took 
a bold step by venturing into self-contained apartments above the pub, offering comfortable 
accommodation for visitors. Additionally, their acquisition of the local caravan park ensures it 
remains a viable option for budget-conscious travellers.
This transformation was not without its challenges. Shifting the perception of the Cri from a 
"sportsman pub" to a family-friendly space required dedication and community engagement. 
However, the Cri embraced the challenge, focusing on creating a welcoming environment for 
everyone. Now, the Cri is a vibrant space where families gather, workshops spark creativity, and 
the Christmas markets bring the community together. The Cri Hotel's story is a testament to the 
power of resilience, adaptation, and a deep commitment to the community it serves.
Weddin

83
Case study – Country Education Foundation 
The Country Education Foundation (CEF) stands as a vital organization within the Australian 
educational landscape. Established as a national non-profit headquartered in Orange, New South 
Wales, the CEF is dedicated to a singular mission: ensuring equitable access to educational 
opportunities for students residing in rural and regional areas. 
The CEF recognises the inherent challenges faced by students from geographically dispersed 
communities who yearn to pursue further education and training. These challenges can be 
multifaceted, ranging from financial constraints to a lack of readily available support structures. 
In response, the CEF has implemented a comprehensive suite of programs designed to empower 
these aspiring students.
Financial assistance forms a cornerstone of the CEF's support system. Through the provision of 
scholarships and grants, the CEF mitigates the financial burdens associated with post-secondary 
education, allowing students to focus on their academic pursuits. However, the CEF's commitment 
extends beyond mere financial aid. Recognizing the complexities of transitioning to a higher 
education environment, the CEF offers invaluable guidance, encouragement, and access to 
essential resources, easing the path for students from rural backgrounds.
The CEF fosters a spirit of collaboration by working together with local communities. This collaborative approach manifests in the establishment of local CEF foundations, 
which possess the autonomy to tailor support and resources to the specific needs of students within their respective regions. Furthermore, the CEF actively champions 
educational equity through advocacy efforts, lobbying for policies that dismantle barriers and ensure all students, irrespective of their geographical location, have equal 
access to quality education. 
CEF Grenfell fundraises throughout the year and accepts donations from residents and businesses to provide financial grants to students who need an extra helping hand. 
The funds come directly from your local community – none of it is government funded – celebrating the aspirations of local youth and working to help them achieve these 
aspirations. It’s our way of saying “we believe in you and want to support your goals.”
Source: CEF, n.d.
Weddin

84
Case study – Grow Grenfell Group
The Weddin Shire has a champion in the Grow Grenfell Group Inc, a dedicated non-profit 
organization that was formed in 2022 with the express purpose of identifying and implementing 
sustainable local projects that can foster positive development for the township of Grenfell, NSW.
The first major project undertaken by the Grow Grenfell Group has been the 'Grenfell Lights’ 
initiative whereby the town’s Main Street precinct is gradually being lit-up with exhibition-style 
lighting. Shop windows building artwork and facades are being illuminated and a significant step-
forward for this exciting project was achieved late last year with the installation of state-of-the-
art lighting on the artwork at the Grenfell Silos.
The silo artwork is a compilation of images which represents the contemporary farming industry 
and landscape of the Weddin Shire. This captivating spectacle by day, is transformed by the Grow 
Grenfell Group into a mesmerising light show by night, drawing visitors in to experience its ever-
changing display.  The silos lights are on display every night from sunset to 9:45pm.
Looking ahead to September, they're taking the initiative to host the town's first-ever poker car 
rally, promising a fun and unique event for visitors and residents alike. Through these multifaceted 
projects, the Grow Grenfell Group is not only brightening Grenfell's nightscape but also injecting 
vibrancy and energy into the town, making it a more attractive destination for tourists.
Source: Australian Silo Art Trail, n.d.; J. Gallimore- President Grow Grenfell Group Inc, personal communication. 
Weddin

85
Case study – Weddin Mountain Muster 
Conducted annually during the first week of the New South Wales Spring school holidays, the 
Weddin Mountain Muster, held in Grenfell, New South Wales, presents a unique opportunity 
for horse riders and their families to cultivate resilience through a compelling blend of outdoor 
adventure and a robust sense of community. 
The Muster was established in 2001 with only a handful of riders and five committee members 
who came together to raise funds for the upgrades to the grandstand at the Grenfell showground. 
Since then, the Muster has grown to become one of Grenfell’s major annual tourism events with 
120 registered riders and makes a significant contribution to the local economy. Riders come from 
far and wide to attend this prestigious event and many have fallen in love with Grenfell.
The cornerstone of the Muster lies in the curated trail riding experiences. Participants are offered the chance to explore the countryside that surrounds Grenfell on guided 
trail rides over five days. Scenic trails, meticulously designed to cater to a range of riding abilities and showcase the countryside, ensure a stimulating and enjoyable 
experience for all involved. Riders and their families camp at the Grenfell Showground each night, where they sooth sore muscles around campfires and reminisce the 
day’s events. At the end of the week, everyone comes together for a finale dinner to celebrate the week and enjoy light-hearted entertainment including poetry written 
during the week of the Muster. 
This immersion in the natural world fosters resilience. The inherent beauty of the Australian bush landscape serves as a potent catalyst for stress reduction, rejuvenation, 
and the cultivation of perspective. Overcoming the challenges presented by the trails, be it navigating the terrain or establishing a strong bond with one's mount, fosters a 
sense of accomplishment and bolsters confidence, ultimately contributing to overall well-being. 
Beyond the individual benefits accrued, the Weddin Mountain Muster serves to foster a sense of community amongst those who share a passion for horses. Riders from 
diverse backgrounds converge upon this event to celebrate their shared love of equine companionship and the exhilaration of exploring new landscapes on horseback. 
New friends are formed around campfires, and, over time, the Muster has created the feeling of family with many participants returning each year. This camaraderie 
fosters social connections and a profound sense of belonging, both of which are fundamental pillars of resilience. 
The Weddin Mountain Muster transcends the confines of a mere equestrian event; it transforms into an experience that actively promotes holistic well-being, strengthens 
the connection between individuals and nature, and ultimately fosters resilience on both individual and collective levels. 
Source: Weddin Mountain Muster Grenfell, n.d.; M. Cooper, personal communication 
Weddin

86
4.2.	What we heard
The communities of the Central West region are committed to building a resilient 
and prosperous future. The voices of the community echo their commitment 
to maintaining a thriving agricultural landscape, fostering interconnected 
communities, supporting diverse local businesses, and advancing critical 
infrastructure and governance. Figure 4 provides a concise explanation of the 
feedback received during consultation.
4.2.1.	 Survey outcomes
The survey was open until 25 June 2024, there were 52 responses across the five 
LGAs and others, refer Figure 35.
The findings align with stakeholder group discussions and are explored in the 
LGA snapshots (Sections 4.2.2 to 4.2.6). To delve deeper, four key questions have 
been identified and are presented in the figures below. 
The results of question 2 (Figure 36) in the survey demonstrate that drought 
resilience extends beyond the farm gate where our communities need to be 
resilient to survive and thrive, even during times of drought. Items were ranked 
in the order of priority, by respondents that believe should receive investment to 
enhance drought resilience in community. Figure 36 shows that a secure water 
supply was the most important aspect of the survey according to respondents, 
followed by reliable assets and infrastructure, skills in agriculture, prosperous 
economy, management and administration and connected and resilient 
community. 
Figure 35	 Survey responses by location
Figure 36  Survey question 2: Drought resilience extends beyond the farm gate where our communities 
need to be resilient to survive and thrive, even during times of drought. Items ranked in order of priority

87
Question 5 of the survey requested respondents rank six outcomes in terms 
of effectiveness of local resilience building. Figure 37 shows the respondents 
ranked ‘investing in water conservation and efficiency’ the highest. The top 
three align closely with the outcomes in Figure 36. 
Question 9 of the survey asked respondents which other economic areas should 
be considered when looked at diversified economy. Health care and wellness 
was chosen as the most popular, as seen in Figure 38. 
Figure 37	 Survey question 5: Ranked from highest to lowest the outcomes respondents believed would 
be effective in building drought resilience for our region
Figure 38	 Survey question 9: Ranked from highest to lowest the outcomes respondents believed would 
be effective in building drought resilience for our region
Figure 39	 Survey question 10: In your opinion, is the current communication and engagement during 
drought sufficient and effective in keeping the community informed and engaged
Effectiveness of current communication and engagement during drought was 
rated in question 10. Figure 39 captured the response rate and overwhelmingly, 
respondents rated no for all options. This is reflective of the information 
gathered in consultation and written up in the LGA snapshots.

88
4.2.2.	 Blayney LGA Snapshot
As identified earlier in this plan, the LGA of Blayney 
is highly reliant on agriculture, however some of this 
impact is offset by the diversity of industry brought by 
Cadia mine (gold mining) and Nestle Purina (pet food 
manufacturing). In recent years a new gold project 
(McPhillamys) by Regis resources was announced. 
As shown in Table 1, Blayney’s economic diversity is 
comparatively high compared to the other LGAs, at 0.62. 
Blayney’s PDI is relatively low so they would not be as 
impacted by drought as Cowra, Cabonne or Weddin 
LGAs, ‘Agriculture, forestry and fishing’ is still the top 
industry of employment for the LGA.
Impacts
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Blayney LGA include: 
•	 Increased financial stress for agricultural support 
businesses and small businesses within the LGA due 
to reduced discretionary spending and decreased 
cash flow through the community.
•	 Reduction in primary production incomes and the 
associated financial and mental stress on farmers.
•	 Declining quality of livestock and crops leading to 
emotional and financial stress.
•	 Children impacted by the stress, interruptions to 
their education and sport. 
•	 Stress and fatigue associated with making difficult 
decisions and trying to anticipate how long the 
drought will last.
•	 Some landholders are unable to maintain their weed 
and pest management therefore increasing hazards 
to others.
•	 Reduced access to water for agricultural businesses 
to support livestock and cropping; decreased grain 
output puts pressure on the supply chain impacting 
the manufacturing industry in the area (for example, 
Nestle).
•	 Nestle note that when grain availability decreases, 
prices increase and impact the overall profitability of 
the operation. The impact of drought on grain quality 
results in increased levels of micro toxins and lower 
quality outputs.
•	 Cadia noted that under drought conditions they 
had reduced water availability and therefore had 
to diversify their sources of water and alter their 
operations to adjust to these circumstances (e.g., 
load shed- don’t run certain pumps).
•	 Increased dust from other industries that would 
usually utilise water for dust suppression which 
increases air pollution.
•	 Decreased availability of water impacts mining 
operations leading to reduced economic outputs for 
the LGA.
•	 Water quality issues created from increased 
utilisation of groundwater during drought which 
has the potential to increase the likelihood for 
contamination and/or decreased water quality.
•	 Increased feelings of social isolation for several 
groups within the community in particular the 
aged population. Often those working in adjacent 
agricultural industries and services become pseudo 
counsellors.
•	 Reduction in visitation as people not wanting to visit 
(aesthetics) as well as not wanting to use up sparse 
water.

89
4.2.3.	 Cabonne LGA Snapshot
Engagement with the Cabonne LGA has been 
challenging. The communities within the LGA are 
widely spread out and unreliable telecommunications 
services reduce the ability to attend virtual and online 
workshops. The community’s resilience has been tested 
in recent years with a number of consecutive major 
flooding events that severely impacted numerous 
communities within the LGA. Coupled with earlier years 
of COVID 19 and drought recovery, the community is 
showing real signs of fatigue in discussing natural 
disasters. 
Impacts
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Cabonne LGA include:
•	 Drought reduces the amount and quality of 
agricultural product available which impacts prices 
and makes it hard to compete on international 
markets. It also means having to access feed from 
further distances away which increases costs.
•	 Reduced cashflow and discretionary spending within 
the community 
•	 Decreased morale due to the economic and 
environmental downturn in drought conditions.
•	 Not many businesses are prepared for drought and 
there is limited financial support for businesses 
outside of agriculture during drought periods. There 
is financial stress on businesses from reduced 
spending. 
•	 The Manildra Group noted they had to change their 
buying pattern which increased the cost of freight 
(buying from Victoria and South Australia instead 
of NSW). Grain was also more expensive so overall 
production costs increased. One of their plants (out 
of region) had to run on imported grain for the first 
time. 
•	 A loss of skilled workers in the community where 
primary producers can’t maintain their workforce.
•	 Farms have become bigger as drought forces some 
off the land; there are more large agricultural 
corporations. This negatively impacts the number of 
people staying in the region, especially young labour 
force and participation in schools and involvement in 
the community. 
•	 Downturn in tourism as the area is not as picturesque 
to visit (browning off from reduced water availability). 
•	 Increased presence of wildlife and potential for 
injury as native animals move closer into towns. 
Wildlife increases competition for food and causes 
damage by reducing ground cover, especially in 
farming areas.
•	 Increased instances of disease and increase in feral 
animals which impacts native wildlife and primary 
producers. 
•	 Reduction in fauna and flora in the regions, reduction 
in groundcover, increasing erosion and dust issues. 
Additional weed problems post drought. 
•	 Increased threat from other natural disasters e.g., 
bushfires- large fire on Mount Canobolas in 2018.
•	 Increased anxiety in the community due to water 
security concerns. 
•	 Increases in isolation due to reduced social 
gatherings and recreation opportunities. This leads 
to greater mental health impacts. 
•	 Supporting those in crisis due to drought takes its 
toll on those providing the support. 
•	 A reduction in the numbers of people volunteering. 
•	 Usually primary producers are prepared for a few 
months of drought but not a few years of drought. 
Impacts vary greatly between farms. 
•	 Maintenance of local assets is reduced due to lack of 
water. Damage to buildings e.g. clay cracking.

90
4.2.4.	 Cowra LGA Snapshot
The Cowra LGA has a PDI ranking that sits in the mid-
range compared to the other LGAs in this Plan. It has 
a relatively high economic diversity score (0.51) but a 
fairly low SEIFA score. Meaning that whilst there is less 
reliance on agriculture than other regions there is a high 
level of disadvantage within the community. In its most 
recent Regional Economic Development Strategy Cowra 
has continued to highlight the need for critical enabling 
infrastructure to assist with business expansion and 
attraction. 
Impacts
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Cabonne LGA include:
•	 Uncertainty around the length of the drought, when the drought will end, this added to the difficulty and 
timeliness of making business decisions i.e. when to sell stock, how long to feed and buy fodder for which 
increased mental stress. 
•	 Agricultural businesses can become ‘credit’ suppliers for primary producers, there is increased demand on the 
resources of agricultural support industries during drought.
•	 Reduced discretionary spending by the agricultural community meant that less money was spent in the local 
economy.
•	 Increased difficulty in obtaining further credit through traditional channels for example, banks.
•	 Decline in the environment leads to a reduction in tourism. This can also impact on mental health at the distress 
of seeing such as decline.
•	 Decrease in mental and physical health (increased stress due to work imbalance and putting off health 
appointments).
•	 Increased stress on water infrastructure.
•	 Reduction in population (due to drought) often leads to a reduction in services and funding, leading to issues 
with maintaining key infrastructure.

91
4.2.5.	 Orange LGA Snapshot
As established earlier in the Plan, the Orange LGA has 
a relatively low reliance on agriculture with a PDI of 
0.03. Large industries, educational providers, health 
and government departments assist with diversifying 
the economy base, Orange scored a high 0.85 regarding 
economic diversity. 
A key issue for the community is reliable water security 
that can keep pace with the region’s population growth 
and support new industry. 
Impacts
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Orange LGA include:
•	 Less discretionary spending in the region, reduced tourism, resulting in impacts on businesses and the local 
economy.
•	 Increase in pressure on the employment markets and housing in Orange as those from smaller centres move to 
the region seeking employment and/or women from farming families return to work. This often occurs at the 
same time there is reduced confidence in hiring.
•	 Decrease in mental and physical health (increased stress and putting off health appointments); greater 
pressure on health services due to increasing demand. 
•	 Increasing social dislocation through isolation, declining mental health, and lower participation in sport and 
recreation, and social activities.
•	 Reduced access to water and heavy water restrictions impacted businesses and the community. There were 
high costs associated with purchasing water entitlements. Also decreases in air quality due to dust. 
•	 Primary producers move back to standard agricultural practices where they might have previously adopted 
more innovative and newer practices. 
•	 Mental anguish of seeing the environment deteriorate as greenspaces dry off and gardens and lawns decline. 
•	 Rising economic inequality as drought impacts citizens differently.

92
4.2.6.	 Weddin LGA Snapshot
Weddin LGA is characterised by a high reliance on 
agriculture meaning that the communities feel the 
effects of drought quite acutely when they occur. This 
is evident in the comparatively high PDI score of 0.75 
and economic diversity score of 0.19 (indicating low 
diversity) (refer to Table 1). Weddin has been challenged 
in recent years through declining services to support 
health, aged care (the Shire has an ageing population 
with a median age of 52) and lack of housing supply. 
Drought has impacted the mental health of various 
groups within the community and highlighted the urgent 
need for an increase in resources in this area and the 
need for continuity of care. Despite these challenges, 
visitors to the region often remark how friendly the 
locals are and how welcome they felt when visiting.
Impacts
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Weddin LGA include: 
•	 Corporate agriculture has impacted the magnitude of drought as stakeholders reported the large agricultural 
businesses contributed less to the local economy and decreased the region’s ability to respond to drought. 
•	 Reduced income from primary production activities especially where drought is prolonged. This adds financial 
and mental hardship and the impacts spending through to the local community. 
•	 Reductions in tourism as tourists are less likely to travel.
•	 Shortage of mental health services which can be difficult to access.
•	 Difficulties in maintaining and retaining skilled labour associated with agriculture when the industry contracts 
in drought.
•	 Children have felt the impacts of drought through greater visibility and exposure to financial stress and social 
isolation that come from living in drought and having less access to water and other resources.
•	 Large disparity in the impacts of drought amongst the region due to the differences in socioeconomic balance 
of the community.
•	 There are major water security concerns in some villages, for example, in Caragabal in the last drought, children 
weren’t able to flush the toilet at school (the Caragabal village has no access to potable water).

93
4.3.	Key themes
Consultation was undertaken in the LGAs of Central West which provided clear insights into how previous droughts have impacted the community and the issues faced. Some key 
themes emerged; these are presented below with an overview of the main comments heard.
Key themes
Responses
Diverse and resilient 
agricultural businesses 
and regional economies 
Economic diversification: Investment in industries and businesses beyond agriculture that support the local community is a priority, whilst still considering opportunities 
to value-add to the agricultural sector through enhanced manufacturing. Continuing to attract investment in a range of services and industries, including tourism, that 
allow sustainability grow and increase employment opportunities will assist with building resilience into the local economy. 
Collaborative efforts: Partnerships which encourage businesses from within the region to share, learn and mentor and provides a network to discuss common challenges. 
Re-investing locally: Increasing investment such as discretionary spending into the region instead of out-migration of funds will help support the local economy. Use of 
local service providers for events such as community festivals, agricultural shows and markets is vital. 
Infrastructure: Needs to support innovative industries and businesses to thrive. 
Protection of the Natural 
and Built Environment 
Promote natural assets: The regions natural assets should be promoted to help enhance tourism prospects and attract people to live and stay. These assets need to be 
maintained and protected.
Sustainable resource use: Continued education on water efficiency measures and sharing of learnings, best practice and innovations between LGAs. This will help 
maintain stores and ensure adequate water for community, industry and the environment.
Governance - Leadership 
and Collaboration 
Coordination: Improved and clearer access and information regarding drought information and assistance services available. It was highlighted that there are numerous 
services available but it isn’t easy to navigate to which is appropriate for the individual’s circumstances. 
Governance systems: Improved coordination across all three levels of government and between LGAs is required to ensure water security, population retention and 
diverse employment opportunities.
Local knowledge: Recognising the importance of local, regional and First Nations knowledge and experience when developing solutions.
Vibrant, connected, and 
supported communities 
Connected: Digital connectivity and improving the ability to work remotely will assist with attracting and retaining people in the region. Assistance and/or programs to 
Engaged: Building volunteer numbers is an ongoing challenge. Volunteers are relied on for organising and delivering a number of community events. Having appropriate 
supports is important.
Services: Accessible mental health services are seen as a high priority. As noted in the case studies, a number of initiatives have been founded with the aim of improving 
community cohesion and mental health overall. Additionally, adequate general health services, education opportunities and energy and water connections are essential 
for ensuring the aging population is cared for and for attracting young people/families to the area.
Infrastructure – built 
assets and technology  
Freight networks: Ensuring the road, rail and air infrastructure supports the region’s industry is important for growth and expansion and retaining local employees. 
Supporting Technology: Improved telecommunications is vital for business and industry growth and to attract people to want to live and stay and support the uptake of 
new technologies.
Water Infrastructure: Supporting enhancements to major water infrastructure projects (pipelines) is essential to help build resilience to droughts.

94
Figure 40 Assessment Matrix
4.4.4.	 Validation
Following the initial assessment, several questions 
were considered to further refine the initiatives and 
prioritise them.
•	 What is the impact of the action/ does it increase 
resilience (in respect with the resilience framework 
and biggest drought impacts identified)?
•	 Beneficiaries – what are and who receives the 
expected benefits of the action?
•	 Does the identified action/initiative align with 
Councils’ general strategic direction? 
•	 Are Council able to influence the action (via the plan)?
•	 Ease of implementation – is there a need for 
significant regulatory, political or legal changes (how 
shovel-ready is it)?
•	 Timeliness – How long will the action take to complete?
•	 Financial – Is there funding available and what is the 
cost? What is the source of funding and who will pay? 
4.4.2.	 Key Questions
•	 Impact: How are Central West impacted by Drought? 
Which impacts are most acute?
•	 Actions: What has worked well in the past? What did 
not work well? What actions or initiatives could local 
government (or others) support to build the region’s 
drought resilience?
	– Concept: What is the anticipated scope of the 
identified action?
	– Benefit: How will the action benefit the region? 
•	 Prioritise: How feasible is the action and is there a level 
of shovel-readiness? Do Councils’ have the capacity 
and influence to undertake the action?
4.4.3.	 Assessment
Through the SRGs, impacts of drought were discussed 
and confirmed. Differences between LGAs are noted in 
Section 5. Idea ideation took place in the first workshop. 
These initial ideas were collated and arranged by theme 
to be further discussed and developed in the second 
workshop. As the final task in the second workshop, 
participants were able to prioritise the actions most 
relevant to their LGA. This provided insights into the 
community’s greatest concerns and their impression on 
what would help to build resilience. Following community 
consultation, the ideas and initiatives from both the 
regional literature and consultation were collated. 
An initial assessment was undertaken to identify 
which actions had the greatest expected benefits (i.e. 
benefitted the most amount of people rather than a 
minority) and which Council had influence to implement 
(Figure 39). In this way, each initiative had a score which 
enabled the prioritisation of ideas.
Based on the valuable insights gathered from 
stakeholder engagement, it is evident that the 
communities' future vision revolves around fostering 
a diversified and resilient economy, continuing to 
improve water security, ensuring appropriate services 
are accessible, and there is improved coordination and 
learning at all levels and across sectors. These insights 
helped to shape the actions detailed in Section 5.
Given the diversity of the communities included in this 
plan a brief snapshot of each LGA has been developed 
to provide greater depth and understanding of each 
community through their own words and feedback 
provided during engagement activities. 
4.4.	Initiatives refinement
The investment logic from the QLD Business Case 
Development Framework was used as a means 
to refine the options for inclusion in the plan. 
This process included:
1. Development of a problem statement
2. A series of key questions as summarised below 
3. Assessment
4. Validation
4.4.1.	 Problem Statement
The Central West regional economy will continue to be 
impacted by droughts, which are predicted to become 
more frequent and severe into the future. The five 
Councils should work together to develop an RDRP to 
identify the steps which communities should take to 
mitigate these impacts. The RDRP should be actionable 
and relevant to individual communities.
LOW
LOW
HIGH
PURSUE
Expected
benefits
Council/regional
Influence
HIGH

95
05
Drought Resilience Actions

96
5.	Drought Resilience 
Actions
The themes, actions and initiatives detailed in this 
plan have been captured from conversations with 
the community, local knowledge of the region and 
policy, planning documents and programs that have 
been developed through various organisations at a 
Commonwealth, State and local level. 
5.1.	 What has already been done to 
build drought resilience 
Throughout the years extreme weather events, 
including droughts, have driven the communities of the 
Central West to take action to improve resilience to 
these events. The case studies in section 4 of this plan 
highlight how the community have responded to drought 
and built their resilience.
In addition to this, the NSW and Commonwealth 
Governments have undertaken significant effort to 
increase resilience to drought. A sample of the programs 
and/or plans in place are listed as follows:
•	 Commonwealth Drought Resilience Research and 
Adoption Program which has five components that 
focus on with farmers and their rural and regional 
communities to prepare for drought (DAFF 2024a).
•	 Rural Assistance Authority (RAA) offering a range 
of loans, grants, advice and assistance, for example, 
Farm Debt Mediation to support both preparedness 
and crisis.
•	 RFCS provides free and independent financial 
counselling to eligible businesses experiencing, or at 
risk of, financial hardship (DAFF, 2024b).
•	 DPIRD is home the Drought Hub which houses a range 
of information applicable to primary producers to 
assist with drought along with providing extension 
and adoption services. 
•	 LLS Drought Adoption Officers have been 
strategically located across the state to assist 
landholders with drought planning and preparedness 
extension services.
•	 DPIRD has supported local Councils and communities 
to develop Regional Economic Development 
Strategies which include information on strategies 
and enabling actions to guide and support economic 
development priorities for each region. 
•	 NSW DCCEEW – Regional water strategies for both 
the Macquarie-Castlereagh and Lachlan Valley’s have 
identified focus areas for improvements to water 
security in town water supplies. DCCEEW offer a 
range of other supports and programs such as Safe 
and Secure Water and Town Water Risk Reduction 
Program which are aimed at addressing the main risks 
to regional water safety and security.
•	 Rural Development Corporations (RDCs) exist for 
the agricultural commodities and house experience 
in research, development and extension activities to 
innovative agriculture.
The need, the action and the expected outcomes are 
provided, along with how these contribute to building 
resilience and the parties responsible for action(s). 
Additional details regarding assumptions and metrics to 
measure progress towards these actions are provided in 
this section.
5.2.	Opportunities tested
From the consultation process a long list of ideas was 
compiled from the community on how impacts of past 
droughts had been lessened and what had potential to 
lessen impacts in future droughts. The long list includes 
of absorptive, adaptive and transformational resilience 
actions, tested through the co-design process, is 
presented in Table 13 below. 
This Plan seeks to capitalise on this previous work 
and ideas and support actions that will benefit the 
broader region.

97
Social
Economic
Environment
•	
Impacts on mental health in particular for primary producers 
but also including small business owners and communities.
•	
Increase in stress related diseases such as PTSD impacts 
on children's mental health challenges in accessing mental 
health services reduced attendance at school stress to 
the social connectedness of communities reduction and 
increased stress on the volunteering community reduction in 
local services from prolonged drought.
•	
Anxiety, distress and unrest amongst the 
first nations community.
•	
Women's roles within the community change - they need 
to seek income away from the farm or business venture to 
provide alternate financial support or they need to forego 
this alternate income to provide cost saving labour in their 
agricultural/small business.
•	
Reductions in the maintenance of infrastructure as 
cashflow is reduced.
•	
Climate change exacerbating drought impacts on human 
health, including water storage facilities such as dams 
necessary to manage droughts, at a higher risk of bacterial 
and algae growth given warmer waters in storage facilities 
such as dams which can increase the risk of bacterial and 
algae growth.
•	
Reduced cashflow in local communities from reduced 
spending by the agricultural community.
•	
Reduced spending on discretionary non-essential services.
•	
Loss of businesses, workers, and families from the 
community from prolonged drought.
•	
Reductions in tourism to retail and food businesses and 
smaller centres that don’t have large tourist attractions.
•	
Reduction in business and investor confidence.
•	
Financial stress on agricultural and regional businesses 
through decreased production, reduced incomes, increased 
expenditure, and increasing debt levels.
•	
Reduced business confidence for investors.
•	
Critical labour shortages post-drought in both agriculture 
and broader industries.
•	
The burden of financially recovering from previous droughts 
limits some businesses from taking advantage of non-
drought conditions, restricting their ability to improve 
resilience for the future.
•	
Reduced cropping yield.
•	
Influence domestic food prices and export market earnings.
•	
Reduction in labour pool - required to move to secure 
new employment.
•	
Impact of stock losses through sale at low prices, loss of 
breeding and production
•	
Reduced groundcover (tree die-back), pasture and topsoil 
which exacerbates wind and rain related soil erosion.
•	
Greater habitation of some animals into regional centres 
e.g. kangaroos.
•	
Reduced water availability to both agriculture and the 
community. Especially those businesses without a 
permanent water supply.
•	
Concerns with the ability to gain access to water (equity).
•	
Water quality issues e.g. salinity.
•	
Threat of other natural disasters such as bushfire 
and dust storms.
•	
Reduced access to water for the environment.
•	
Impacts to culturally significant sites for 
First Nations Peoples.
•	
Post-drought, farmers can be slow to restock due to the need 
to give pastures time to recover and limited access to capital.
•	
Decline in water bird, fish, and aquatic plant populations, as 
well as decreases in terrestrial plant and animal populations 
•	
Drought has negative environmental changes that 
accumulate over time. Climate change exacerbates land 
degradation, creating a reinforcing feedback loop between 
climate change, land degradation and drought.
•	
Risks of parasites and worm infestations. A number of 
conditions occur more commonly when drought-feeding, 
especially when livestock are congregated on small areas 
due to drought-feeding situations.
•	
Look at opportunities to minimise evaporation from 
waterbodies and evapotranspiration from plants, overall 
maintaining the availability of surface water. 
•	
Changes in climate patterns such as El Nino and the Indian 
Ocean Dipole, will affect the frequency and magnitude of 
rainfall events over NSW. 
Table 13  Long list of opportunities tested during the co-design process with SRGs

98
5.3.	Priority actions
To meet the objectives of the Plan, actions have been 
developed under the five themes (with accompanying 
sub-themes) identified throughout this Plan.
Through the SRG’s and one to one meeting with 
stakeholders’ data was gathered on: 
1.	
What was working well to respond to drought, 
2.	
What was not working well, and 
3.	
What needed to change. 
This process helped to identify and focus the idea 
development on existing measures that the community 
valued, those interventions that didn’t support resilience 
and those that existed and either needed to be changed 
because a component of the system wasn’t working or 
there is a need that isn’t being met e.g there is drought 
information available however the gap/missing element is 
that there was a lack of awareness about where to find this 
information therefore how can the plan address this gap. 
The pathways to increasing resilience are based on 
the community response in identifying their highest 
vulnerabilities to drought, their greatest source of ‘pain’ 
or where they have identified that the market is failing. 
This community voice is echoed in the regional data 
highlighted in section 2 of this Plan. 
The actions have been characterised as absorptive, 
adaptive and transformative. Achieving a level of 
resilience will be determined by many factors including 
the ability to influence behaviour change and participate 
in resilience initiatives. Meaning that actions can have 
differing levels of impact depending on the level of 
uptake by the individual. 
A range of resilience levels are indicated across several 
actions where they level of uptake of the activity can be 
variable an example of this could be extension focused 
on improving soil quality and pest management. Some 
participants will learn some new skills that they can 
moderately incorporate into their business that will help 
through the next drought whilst other primary producers 
may have be able to incorporate more components 
of the extension work into their business to achieve 
adaptive change whilst other producers are able to 
connect with other complimentary programs that have 
a more transformative impact on their business. Much 
of this variance in resilience levels is down to addressing 
the barriers to change. 
Actions have been categorised as absorptive where 
an intervention is likely to reduce the impact of 
drought. This assumes that current resilience levels 
are maintained and through extension of the activity 
a greater number of community members can 
participate.
Actions are classified as adaptive where the activity 
supports system modification or change that if 
adopted will increase overall responsiveness to 
drought through better preparedness and planning. 
Transformative change is identified where there is a 
complete redesign of the system.
Each theme provides a detailed need for the resilience 
action, specific and prioritised actions, the resilience 
frameworks that applies to each theme or sub-theme 
and the delivery model that includes a lead agency 
and potential partners. 
The Plan actions have been discussed with some 
delivery partners to canvas their willingness to lead and 
support the implementation of this Plan.  Many of these 
responses were provided on a local level and signified 
a real desire to make changes for the benefit of the 
region’s communities. Further acceptance testing would 
be required to gain complete consensus with the State 
and Commonwealth Government and delivery partners 
where significant resources and funding are identified. 
5.4.	Theory of Change 
The FDF aims to enhance the public good by building 
drought resilience in Australia's agricultural sector, 
the agricultural landscape, and communities 
(DAWE, 2020). This RDRP has incorporated the 
three types of resilience (environment, social and 
economic) into each of the drought resilience 
actions considered as part of the process. 
The theory of change used in this RDRP to investigate 
the ways in which economic, environmental and social 
resilience can contribute to the Central West vision 
for drought resilience is outlined in Table 14 below. 
Using the FDF model (DAWE, 2020), the table provides 
a more explicit theory of change demonstrating 
the link between each step in the process. 
To recap, the Plan’s vision is “Our vision is to create 
resilient, healthy, and prosperous communities who 
thrive through the challenges of drought. We wish to 
be a liveable, connected, and inclusive rural region. We 
look to prioritise innovation that helps secure our natural 
resources and leads to assured and flexible employment 
opportunities” and defines the current state of the 
Region’s resilience and what needs to change?

99
If  (you do this)
Then
Has the Impact of
To create 
transformational change 
Contributes to the vision
Economic Resilience
If there is more drought resilient Research, 
Development, Extension and Adoption and new 
technologies are developed and made more 
accessible 
Then more primary producers will adopt new 
technologies and production techniques that allow 
them to better respond to drought. 
Then there is increased ability to businesses to 
prepare, plan for drought. 
Promoting regional 
businesses that are self-
reliant, productive, innovative 
and profitable. 
Healthy diversified 
businesses and industry that 
interact with and contribute 
to a complex and wider 
economy.
Resilient, healthy, and 
prosperous communities who 
thrive through the challenges 
of drought. Who are liveable, 
connected, and inclusive 
rural region.
If there is greater access and awareness of data 
information and early warning indicators for 
businesses and communities 
Then there is an increased ability for businesses 
and communities to manage and assess risk and 
install timely interventions. 
Providing varied regional 
employment opportunities 
that meet the needs of the 
region and its residents.
That prioritise innovation 
that helps secure natural 
resources and leads to 
assured and flexible 
employment opportunities.
If businesses within the community have increased 
awareness and access to business planning and 
risk management expertise 
The businesses will be better prepared to manage, 
respond and recover from drought reducing the 
financial exposure to drought. 
If communities can diversify their economies to 
include industries that provide greater sources of 
income.
Then there will be less reliance on agriculture, 
providing more diverse employment opportunities, 
filling labour shortages, creating more diverse 
communities that are more able to withstand the 
economic pressures of drought.
Environmental resilience
If local governments, businesses and communities 
are better able to understand their natural 
capital and increased awareness of best practice 
techniques 
Then they will better manage natural resources 
through improved landscapes which produce 
better environmental outcomes
Regional landscapes that 
are healthy, sustainable and 
functioning. 
Environmental management 
is connected across 
landscapes with 
communities, governments, 
primary producers and other 
stakeholders creating diverse 
systems that are responsive.
If governments are better able to manage water 
resources through new and innovative practices, 
appropriate infrastructure and increased 
collaboration and information sharing.
Then they can reduce the impacts of drought and 
produce better environmental outcomes. 
Regional infrastructure that 
is reliable and fit for future 
community needs.
If governments are better able to manage and 
develop reliable and appropriate climate adapted 
infrastructure through new and innovative 
practices, increased collaboration and information 
sharing.
Then councils can reduce climate vulnerable 
assets and provide better environmental 
outcomes.
If governments and communities are better able 
to share information and gain knowledge on 
innovative environmental practices.
Then communities will be more self-empowered to 
manage their own natural resources.

100
If  (you do this)
Then
Has the Impact of
To create 
transformational change 
Contributes to the vision
Social Resilience
If community leaders exercise their 
leadership skills confidently and if 
community members participate in social 
and professional community networks and 
interagency partnerships.
Then there will be greater connectedness, 
purpose and stronger social capital that 
supports drought planning and efforts to 
increase resilience. 
Communities that are 
resourceful, adaptable 
and thriving. 
Communities that respond 
to drought cohesively 
and effectively drawing 
on the social capital, 
collective preparedness 
and inclusive community 
networks.
If information and knowledge on drought 
preparation and planning is shared in 
communities and led by community leaders.
Then there will be greater planning and 
preparedness for drought in new and 
innovative ways.
If community leaders understand who 
forms the basis of their communities and 
can incorporate this knowledge into their 
development of services and infrastructure.
Then services and infrastructure are adapted 
to suit those most vulnerable to drought and 
changing climate conditions 
Communities that are 
inclusive and whose needs 
are understood. 
If community leaders can improve the access 
to mental health services and communities 
can improve their awareness of the 
importance of good mental health.
Then there can better management of the 
risk factors of mental health and increased 
utilisation of services which can produce 
better health outcomes. 
Communities that are 
connected and healthy.
If communities can improve collaboration, 
knowledge sharing education and training 
opportunities.
Then there will be greater connectedness, 
purpose and stronger social capital that 
supports drought planning and efforts to 
increase resilience.
Table 14  Theory of change

101
The LGAs of the Central West expressed a desire for their communities to have a diverse 
range of industry and services that meet the community need and reduce the impacts 
of drought. Some LGAs are heavily reliant on agriculture as evidenced earlier in this 
Plan and expressed a desire for both increased diversity in the local economy and in the 
agricultural sector. The importance of attracting investment to allow for sustainable 
growth and increasing employment opportunities across a range of services and 
industries is recognised. Ensuring appropriate infrastructure is in place to support this 
growth is also key and actions associated with this are outlined in Theme 5. 
Program logic 
Vision: Our vision is to create resilient, healthy, and prosperous communities who thrive 
through the challenges of drought. We wish to be a liveable, connected, and inclusive 
rural region. We look to prioritise innovation that helps secure our natural resources 
and leads to assured and flexible employment opportunities.
Impact: Regional businesses that are self-reliant, productive and profitable and well 
prepared for drought, and 
Regional communities that are well connected, resourceful and adaptable. That 
provide opportunities for members to live, grow and thrive.  
Outcomes: More regional businesses that are prepared for drought and better able 
to manage risk, creation of networks and social connectedness through bringing 
together likeminded people to work together to proactively respond to drought, 
provides absorptive assistance that will allow businesses to weather the financial 
impact of drought and reduces unemployment in the region during enduring droughts, 
increasing knowledge and skills across regional businesses and allows better planning 
for drought, providing education and training to build capacity in the region to respond 
to and recover from drought, builds new skills and capacity that support businesses 
to better plan, manage and adapt businesses to drought, increasing the education 
and awareness of innovative practices that can be adopted through planning to 
provide better environmental outcomes (reduced emissions), promotes increased 
collaboration, networking and social connectedness and empowering communities 
to work together to solve problems on varying scales that suit their communities’ 
resources, increases the number of agricultural businesses adopting innovative 
production technologies, improved environmental outcomes from adopting agricultural 
practices that are less impactful on the environment, the volume and adoption of 
relevant R&D increases. 
Activities: Business program with multi-faceted offerings including crisis/emergency 
offerings/incentives to retain workforce/education and skills building/mentoring and 
learning opportunities. Increase Business and Economic Development activity to support 
diversification, increased coordination and promotion of the region’s tourism, cross 
collaboration across LGA’s, promotion and adoption of innovative and new technologies, 
continued investment in R&D, improved information and timeliness of data.
Stakeholders: Regional communities, Business NSW, Business Chambers of 
Commerce, Regional Development Australia, Business Education Program providers, 
Central NSW BizHQ, Rural Financial Counselling, Consortium of Local Councils, State 
Government (including DPIRD), Business owners, Central NSW Joint Organisation, local 
event companies. Local Land Services / Research and Development Corporations NSW 
Farmers Association, IT providers, Southern NSW Innovation Hub, Australian Climate 
Service, National Field Days, private and not-for-profit researchers (e.g, FarmLink) and 
other private extension and adoption providers.
Programs and Plans: Regional Economic Development Strategies Cowra, Orange/
Blayney and Cabonne and Southern West Slopes, Local Economic Development 
Strategies - Local Lands Services Drought Adoption Officers, Young Farmer Business 
Program, Farm Business Resilience Program, Saving our Soils During Drought, Carbon 
and emissions, rural financial counselling service, Rural Assistance Authority, NSW 
Farmers Federation Policy, National Agricultural Innovation Agenda, National Primary 
Industries Research Development & Extension Framework 
Theme 1:
The Economy – 
Diverse and resilient regional economies and agricultural businesses

102
Insights from consultation and the need
The region’s businesses especially those in highly reliant agricultural regions identified how impacted they are by drought and the challenges this creates for the broader business 
community. Improving the access to education and opportunities that help build business skills including financial literacy and business mentoring are critical to building drought 
resilience. There’s a need for more streamlined support systems and resources that are easy to navigate. Early education and training in digital and business skills are essential to 
help businesses diversify income streams and manage resources effectively during droughts.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type 
1.1
Advocate for the development of a State-wide Business Drought Resilience Program that supports businesses outside the 
current agricultural and agricultural service businesses model. 
Adaptive when realised
1.2
The business program should include crisis/emergency offerings similar to primary producers including financial support, 
extension of financial counselling and advice, low interest loans that support areas such as digital resilience and built 
infrastructure along with tax incentives.
Absorptive to Adaptive
1.3
The business program should include incentives for regional businesses to support them in maintaining their workforce 
throughout drought.
Absorptive
1.4
Incentivise and promote small business education programs to help business owners prepare their businesses for drought 
and increase business skills that allow them to better plan for and manage risk. Advocate for increased financial support 
and resources to NSW Business Chambers to assist them in increased opportunities that build skills to meet their 
community’s needs. 
Adaptive
1.5
Provide education to businesses to adapt workplaces to become more efficient through energy use, climate adaptation 
and design.
Absorptive to Adaptive
1.6
Create mentorship opportunities for small business to learn from other business owners in their LGA and across the region.
In some of the smaller, more informal business networks, this could be supported by Councils providing a location for 
likeminded businesspeople (across all industries) to come together and discuss business challenges/opportunities where it 
has been challenging to formalise a business network.
Adaptive 
Sub-theme:
Economic support and education

103
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive 
The incentive components of the business program will provide 
temporary financial relief to support businesses through the 
immediate drought.
Adaptive 
Gaining new skills and knowledge can assist in preparing and 
adapting businesses for future droughts. 
Transformative
Implementing the actions contained in the Economic Development 
Strategies provide transformative change. Bringing new industry, 
infrastructure and services to the region allows for new and 
expanded businesses and employment opportunities. 
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Business NSW
Potential delivery partners
Business Chambers of Commerce, Regional Development 
Australia, Business Education Program providers, Central 
NSW BizHQ, Rural Financial Counselling, Consortium 
of Local Councils, State Government (including DPIRD, 
Business owners, Central NSW Joint Organisation, local 
event companies.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$ 
Significant Financial Support Required
Sub-theme:
Economic support and education 
Key outcomes
•	 Creation of networks and social connectedness through bringing together 
likeminded people to work together to proactively respond to drought.
•	 Provides absorptive assistance that will allow businesses to better 
weather the financial impact of drought.
•	 Provides absorptive assistance that will allow businesses to weather the 
financial impact of drought and reduces unemployment in the region.
•	 Increasing knowledge and skills allows better planning for drought. 
•	 Providing education and training to build capacity in the region to respond 
to and recover from drought.
•	 Builds new skills and capacity that support businesses to better plan, 
manage and adapt businesses to drought.
•	 Increasing the education and awareness of innovative practices that can 
be adopted through planning to provide better environmental outcomes 
(reduced emissions). 
•	 Promotes increased collaboration, networking and social connectedness 
and empowering communities to work together to solve problems on 
varying scales that suit their communities’ resources.

104
Insights from consultation and the need
Many communities identified having a strong agricultural sector as being important to the prosperity of their LGA. Diversifying local economies reduces this reliance however 
further support is needed to attract other industries to the region. While initiatives such as agri-tourism and business diversification have been beneficial, comprehensive economic 
development plans focusing on bringing in new industries and infrastructure are crucial to strengthen regional resilience. 
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
1.7
The consortium of Councils to continue to implement the Economic Development Strategies for each LGA. These plans 
have highlighted the specific and detailed needs of the communities on both a regional and LGA level. Where there are 
synergies across the various Economic Development Strategies the LGAs should utilise the Central Joint Organisation to 
progress the action(s). To support the continuous improvement of these strategies a Business Community Survey should be 
developed as a baseline for each LGA and identifies business attitudes/needs/sentiment that will assist in informing future 
refinement and development of activities.   
Adaptive 
and Transformative
1.8
Investigate opportunities to promote and coordinate regional tourism across the LGAs, collaborating to benefit from 
events held in other LGAs. Increase the coordination and promotion of local events between LGAs. Some of the smaller 
LGAs would benefit from Council taking a more active role in promoting and coordinating the information on tourist events. 
For example, developing a calendar of events, and a ‘what to do and see’ for the area which includes retail business and 
attractions.
Absorptive
Sub-theme:
Economic diversity and development

105
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive 
Increased tourism would provide an alternative economic source to 
diversify the local economy during drought. 
Transformative
Implementing the actions contained in the Economic Development 
Strategies provide transformative change. Bringing new industry, 
infrastructure and services to the region allows for new and 
expanded businesses and employment opportunities. 
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Consortium of Local Councils / Destination NSW
Potential delivery partners
DPIRD, NSW Government, RDA, Central NSW Joint 
Organisation, media, private tourist operators and 
providers and not-for-profits in the region including 
Orange360.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$ 
Significant Financial Support Required
Sub-theme:
Economic diversity and development 
Key outcomes
•	 A robust regional economy that is less impacted by drought as existing 
service providers are able to adapt and transformative new industries and 
infrastructure are created. 
•	 Creates new sources of income and employment opportunities which 
encourage population migration. 
•	 Reduced disruption and recovery time from the impacts of drought. 
•	 To create greater diversity of employment opportunities within the region. 
•	 Creates a diverse and more inclusive community that supports 
population growth.

106
Insights from consultation and the need
Agriculture is a key source of income and employment for many of the LGAs within this plan. Resilience is considered primarily through improving diversification in agriculture that 
supports new innovation and technology which may enable transformative change. Primary producers have made significant improvements in water efficiency and land management 
practices, but ongoing support in adopting innovative farming techniques, new technologies and improved water infrastructure/ security is required to enhance long-term 
agricultural resilience.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
1.9
The consortium of Councils to continue to implement the Economic Development Strategies for each LGA. These plans 
have highlighted the specific and detailed needs of the communities on both a regional and LGA level. Where there are 
synergies across the various Economic Development Strategies the LGAs should utilise the Central Joint Organisation to 
progress the action(s). To support the continuous improvement of these strategies a Business Community Survey should be 
developed as a baseline for each LGA and identifies business attitudes/needs/sentiment that will assist in informing future 
refinement and development of activities.   
Absorptive, Adaptive and 
Transformative
1.10
Investigate opportunities to promote and coordinate regional tourism across the LGAs, collaborating to benefit from events 
held in other LGAs. Increase the coordination and promotion of local events between LGAs. Some of the smaller LGAs 
would benefit from Council taking a more active role in promoting and coordinating the information on tourist events. For 
example, developing a calendar of events, and a ‘what to do and see’ for the area which includes retail business 
and attractions.
Absorptive, Adaptive and 
Transformative
1.11
Support and facilitate capability building to enable producers to take advantage of alternative income streams through 
natural capital accounting and valuing ecosystem services such as biodiversity and carbon.
Absorptive, Adaptive
1.12
Increasing the awareness and understanding of climate data and early warning indicators to support improved 
decision-making.
Absorptive, Adaptive 
1.13
Increased awareness and information dissemination of Commonwealth and State Government Programs that assist with 
the purchase of drought resilient and emergency infrastructure including water and grain storage and support services.
Absorptive, Adaptive
Sub-theme:
Agriculture

107
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Uptake of natural capital opportunities act to improve the 
environmental outcomes from farms and diversify primary 
production incomes. 
Adaptive
Education and increased awareness allows users to make adaptive 
change to existing systems. 
Transformative
Business transformation from the adoption of new agritech, value 
adding opportunities and natural capital 
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Local Land Services / Research and Development 
Corporations.
Potential delivery partners
NSW Farmers Association, IT providers, Southern NSW 
Innovation Hub, DPIRD, Australian Climate Service, 
National Field Days, private and not-for-profit researchers 
(e.g, FarmLink) and other private extension and 
adoption providers
Timeframes
Medium term: 3-4 years
Cost estimates
$$  
Additional Resources Required
Sub-theme:
Agriculture
Key outcomes
•	 Increased R&D into innovative drought resilient production techniques 
and practices.
•	 This will allow on-going R&D into innovative techniques that will improve 
drought resilience and increase adaptive capacity through providing 
practical production solutions.
•	 Increased awareness, knowledge and skills on new production practices 
that depending on the level of adoption can reduce the impact of 
agriculture on the natural environment. The degree to which this 
knowledge is incorporated into agricultural systems will have improve 
resilience on varying levels. 
•	 Increased awareness and education on the potential for alternate income 
streams from utilising agricultural land that also provide more favourable 
environmental impacts.
•	 Increased awareness and knowledge on climate data that can be utilise to 
prepare for and manage risk prior to and throughout drought.  
•	 Increase the awareness of existing absorptive and adaptive drought 
measures to promote an increase in uptake. Increased adoption of 
infrastructure will improve drought preparedness.  
•	 Continue to invest in new practices and innovations that allow agriculture 
to better respond and recover from drought. 
•	 Maintain the pace of current drought tolerant systems 
•	 Build capacity in more agricultural businesses to respond to changing 
climatic conditions. 
•	 Allows agricultural businesses to improve preparedness for drought and 
mitigation of risk.
•	 Supports increased uptake of infrastructure that supports increased 
self-reliance and preparedness in agricultural businesses
•	 Better evidenced based decision making on business management 
and production.

108
This theme is focussed on protecting and conserving the natural environment whilst 
managing natural hazard impacts and promoting renewable energy industry and 
climate change adaptation. Provision of quality, secure water is a high priority for many 
of the LGAs.
Program logic 
Vision: Our vision is to create resilient, healthy, and prosperous communities who thrive 
through the challenges of drought. We wish to be a liveable, connected, and inclusive 
rural region. We look to prioritise innovation that helps secure our natural resources 
and leads to assured and flexible employment opportunities.
Impact: Regional landscapes that are functional and sustainable with healthy natural 
capital and better able to recover from disturbances. 
Regional economies that are stable and support key industries. 
Communities that are self-empowered to manage their own natural resources and are 
inclusive and whose needs are understood.
Outcomes: Increases engagement communities in conservation efforts, promotes 
local and regional alliances to work together to build capacity and learn from each 
other, promotes longer-term opportunities that increase the efficiency of water use, 
integrates local and indigenous knowledge into conservation practices, increased 
planning and adaptation to the changing climate.
Activities/Actions: adopt more drought tolerant plants and gardens, information, 
knowledge and education building, , provide education and awareness on efficient 
water use, retaining water and re-hydrating the landscape, innovative ways to provide 
education, implement current strategies for climate adaptation and renewable energy, 
adapting to climate via innovative design measures, First Nations Peoples knowledge 
water and environmental management. 
Stakeholders: Consortium of Local Councils, Central Tablelands Water, NSW 
DCCEEW, local gardening providers and nurseries, architects and building designers, 
NSW Government, consultants and adaptation specialists, community, researchers and 
scientists, Schools, Innovation Hubs, LLS, DPIRD, First Nations peoples, WaterNSW, 
Central West Council Environmental & Waterway Alliance, Environmental Watering 
Advisory Group
Programs: Central West and Orana Regional Plan 2041, Central NSW JO Water 
Advocacy Plan, Blayney Shire Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032, Cabonne 
Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032, Cowra Shire Council Community Strategic Plan 
2017-2036, Orange City Council Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032 Macquarie-
Castlereagh Regional Water Strategy 2023, Lachlan (draft) Regional Water Strategy 
2023, Weddin 2027 Community Strategic Plan, Future Drought Fund - Drought 
Resilient Soils and Landscapes grants, NSW Landcare Enabling Program 2023-2027
Theme 2:
The Environment –  
Protection of the Natural and Built Environment

109
Insights from consultation and the need
Efforts to protect both the natural and built environment are seen as crucial for long-term resilience to drought. Communities highlighted the importance of managing water 
resources effectively, including improving water infrastructure and promoting sustainable land management practices. There’s a growing need to incorporate climate change 
adaptation strategies, such as drought-tolerant plantings and landscape hydration initiatives, to preserve ecosystems and reduce the impact on built environments. Increasing public 
awareness about sustainable practices in both urban and rural settings is necessary to preserve the environment during droughts. Many of the LGA’s across the Plan area were keen 
to explore how their communities on an individual level could contribute to improved environmental outcomes through practice change. 
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
2.1
When opportunities arise, convert public greenspaces to more drought tolerant plants and gardens, suited to the climate 
and that utilise less water. 
Absorptive, Adaptive 
2.2
Provide education and awareness to the community on:
efficient water use, suitable plantings and grasses for local gardens, and watering practices to maximise efficient water 
absorption, as well as how to protect and maintain groundcover to reduce the likelihood of soil erosion. 
Provide education regarding the use of greywater and suitable reuse. 
Provide information and education to the community and primary producers on how to retain water in the landscape and 
how to re-hydrate the landscape.
Absorptive, Adaptive 
and Transformative
2.3
Where available, utilise recycled water to maintain local greenspaces and maintaining infrastructure. 
Where recycled sources are in excess of need, investigate options for other users who may be able to use recycled water, 
to reduce the burden on the potable system. 
Absorptive, Adaptive 
and Transformative
2.4
Incorporate First Nations people’s knowledge and engage them in decision-making process concerning water and 
environmental management (refer to Regional Water Strategies).
Adaptive
2.5
Advocate for improved housing design and landscaping requirements which reduce water use and improve energy 
efficiency of homes.
Adaptive to 
Transformative
2.6
Councils to continue to plan and implement their climate change (adaption and mitigation) strategies and management 
plans. Adaptation strategies are focussed on adapting to the projected changes whereas mitigation strategies aim to 
reduce the emissions and therefore degree of changes expected.
Adaptive to 
Transformative
2.7
Councils to develop (where appropriate) and implement renewable energy expansion and/or energy efficiency/ net-zero 
emissions programs and strategies.
Adaptive and 
Transformative
Theme 2:
The Environment –  
Protection of the Natural and Built Environment

110
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Measures that reduce the reliance and increase the extension of 
natural resources, through reduced water use and lessen the impact 
of drought.
Adaptive
Considers new information, education and awareness are providing 
opportunities to modify existing practices and systems in response 
to drought.
Transformative
The development of new and innovative technologies, practices and 
changing infrastructure and operations creates more impactful and 
revolutionary change. 
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Consortium of Local Councils.
Potential delivery partners
Central Tablelands Water, NSW DCCEEW, local gardening 
providers and nurseries, architects and building designers, 
NSW Government, consultants and adaptation specialists, 
community, researchers and scientists, Schools, Innovation 
Hubs, LLS, DPIRD, First Nations peoples, WaterNSW, 
Central West Council Environmental & Waterway Alliance, 
Environmental Watering Advisory Group
Timeframes
Medium term: 3-4 years
Cost estimates
$$  
Additional Resources Required
Key outcomes
•	 Increases engagement communities in conservation efforts
•	 Promotes local and regional alliances to work together to build capacity 
and learn from each other. 
•	 Promotes longer-term opportunities that increase the efficiency 
of water use (recycling).  
•	 Integrates local and indigenous knowledge into conservation practices.
•	 Increased planning and adaptation to the changing climate.
Theme 2:
The Environment –  
Protection of the Natural and Built Environment

111
Seeking a strong, transparent, and accountable leadership, community involvement 
and engagement in the decision-making process, investing in the development of 
future leaders and improving community ownership and cohesion. Many stakeholders 
look to Councils for assistance (information and guidance) during droughts.
Program logic 
Vision: Our vision is to create resilient, healthy, and prosperous communities who thrive 
through the challenges of drought. We wish to be a liveable, connected, and inclusive 
rural region. We look to prioritise innovation that helps secure our natural resources 
and leads to assured and flexible employment opportunities
Impact: Communities that are resourceful, adaptable and thriving. Communities that 
are inclusive and whose needs are understood. 
Communities that are connected and healthy with increased social capital. 
Outcomes: increased collaboration between partner agencies, timelier interventions, 
builds shared knowledge of agency responsibilities, builds local capacity, increased 
cohesion across agencies through improved relationships, and inspires innovative 
solutions to local challenges, encourages self-organisation and increases 
empowerment of communities, fosters diversity and inclusivity to improve innovation 
and quicker adaption, progresses the regions identified issues, utilises the capacity of 
the JO to deliver for the broader region, seeks to address the gaps in current resilience 
measures, promotes better evidenced/data based decision making, knowledge and 
information for risk management and drought preparedness, assists with building 
climate knowledge, greater access to drought information, enhanced connectivity and 
communication from more coordinated approach to drought information.
Activities: leverage and build existing networks, mapping of organisational 
relationships, increased coordination or information sharing and distribution, improved 
collaboration and drought preparedness, increased access to data and information, 
build local capacity to respond, improved information and knowledge, extending and 
building on the resilience needs already identified through advocacy.
Stakeholders: Consortium of Councils, DPIRD, LLS, Rural Financial Counselling, RRA, 
WaterNSW, (NSW) DCCEEW, NSW Government, Local Health District and Primary 
Health Network, Bureau of Meteorology, Not for Profits e.g. Salvation Army, Australian 
Climate Service, Central NSW Joint Organisation, NSW Farmers Association.
Programs: Central West and Orana Regional Plan 2041, Centroc (2018) Drought Issues 
Paper, Climate Services for Agriculture FDF program
Theme 3:
Governance – 
Leadership and Collaboration

112
Insights from consultation and the need
Strong leadership and collaboration between local councils, community groups, and government agencies are essential for building resilience to drought. Many expressed the need 
for better coordination and communication across different levels of government to streamline drought response efforts. There’s also a need for more collaborative planning that 
involves stakeholders from diverse sectors, ensuring local knowledge and expertise are included in decision-making processes. Establishing clear leadership roles and fostering 
partnerships between governments, industries, and communities would assist in enhancing the region’s capacity to respond proactively to drought-related challenges.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
3.1
Leverage existing networks established for the coordination of natural disasters to discuss climatic conditions, 
potential drought responses, new products, services and information generated by each of the services. This will allow 
participants to maintain an up-to-date knowledge of ‘who is doing what’ or ‘who’s who’. This will create a clear picture 
of which organisations are providing different services. Mapping of these relationships reduces confusion about where 
to access support, the referrals processes, and easier identification of gaps that need to be addressed to further 
support recovery in communities. The future Disaster Adaption Plans, required by the NSW Reconstruction Authority 
to be developed, provide an opportunity for each Council area and the Central West region to identify if any additional 
resources are needed for coordination or information sharing and distribution during challenging times.
Absorptive to Adaptive
3.2
Progress drought issues identified in the Centroc (2018) Drought Issues Paper which references key drought issues for 
the region that require further investigation and action. Some of the focus areas are drought assistance programs for 
business, improved coordination of drought assistance, drought preparedness, water management/infrastructure and 
improved collaboration with other agencies and health impacts of drought.  
Adaptive to Transformative
3.3
Promote access to early warning information and data that allows intervention services to commence and communities 
and agencies to be alerted to the changing climatic conditions, and consider their response. This action is partly 
completed via the Climate Services for Agriculture FDF program and work between the Southern NSW Innovation Hub 
and partner universities on early insights dashboard. This may be a dedicated person who would provide and interpret 
climate data and outline relevance within the local context.
Absorptive, Adaptive
3.4
Advocate for improved processes regarding applying for support, increased equity across drought areas, as drought 
does not stop at a LGA area, and reduced red tape throughout application process.
Absorptive
3.5
Create a dedicated drought page on Council’s website that provides an avenue to access locally based drought 
information from other agencies. This should include references to: DPIRD’s drought hub, rural financial counselling 
service, mental health resources, business support and Bureau of Meteorology climate and rainfall data and other early 
warning indicator data. 
Absorptive, Adaptive
Theme 3:
Governance – 
Leadership and Collaboration

Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Early intervention allows for improved ability to prepare for and 
absorb the impacts.
Adaptive
Early indicator of changes provides warning/lead time for 
system adaptation.
Transformative
 The ability to deliver system change identified in Centroc (2018) 
Drought Issues Paper will create large scale change for the region.
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Various
Potential delivery partners
Consortium of Councils, DPIRD, LLS, Rural Financial 
Counselling, RRA, WaterNSW, (NSW) DCCEEW, NSW 
Government, Local Health District and Primary Health 
Network, Bureau of Meteorology, Not for Profits e.g. 
Salvation Army, Australian Climate Service, Central NSW 
Joint Organisation, NSW Farmers Association.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$  
Significant Financial Support Required
Key outcomes
•	 Supports increased collaboration between partner agencies responsible 
for drought. 
•	 Allows timelier intervention of resources from certain areas when required. 
•	 Builds shared knowledge of agency responsibilities and allows 
identification of gaps and potential options to address these challenges. 
•	 Builds local capacity to respond on a local level. 
•	 Increased cohesion across agencies through improved relationships. 
•	 Helps build relationships and inspire innovative solutions to local challenges
•	 Encourages self-organisation and increases empowerment of communities 
to deliver solutions. 
•	 Fosters diversity and inclusivity through leveraging existing networks 
across multiple organisations to improve innovation and quicker adaption. 
•	 Progresses the regions identified issues. 
•	 Utilises the capacity of the JO to deliver for the broader region. 
•	 Seeks to address the gaps in current resilience measures. 
•	 Promotes better evidenced/data based decision making.  
•	 Provides knowledge and information for risk management and 
drought preparedness. 
•	 Assists with building local capacity and climate knowledge.  
•	 Allows timelier access to relevant critical supports that can help alleviate 
economic and social pressures of drought. 
•	 Builds and fosters trust through improved communication and accountability.
•	 Expands on local knowledge of drought resources that can be accessed to 
assist with preparedness for drought as well as management and recovery. 
•	 Provides a consolidation of drought resources that provide access to 
information and services that can assist with improving resilience. 
•	 Provides greater access to drought information that allows users to be self 
empowered in seeking further services. 
•	 Enhanced connectivity and communication from more coordinated 
approach to drought information. 
Theme 3:
Governance – 
Leadership and Collaboration

114
Services that support a healthy, active, inclusive and liveable community with good 
governance and strong sense of shared responsibility. Community and social bonds are 
a keystone to getting people through tough times. 
Program logic 
Vision: Our vision is to create resilient, healthy, and prosperous communities who thrive 
through the challenges of drought. We wish to be a liveable, connected, and inclusive 
rural region. We look to prioritise innovation that helps secure our natural resources 
and leads to assured and flexible employment opportunities
Impact: Regional communities work together in trusted relationships, they are self-
empowered and well connected. 
Regional communities that are resourceful, adaptable and thriving.
Outcomes: self-organisation and community empowerment, improves social 
networks and preparedness, opportunities for communities to invest in resilience 
building activities, training and education that will benefit other segments of 
the community, increasing knowledge and education in mental health provides 
opportunities to intervene earlier, creates increased cohesion and belonging through 
supportive networks and in the longer-term healthier stronger communities, improves 
coordination and resources of existing activities that maybe operating in isolation, 
identify services that meet the specific needs of the community and take into account 
the nuances of each region and its population, increases coordination and awareness 
of the existing health resources available, seeks to foster diversity and inclusivity in 
developing new services to support good mental health, seeks to promote redundancy 
through building access to mental health services through a range of avenues, 
increased relationships and community knowledge, investment in social capital 
through increased opportunities for leadership training.
Activities: Develop Local Resilience Community Funds, opportunities for mental health 
training, community resilience and leadership training, increased access to mental 
health services, increased awareness and, incentives to support trainees and upskilling 
programs. matrix of skills required in each community against those people looking 
for employment, decentralise training and deliver local options so that participants 
can stay and learn in their communities. Partnerships with universities or other training 
providers may assist with obtaining local providers, retraining options for those in 
agriculturally reliant communities, Improve digital literacy 
Stakeholders: Community, Consortium of Councils, Local health district, training 
providers in mental health and resilience NSW Health – Local Health District and 
Primary Health Network local health providers, not for profits e.g., Rural Doctors 
Network, researchers/universities, education providers e.g. schools, Local community 
groups (Mens/ Womens Sheds, Lions Clubs, Progress Associations, etc.), LLS, NSW 
Rural Fire Service (RFS) brigades.  Local employers, TAFE, NSW Department of 
Education, Group and local registered training organisations, Private education 
providers, Business Chambers of Commerce, Central NSW BizHQ, Regional 
Development Australia, digital skills providers e.g. nbn Local, NSW Government, 
Central NSW Joint Organisation.
Programs: Central West and Orana Regional Plan 2041, Cabonne Community Strategic 
Plan 2022-2032, Cowra Shire Council Community Strategic Plan 2017-2036, Orange 
City Council Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032, Weddin 2027 Community Strategic 
Plan, NSW Central West Food and Fibre Strategy
Theme 4:
Community –  
Vibrant, connected, and supported communities

115
Insights from consultation and the need
Drought can be particularly isolating for certain demographics within the community. The longevity and severity of the drought can exacerbate this impact. The importance of 
supporting community events and gatherings is vital for maintaining social cohesion. Continued support for community-driven social programs and strategies to engage more 
volunteers are necessary. Informal gatherings that foster social bonds are also essential for community well-being during difficult times.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
4.1
Investigate the options to develop Local Resilience Community Funds that sit within and are administered by the 
community. These would support social resilience and increase self-reliance through:
•	 One-off contributions for new events or for existing events that need support to continue during the drought, for 
example, cul-de-sac parties.
•	 Provide opportunities for community members to apply for or be offered mental health training to be able to support 
others within their community through drought. 
•	 Community Resilience training which focuses on providing skills and training to support those in leadership roles or 
recognised as leaders within the community. 
•	 Community events where mental health services can be accessed in a range of formal and informal channels.
Similar community-built funds exist amongst other communities including Upper Lachlan and Crookwell which provide 
a model as to how to establish this kind of fund. Having established, community-built funds in place provides an 
opportunity to build resilience skills prior to drought events.
Absorptive
Sub-theme:
Social connection

116
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Allows communities to absorb the impacts of droughts by 
supporting strengthening social connection.
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Community
Potential delivery partners
Consortium of Councils, Local health district, training 
providers in mental health and resilience.
Timeframes
Medium term: 3-4 years
Cost estimates
$$  
Additional Resources Required
Key outcomes
•	 Seeks to encourage self-organisation and community empowerment
•	 Improves social networks and preparedness. 
•	 Provides opportunities for communities to invest in resilience building 
activities, training and education that will flow through to other segments 
of the community as more of the community adopt these techniques. 
•	 Increasing knowledge and education in mental health provides 
opportunities to intervene earlier, creates increased cohesion and 
belonging through supportive networks and in the longer-term healthier 
stronger communities.  
•	 Improves coordination and resources of existing activities that maybe 
operating in isolation
•	 Seeks to encourage self-organisation and community empowerment
•	 Improves social networks and preparedness.  
Sub-theme:
Social connection

117
Insights from consultation and the need
Mental health was identified as a key impact of drought across all LGAs. The key challenges in this area were sighted as there being insufficient resources to meet the community 
needs, as resources are often not available in a timely manner or are hard to access and don’t necessarily meet the needs of regional and rural communities. Innovative solutions, 
such as peer support networks and mental health first aid training can provide critical early intervention. Raising awareness and reducing the stigma around mental health are key to 
building stronger, more resilient communities.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
4.2
Investigate alternative mental health services that meet the needs of people living in rural and remote communities and 
how these services might be made easier and timelier to access. This may include expansion of the peer worker model 
adopted by Local Health District during the last drought and opportunities through the education system that support 
youth mental health. 
Absorptive and 
Transformative
4.3
Identify a suitable organisation to identify, maintain and publish details of all the mental health services available in the 
region and what they offer. 
Absorptive
4.4
Increased access to mental health first aid and training and support programs that focus on maintaining and building 
good mental health in everyday life. This would include promotion of existing programs/ support such as the Rural 
Adversity Mental Health Program. As well as increasing resilience and leadership skills training delivered to the 
region’s youth.
Absorptive. 
Adaptive
Sub-theme:
Mental Health

118
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Training and education provide the ability to absorb the stresses 
associated with drought.
Transformative
Creating a new system to deliver these services.
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
NSW Health – Local Health District and Primary 
Health Network.
Potential delivery partners
Consortium of local Councils, local health providers, 
not for profits e.g., Rural Doctors Network, researchers/
universities, education providers e.g. schools, Local 
community groups (Mens/ Womens Sheds, Lions Clubs, 
Progress Associations, etc.), LLS, NSW Rural Fire Service 
(RFS) brigades.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$  
Significant Financial Support Required
Key outcomes
•	 Seeks to identify services that meet the specific needs of the community 
and take into account the nuances of each region and its population. 
•	 Increases coordination and awareness of the existing health resources 
available. 
•	 Promotes self-empowerment as communities are able to access the 
services they feel best meet their needs. 
•	 Seeks to foster diversity and inclusivity in developing new services to 
support good mental health. 
•	 Seeks to promote redundancy through building access to mental health 
services through a range of avenues.  
Sub-theme:
Mental Health

119
Insights from consultation and the need
To create resilient communities, residents require the skills, knowledge, training and resources to support them to be able to stay and live in their communities and create lives with 
purpose and meaning that also contribute to the economy. There’s a clear need for more accessible education and training opportunities, especially in areas that meet the community 
need, diversify skills in the agricultural sectors, build resilience and address climate risk assessment. Localised educational programs targeting both primary producers and small 
business owners, as well as youth, are essential to equip communities with the skills needed for long-term drought resilience.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
4.5
On a LGA level utilise the Registered Training Organisations to create a matrix of skills required in each community 
against those people looking for retraining to ensure that there is alignment between the two. 
Adaptive
4.6
Investigate options to decentralise training and deliver local options so that participants can stay and learn in their 
communities. Partnerships with universities or other training providers may assist with obtaining local providers.
Adaptive
4.7
Deliver timely retraining options for those in agriculturally reliant communities that may be stepping away from 
agriculture (due to drought) to avoid the likelihood of having these people leave the area. 
Absorptive to Adaptive
4.8
Council to support RDA and other agencies such as Country Women’s Association (CWA) to promote and work with 
local digital literacy providers e.g. National Broadband Network (nbn) Local, to rollout courses or programs to 
improve these skills. 
Absorptive to Adaptive
Sub-theme:
Education and training

DRAFT – Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Central West Region
120
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Resilience and leadership training will improve absorptive capacity
Adaptive
Retraining for displaced workers and trainees allows them to adapt 
to new circumstances with new skill development
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Various
Potential delivery partners
Local employers, TAFE, NSW Department of Education, 
Group and local registered training organisations, Private 
education providers, Business Chambers of Commerce, 
Central NSW BizHQ, Regional Development Australia, 
digital skills providers e.g. nbn Local, NSW Government, 
Consortium of Local Councils, Central NSW Joint 
Organisation.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$  
Significant Financial Support Required
Key outcomes
•	 Increased relationships and community knowledge. 
•	 Empowered community members through training and education
•	 Investment in social capital through increased opportunities for 
leadership training.
Sub-theme:
Education and training

121
Transport and infrastructure that supports and links the region and provides 
connectivity is paramount to creating liveable communities and supporting businesses 
and industry to diversify and grow. There are a several renewable energy zones 
proposed within and around the Central West which may assist with diversifying the 
economy as well as attracting new residents and providing new job opportunities. 
Major infrastructure projects also bring increased funding for services. It is vital that 
infrastructure and services can support the communities needs and are implemented 
with a sense of urgency.
Program logic 
Vision: Our vision is to create resilient, healthy, and prosperous communities who thrive 
through the challenges of drought. We wish to be a liveable, connected, and inclusive 
rural region. We look to prioritise innovation that helps secure our natural resources 
and leads to assured and flexible employment opportunities
Impact: Regional infrastructure that is reliable and fit for future community needs.
Outcomes: Increased reliability in regional assets when responding to drought, 
Improved cross-sector collaboration amongst agencies and communities, enhanced 
connectivity and communication through improved collaboration, develops a culture 
of trust amongst agencies and communities
Activities: Advocate for improved transport services, increased and reliable 
telecommunications, digital plan that identifies better connectivity and/or digital 
literacy, planning and repurposing of existing infrastructure and new climate 
adapted infrastructure.
Stakeholders: Consortium of local Councils, Central Tablelands Water, NSW DCCEEW, 
Basin Authority. NSW Government (including Transport for NSW), Telecommunications 
providers, RDA, nbn Local, local businesses, NSW Farmers Association
Programs: Central NSW JO Water Advocacy Plan, Central West and Orana Regional 
Plan 2041, Blayney Shire Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032 
Orange, Blayney and Cabonne REDS- 2023 Update, South West Slopes REDS- 2023 
Update, Macquarie-Castlereagh Regional Water Strategy 2023
Lachlan (draft) Regional Water Strategy 2023, NSW Central West Food and Fibre 
Strategy, Orange City Council Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032, Weddin 2027 
Community Strategic Plan, Cowra Shire Council Community Strategic Plan 2017-2036, 
Blayney Shire Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032 , Cabonne Community Strategic 
Plan 2022-2032, Central NSW Joint Organisation Transport Infrastructure Advocacy 
Plan (2024)
Future Transport 2056 Central West and Orana Regional Transport Plan
Theme 5:
Infrastructure – 
Built assets and technology

122
Insights from consultation and the need
The regions water resources were discussed throughout the Plan’s entirety ensuring water security and improving water management infrastructure are essential for building 
resilience to drought in this region and this is supported by the significant effort of the Consortia of Councils and the Central West JO. Expanding and building water infrastructure 
that meet the needs of the region’s industry and community needs along with educating the public on water-saving techniques are all necessary steps to secure reliable water access 
for both agricultural and urban areas.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
5.1
Continue to support and progress water security investigations identified in the following reports that benefit the region including: 
•	 Lachlan Macquarie Drought Study (2017)
•	 Central West Joint Organisation Water Security Study (2009) which includes interventions that focus on demand 
management and water conservation, investigation of infrastructure that will improve water security in the region and 
recognise the changing climate conditions. 
•	 Belubula Water Security Project Progress investigations into improved water security including the final Business Case into 
the augmentation of Lake Rowlands
•	 Sub-Regional Town Water Strategy is being developed by Orange City Council, Cabonne Shire Council and Central 
Tablelands Water that covers their areas of operation in the upper Macquarie Valley. It includes strategies that encompass 
existing and proposed pipeline links between the towns of Manildra, Orange and Molong (and adjacent areas). Linking 
these existing town water supply schemes can provide shared benefits and improve the drought resilience of the individual 
town water supply schemes.
Continue to support the State Government on the implementation of solutions identified with the regional water strategies of 
Macquarie-Castlereagh and the Draft Lachlan Water Strategy including improvements to town water security.
Absorptive, Adaptive and 
Transformative (dependent on 
the level of implementation)
5.2
Continue to investigate options through NSW DCCEEW to upgrade, extend and replace water treatment facilities to provide 
improved water quality and extend the use of water recycling to maintain Council owned services, for example, parks, 
gardens throughout droughts.
Adaptive and 
Transformative
Sub-theme:
Water

123
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
5.3
Continued work with NSW DCCEEW that supports regional water issues and specific LGA challenges. This may include 
investigations into the extension of recycled water use to assist in reducing potable water demand and for use in the 
construction industry so that works can continue during drought or expansion of the Regional Water Loss Management Hub 
Pilot project which is focused on reducing water use through water loss management leading to an ongoing and self-sustaining 
program of improving practice in water loss management with a focus on pressure management.
Adaptive to 
Transformative
5.4
Continued advocacy for greater recognition of town water supply in the Basin Plan and to reduce red tape associated with 
improving water security. This advocacy can be progressed through the 2026 Basin Plan Review.
Absorptive
5.5
Continue to advocate for greater sharing of water data across all levels of government to assist in improved evidence-based 
decision making.
Absorptive and 
Adaptive
5.6
Advocate for and support increased collaboration across all levels of government on water policy and security that support 
regional water supplies with recognition of local experience and capability in delivering solutions.
Absorptive and 
Adaptive
Sub-theme:
Water

124
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Absorptive
Increased water supply capacity provides greater resistance during 
drought, potentially delaying the need to move to higher water 
restrictions.
Adaptive
Upgrades and other improvements are adaptive measures to deal 
with future climate changes and uncertainty.
Transformative
New and improved water infrastructure options and methods of 
operating will create a transformation within the system.
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Consortium of Councils and Central NSW JO
Potential delivery partners
Consortium of local Councils, Central Tablelands Water, 
Government, Central NSW JO, Murray-Darling Basin 
Authority.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$  
Significant Financial Support Required
Key outcomes
•	 Increased reliability of regional assets when responding to drought. 
•	 Improved cross-sector collaboration amongst agencies and communities
•	 Enhanced connectivity and communication through improved 
collaboration. 
•	 Develops a culture of trust amongst agencies and communities
Sub-theme:
Water

125
Insights from consultation and the need
Communities sighted the importance of enabling infrastructure to underpin many of the other plan actions occurring. Upgraded and fit for purpose infrastructure, including transport 
networks and digital connectivity, is crucial for supporting regional economic growth and diversification. Better access to technology and reliable communication systems will enable 
communities to attract new businesses, improving long-term drought resilience and economic stability.
Actions
Activity
Resilience Type
5.7
Advocate for improved transport services (enabling infrastructure) including rail, road and air network upgrades that make it 
possible for existing local businesses to grow and to attract new people and businesses to the region. 
Transformative 
where realised
5.8
Advocate for increased and reliable telecommunications services to assist businesses (including primary producers) within 
the region increasing their digital footprint and adopting new technologies. 
Transformative 
where realised
5.9
Where appropriate, support the repurposing of existing infrastructure to attract new businesses to the region. 
Adaptive
Sub-theme:
Enabling infrastructure

DRAFT – Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Central West Region
126
Resilience framework
Resilience Framework principles that apply: 
Adaptive
Repurposing existing infrastructure is an adaptive measure bringing 
benefit to both community and the economy.
Transformative
New and improved infrastructure creates a transformation within the 
system which improves service provision and builds economic and 
social resilience.
Delivery model
Suggested lead agency
Consortium of local Councils.
Potential delivery partners
NSW Government (including Transport for NSW), 
RDA, nbn Local, Central NSW Joint Organisation, local 
businesses, NSW Farmers Association.
Timeframes
Long term: 5-10 years
Cost estimates
$$$  
Significant Financial Support Required
Key outcomes
•	 Sustainable infrastructure that is climate adapted and minimises disruption.
•	 Increased digital access supports improved communication, information 
sharing and access to services including uptake of technological services.
Sub-theme:
Enabling infrastructure

127
5.5.	Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning 
To drive improved drought resilience in the region, this 
plan has identified the steps required for change to meet 
the needs of the region. These include the identified 
priority and related actions to be implemented; the 
outcomes that could be achieved as a result, and 
specifically how each would relate to building resilience. 
The plan also includes steps required to implement the 
change, and identifies a delivery model to do so. 
To ensure this Plan delivers on the actions identified, 
a Monitoring, Evaluation Learning (MEL) Framework 
should be adopted to ensure transparency, adaptive 
management, and long-term implementation. The FDF 
MEL Framework will be used to assess the effectiveness 
of implementing this Plan (DAWE, 2020). 
The MEL framework listed in Figure 40 links to 
four major activities of impact, rationale, outputs 
and outcomes. 
The drought impacts have been identified in Section 
3.7 and LGA-specific impacts are presented in the LGA 
snapshots. These drove the development of the actions 
(Section 5.3). The themes in Section 5 outline, for each 
action, what strategic priorities they align to (Social, 
Economic, Environmental), how they build resilience, the 
intended outcomes, the implementation steps, parties 
involved, estimated magnitude of cost, timeframe for 
implementation, and suggested evaluation metrics. 
The five Councils working together with delivery 
partners including NSW State Government, not-for profit 
organisations, industry and community organisations 
will need to collaborate on the implementation of 
this Plan. 
The Councils have been nominated as the lead agency 
for the delivery of some actions within this plan. This is 
due to both the allocation of implementation funding 
via the FDF and the ability of Councils to lead and 
advocate for the resilience needs of their communities. 
However, it is expected that many of the initiatives will 
be delivered as a collaborative effort. 
The net has been cast wide to identify delivery partners 
for the actions have been identified where the action 
aligns and compliments their current responsibilities, 
area of interest or where they are best placed to lead 
an action because of their geographic alignment to the 
region or a previous working model. 
On a local level the stakeholders who represented 
potential delivery partners were encouraged by the Plan 
actions. Those delivery partners with a larger service 
footprint such as the Central NSW JO would appreciate 
greater visibility in how actions in these Plans align to 
those in surrounding areas. 
Where plan actions aligned with State and 
Commonwealth Government strategies delivery partners 
expressed a greater level of interested as they could 
more clearly understand their role. 
A certain level of hesitancy was expressed by delivery 
partners where they anticipated a greater demand on 
their time or there is an identified need for financial 
resources to deliver plan outcomes. 
This plan does not create a responsibility on delivery 
partners to providing resources or funding. 
Initial Plan measures of success have been identified for 
the first year of the plan (see Table 15). This establishes 
a starting point to measure the effectiveness and 
progress of each of the actions. 
When identifying the measures of success for each 
of the actions, the metrics should, where possible, 
have quantifiable terms to enable data to be gathered 
to support a clear monitoring and review process. 
Ideally, they should follow the SMART criteria: Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound.
MONITORING
EVALUATION
LEARNING
I
M
P
A
C
T
O
U
T
C
O
M
E
S
O
U
T
P
U
T
S
R
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
E
Figure 40  Future Drought Fund MEL Framework

128
•	 The remit of delivery partners/stakeholders will 
not fundamentally change. 
•	 Implementation targets past the short-term can 
be defined and agreed.
•	 That the region is not moving directly into another 
drought and has some lead time to commence 
plan activities.
•	 Other agencies continue to deliver drought work that 
is being leveraged as a part of this plan.
•	 Some of the longer-term factors that may impact plan 
outcomes include:
•	 Ability to effect meaningful and longer-term 
behaviour change.
•	 Legislative and regulatory change required to 
implement the actions.
•	 Regular review and update of the plan.
This should include community consultation to ensure 
the needs, actions and outcomes are still relevant and 
to ensure local ownership of the plan. The consortium 
of Councils/ PCG will continue to meet bi-annually to 
assess plan progress. This may include inviting other 
stakeholders and delivery partners to provide progress 
updates. Aside from this, the consortium of Councils 
would be involved in other implementation groups for 
specific actions. 
Additionally, using the Central NSW Joint Organisation, 
this consortium of Councils along with the other two 
RDRP’s that cover the Central West should be reviewed 
in parallel to ensure where there are common actions 
they can be progressed in parallel. 
Some of the key parameters assumed in the 
implementation of the plan include: 
•	 Effective cooperation between delivery partners. 
•	 Capacity of the consortium of local Councils to lead 
and coordinate other stakeholders. 
•	 Capacity and engagement of other stakeholders 
to lead and coordinate actions where required.
•	 Capacity of other stakeholders and the 
community to participate and actively engage 
in implementation activities.
•	 The ability to record and share plan outcomes.
•	 The integration of the Plan with other local 
planning activities. 
•	 Stakeholders’ willingness to share knowledge 
and work with each other. 
•	 On-going funding to support implementation 
of plan actions.
Where possible, metrics have been adopted from 
existing data and systems such as the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, census data and existing reporting 
that could be obtained through Council. The metrics 
would need to be monitored and reported to establish 
a baseline level with future years measures of success 
and metrics to be identified. 
For practical implementation of the RDRP to occur a 
detailed implementation plan should be developed 
in conjunction with action leads and key project 
partners ensuring there is good representation of 
local representatives across a range of demographics 
and from each of the LGA’s to capture local nuances, 
knowledge and understanding to the delivery of actions. 
The implementation plan should allow flexibility for 
leads to adapt and pivot implementation as needed.  
Critical to regional-level monitoring of, and 
improvement to, the Plan, an on-going project control 
group comprising of the five Councils with external 
stakeholders as needed will be required. This group 
would have the role of initiating actions in line with the 
plan, reviewing progress against the plan objectives and 
overseeing implementation. The PCG will continue to 
meet regularly to oversee the first phase of the Plan’s 
implementation. 
The Plan is a snapshot in time and requires regular 
update to ensure the overall actions still align with 
the region’s requirements. A short progress review 
should be published annually as part of the individual 
Councils Annual Report (as part of their Integrated 
Planning and Reporting (IP&R) processes), highlighting 
any issues in implementation, and reporting using the 
metrics described. A review and update of plan should 
be scheduled every 4 years (to align with IP&R updates).

129
5.5.1.	 Monitoring progress and plan outcomes
The following table outlines the actions alignment to the FDF MEL Framework. Additional details regarding lead agency, partners and measures of success can be found in Table 
14 highlights the indicators/ metrics to be used in the short-term. Further expansion of the metrics and indicators for medium to long-term actions will need to be addressed in 
future Plan evaluations and/or revisions. 
Theme
FDF outcome / priority alignment
Metric
Timing
Theme 1 – The Economy – Diverse 
and resilient regional economies and 
agricultural businesses
Economic support and education
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security.
•	
Businesses have improved access to new and existing knowledge and technology to 
enable more effective responses to risks such as drought.
•	
Businesses engage in strategic business planning and risk assessment.
•	
Businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
•	
Businesses have built skills in business planning, financial and risk management.
•	
Businesses identify and adopt innovative and transformative ways to build drought 
resilience
•	
The number of, and participation in, local networks and programs to enhance drought 
resilience increases.
•	
Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner more often to build drought 
resilience.
At least one cross-LGA 
business workshopping 
session held to inform 
the scope of services and 
suppliers.
Short term 
Development of package 
of services/suppliers. 
(Business case presented)
Medium
Business case for State-
wide Business Drought 
Resilience Program 
underway/ completed.
Long term to deliver and 
implement
Theme 1 – The Economy – Diverse 
and resilient regional economies and 
agricultural businesses
Economic diversity and development
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
•	
Businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
•	
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed and adopted.
•	
The number of, and participation in, local networks and programs to enhance drought 
resilience increases.
•	
Improved access to, and greater utilisation of community infrastructure.
•	
Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often to 
build drought resilience.
At least two cross-LGA 
meetings between 
economic development 
officers (or similar role).
Baseline Business 
community survey
Short-term 
Progress against Regional 
Economic Development 
Strategies and local 
economic development 
to be evaluated by NSW 
Government (through 
reporting)
On-going reporting against 
implementation

130
Theme
FDF outcome / priority alignment
Metric
Timing
Theme 1 – The Economy – Diverse 
and resilient regional economies and 
agricultural businesses
Agriculture
•	
More primary producers adopt transformative strategies and technologies to reduce 
financial exposure to drought.
•	
More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving productivity and 
profitability.
•	
More primary producers adopt whole-of-system approaches to natural resource 
management (NRM) to improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and 
landscape health.
•	
New partnerships are formed to fund and undertake drought resilience RD&E.
•	
The volume and adoption of relevant drought resilience RD&E increases.
•	
Primary producers and businesses have improved access to new and existing knowledge 
and technology to enable more effective responses to risks such as drought. 
•	
More primary producers incorporate NRM philosophies and approaches in business 
planning and risk assessment to better manage their natural resources through drought. 
•	
More primary producers and businesses make greater use of data to better understand 
their farm business’ level of drought resilience and make business decisions.
•	
Relevant and reliable climate data are available and used for decision-making.
•	
NRM related RDE&A outputs are relevant and tailored.
•	
Communities’ and farm businesses’ engagement and collaboration with NRM bodies 
increases.
•	
Primary producers’ awareness of new and existing NRM practices is increased, and 
lessons from experimentation are shared.
•	
More primary producers and agricultural communities experiment with adaptive or 
transformative NRM practices and systems.
Attendance at 
extension workshops 
and engagement with 
drought adoption officers 
increases.
Increased reporting of 
adoption via relevant 
extension providers.
This is medium term/ 
ongoing.

131
Theme
FDF outcome / priority alignment
Metric
Timing
Theme 2 – The Environment – 
Protection of the Natural and Built 
Environment
•	
Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	
More primary producers incorporate NRM philosophies and approaches in business 
planning and risk assessment to better manage their natural resources through drought. 
•	
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed and adopted. 
•	
Communities’ and farm businesses’ engagement and collaboration with NRM 
bodies increases.
•	
Primary producers’ awareness of new and existing NRM practices is increased, 
and lessons from experimentation are shared.
•	
More primary producers and agricultural communities experiment with adaptive or 
transformative NRM practices and systems.
•	
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and innovation.
Monitoring water use data 
collected by Councils/ 
surveys on behaviour 
change 
Short-term and on-going 
reporting
Progress against climate 
change related plans and 
strategies communicated. 
On-going reporting and 
delivered in the longer-
term
Progress against Regional 
Water Strategies 
communicated.
On-going reporting and 
delivered in the longer-
term
Theme 3 – Governance - Leadership 
and Collaboration
•	
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	
Relevant and reliable climate data are available, and used for decision-making.
•	
Partnerships and engagement is built between stakeholders managing 
natural resources.
•	
The number of, and participation in, local networks and programs to enhance drought 
resilience increases.
•	
Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often 
to build drought resilience.
•	
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
•	
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and innovation.
Webpage established on 
each Council website to 
host drought information.
Initial implementation and/
or planning may be short-
medium term and ongoing 
actions.
Theme 4 – Community - Vibrant, 
connected, and supported 
communities
Social Connection
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing 
to wellbeing and security. 
•	
The number of, and participation in, local networks and programs to enhance drought 
resilience increases.
•	
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
•	
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Discussions with other 
regions on resilience fund 
completed.
Reporting by service 
providers on service/
training uptake
Medium term to establish, 
then ongoing.
Medium term to establish 
and ongoing.

132
Theme
FDF outcome / priority alignment
Metric
Timing
Theme 4 – Community - Vibrant, 
connected, and supported 
communities
Mental Health
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	
Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Service providers identified 
to publish resources and 
completion of gap analysis 
started.
Short-medium term to 
establish, then ongoing.
Theme 4 – Community - Vibrant, 
connected, and supported 
communities
Education and Training 
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
•	
Primary producers and businesses have built skills in business planning, financial 
and risk management.
Skills matrix initiated.
Short-medium term to 
establish, then ongoing.
Theme 5 – Infrastructure – built assets 
and technology
Water
Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	
Primary producers and businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
•	
Improved collaboration between NRM bodies, governments, communities and primary 
producers. 
•	
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and innovation.
•	
Better use of research and co-design processes to develop NRM activities that directly 
address regional priorities.
•	
Improved access to, and greater utilisation of community infrastructure.
•	
Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often to 
build drought resilience.
•	
Community leaders and networks have stronger capability to undertake strategic 
drought resilience planning.
•	
Communities use best practice data and information to better understand their 
resilience to drought, and plan for resilience to drought.
Progress against 
existing plans/ strategies 
communicated.
Some actions are short 
term to implement but 
most are long term and 
require significant funding 
(infrastructure changes).
Theme 5 – Infrastructure – built assets 
and technology
Enabling infrastructure
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing 
to wellbeing and security. 
Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	
Improved access to, and greater utilisation of community infrastructure.
•	
Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often to 
build drought resilience.
Progress against 
existing plans/ strategies 
communicated.
Short term to enact but 
ongoing.
Table 15	
Initial MEL framework

133
5.5.2.	Action Implementation 
Table 16 has been created to adapt the information from Appendix B and Table 16-18 to illustrates the staging of implementation of Plan actions. Detailed implementation steps 
can still be found in the Appendix/ 
Theme
Action 
Economy
1.6 Create mentorship opportunities and enhanced business networks.
1.7 Develop a Community Business Survey to baseline and inform future needs of the REDS and Local Economic Development Strategies and business community sentiment/
needs/attitudes 
1.8 For smaller councils with less structured tourism programs - develop a calendar of future tourism events/local attractions/service providers
1.8 Continue to support and promote innovation in research and development and extension activities 
1.9 Map the barriers and challenges to improving adoption to R&D, Seek to identify the key drivers of resistance/challenges to adoption. 
1.12 Increasing the awareness and understanding of climate data and early warning indicators to improve decision-making.
1.13 increasing the awareness and information dissemination of Commonwealth and State Government Programs that assist with the purchase of drought resilient and 
emergency infrastructure including water and grain storage and support services
Environment
2.1 Through local council asset/maintenance planning cycle integrate future inclusion of drought tolerant gardens/plantings. 
2.2 Scope a program for how local councils can deliver awareness, education and information on water efficiency, sustainability identified in Theme 2 including local partners 
who can support the delivery of education, awareness and best practice. 
2.3 utilise recycled water to maintain local greenspaces and maintaining infrastructure
2.4 Through the revision of existing local water strategies seek to broaden engagement to incorporate First Nations Peoples knowledge water and 
environmental management.
2.5 Advocate for improved housing design and landscaping requirements which reduce water use and improve energy efficiency of homes.
Governance 
3.1 Identification and formalise existing regional networks established for the coordination of natural disasters.
3.1 Investigate opportunities through the Disaster Adaptation Plans to engage local resources to support drought response.  
3.1 Map of existing roles and responsibilities of drought agencies
3.2 Continued advocacy of drought issues identified in Centroc (2018) Drought issues Paper
3.3 Increase access to early warning information and data through councils website and through improved promotion of available information
3.4 Continued advocacy for simplified processes to access drought support. 
3.5 Create a dedicated drought page on Council’s website

134
Community
4.1 Investigate the options to develop Local Resilience Community Funds that sit within and are administered by the community.
4.2 Investigate regional and state organisations who are working on mental health services for region communities and options to participate. 
4.3 Publish details of all the mental health services available in the region
4.4 Increased access to mental health first aid and training and support programs and Increase resilience and leadership skills training.
4.5 Develop a skills matrix that supports the identified skills in the region. 
4.8 Investigate partnerships and implement programs to promote and work with local digital literacy
Infrastructure
5.3 Continue to work with NSW DCCEEW on the Regional Water Loss Management Hub Pilot to create an expanded and enduring program. 
5.4 Continued advocacy for greater recognition of town water supply in the Basin Plan through the 2026 Basin Plan Review.
Table 16  Short term actions (1-2 years)
Theme 
Action 
Economy
Preparation of Business Case/further investigations for Business Drought Resilience Program. 
1.6 Continuing implementation of Regional/Local Economic Development Strategies
1.9 Implement strategies that will assist in mitigating the behaviour change required to increase the adoption of agricultural technologies and production techniques.
1.9 Continue to extend and adopt agricultural innovation. 
Environment
2.1 Realise increased increasing drought tolerant greenspaces 
2.2 Package of water efficiency, innovative hydration techniques and best practice of environmentally friendly information is fully implemented
2.3 Investigate options for other water users who may be able to use surplus recycled water.
2.5 Identified local scale changes that can be made to planning instruments to encourage climate adapted design and landscaping. 
2.6 Councils to continue to plan and implement their climate change (adaption) strategies.
2.7 Councils to continue to plan and implement renewable energy expansion and/or energy efficiency/ net-zero emissions programs and strategies
Community
4.2 Investigate/define the mental health service need for the region 
4.4 Increased access to mental health first aid and training and support programs.
4.6 Investigate options to decentralise training and deliver local options so that participants can stay and learn in their communities. 
4.7 Deliver timely retraining options for those in agriculturally reliant communities.
5.1 Progress water security investigation - Belubula Water Security Project
5.2 Continue to investigate options through NSW DCCEEW to upgrade regional water infrastructure.
5.3 Continued work with NSW DCCEEW that supports regional water issues – realisation of new opportunities
5.5 Continue to advocate for greater sharing of water data across all levels of government to improve decision making.
5.6 Advocate for improved collaboration across all levels of government on water policy and security that support regional water supplies.
5.9 Investigate options of repurposing of existing infrastructure
Table 17 Medium term (3-4 years)

135
Theme 
Action 
Economy
1.1 State-wide Business Drought Resilience Program that supports businesses outside the current agricultural and agricultural service businesses model.
1.6 The consortium of Councils implement and refine the Economic Development Strategies for each LGA. 
1.9 Continue to invest in innovative R&D that supports agricultural production
Environment
2.5 Evidence improved housing design and landscaping requirements which reduce water use and improve energy efficiency of homes. 
Governance 
3.2 Progress drought issues identified in the Centroc (2018) Drought Issues Paper 
Community 
4.2 Be able to evidence improved mental health services for the region
Infrastructure
5.1 Progress water security investigations including Lachlan Macquarie Drought Study (2017), Central West Joint Organisation Water Security Study 
(2009), and Sub-Regional Town Water Strategy.
5.1 Continue to support the NSW Government with the implementation of solutions identified with the regional water strategies of Macquarie-
Castlereagh and the Draft Lachlan Water Strategy including improvements to town water security
5.2 Continue to investigate options through NSW DCCEEW to upgrade regional water infrastructure.
5.3 Continued work with NSW DCCEEW that supports addressing regional water issues.
5.5 Continue to advocate for greater sharing of water data across all levels of government to improve decision making.
5.6 Advocate for improved collaboration across all levels of government on water policy and security that support regional water supplies.
5.7 Advocate for improved transport services including rail, road and air network upgrades 
5.9 Advocate for increased and reliable telecommunications services to assist businesses within the region increasing their digital footprint and 
adopting new technologies. 
Table 18   Long term (5-10 years)

136
Conclusion
06

137
6.	Conclusion
This Plan has been developed by and for the communities of Central 
West. The Plan is an important step in voicing the areas of focus and 
the actions the community seeks to undertake in order to move them 
towards improved drought resilience. 
This Plan is a snapshot in time and reflects the key areas of 
importance to the community. These areas of focus are not static and 
will require regular review and update. 
The Plan contains a series of actions, some of which can be funded 
through the FDF implementation funding and some that will require 
alternate funding channels to be identified and obtained. These 
actions capitalise on earlier efforts made by the community to 
improve its response to drought.
While this Plan has been designed with the Consortium of Councils 
being the main leader of actions to ensure the plan is actionable, to 
fully implement the Plan, Central West Councils will require both 
a collaborative effort with all levels of government, the regions 
industry, not-for-profit organisations, and the community, to be 
partners in the delivery of the actions. 
The Central West RDRP provides a pathway to develop and build 
drought resilience into regional NSW.

138
07
Reference List and Appendices

139
Reference List 
Note: all case studies were developed in conjunction with information provided by 
members of the five LGAs and some publicly available information.
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences). 
2020. Measuring drought risk – The exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to 
https://daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/search/asset/1030903/0 
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences). 
2022. Community Vulnerability and resilience to drought index – stage 1. Department of 
com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fdaff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au%2Fclient%2Fen_AU
%2Fsearch%2Fasset%2F1034241%2F1&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK 
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences). 
data/farm-data-portal 
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics). n.d.b Climate and 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/climate
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics). 2021a. Data by Region. ABS. https://dbr.abs.gov.au/
index.html 
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics). 2021b. Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA), 
Australia. 
ABS. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/people-and-communities/
socio-economic-indexes-areas-seifa-australia/latest-release
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics). 2021c. 2021 Australia, Census All persons 
QuickStats. 
ABS. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/
AUS 
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics). 2022a. Value of Agricultural Commodities Produced, 
Australia, 2020-21. ABS. https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/value-
agricultural-commodities-produced-australia/2020-21#data-downloads 
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics). 2022b. Agricultural Commodities, Australia, 
2020-21. 
ABS. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/agricultural-
commodities-australia/2020-21 
Abunyewah, M., Byrne, M. K., Keane, C. A., and Bressington, D. 2023. Developing 
Psychological Resilience to the Impact of Drought. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 20 (4): 3465. https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/20/4/3465 
AdaptNSW. 2024a. Climate Change Impacts on agriculture. NSW Government. 
https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/impacts-climate-change/
agriculture#:~:text=Warmer%20temperatures%20are%20contributing%20to%20
longer%20droughts%20and,decreasing%20production%20and%20making%20
animal%20welfare%20an%20issue. 
AdaptNSW. 2024b. Climate Change Impacts on Drought. NSW Government. https://www.
climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/impacts-climate-change/weather-and-oceans/
drought 
AdaptNSW. 2024c. Climate Change Impacts on our Water Resources. NSW Government. 
https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/impacts-climate-change/water-
resources 
AIHW (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare). 2024a. “My Hospitals: My Local Area”. 
area 
AIHW (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare). 2024b. Hospital: Orange Health 
Service. Version 2024051602. Canberra: AIHW. https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-data/
myhospitals/hospital/h0214 
Arts Out West NSW. 2023. "CASP Stories: Light up the night in Grenfell." Arts Out West 
NSW. https://artsoutwest.org.au/casp-stories-light-up-the-night-in-grenfell/
and Skills Australia. https://www.jobsandskills.gov.au/data/small-area-labour-markets
Australian Schools Directory. 2024. “Schools in NSW”. Future Media Group Pty Ltd. 
https://www.australianschoolsdirectory.com.au/schools-in-nsw 
Australian Silo Art Trail. n.d. "Grenfell Silo Art - NSW." Australian Silo Art Trail. Accessed 
May 28, 2024. https://www.australiansiloarttrail.com/grenfell
Baguley, Darren. 2021. "Smart farms of the future." The Farmer. March 29, 2021. https://
thefarmermagazine.com.au/smart-farms-of-the-future-in-nsw-farmers-magazine/

140
Barker, S. 2023. NSW Gov Delivers $6.2M Investment for Regional Water Infrastructure. 
Utility Magazine. https://utilitymagazine.com.au/nsw-gov-delivers-6-2m-investment-for-
regional-water-infrastructure/ 
Beard, G., Chandler, E., Watkins, A., Jones, D. 2011. How does the 2010–11 La Niña compare 
with past La Niña events. Bulletin of the Australian Meteorological and Oceanographic 
Society, 24, 17-20
Béné. C., Wood, R. G., Newsham, A., Davis, M. 2012. Resilience: New Utopia or New 
Tyranny? Reflection about the Potential Limits of the Concept of Resilience in Relation 
to Vulnerability Reduction Programmes. IDS Working Papers, 2012: 1-61. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x 
Blayney Shire Council. n.d. Home. NSW Government. https://www.blayney.nsw.gov.au/ 
Blayney Shire Council. 2020. Blayney Showground and Equestrian Sports Facilities 
Strategic Plan 2020-2025.  https://www.blayney.nsw.gov.au/ArticleDocuments/963/
Blayney%20Showground%20Strategic%20Plan%2020-25.pdf.aspx
Blayney Shire Council. 2021. “Village Bores.” Blayney Shire Council. https://www.blayney.
nsw.gov.au/environment/water-and-wastewater/village-bores
BoM (Bureau of Meteorology). 2024a. Drought Knowledge Centre. The Australian 
Government. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/
BoM (Bureau of Meteorology). 2024b. Weather Station Directory - Orange Agricultural 
www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/  
Breakout River. 2014. “About Us”. Accessed June 15, 2024. https://www.breakoutriver.
com.au/about.html  
Bromar Engineering. n.d. “About”. Accessed May 21, 2024. https://www.bromarengineering.
com.au/about
Brumby Aircrafts Australia. 2024. “Brumby Aircraft Australia”. https://www.brumbyaircraft.
com.au/ 
Cabonne Council. 2023. NSW Government. Cabonne Council Annual Report 2022-23. 
https://www.cabonne.nsw.gov.au/Council/Business-Papers-Reports-Policies-and-
Publications/Reports
Cabonne Council. n.d. Home. NSW Government. https://www.cabonne.nsw.gov.au/Home
Canowindra International Balloon Challenge. n.d. "Cabonne Community Balloon Glow". 
Accessed May 28, 2024. https://www.canowindrachallenge.org.au/cabonne-community-
balloon-glow/
Canowindra Phoenix. 2024. “Recovery and Resilience Workshop Come to Canowindra.” 
January 18, 2024. https://www.canowindraphoenix.com.au/recovery-and-resilience-
workshop-comes-to-canowindra/
Centroc (Central NSW Region of Councils). 2018. Drought issues paper. The Western 
Research Institute (WIR) for Centroc. https://www.centraljo.nsw.gov.au/content/uploads/
Centroc-drought-issues-paper-FINAL.pdf 
Cianconi, P., Betro, S., and Janiri, L. 2020. The impact of climate change on Mental Health: 
A Systematic Descriptive Review. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 2020: 11. https://www.frontiersin.
org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00074/full 
City of Sydney. 2018. Resilient Sydney: A Strategy for City Resilience 2018. https://
www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEw
jwz_Lz87WCAxW0jVYBHQPuBiUQFnoECBUQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.
cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au%2F-%2Fmedia%2Fcorporate%2Ffiles%2F2020-07-
migrated%2Ffiles_r%2Fresilient-sydney-a-strategy-for-city-resilience-2018.pdf%3Fdo
wnload%3Dtrue&usg=AOvVaw1KJSxbVwMgn4YIZb9Hqs7T&opi=89978449
Climate Council. 2018. Factsheet: Climate Change and Drought. Climate Council of 
Australia Limited. https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_
MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf 
Resilience: Building the resilience of our nation to disasters. Commonwealth of Australia. 
https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/media/2153/nationalstrategyfordisasterresilience.pdf
Conlon, Fiona. 2021. Central Tablelands Water: Water Supply Development Servicing Plan 
2021. Atom Consulting and Fiona Conlon Water Asset Management Pty Ltd. https://www.
ctw.nsw.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Central-Tablelands-Water-DSP-adopted-
at-Council-Meeting-16-06-2021.pdf

141
Conron Stockcrete. 2024. “About”. Accessed May 21, 2024. https://conronstockcrete.com.
au/pages/about
CRC (Cooperative Research Centre). 2018. Orange Stormwater to Potable: Building urban 
water supply diversity. https://watersensitivecities.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/
Orange-stormwater-to-potable-Case-Study-180503-V8_WEB.pdf
Council Communications, 2019. Orange can handle growth, despite the drought. Orange 
City Council. Orange can handle growth, despite the drought - Orange City Council (nsw.
gov.au) 
CEF (Country Education Foundation of Australia). n.d. “About CEF”. Accessed April 25, 
2024. https://cef.org.au/
Cowra Uniting Church. n.d. "Cowra Uniting Church Food Hall." Accessed May 28, 2024. 
https://cowra.uca.org.au/food-hall/
Cowra Council. n.d. Home. NSW Government. https://www.cowracouncil.com.au/Cowra-
Council-Home
Cowra Council. 2023. "Business Resilience Session at Club Cowra on October 25." Media 
Release, October 10, 2023. https://www.cowracouncil.com.au/News/Latest-News-and-
Media-Releases/Business-Resilience-Session-at-Club-Cowra-on-October-25
Cowra Shire Council. 2021. “NSW Critical Drought Initiative Cowra Drought Water Security 
Project – Project Plan/Business Case.” DWS088. Version 3.
CSIRO and BoM (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research and Bureau of 
bom.gov.au/state-of-the-climate/State-of-the-Climate-2018.pdf
CSIRO and BoM (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research and Bureau of Bureau 
bom.gov.au/state-of-the-climate/2022/documents/2022-state-of-the-climate-web.pdf 
CTW (Central Tablelands Water). 2018. Draft Asset Management Plan – April 2018. NSW 
Government. https://www.ctw.nsw.gov.au/Documents/IPR/Draft%20CTW%20Asset%20
Management%20Plan%20-%20April%202018%20V1.pdf 
CTW (Central Tablelands Water). 2019. “Home”. NSW Government. https://www.ctw.nsw.
gov.au/about-us/who-we-are/ 
CTW (Central Tablelands Water). 2020. Level 5 Water Restrictions from 5 April 2020. 
NSW 
Government. 
https://www.ctw.nsw.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Media-
Release-Level-5-Water-Restrictions-30-3-20.pdf 
CTW (Central Tablelands Water). 2024. “Lake Rowlands Augmentation final business case 
to proceed.” Media Release. March 5, 2024. https://www.ctw.nsw.gov.au/wp-content/
uploads/2024/03/Media-Release-Lake-Rowlands-Augmentation-BWSP-final-business-
case-5-3-24-website.pdf
Culture maps for Central NSW. 2023. Aboriginal experiences map https://centralnsw.
com/view-all-maps/aboriginal-experiences-map/
farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund?utm_campaign=website&utm_
medium=email&utm_source=ehq_newsletter#drought-resilience-funding-plan
agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/rural-financial-
counselling-service 
land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund/climate-services
Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics). 2023. Drought Resilience. The 
drought/resilience 
www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf
www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/national-climate-resilience-and-
adaptation-strategy.pdf 
Delta Agriculture. n.d. Delta Agribusiness Group. Accessed May 15, 2024. https://www.
deltaag.com.au/

142
default/files/documents/aust-govt-drought-response-plan_0.pdf 
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, n.d., Groundwater 
Quality, 
https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/water/our-work/science-data-and-modelling/
groundwater-management-and-science/groundwater-quality 
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, n.d., Groundwater 
Vulnerability: 
Lachlan 
Catchment, 
https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0007/151765/Lachlan-vulnerability-map.pdf
DPE (Department of Planning and Environment). 2023a. Draft Regional Water Strategy: 
Lachlan: Shortlisted Actions – Executive Summary. NSW Government. https://water.dpie.
nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/582863/lachlan-rws-executive-summary.pdf 
DPE (Department of Planning and Environment). 2023b. Regional Water Strategy: 
Macquarie-Castlereagh – Executive Summary. NSW Government. https://water.dpie.nsw.
gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/586817/macquarie-castlereagh-rws-executive-
summary-final.pdf 
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). n.d.a. “Cowra Agricultural Research and 
Advisory Station”. NSW Government. https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/about-us/science-and-
research_old/centres/cowra 
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). n.d.b “Local office contacts”. NSW 
Government. https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/contact-us/local-office 
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). n.d.c. “Enhanced Drought Information 
System (EDIS): Combined Drought Indicator”. NSW Government. Accessed 16 May 2024. 
https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/ 
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). n.d.d. "Agtech Pilot Farm Blayney." NSW 
Government. https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/dpi/climate/farms-of-the-future/agtech-pilot-
farm-blayney
DPIE (Department of Planning, Industry and Environment). 2021. "Resilience outcomes for 
the planning system". NSW Government. https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/
files/2023-03/resilience-outcomes-for-the-planning-system.pdf
DRNSW (Department of Regional New South Wales). 2022a. Future Ready Regions 2023 
Update. Online: NSW Government. https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-12/
Regional%20Drought%20Resilience%20Planning%20Program%20Guidelines.pdf 
DRNSW (Department of Regional NSW). 2022b. Regional NSW Investment Attraction 
Strategy 
2022-2027. 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-05/RNSW%20
Investment%20Attraction%20booklet_v30_accessible.pdf 
DRNSW (Department of Regional NSW). 2023a. Orange, Blayney and Cabonne Regional 
Economic Development Strategy - 2023 Update. NSW Government. https://www.nsw.gov.
au/sites/default/files/2023-03/Orange-Blayney-and-Cabonne-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
DRNSW (Department of Regional NSW). 2023b. Cowra Regional Economic Development 
Strategy - 2023 Update. NSW Government. https://www.cowracouncil.com.au/files/
assets/public/v/1/business/economic-development/cowra-reds-2023-update.pdf
DRNSW (Department of Regional NSW). 2023c. South West Slopes Regional Economic 
Development Strategy – 2023 Update. NSW Government. https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2023-03/South-West-Slopes-REDS-2023-Update.pdf 
Ekström, M., Abbs, D., Bhend, J., Chiew, F., Kirono, D., Lucas, C., McInnes, K., Moise, A., 
Mpelasoka, F., Leanne, W., Whetton, P. 2015. Central Slopes Cluster Report, Climate 
Change in Australia: Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions. 
CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology. https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/
media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/CENTRAL_SLOPES_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf
Evolution Mining. 2024. “Cowal”. https://evolutionmining.com.au/cowal/ 
Folke, C., Carpenter, S.R., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Chapin, T., Rockström, J. 2010. 
"Resilience Thinking: integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability". Ecology 
and Society. 15(4): 20. https://www.jstor.org/stable/26268226
Forbes Advocate. 2023. “Woodfired Eugowra will be bigger, better than ever.” Forbes 
Advocate, 
August 
1, 
2023. 
https://www.forbesadvocate.com.au/story/8284993/
woodfired-eugowra-will-be-bigger-better-than-ever/
Geolyse. 2017. “Lachlan Macquarie Drought Study”. Town Water Supplies. Draft. Reference 
supplied by NSW DCCEEW.

143
Review of Environmental Factors: Central Tablelands Regional Water Security Pipeline 
Project. Orange City Council and CTW (Central Tablelands Water).  https://www.google.
com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwil3
ZDDm6WGAxUjSWwGHY_HBiUQFnoECA4QAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fyoursay.orange.
nsw.gov.au%2F15610%2Fwidgets%2F101858%2Fdocuments%2F73486&usg=AOvVaw
3tPT7DBeq7-RwnIVO_iEIe&cshid=1716516850463255&opi=89978449  
Greet, N., Barnes, P., Borzycki, A., and Blackburn, J. 2021. A National Resilience 
Framework for Australia. Global Access Partners Pty Ltd, Institute for Integrated 
Economic Research Australia Ltd. Australia. https://globalaccesspartners.org/GAP_
IIERA_NationalResilienceFramework_Report_July21.pdf 
Grenfell Commodities. 2024. “Home”. Accessed May 21, 2024. https://www.grenfellcomm.
com.au/
Haider, L.J. and Cleaver, F. 2023. “Capacities for resilience: persisting, adapting and 
transforming through bricolage.” Ecosystems and People, 19(1): 15. https://doi.org/10.108
0/26395916.2023.2240434 
Hospitals Accommodation. 2024. “Orange Health Service Accommodation Western 
NSW”. Hospitals Accommodation. https://www.hospitalsaccommodation.com/western-
nsw/orange-health-service.php 
Hughes, N., Galeano, D., Hatfield-Doggs, S. (2019). The Analysis of The effects of Drought 
and Climate Variability on Australian Farms. ABARES Insights. https://www.agriculture.
gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/EffectsOfDroughtAndClimateVariabilityOnAustrali
anFarms_v1.0.0.pdf 
Iberdrola Australia. n.d. Flyers Creek Wind Farm. https://www.infigenenergy.com/our-
assets/owned-renewable-energy-assets/flyers-creek-wind-farm 
Indigenous Cultural Adventures. n.d. "Our Story." Accessed April 18, 2024. https://www.
indigenousculturaladventures.com.au/
Infrastructure Australia. 2022. Resilience Principles Infrastructure Australia’s Approach 
au/sites/default/files/2022-06/Resilience%20Principles%20-%20Infrastructure%20
Australia%27s%20approach%20to%20resilience.pdf
KB5Fitness. n.d. " Welcome to KB5itness." KB5Fitness. Accessed April 16, 2024. https://
kb5fitness.com.au/
Kirono, D.G.C., Round, V., Heady, C., Chiew, F.H.S, Osbrough, S. 2020. "Drought projections 
for Australia: Updated results and analysis of model simulations". Weather and climate 
extremes. 30. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212094720300645
Lester, L., Flatau, P., and Kyron, M. 2022. Understanding the Social Impacts of Drought. 
Perth: The University of Western Australia. Understanding-the-Social-Impacts-of-
Drought-UWA.pdf (gsdc.wa.gov.au) 
LLS (Local Land Services). 2021. "The Podcast sharing local farmers' stories for 12 
months." NSW Government. https://www.lls.nsw.gov.au/what-we-do/news-and-events/
news/cw-news/2021/the-podcast-sharing-local-farmers-stories-for-12-months
LLS (Local Land Services). n.d. “Saving our soils during drought.” NSW Government. 
https://www.lls.nsw.gov.au/what-we-do/our-major-projects/saving-our-soils
Manildra Group. n.d. “Manildra Group”. Accessed May 13, 2024. https://www.manildra.
com.au/ 
Maru, Y., T., Sparrow, A., Butler, J., R, A., Banerjee, O., Ison, R., Hall, A., Carberry, P. 2018. 
Towards Appropriate Mainstreaming of "Theory of Change" Approaches into Agricultural 
Research for Development: Challenges and Opportunities. Agricultural Systems 165: 
pp.344-353. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.04.010 https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/abs/pii/S0308521X17310053
Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Portner, H., Roberts, D., Skea, J., Calvo Buendia, E., Shukla, 
P., Slade, R., Connors, S., van Diemen, R., Ferrat, M., Haughey, E., Luz, S., Neogi, S., Pathak, 
M.,Petzold, J., Portugal Pereira, J., Vyas, P., Huntley, E., Kissick, K., Belkacemi, M., Malley, J.,. 
2019. Climate Change and Land. IPCC. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2019/11/
SRCCL-Full-Report-Compiled-191128.pdf 
McIver, Ellen. 2023. “Workshops for mental health resilience in the bush.” The Farmer, 
November 13, 2023. https://thefarmermagazine.com.au/farmers-helping-our-own/  
McPhillamys Gold Project. n.d. McPhillamys Gold Project. https://mcphillamysgold.com/ 
Morse, James and Sal. 2020. “Cracking the Morse code: Balancing recovery, production 
and profit in a cattle enterprise.” Seeds for Success. Audio Podcast. https://podtail.com/
podcast/seeds-for-success/cracking-the-morse-code-balancing-recovery-product/

144
My Climate View. 2023. Your Location. Your Commodity. Your Climate View. Department 
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Future Drought Fund. Commonwealth Scientific 
and Industrial Research and Bureau of Meteorology. https://myclimateview.com.au/about 
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration). 2024. The Effects of Climate 
Change. https://science.nasa.gov/climate-change/effects/ 
National Climate Centre and Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). 2012. Australia's Wettest Two-
Year Period on Record; 2010–2011. Special Climate Statement 38. http://www.bom.gov.
au/climate/current/statements/scs38.pdf 
National Digital Inclusion Map, 2020, The national picture (digitalinclusionindex.org.au)
Nelson, Donald, R. 2011. “Adaptation and Resilience: responding to a changing climate.” 
WIREs Climate Change, 2: 113-120. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.91
Nestle. 2022. “Nestle Purina unveils $90m expansion of Blayney factory”. Nestle Australia. 
https://www.nestle.com.au/en/media/news/purina-blayney-factory 
Newmont Corporation. 2023. 2023 Annual Report. Denver, Colorado, USA. https://s24.
q4cdn.com/382246808/files/doc_financials/2023/ar/newmont-2023-annual-report.pdf 
NHPC (The Newell Highway Promotions Committee). 2024. “Newell Highway”. Accessed 
May 21, 2024. https://www.newellhighway.org.au/route39/about/
NSW Business Chamber. 2018. Drought Survey August 2018. https://businessnsw-qa.
nswbc.com.au/content/dam/nswbc/businessnsw/pdf/Drought-Survey-2018-Report-
Final_1.pdf?icid=member-plus-landing-page 
NSW Government. 2021. Central West and Orana Climate change snapshot. Office of 
Environment and Heritage. https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2021-06/Central%20West%20and%20Orana%20climate%20change%20
snapshot_1.pdf?la=en&hash=20005FFCABC0DED0A8BF69D0C86C7387499C5E81
NSW Government. 2022. Central West and Orana Regional Plan 2041. https://www.
planning.nsw.gov.au/plans-for-your-area/regional-plans/central-west-and-orana-
regional-plan-2041 
NSW Government. 2024a. Drought, floods and extreme events. Department of Planning, 
Housing, 
and 
Infrastructure. 
https://water.dpie.nsw.gov.au/our-work/allocations-
availability/drought-and-floods  
NSW Government. 2024b. “Our Communities: Orange”. NSW Government.  https://www.
nsw.gov.au/departments-and-agencies/wnswlhd/careers/our-communities/orange 
Orange City Council. n.d.a. Home. NSW Government. https://www.orange.nsw.gov.au/ 
Orange City Council. n.d.b. "Stormwater Harvesting." Orange City Council. Accessed May 
1, 2024. https://www.orange.nsw.gov.au/water/stormwater/
Productivity Commission. 2009. Inquiry into Government drought support. Australian 
Government. https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/drought/pdf/drought-support-
draft.pdf 
RDA (Regional Development Australia) Central West. 2021. Weddin LGA Economic 
Snapshot. 
Australian 
Government. 
https://rdacentralwest.org.au/wp-content/
uploads/2022/01/Weddin-Shire-Council.pdf 
Reisinger, A., Garschagen, M., Pathak, M., Poloczanska, E., van Aalst, M., Ruane, A., C., 
Howden, M., Hurlbert, M., Mintenbeck, K., Pedace, R., Corradi, M., R., Viner, D., Vera, 
C., Kreibiehl, S., O’Neill, B., Pörtner, H., Sillmann, J., Jones, R., Ranasinghe, R. 2020. The 
Concept of Risk in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report: A Summary of Cross-Working 
Group Discussions. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, 
Switzerland. 
pp15. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2021/02/Risk-guidance-
FINAL_15Feb2021.pdf 
Regional Development Australia. n.d. "Central West Inspired Women." Australian 
Government. Accessed April 16, 2024.  https://rdacentralwest.org.au/projects/central-
west-inspired-women-2024/
REROC (Riverina Eastern Regional Organisation of Councils). n.d. Projects. https://reroc.
com.au/projects 
Rotary International. n.d. “Welcome to the Rotary Club of Blayney”. Accessed May 28 
2024. https://portal.clubrunner.ca/8211
Shirdelmoghanloo, H., Kefei, C., Blakely, P., H., Angessa, T., T., Westcott, S., Khan, H., A., 
Hill, C., B., Li, C. 2022. Grain Filling Rate Improves Physical Grain Quality in Barley Under 
Hear Stress Conditions During the Grain Filling Period. Frontiers in Plant Science. 13. 
1664-462X. 10.3389/fpls.2022.858652

145
Simonsen, S., Biggs, r., Schlüter, M., Schoon, M., Bohensky, E., Cundill, G., Dakos, V., Daw, 
T., Kotschy, K., Leitch, A., Quinlan, A., Peterson, G., Moberg, F. n.d. Applying Resilience 
Thinking: Seven Principles for Building Resilience in Social-Ecological Systems. Stockholm 
Resilience Centre. Stockholm University. https://www.stockholmresilience.org/download
/18.10119fc11455d3c557d6928/1459560241272/SRC+Applying+Resilience+final.pdf 
Southern NSW Innovation Hub. 2022. Baselining Drought: Developing a baseline 
understanding of farmer and community perceptions of drought. David Brown Consulting 
for Southern NSW Drought Resilience Hub. https://cdn.csu.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0004/4258885/Baselining-Drought-FINAL.pdf
Steffen, W. 2015. Thirsty Country: Climate Change and Drought in Australia. Climate 
Council. https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/37d4a0d2a372656332d75d0163d
9e8b8.pdf  
TAFE NSW. 2024. “Locations”. NSW Government. https://www.tafensw.edu.au/locations 
Taylor, B., Walton, A., Loechel, B., Measham, T. & Fleming, D. 2017. Strategic foresight 
for regional Australia: Megatrends, scenarios and implications. Canberra: CSIRO and the 
Australia 
Telstra. n.d.a. “Our coverage maps”. https://www.telstra.com.au/coverage-networks/our-
coverage 
Telstra. n.d.b. “Mobile Black Spot Program”. https://www.telstra.com.au/coverage-
networks/mobile-black-spot-program 
Think.Orange Region. 2019. Economic Profile. NSW Government, Orange City Council, 
Blayney Shire Council, Cabonne Shire Council. https://thinkorangeregion.com.au/think-
invest/ 
Timbal, B., Abbs, D., Bhend, J., Chiew, F., Church, J., Ekström, M., Kirono, D., Lenton, A., 
Lucas, C., McInnes, K., Moise, A., Monselesan, D., Mpelasoka, F., Webb, L., Whetton, P. 
2015. Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s 
Natural Resource Management Regions. CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology. Australia. 
https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/
MURRAY_BASIN_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf 
Transport for NSW. 2023. Regional trains and coaches. NSW Government. https://
transportnsw.info/document/1447/Regional-trains-coaches-network-map.pdf 
Verto. 2024. “Our Heritage”. Verto. https://www.verto.org.au/about-us/our-heritage
Walker, B. 2020. Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecology and Society, 25.
Walker, B., Holling, C., S., Carpenter, S., R., Kinzig, A., P. 2004. Resilience, Adaptability 
and Transformability in Social-Ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 9. [25]. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/42764046_Resilience_Adaptability_and_
Transformability_in_Social-Ecological_Systems 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-00650-
090205
Walker, G., R., Crosbie, R., S., Chiew, F., H., S., Peeters, L., Evans, R. 2021. Groundwater 
Impacts and Management under a Drying Climate in Southern Australia. Water. 2021; 
13(24):3588. https://doi.org/10.3390/w13243588
We are Explorers. 2023. "Indigenous Cultural Adventures Orange - Exploring Aboriginal 
Culture 
on 
Wiradjuri 
Country." 
https://weareexplorers.co/indigenous-cultural-
adventures-orange/
Weddin Community Native Nursery. n.d. "Volunteering." Weddin Community Native 
Nursery. Accessed April 18, 2024.  https://www.weddinnativenursery.com/volunteering
Weddin Landcare. n.d. "Ooma Creek Tributary Riparian Restoration Project." Weddin 
Landcare. Accessed April 18, 2024. https://weddinlandcare.com.au/ooma-creek-
tributary-riparian-restoration-project/
Weddin Mountain Muster Grenfell. n.d. “About”. Accessed April 23, 2024. https://www.
weddinmountainmuster.com.au/
Weddin Shire Council. 2023. Annual Report 2022-23. https://www.weddin.nsw.gov.au/
Council/Integrated-Planning-and-Reporting/Reports
Weddin Shire Council. n.d.a Home. NSW Government. https://www.weddin.nsw.gov.au/
Home 
Weddin Shire Council. n.d.b. Weddin 2027: 2017-2027 Community Strategic Plan Bringing 
Us 
Together. 
https://www.weddin.nsw.gov.au/files/assets/public/v/1/council/plans-
strategies-amp-reports/ipr/csp/community-strategic-plan-2017-2027.pdf

146
Whetton, P., Ekström, M., Gerbing, C., Grose, M., R, Bhend, J., Webb, L., Risbey, J., Holper, 
P., Clarke, J., M., Hennessy, K., J. 2015. Climate Change in Australia Information for 
Australia's Natural Resource Management Regions: Technical Report. Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and Bureau of Meteorology 
(BoM). 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275340315_CSIRO_and_Bureau_
of_Meteorology_2015_Climate_Change_in_Australia_Information_for_Australia's_
Natural_Resource_Management_Regions_Technical_Report_CSIRO_and_Bureau_of_
Meteorology_Australia_222_pages_ht#full-text 
Wise, R., M., Fazey, I., Stafford Smith, M., Park, S., E., Eakin, H., C., Archer Van Garderen, 
E., R., M., Campbell, B. 2014. Reconceptualizing adaptation to climate change as part of 
pathways of change and response. Global Environmental Change. 28. pp. 325-336. https://
research.fit.edu/media/site-specific/researchfitedu/coast-climate-adaptation-library/
australia-amp-new-zealand/australia-national/Wise-et-al.--2014.--Reconceptualising-
Adaptation-to-CC.pdf

147
Appendix A
What we heard – summary
Blayney LGA – what we heard
What worked well
Blayney stakeholders identified many initiatives 
that worked well throughout the last drought. The 
information provided by Local Land Services on drought 
and lot feeding was praised, as well as workshops by the 
Southern NSW Innovation Hub. 
Events and programs that supported rural communities 
such as local shows and Buy from the Bush boosted 
both the social and economic resilience of the 
community. A fundraiser was used to fund a Financial 
Advisor for the region. The recent formation of the 
Blayney Chamber of Commerce will be a great pathway 
to increase economic resilience in the community by 
providing an opportunity for local businesses to come 
together and learn from each other. 
Having both Nestle Purina and Cadia gold mine 
located in the LGA has provided an opportunity for the 
farming community to seek off-farm income. A recent 
$100 million upgrade to the Nestle factory improved 
automation but also improved job security for those 
employed which is a form of drought-proofing the local 
economy. Additionally, Cadia has done a lot of work to 
improve its drought resilience, meaning they weren’t 
as affected in the last drought. This work included 
diversified water production and using long-term water 
forecasting/modelling (more robust modelling with 
longer outlook that considers droughts). They have also 
improved their recovery and reuse of water onsite.
What hasn’t worked well or needs to improve
Grants are welcomed however there are sometimes 
challenges with the process of application. Drafting 
grant applications can become onerous on communities 
with limited time or suitable resources to assist, which in 
turn means that these lifelines are not accessed. What 
is rarely factored in by communities is the administrative 
time associated with grants and back-dating subsidies 
that businesses have to absorb. Once this is fully 
understood, the process of grant application can prove 
‘too hard’ for a community. 
For some, Rural Financial Counselling is seen as a last 
resort rather than a tool to help early-on; this perception 
needs to change from welfare to investment. Often-
times those employed in adjacent agricultural services 
(for example, agronomists) serve as counsellors to 
producers. Additionally, there are usually a lot of 
resources that could be accessed but the information is 
overwhelming or disjointed, making it hard for people to 
understand what supports are available. 
Consultation indicated that improving the understanding 
of climate predictions and interpreting risk is required 
for the community along with presenting complex 
information in simple terms would be crucial for 
improving decision making. 
At times it is challenging to engage volunteers and 
community events are then cancelled; other times there 
is poor attendance at events. Reverting back to paper 
communications for community or Council events, 
distributed through rates notices, may improve 
the attendance. 
There was suggestion of creating a community 
rehabilitation fund to help with response and recovery. 
Funds could be built up during non-drought periods 
through rates and industry operation fees and then 
funds able to be used when certain triggers are met. The 
media sensationalising drought has negative impacts on 
the community and reduces tourism. 
What needs to happen / ideas?
The Blayney LGA highlighted that resilience could be 
improved through:
•	 Increased support for the newly formed Blayney 
Business Chamber, this may be forming an alliance 
with more established chambers in surrounding LGAs 
to learn and share. The chamber is likely to focus on 
business mentoring and coaching, group workshops 
for business owners and advocating for inclusive 
support.
•	 Provide targeted financial, digital, and business 
mentoring and coaching early for both farmers 
and other business owners. This action could be 
supported through the business chamber for small 
business and existing channels for agriculture. It 
is noted that DPIRD already runs a farm business 
coaching program. 
•	 New and innovative ways to provide mental health 
support e.g., buddy programs. Have mental health 
first aid training in businesses/ training available.
•	 Further investigations to secure urban potable 
water through water infrastructure improvements 
(increasing capacity of Lake Rowlands, extend 
pipeline network between towns/villages in the 
region, investigate and extend use of treated sewage

148
on sporting grounds and parks). Council to advocate 
for the progress of the Belubula Water Security 
Project which includes investigations into the pipeline 
between Lake Rowlands and Carcoar Dam.
•	 Investigation of post mining opportunities for the 
McPhillamys Gold Project site that provide the 
Blayney Shire and wider region with a long lasting 
positive economic legacy e.g., ensuring re-purposing 
and/or reuse of infrastructure.
•	 Invest in new and existing events that provide an 
opportunity for the community to come together. 
•	 Creating tourism and agri-tourism opportunities for 
the region.
•	 Build local council’s emergency response capacity 
and conduct contingency planning to help support 
the community.

149
improving access to training and support for 
businesses. 
•	 The Manildra Group cited a bulk unloading facility 
and increased stockpiling would allow them to bring 
in other feedstock for locals.
•	 Build an emotional link between the city and 
farming communities; consider sister city/ farm to 
fork pathways to encourage connections. This also 
involves positive story-telling. 
•	 Workshops from LLS on nutritional requirements for 
animals
•	 Increase Council assistance with accessing grants 
and funding. 
•	 Increased training should be provided across the 
community in innovative practices. 
•	 Encourage people to move and stay in the area. 
This should include initiatives to retain youth in the 
community. 
•	 Increase the flexibility to work from home to attract 
more people to live in the area. Improved accuracy of 
long term weather forecasts to enable producers to 
better plan for changing conditions. 
•	 Improvements to water infrastructure and security to 
conserve the water in the region. This includes: 
	– Molong Town Water Security Strategy
	– Sub-regional Water Security Project
	– Belubula Water Security Project
	– Water harvesting (Orange- out of region)
	– Landscape re-hydration strategies- LLS and other 
agencies to conduct workshops
•	 The Cabonne LGA stakeholders identified several 
challenges to increasing resilience to drought 
including:
•	 Management of water needs to be improved and we 
need to be smarter about what irrigation water is 
used for. 
•	 Ensuring that environmental flows continue even 
through drought.
•	 State Government grants can produce unintended 
impacts. Some (out of region) farmers can make 
money (depending on if they are filling a gap in the 
market e.g. supplying fodder).
•	 Less help from banks as credit is harder to obtain. 
•	 Need to deliver water efficiency education early and 
Council to provide marketing and promotion. 
•	 Council is looked at to help direct the community to 
support services for drought. Stakeholders would like 
to see this role expanded. 
•	 Engagement on the communities needs across the 
LGA need to be improved.
•	 Where drought support measures include financial or 
material products, suppliers should be encouraged 
to buy or source locally to help support the regional 
economy.
•	 Improved infrastructure that is more resilient to the 
impacts of a changing climate and suitable for the 
communities needs. 
What needs to happen / ideas?
Cabonne LGA highlighted that resilience could be 
improved through a number of actions outlined below.
•	 Encourage diverse industry and business, promote 
region as an option for larger companies and 
employers to base themselves. This will assist with 
moving away from the region’s reliance on agriculture.
•	 Improved equity in drought support, importantly 
Cabonne LGA – what we heard
What worked well
The following actions and initiatives were identified by 
stakeholders as beneficial during previous droughts:
•	 Diversifying business helps reduce the impacts of 
drought.
•	 Local dairy farms have improved water efficiency 
through increasing innovation.
•	 Increasing shade and on-farm water infrastructure 
improves animal welfare and reduces water loss. 
Reducing stock numbers and using rotational and 
pro-grazing methods help maintain ground cover
•	 Community events, especially community meals, 
helped bring people together and divert attention 
from drought e.g. Farm family gatherings (State 
Government funded) bought people together for 
social dinners, sometimes with a speaker and were 
well supported by the community. 
•	 There are a number of places where farmers can turn 
to for guidance, reassurance, mental health, someone 
to talk to e.g. Men’s Shed.
•	 Seed funding is helpful to get some local community 
events off the ground.
•	 Local Landcare have improved Molong Creek flows by 
removal of willows (replacing with native vegetation). 
•	 Primary producers have become much better at 
managing groundcover and preserving resources 
through drought due to improved management 
practices. 
•	 There has been an increase in the number of 
specialists and technical advisers who can help with 
drought preparedness. 
•	 What hasn’t worked well or needs to improve

150
•	 Better utilisation and understanding of groundwater.
•	 Diversification of tourism, include agri-tourism, 
glamping, etc. Also improving access via 
infrastructure re-purposing/ upgrades e.g. including 
cycleways when building roads and repurposing 
infrastructure like closed railways as walking/ riding/ 
cycleways to target recreational tourism. 
•	 Increased support for mental health and financial 
counselling within the region. 
•	 Continue events that bring community together and 
provide a social outlet. These need to be a mix of 
formal and informal gatherings. These events help 
build resilience, adaptability and improve mental 
health. Council may be able to provide support by 
making Council facilities available for events and/or 
providing a package of information that helps people 
understand the process and requirements for hosting 
an event.
•	 Council and community to implement drought 
tolerant street plantings/ landscaping. 
•	 Encourage sustainability in households e.g. water 
tanks.
•	 Celebration and recognition of volunteers in 
community organisations to encourage volunteering. 
•	 Additional support for local sporting clubs/ facilities 
as social hubs. 
•	 Recognition that communities and Councils can only 
do so much to support the community during drought 
events, especially prolonged periods, and therefore 
State and Federal intervention is required.
•	 Increased tax incentives for fodder and water 
conservation activities.

151
•	 Re-invigorate the main street- repurpose existing 
buildings to make it more attractive for tourists. 
Incentivise absentee landlords with retail premises 
in the community to consider repurposing of their 
premises to make them more attractive for new 
businesses. Development of a CBD activation 
Strategy would assist in building the resilience of 
retail businesses of Cowra.
•	 Improve tourism offerings to increase the number of 
people that choose to stay in Cowra.
•	 Work with media outlets to encourage positive 
drought messaging and promotion of the region that 
encourages tourism. Build on positives- Cowra as 
“Head of Lachlan Valley.”
•	 Improve recreational offerings including access to 
walking tracks and utilisation of the Lachlan River. 
Investigate opportunities to learn from First Nations 
Peoples and integrate this into recreation/ tourism 
offerings.
•	 A local person who acts as a Coordination of 
information to improve understanding of different 
support services and funding options.
•	 Support for youth to stay, learn and work in the 
community through TAFE, university and trade 
opportunities offered locally.
•	 Advocacy for local resource management skills and 
trade education.
•	 Look at ways to improve the outcomes for vulnerable 
groups throughout drought. 
•	 Mentorship program for businesses that includes the 
following aspects of business ownership: 
	– Understanding the fundamentals of business, for 
example, profit/loss, gross margins 
	– Grants for digital improvements, for example, 
website improvement that were administered by 
Bus HQ – Consultancy arm of Business NSW – has 
previously provided 
	– Digital education to support businesses moving 
onto an online platform to combat the reduced 
numbers of visitors to the region. 
•	 Help for newcomers entering the agricultural industry 
(address barriers to entry into agriculture).
•	 Development of pathways to industrial agriculture 
(protected cropping, feed lotting, meat processing), 
value-adding and regenerative practices (circular 
economic farming).
•	 Improve communication of what’s on in the 
community and between LGA’s (regarding events)
•	 Reduce red-tape/improving the application processes 
associated with development, business diversification 
and expansion in the region. 
•	 Changes to land zoning to support industrial 
development and attract people/ business/ industry 
to the community. 
•	 Improve freight logistics including improving roads, 
rail and air, to make the region more attractive for 
individuals and businesses. 
•	 Increasing mental health literacy through early 
intervention and removing stigma. This may include:
	– Connectivity/understanding of access pathways to 
resources/support.
	– Increasing self-care literacy.
•	 Improve liveability to attract people to the area; 
address housing, health, telecommunication, and 
connectivity issues. 
Cowra LGA – what we heard
What worked well
Initiatives identified as being valuable for the community 
included the information and support provided by 
DPIRD /LLS. Additionally, funding that subsidised silos 
and water infrastructure assisted primary producers. 
Rural Financial Counselling is also seen as very 
beneficial. Tourism which promoted and engaged with 
agriculture like the hay bale art, silo art and campaigns 
like #buyfromthebush are looked on favourably by the 
community. Council also worked with the Business 
Chamber to help provide training and support to local 
businesses with moderate uptake. 
What hasn’t worked well or needs to improve
The Cowra LGA cited the need to have better media 
messaging around drought that didn’t negatively impact 
agriculture, communities and tourism.
It was noted that there is a need to reduce red tape 
around grants, land development activities that support 
economic diversification, securing oversees workers and 
applying for drought related programs and support such 
as low interest loans and freight subsidies.
Cash cards were used with some success in the last 
drought however there needs to be more structure to 
the program to ensure the money says within the local 
economy. 
Improvements in coordination between drought support 
agencies and improved accuracy of drought indicators 
are needed.
What needs to happen / ideas?
Cowra LGA highlighted that resilience could be 
improved through a number of mechanisms outlined 
below.

152
•	 Improved climate modelling that is delivered by 
an identified credible/local body who can provide 
localised insight into a wider Bureau forecasting and 
trends. 
•	 Improved environmental resilience: drought tolerant 
plantings by Council and prioritised maintenance of 
green spaces; increase community knowledge of the 
application of water to grow and maintain gardens; 
education around how to retain water in dams and in 
our landscapes and soils.
•	 Advocate for greater collaboration across the three 
levels of government to address water security. 
•	 Continue to progress water security measures:
	– Extend the stormwater harvesting scheme 
(gain state approvals for stage 2- ongoing). 
Encourage surrounding Councils to implement 
similar schemes, provide education and advice as 
required.
	– Support and advocate for improvements to Lake 
Rowlands
	– Pilot recycled water plant
•	 Economic diversification activities that focus outside 
of the areas of mining, food and wine (for example 
market new sporting complex to surrounding 
Councils), investment in tourism facilities and events 
(for example camping amenities) and support the 
growth of agri-tourism.
	– Supporting of programs and events 
	– Positive and proactive messaging and 
communications on water and drought related 
issues
	– Long-term planning for future water security 
needs, and 
	– Ability to support other smaller communities.
What hasn’t worked well or needs to improve
The Orange community identified several challenges to 
increasing resilience to drought including: 
•	 The need to reduce bureaucracy and increase the 
speed at which support services are available within 
communities. 
•	 Unrealistic delivery timeframes associated with State 
funding, sometimes issues with finding trades and 
suppliers.
•	 The messaging around drought preparedness and 
support needs to be reconsidered to remove the 
stigma attached to handouts and welfare. 
•	 Over-reliance on community good will and volunteers.
•	 Uncoordinated delivery of support services increases 
stress.
•	 Short-term work contracts leading to feelings of job 
instability and reduced security.
•	 Work with media outlets to encourage constructive 
journalism/ storytelling rather than images and 
stories that discourage tourists.
What needs to happen / ideas?
•	 Increasing the research, understanding and 
awareness of information and datasets that support 
early drought intervention actions by all levels of 
government and messaging that allows local industry, 
business and community to respond (triggers for 
action captured in a plan).
Orange LGA – what we heard
What worked well
The stakeholder engagement confirmed that some of 
the following initiatives have supported the region’s / 
Orange’s ability to absorb the shock of drought: 
•	 On-going water education and awareness assisted 
the Orange community to implement efficient water 
use techniques and reduce their water usage as 
required to make sure they didn’t run out of water 
during the last drought (see case study). Council 
should help surrounding Councils to implement 
similar education and water saving programs in their 
LGAs.
•	 Council support and hosting of community events 
like Day on the Green, especially events designed 
to connect people who may not otherwise interact 
improves social cohesion and bridges the divide 
between town and rural residents (silos).
•	 Campaigns such as #buyfromthebush brought 
a positive focus to regional businesses and the 
successful crafting of the messaging encourages the 
financial support of the regional retail communities, 
helping re-invigorate the local economy. 
•	 Rural Financial Counselling and the support from this 
service and other agribusiness consultants to assist 
their clients in approaching their financial institutions 
around additional funding was sighted as beneficial 
and something that should continue. 
•	 Local Not-for-Profit Groups such as Men’s/Women’s 
Shed, Salvation Army, Lions Clubs, amongst others, 
were sighted as providing valuable support for at-risk 
and in-need community members.
•	 Employers adapting compassionately to assist 
employees (see case study).
•	 Orange City Council were praised for their approach 
to

153
•	 Coordination of services to provide clearer messaging 
and communication on the resources, information, 
support and funding that can be accessed. For 
example, a drought officer that serves as a 
permanent support that links to other services. There 
may need to be a trigger point for employment to 
commence.
•	 Advocate for small business support during droughts.
•	 Business chamber to support greater levels of 
mentorship and education for small businesses.
•	 Increasing the understanding of mental health 
through:
	– Early intervention and removing stigma
	– Connectivity and understanding of access 
pathways to support 
	– A platform that identifies all available mental 
health services
•	 Preserving neighbourhoods and the sense of micro-
communities as Orange’s population continues to 
grow, for example local cul de-sac parties.
•	 Council continues to support and host community 
events to bring the community together and provide 
something for people to look forward to in difficult 
times.

154
•	 Improved access to health and mental health services 
that meet the needs of the community. Greater 
mental health assistance is required. There is now 
only one doctor in the community who, aside from 
providing GP services, is also looked at to support 
the community’s mental health. Rural Chaplains have 
recently been established in Young by the Salvation 
Army to support community mental health however 
more assistance is required to meet the need. Locums 
have also come to assist but unable to alleviate the 
issue and another doctor is required.
•	 To assist with the housing issues, investigate options 
to reinvigorate the unused houses on agricultural 
properties as both a solution to the housing shortage, 
and possible accommodation for tourism and 
investigate options of homestays to support travellers 
to the region requiring accommodation.
•	 Developing a connected business community. 
Attempts at a formalised group or chamber in the 
past have not endured. An option could be for Council 
to provide a space for the business community to 
gather and discuss their experiences and organise 
‘guest speakers’ for some of the gatherings. 
•	 Increased support for grant writing and 
administration.
•	 Resilience training for community leaders, 
encouraging youth to be involved and succession 
planning for community groups.
•	 Look at partnering with universities to have health 
staff train in the region. This would help fill the 
shortfall in health services in the region.
•	 Adapting to a changing climate by changing ways of 
working and work hours. 
for the community to navigate what supports are 
available. The need for financial drought support to 
recognise small businesses outside of agriculture was 
also highlighted. There are no forums for the business 
community to come together to solve problems and 
collectively support business and tourism. Assistance 
with navigating and reducing red tape for business 
and organisations when trying to secure overseas 
workers, grant funding and attracting new services and 
development were also emphasised. There is a need to 
change attitudes to preparedness for drought, increase 
sharing and encourage adoption of innovative primary 
production techniques. 
What needs to happen / ideas?
The communities of Weddin Shire highlighted the 
following key areas where they felt action was required: 
•	 Improving the water supply and security across 
the LGA communities, villages and industries, in 
particular the village of Caragabal. This needs to be 
coupled with activities that represent education and 
awareness of efficient water use and investigation of 
water harvesting.
•	 Greater coordination and promotion of the tourist 
attractions, events, accommodations and retail 
offering in the LGA. Look at ways to capitalise on 
tourism associated with events in neighbouring 
LGAs such as the Elvis festival and Grazing Down the 
Lachlan which attracts a lot of tourists.
•	 Promotion of success stories in the community 
newsletter and a welcome pack for new residents 
that promotes existing services available would help 
to retain people.
•	 Consider options for a cultural centre close to the 
Grenfell main street and beautification of old main 
street that enhance the regions cultural and heritage 
features. Seek ways to improve tourist mobility 
around town and make the local villages more 
attractive for visitors.
Weddin LGA – what we heard
What worked well
Events that brought the community together were well 
received and many of the volunteers that support these 
events have diverse interests and supported multiple 
community organisations. The silo art and work towards 
‘lighting’ of the silos and other main street businesses, 
as well as the re-invigoration of the main street has 
added to the appeal of the Grenfell community. In the 
millennial drought, TAFE ran subsidised training for 18 
farmers to upskill and re-train off-farm to diversify their 
income. This was highly successful. 
What hasn’t worked well or needs to improve
Some of the challenges the community face in 
increasing resilience include how to attract new people 
and families to the region and work to retain or attract 
younger generations back to the area. Corporate 
agriculture results in less families, that means fewer 
children in schools and therefore the schools become 
less viable which in turn makes it hard to attract new 
families. Housing issues were also noted with current 
land zoning seen as prohibitive to investment and 
building. There is also concern over the lack of general 
practice doctors and mental health support. Lack of 
adequate health services makes it difficult to attract 
newcomers to move to the area. There are some issues 
around opening hours of shops in terms of servicing 
tourists. It is also difficult to attract volunteers when 
many people are time poor and concerned about taking 
on a formal role within a committee. 
It was noted that sometimes drought subsides don’t 
always work as intended or there are unintended 
circumstances. An example was given where different 
states have different supports in place that actually 
make it more difficult to sell fodder as producers are 
competing with subsidised fodder. It is often hard

155
•	 Community greening projects looking into 
composting, water tanks and waterwise designs. 
•	 Incorporate local indigenous knowledge into water 
and environmental management.
•	 Increase digital resilience by delivering and 
advocating for reliable technology and connection 
to the outside world (access). This needs to be 
supported by providing education (namely to the 
ageing population to ensure they are able to connect 
in a secure way), upskilling (improving digital literacy), 
and promotion of remote working. Currently lack of 
digital connectivity in the region is prohibitive to the 
adoption of agtech that would assist with automation 
of farming practices that have the potential to 
increase yields and productivity.
•	 Improve the community and school population 
(resilience) by attracting non-primary production 
families to the area from surrounding industry (for 
example, Solar Farm, Lake Cowal mine) and also from 
further afield for a tree-change. Strategies might 
include: 
	– targeted marketing to attract those leaving the 
cities for rural areas 
	– incentives for these people to move to 
Weddin Shire

156
Appendix B 
Central West RDRP Action Plan
Priority 1
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme  1
1.1 - 1.5
Organisation of lead and 
partner agencies will need to 
occur, understanding what 
if any progress can be made 
within existing resourcing - 
otherwise requires additional 
resources and dedicated 
funding to initiate. 
Consult and engage with regional businesses to scope / verify 
the services required to increase resilience (preparedness and 
support services) and increase adaptive capacity.  
Develop the package of services and suppliers who can support 
delivery. 
Present to NSW Government with a view of obtaining funding for a 
further investigations / business case / establishment of service.
Business NSW
Consortium of 
Local Council's can 
provide input to the 
development of the 
program through 
communication of local 
/ community needs. 
$$$
Theme 1
1.7
Individual councils may 
consider the need for future 
community engagement, survey 
and studies that need to be 
conducted to inform their future 
decisions.  
Overall progress towards 
implementation is driven more 
through access to funding on a 
state and federal level. 
1. Conduct a Business Community Survey across the region as a 
sense and pulse check to collect information on current business 
attitudes / sentiment to inform future iterations Economic 
Development Strategies.  
 2. Continue to implement Economic Development Strategies.  
Local Economic Development officers at Councils continue to 
progress activities and programs that support the implementation 
of these strategies. Including cross collaboration across the 
LGA's.  
The consortium of Councils and the Central NSW Joint 
Organisation should continue to explore partnerships and 
opportunities through Department of Regional NSW that support 
economic diversity and regional development (future development 
opportunities).  
Further investigation through engagement and research may need 
to be conducted on a local level to inform future developments 
Consortium of 
Local Councils
Consortium of Councils 
can continue to work 
through their existing 
channels on local and 
regional development. 
$$

157
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 1
1.8
The availability of Council 
and partner resources will 
determine action initiation. 
Some activities can be funded 
through existing organisational 
resources, this will be 
dependent on the scale.  
FRRR may provide funding 
opportunities for local level 
tourism events. 
Councils to develop and refine plans for how they will work with 
local communities to better support the tourism opportunities 
within the region. This may include for some of the smaller 
community engaging a third party to assist them in developing 
promotional material, website development and calendars of 
events.  
Where tourism promoters such as Orange360 exist the council 
much of the promotion and event development is already 
managed.  
Councils without these resources should investigate the 
opportunity to take a more active role in the coordination and 
promotion of local events.  
 Councils to engage with tourism providers such as Orange360 to 
help with promotion and event development. 
Economic development officers / community engagement officers 
from each LGA to engage with each other on a regular (quarterly?) 
basis to discuss events and cross promotion. 
Councils to consider a page on their website and / or brochure that 
promotes local retailers / businesses and events that is regularly 
updated. 
Engage with local media outlets to promote good news stories and 
reduce the amount of negative stories about drought.  
During planning processes (e.g. IP&R), consider any additional 
infrastructure required to improve tourism numbers and / or any 
buildings / infrastructure that could be repurposed. 
Support visitor economy businesses to adapt, recover and 
flourish by providing a comprehensive suite of grants, training and 
business advice programs delivered through a new one-stop shop.
Consortium of 
Local Councils 
/ Destination 
NSW
Consortium of Councils 
would have a varying 
role across each of 
the LGA;s. Where the 
tourism sector is less 
formalised Council may 
need to take more of a 
lead role. 
Councils may wish to 
engage an external 
provider to assist 
in development of 
promotional material, 
website development, 
calendar of events 
where the need arises. 
This could be funded 
from implementation 
funding. 
$$
Theme 1
1.9-1.13
Extension and adoption 
activities are currently 
undertaken across a range 
of platforms on both a local 
and regional level. Additional 
investigation is required to be 
better able to support local 
extension providers to change 
behaviour to increase this 
uptake. 
Map the barriers and challenges to improving adoption to R&D.  
Seek to identify the key drivers of this resistance.  
Identify strategies and resources to address the behaviour change 
and need.  
Focus on Implementing those strategies including working with 
willing adopters to showcase and share knowledge to promote 
uptake.  
Local Land 
Services / 
Rural and 
Development 
Corporations’  
(initiators of 
most extension 
programs)
N / A
$$

158
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 3
3.2
Changing climate conditions are 
likely to bring focus to progress 
/ implementation of this action.
Seek approvals and / or funding to continue implementation or 
business case development / further investigations. 
Including undertaking any further studies which may inform 
progression of drought priorities. 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation 
Consortium of 
Councils would 
continue to support 
the Central West JO 
with information, 
contribution to 
submission and 
advocacy where 
required. 
$$$
Theme 4
4.1
Initiation and endurance of this 
action will need to be driven by 
community willingness.  
Funding opportunity for 
Foundation Rural Regional 
Renewal - Community 
Fundraising. 
Collaborate with other regions such as Upper Lachlan Foundation 
and Crookwell community trust to define the most appropriate 
model.  
Consortium of Council may establish a community meeting 
and invite existing funds to present to the community on how 
their fund works. Progression of the action would be reliant on 
identification of interested community groups agreeing to step 
forward and lead.  
Could utilise implementation funding to establish a base 
investment.
Community / 
Community 
not-for-profit
Consortium of Councils 
role could extend to 
creating connections 
with other LGA's who 
have a community 
funds (inviting funds to 
brief community).
$$
Theme 4
4.2
Formation of the community 
drought networks in action 
3.1 could provide a catalyst to 
initiate this action.  
Noting implementation will 
require identification of further 
funding avenues.
Investigate if other regional / state organisations are investigating 
alternate mental health services and what options there are to 
participate.  
Investigate the services required across the LGA through 
consultation with delivery partners and community members. 
Councils maybe able to inform the initiative through conducting 
a community health survey may help understand and shape the 
services required.  
This would then require funding and investment in additional 
resources to implement.
NSW Health –  
Local Health 
District and 
Primary Health 
Network
Consortium of Councils 
would be able to talk 
to the community 
voice, this may help to 
identifying other local 
stakeholders. 
$$$
Theme 5
5.1
Much of this work is dependent 
on funding to complete 
and implement further 
investigations and solutions.  
Other agencies to continue to 
progress strategies that are 
aligned to local and regionally 
driven studies. 
Seek approvals and / or funding to continue implementation or 
business case development / further investigations. 
Councils may seek to undertake additional investigation to inform 
and refine future water supply options. 
Central 
Tablelands 
Water / 
Consortium of 
Local Councils
The consortium of 
Councils and the 
Central NSW JO would 
continue to investigate 
and advocate for 
suitable water security 
solutions for their 
communities. 
$$$

159
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 5
5.1
Progression of implementation 
of these strategies by other 
partners agencies will be 
critical. 
Existing implementation plans in place and under  
development through NSW DCCEEW. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils
Consortium of 
Councils are engaged 
under the existing 
implementation 
arrangements for 
these strategies. 
$$$
Theme 5
5.4
This action will be triggered 
by future work on local and 
regional water strategies 
or progress on other water 
security studies. 
1)Continue advocacy on the importance of having close 
collaboration. 
2)Continue to develop and maintain good working relationships 
with state and commonwealth agencies. 
3) Delivery partners may seek to use the upcoming Basin Plan 
Review as opportunity to extend this collaboration. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils, 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation
Consortium of Councils 
seek to express the 
views of the benefits 
of shared data and 
improved decision 
making on a local level. 
$
Theme 5
5.5
Councils may wish to dedicate 
some of their implementation 
funding to further investigations 
/ studies to inform these water 
supply challenges. 
– Continue to work with DCCEEW to identify and investigate 
opportunities for improvements in recycled water (identified 
as one area for further investigation under the Macquarie-
Castlereagh regional water strategy). 
– Continue to actively engage with the NSW DCCEEW programs 
that support increased training and education, innovative ways to 
operate.  
– Continue to develop and refine Integrated Water Cycle 
Management Strategies (IWCM) enhance their ability to deliver 
safe, reliable, and efficient water services while addressing 
broader environmental and community goals. 
– Noting that implementation of new and upgraded recycled water 
infrastructure would be a medium to long-term to deliver. 
Individual Councils will have specific needs and may seek to 
undertake further investigation to inform what further activities 
with NSW DCCEEW may include. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils, 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation,
Each LGA will have 
specific water supply 
issues to address. 
Continue to work with 
the Central NSW JO. 
$
Theme 5
5.7
Renewal / revision of REDS 
and other DPIRD studies and 
investments are likely to be the 
trigger for this action. 
Implementation is detailed in Regional Economic Development 
Strategies and Central NSW Joint Organisation Transport 
Infrastructure Advocacy Plan (2024). 
Individual councils may seek opportunities to more thoroughly 
inform components of better rail, road and air services through 
engaging further research . 
Consortium of 
Local Councils, 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation,
Consortium of Councils 
will continue to 
advocate for improved 
infrastructure in 
conjunction with other 
partners such as RDA 
and Central NSW JO. 
$

160
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 5
5.8
 Renewal / revision of REDS 
and other DPIRD studies and 
investments are likely to be the 
trigger for this action.
Councils to work with partners (nbn local / RDA) to develop a 
digital plan that identifies areas within the region that require 
better connectivity and / or digital literacy.  
Councils may wish to undertake additional studies into inform 
future focus areas in telecommunications.  
Use these outputs to influence via established advocacy channels. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils, 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation
Consortium of Councils 
would continue to work 
with the Central NSW 
JO 
$
Priority 2
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 2
2.4
Review of existing 
environmental and water 
related policies and creation of 
new programs / plans / policies 
will drive the initiation of this 
action. 
Both local and regional environmental and water agencies have, 
and continue to, engage with First Nations Peoples on these 
matters. Regional Water Strategies have a key priority in First 
Nations Water Actions that should continue to be implemented. 
Consortium of Local Councils should seek to include First Nations 
engagement on a local level when undertaking new projects / 
updating policies and strategies. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils
When reviewing water 
and environmental 
plans the consortium of 
councils can consider 
how to include First 
Nations people into 
the development, 
implementation and 
review of policies, plans 
and programs. 
$
Theme 3
3.1
There is unlikely to be impetus 
for this action to be initiated 
until there is an emerging 
drought / changing climate 
conditions. 
1) Identification and formation of members of the regions drought 
network.  
2) Formation of a standard agenda and terms of reference and 
regular meeting cycle of participants.  
3) The working group through its meetings should seek to map the 
roles and responsibilities of its members.  
4) Councils should investigate the opportunity to available of 
resourcing through their Disaster Adaptation Plans which may 
support them to undertake some of these activities. 
DPIRD
Consortium of Councils 
would participate in the 
groups meetings and 
be able to represent 
the community voice. 
Councils could look to 
support the meetings 
through existing 
resources e.g. water 
operations. 
$

161
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 3
3.3
Reliance on additional 
resources / funding to be 
available to establish this 
function. 
1) Investigate and advocate for additional local resources that can 
translate and promote climate data through a local lens to help 
improve drought preparedness (Disaster Adaptation Plans) 
2) Work with agencies such as the Australian Climate Service, 
Bureau and Southern Innovation Hub to obtain up to date data and 
predictions and interpret these for local conditions.
DPIRD
Consortium of Councils 
can support this 
through investigation of 
resourcing (via Disaster 
Adaptation Plans). 
$$
Theme 3
3.5
Reliance on additional 
resources / funding to be 
available to establish this 
function. 
1) Use outputs from Action 3.1 
2) Develop a Drought Communication Plan 
3) Create webpage with links to drought resources  
4) Identify opportunities to promote / share this information with 
various sectors of the community. E.g. newsletters 
5) Regularly review to ensure currency of information and 
effectiveness of Plan. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils
The Consortium of 
Councils are often 
looked during drought 
for messaging, 
information and advice. 
$
Theme 4
4.3
Formation of the community 
drought networks in action 
3.1 could provide a catalyst to 
initiate this action
1) Through consultation with local delivery partners, identify the 
appropriate organisation that has the ability to host information on 
mental health support services.  
2) This organisation should seek to maintain and publish a 
database of available resources that the local region can utilise 
for various purposes e.g. crisis support, resilience etc 
3) The opportunity to provide information would need to be 
promoted via an expression of interest and canvassing of 
suppliers.  
4) The publishing of this information should provide an option for 
providers to register and update their details.  
5) Councils are able to promote this information through 
newsletters and communication. Utilise local community groups to 
help dispense information and where to access support services. 
These groups may be leveraged to pulse-check the communities 
resilience and mental health. 
6) Database will need to be maintained regularly. 
NSW Health –  
Local Health 
District and 
Primary Health 
Network
Consortium of Councils 
would speak to the 
community need 
and may assist with 
identifying other local 
stakeholders. 
$

162
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 4
4.4
The lead agencies will be 
contingent on developing 
enduring services to support 
the community.  
Foundation of Rural, Regional 
Renewal may provide funding 
opportunities for individualised 
local level training programs.  
1) Utilising the information collected in action 4.3 and in 
collaboration with delivery partners seek to run a series of 
information sessions across the LGA that promote the services 
available.  
2) When promoting the event seek to include a diverse range of 
community members from not for profits such as Lions Club & 
Salvation Army, education providers and those most vulnerable 
in the community. Along with those organisations that might view 
the training as a sponsorship opportunity that would benefit the 
community.  
3) Look to hold the event annually to update the community on 
new providers / services and consider a range of methods to 
communicate this information to the broader community.  
NSW Health –  
Local Health 
District and 
Primary Health 
Network
Consortium of Councils 
would speak to the 
community need 
and may assist with 
identifying other local 
stakeholders. 
On a local level 
Councils could 
provide guidance on 
grant funding that 
can be applied for 
local organisations 
such as Salvation 
Army and CWA to 
apply for funding to 
build resilience and 
mental health skiLocal 
Land Services in the 
community along 
with promotion and 
communication of 
events. 
$$
Theme 4
4.8
Informed by the development of 
a digital literacy plan.  
Potential funding opportunities 
through the Foundation for 
Rural Regional Renewal (FRRR)
Identify a local provider who can deliver digital literacy program.  
Canvas interested local not for profit organisations and 
community members. 
Deliver local training and education.
Consortium of 
Local Councils 
Consortium of Councils 
would be able to 
lead this action to 
coordinate local 
resources to deliver the 
program.
$
Theme 5
5.6
Councils may wish to dedicate 
some of their implementation 
funding to further investigations 
/ studies to inform these water 
supply challenges. E.g. dams 
safety upgrades
Continue to identify and progress opportunities that can be 
funded through National Water Grid and Safe and Secure Water 
Program. 
Individual Councils will have specific needs around water 
quality, infrastructure. Councils may seek to undertake further 
investigation to inform what further activities with NSW DCCEEW 
may include. 
Consortium of 
Local Councils
Each LGA will have 
specific water supply 
issues to address. 
Continue to work with 
their Central NSW JO. 
$$$

163
Priority 3
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 1
1.6
From existing resources within 
Business Chambers and Local 
Councils. 
 1. Each local business chamber to identify and map its existing 
mentor / mentee relationships / opportunities.  
2. Cross LGA chambers to meet and discuss opportunities 
to mentor / mentee across LGA's and collaborate on mutual 
programs / share resources.  
3. Meetings should be regular to capture new opportunities.  
LGA's without formalised / or newly formalised business networks 
could support this through.  
1. expression of interest to identify level of potential participation.  
2. Create a calendar of meeting dates  
3. Utilise council facilities to provide a meeting location. 
Business 
Chambers and 
Consortium of 
Local Councils 
Consortium of Councils 
role will be dependent 
on the strength of the 
business community. 
Some Councils will 
need to take a more 
active role in the 
action to promote 
and drive mentoring 
opportunities and 
business networks. 
$
Theme 2
2.1, 2.2, 
2.5, 
2.6, 2.7
Action can be aligned to 
the planning and reporting 
timeframes associated with 
these activities.  
Full / further implementation of 
strategies would be contingent 
on further resources. 
Funding for components of the 
action e.g. development of a 
community garden to showcase 
practices may attract funding 
from Foundation Rural Regional 
Renewal (FRRR) 
Incorporate more drought tolerant parks through cyclical asset 
and maintenance planning and upgrade / renewal.  
Expand existing water awareness and education activities to 
include information on efficient watering and garden practices 
including how to build a drought tolerant garden. Consider options 
for online information and workshops / field days with local 
providers for demonstrations. 
Prioritise use of recycled water to supply council owned assets. 
Councils to advocate to improved building standards when 
updates to policy occur and encourage / reward developers for 
'greener' design. Orange to continue to expand the recycled water 
residential network as appropriate. 
Councils to develop a climate change policy (if none is in place) to 
guide their approach to climate adaptation / mitigation. Councils 
to implement actions within their associated strategies / plans.
Consortium of 
Local Councils
The Consortium 
of Councils would 
through normal 
business activities 
be able to consider 
through future 
planning, development 
applications, asset and 
maintenance how to 
incorporate several of 
the activities. 
Some of the 
consortium have 
climate adaptation 
strategies
$$

164
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 2
2.3
This action would occur as a part 
of the previous action 2.2.
1. Identify scope of information and education to be provided.  
2. Confirm delivery partners - including Mulloon institute 
3. Formats and program to deliver information and education e.g. 
workshops / demonstrations / showcasing of best practice.  
4. Review and reset every 1-2 years
Local Land 
Services / 
DPIRD
The Consortium 
of Councils could 
consider how to 
integrate this 
information into 
the planning of 
the education and 
awareness in the 
earlier action.
$
Theme 3
3.4
This is an on-going action that 
will be led by NFA and can 
be supported by Councils. It 
is likely to gain more traction 
during periods of greater 
climate variability. 
Continue to utilise existing advocacy channels. 
NSW Farmers 
Association
Consortium of 
Councils would speak 
to and support the 
community voice. 
$
Theme 4
4.5
This could be funded through 
implementation funding. 
Alternatively identified RTO 
maybe able to investigate 
funding opportunities.
1) Across the delivery partners identify a local RTO that is best 
placed to lead the development of a gaps analysis / skiLocal 
Land Services matrix that informs future education and training 
opportunities.  
2) Run a series of workshops with local businesses, industry and 
retailers, Councils to understand the skiLocal Land Services they 
require for unfilled roles now and into the future.  
3) Engage with the community – including school leavers, those 
looking to retrain, the unemployed on what skiLocal Land Services 
/ education they have or are planning to acquire.  
4) Upon identification of the gaps investigate opportunities to 
meet the required changes through alternate training course and 
education that support local employment needs. 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation 
and Local 
Registered 
Training 
Organisations
Consortium of Councils 
would be best placed 
to identify a lead / key 
RTO for their area and 
provide oversight to 
the plan action.
Councils may seek 
to undertake this 
individually to 
account for the 
nuance in location. 
Would be contingent 
on identification of 
funding.
$
Theme 4
4.6
Councils may seek to undertake 
training identification 
individually to account for the 
nuance in location. Would be 
contingent on identification of 
funding. 
Training providers to seek to improve localised training options. 
TAFE / NSW 
Department 
of Education 
/ Group and 
local training 
organisations 
/ Private 
education 
providers
Consortium of Councils 
would be best placed 
to identify a lead / key 
RTO for their area and 
provide oversight to 
the plan action. 
$$

165
Central West 
Plan Themes
Action 
number
Action trigger
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Consortia 
anticipated role
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 4
4.7
Consortium of Councils are well 
positioned to work with RTO's to 
identify future funding / grants.  
Dependent on external funding 
becoming available. 
Through the development of the development of the  
gap analysis / skiLocal Land Services matrix discussed earlier. 
Engage with current primary producers to gain an understanding 
of the general skiLocal Land Services base. Including this 
information may assist in designing future pathways to retrain, 
funding / grant opportunities and potential partnerships to deliver 
training. 
Local RTO 
within each LGA
Consortium of 
Councils would speak 
to the community 
need, may have staff 
who can provide grant 
advice, promotion of 
the activity.
$$
Theme 5
5.2
Timeframes for the Basin Plan 
Review will create the impetus 
for this action.  
Implementation funding could 
be allocated to support and 
inform the regions submission. 
1) Working with the Central NSW JO and the broader LGA’s that 
make up the regions footprint.  
2) The region can continue to position itself now to make 
submission to the Basin Plan Review 2026.  
3) In positioning to make this submission stakeholders can give 
consideration to other partners they may wish to collaborate with 
the develop and inform their submission. This may include other 
regional stakeholder groups or technical studies / resources.  
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation
Consortium of Councils 
seek to express the 
views (environmental, 
social and economic) 
on the impact of the 
Basin Plan.
$
Theme 5
5.3
On-going likely to be more 
prevalent in preparing for the 
Basin Plan submission and 
future water studies. 
Continue to implement the NSW Open Data Policy which is 
focused on making more data available to the public, research, 
business and industry.
Consortium of 
Local Councils, 
Central 
NSW Joint 
Organisation
Consortium of Councils 
seek to express the 
views of the benefits 
of shared data and 
improved decision 
making.
$
Theme 5
5.9
Reliant on the identification 
of additional resources / 
implementation funding to 
complete the audit if consortium 
can not support. 
Implementation would require 
in-kind contribution from local 
communities through labour, 
materials, grants etc not for 
profit organisations may be able 
to apply for grant funding. 
Identify existing infrastructure which is available to be 
repurposed. Work with other agencies and businesses to 
consolidate use of infrastructure. 
This could be an initial audit or expression of interest to identify 
unused buildings that could be repurposed for business or 
housing. Consortium maybe positioned to undertake the audit 
themselves.  
Upon completion of the audit, develop a plan with local 
communities and businesses to identify and prioritise 
opportunities that can be progressed.  
Consortium of 
Local Councils
Consortium of Councils 
could lead exploration 
/ audit of potential 
buildings / formation 
of local partnerships. 
The consortium would 
also be able to provide 
guidance on planning 
considerations and 
grant opportunities.
$$$

166
Key: 
Themes:
Theme 1 - The Economy: Diverse and resilient agricultural businesses and regional economies 
Theme 2 - The Environment: Protection of the Natural and Built Environment 
Theme 3 - Governance: Leadership and Collaboration 
Theme 4 - Community: Vibrant, connected, and supported communities 
Theme 5 - Infrastructure: built assets and technology 
Cost:
$
Existing Resources available from Stakeholders and Partners
$$
Additional Resources Required 
$$$
Significant Financial Support Required from Stakeholders and Partners
Timeframe:
Short term: 1-2 years
Medium term: 3-4 years
Long term: 5-10 years

167
Appendix C 
Future Plan Updates
CSIRO reviewed this initial plan. There were a number 
of suggestions for changes/ updates for future plan 
revision. To ensure these are considered in the next 
revision, a summary is listed below.
1. Future plan updates could revise the vision, actions, 
and outcomes to better reflect the interests of those 
who may be particularly vulnerable to drought.
2. Future plan updates could ensure that stakeholder 
needs continue to be reflected by maintaining and, 
where possible, expanding the level of active and 
direct stakeholder participation during the plan’s 
ongoing implementation.
3. Future plan updates could provide more information 
about each collaboration and partnership. A table 
summarising the main purposes of each collaboration 
or partnership, its joint activities, and some measures 
of its quality could be incorporated into the plan as a 
monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) activity. 
4. Future plan updates would benefit from clearer 
articulation of a structured learning process across 
its various components. This could build on the 
vision for learning across all levels and sectors and 
could be connected to, and consistent with, the MEL 
framework. In particular, this could involve specifying 
governance arrangements for implementing the MEL 
framework and assigning responsibilities to partners 
in plan implementation.
5. Future plan updates would benefit from a more 
nuanced interpretation and use of adaptive 
governance principles. Doing so would be 
advantageous for building additional spare capacities, 
and creating flexibility in decision-making to build 
the resilience of the region to drought and related 
stresses and shocks.
6. Additionally, future plan updates could also better 
articulate what next steps will be carried out by whom 
to develop more detailed governance arrangements 
for plan implementation. In this way, future plan 
updates will be able to report on how principles of 
ongoing learning and adaptive governance are being 
implemented in practice.
7. Future plan updates could include further analysis of 
the links between other plans and policies, and their 
implications for understanding and contributing to the 
region’s resilience. Specific details could be provided 
about how the plan will complement existing plans 
and policies to build resilience.
8. Future plan updates could further explore and verify 
identified cause-and-effect relationships, with a view 
to characterising any feedback loops (e.g. vicious 
cycles such as poverty traps) and thresholds (e.g. 
critical production levels below which processing 
facilities become non viable) that make it more 
difficult to recover from drought. This is particularly 
relevant when assessing potential actions for building 
drought resilience for more vulnerable areas or 
segments of the community.
9. Future plan updates could conduct a more thorough 
resilience assessment that covers economic, social, 
cultural and environmental dimensions. It could 
also extend the current impact and vulnerability 
assessment by explicitly considering the capacities 
(anticipatory, absorptive, adaptive and transformative) 
of the region's different sectors and community 
segments to drought and related stresses and shocks.
10. Future plan updates could develop a suite of 
plausible future scenarios through a participatory 
process and consider a mix of livelihoods and 
sectors, including those that rely less on agriculture 
and water. The participatory scenario development 
process and its outcomes could inform active 
learning and adaptive governance for future updates 
of the plan and its implementation.
11. Future plan updates could more clearly outline how 
the proposed options increase reserves, and create 
spare capacity and response options. Ideally, this 
should be informed by a resilience assessment 
of the current state of reserves, spare capacity 
and economic diversification. Future plan updates 
could also provide more explicit descriptions of 
what external support is required for successful 
implementation.
12. Future plan updates could identify more 
opportunities for innovation that support adaptation 
and transformation in the region. At present, actions 
are described in general terms that may provide 
opportunities for innovation, however more specific 
details would make the extent of innovation clearer.
13. Future plan updates could provide more supporting 
assessment of how proposed actions are expected to 
contribute to resilience-building goals.
14. Future plan updates could further develop the MEL 
framework to be informed by a well-articulated 
theory of change, with logical priorities and actions 
linked to the envisioned outcomes, including 
identifying the associated monitoring roles and 
responsibilities.