FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 1

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 2  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF 
GOVERNMENT FUNDING 
This project is jointly funded by the Australian 
Government and the NSW Government under the 
Future Drought Fund. 
We also acknowledge the assistance from each council involved:

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 3

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 4  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF 
COUNTRY 
We acknowledge the traditional custodians of the lands we are on, 
including the Ngemba, Wongaibon and Kamilaroi People, and pay our 
respects to their Elders past, present, and emerging. We celebrate the 
strength, courage and resilience of these communities, which inspire all 
generations to contribute towards a better New South Wales. 
As individuals, communities, and governments, it is our collective 
responsibility to honour the culture and customs that have nurtured and 
continue to nurture this land. We endeavour to create a safe and inclusive 
environment for current and future generations, guided by wisdom of the 
traditional owners and aspirations of all who share this Country. 
Map Source:  
Tourism NSW – 
 Aboriginal  
Language Map

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 5  
FOREWORD  
The challenges of persistent aridity and the increasing frequency and severity of drought 
in Far North West New South Wales are not only a testament to the harsh realities faced 
by our communities, farmers, and landscapes but also instigates resilience, innovation, 
and unity. This Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan - 004) emerges from a 
collaborative effort involving the communities and Councils of the Bourke Shire, 
Brewarrina, Cobar, and Walgett Shires.   
This initiative embodies their collective ambition to significantly lessen the impacts of 
drought, enhance the viability of local businesses throughout these challenging 
periods, and sustain the economic productivity of the region. Together the Councils 
strive to enable their communities to emerge from period of drought more robust, 
adaptable and sustainable, with confidence of long-term liveability within the region.   
This plan is a proactive roadmap for our future, drawing upon the knowledge of our 
land, the ingenuity of our people, and the strength of our communities. It recognises 
that the wellbeing of our region is inextricably linked to our ability to anticipate, prepare 
for, and adapt to the changing environment and climatic events. By engaging with all 
sectors of the community, including Councils, businesses and farmers, the RDR Plan 
leverages local knowledge, scientific research, and practical experience to forge a path 
forward.  
Our region's history is marked by resilience in the face of adversity, and a constant 
awareness of water scarcity, driving the continual management of resources, whether 
in times of drought or relative abundance. The recent episodes of drought have 
underscored the necessity to enhance our proactive measures, focusing on 
strengthening our environmental, economic and social frameworks to mitigate these 
conditions.   
This RDR Plan lays out strategic priorities and actions that will help to reduce the 
impact of drought, support our communities during times of scarcity, and ensure the 
sustainability of our agriculture, local businesses and natural resources. By collectively 
advancing these goals, we are setting a course for a resilient, economically vibrant, 
and sustainable future.  
Our sincere gratitude goes to our people, partners and organisations who have 
contributed to the development of this plan. Your insights, expertise, and dedication 
have been invaluable in forging a legacy of resilience for future generations.  
______________  
Signed by Ross Earl  
Ross Earl  
Executive Officer  
Far North West Joint Organisation

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 6  
CONTENTS  
Acknowledgement of Country ........................................................................................ 2  
Foreword ........................................................................................................................ 3  
Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 5  
Vision ............................................................................................................................. 8  
Drought Resilience at a Glance ...................................................................................... 9  
A Plan for Drought Resilience .......................................................................................  12  
Objectives .....................................................................................................................  12  
Strategic Alignment .......................................................................................................  13  
About this Regional Drought Resilience Plan ................................................................  14  
Purpose of the Plan .......................................................................................................  14  
The Process for RDR Plan Development ......................................................................  14  
Background Contexts & Key Inputs ...............................................................................  17  
Other Important Linkages ..............................................................................................  17  
Our Partners ..................................................................................................................  17  
Regional Profile .............................................................................................................  19  
Our History of Drought Impacts .....................................................................................  32  
Future Drought Projections and Impacts .......................................................................  38  
Our Drought Resilience Journey .................................................................................... 54  
Long-Term Water Security Projects ................................................................................ 59  
Telecommunications Security ......................................................................................... 72  
Stronger Communities Program ..................................................................................... 85  
Sustainable Recreation & Tourism Strategy ................................................................... 98  
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning .............................................................................. 109  
Appendices ..................................................................................................................... 110  
Appendix 1: Glossary of Key Terms ..............................................................................  110  
Appendix 2: References ................................................................................................  114  
Appendix 3: Background Context and Key Inputs ......................................................... 116  
Appendix 4 Long List of Projects ................................................................................... 139  
Appendix 5: Stakeholder Engagement Plan & Community Consultation Report ........... 149  
Appendix 6: Project Economic Feasibility Assessment and Cost Benefit Analyses ...... 150

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 7  
INTRODUCTION  
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program (‘the program’) is designed to enable 
local governments and their communities to better prepare for, respond to, endure, and 
thrive during, and recover from drought.   
The Far Northwest Joint Organisation.1 (FNWJO), which is a representative body for the 
three Shire Councils of Bourke, Cobar and Walgett, lodged successful applications to 
develop a Regional Drought Resilience Plan on behalf of seven Councils of Bogan, 
Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, Coonamble, Walgett, and Warren Shire.   
All seven councils are part of the Western Plains Functional Economic Region. The 
councils were grouped into two consortia based on their location within the Functional 
Economic Regions.   
The first consortium, known as the Far Northwest Region, includes Bourke, Brewarrina, 
Cobar, and Walgett Shires. The second consortium, known as the Northwest Region, 
comprises Bogan, Coonamble, and Warren Shires.  
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan-004 or The Plan) relates to the 
Functional  
Economic Region of Bourke Shire, Brewarrina Shire, Cobar Shire and Walgett Shire.  The 
Plan was co-designed with these Councils and their respective communities, and for the 
purpose of RDR Plan-004 will be referred to as the Far Northwest Region.    
The plan included:  
• 
A drought resilience literature review and an initial resilience assessment of the Far 
Northwest region.   
• 
Engagement with the community members, organisations, and the local Councils.  
• 
Development of initiatives and projects to improve the drought of the region across 
four outcome areas:2  
Figure 1 – Outcome Areas  
1 Far North West Joint Organisation (FNWJO) is a representative body for several local government organisations as 
proclaimed in the Local Government Amendment (Regional Joint Organisations) Act 2017 No 65. Joint organisations, by 
this proclamation, are formally included in the Local Government Act 1993.  
2 The outcome areas were derived from consultation with the communities and Councils of the Far Northwest Region.  
People, Culture, and 
Community 
Economy 
Landscape and Natural 
Environment 
Infrastructure and Built 
Environment 
Enhance regional liveability, 
foster a robust 
and attractive community, 
and improve social resilience 
and wellbeing. 
Expanding the business and 
agricultural sector's self- 
reliance and performance, 
ensuring stability and 
growth within the region’s 
economy. 
Improving the environmental 
resilience of the entire 
regional landscape, including 
agricultural lands and river 
systems. 
Strengthening infrastructure to 
support economic and 
environmental sustainability.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 8  
The initiatives and projects form part of a Drought Resilience, Adaptation and 
Management model that has three pillars to prepare, respond and limit the impact of 
droughts. Those pillars include:3  
Pillar 1: 
Planning and Monitoring 
Pillar 2:  
Responding to Drought 
Events 
Pillar 3:  
Building Future Resilience 
•Implementing drought 
monitoring, early warning 
systems, and responsive 
planning. 
•Identifying vulnerable 
sectors and groups for 
targeted support during 
drought. 
•Undertaking measures to 
mitigate drought impacts 
and enhance long-term 
resilience, including 
initiatives across the 
outlined priority areas. 
Figure 2 - Drought Resilience, Adaption and Management Model Pillars  
The Far Northwest region of New South Wales is confronted with a multifaceted spectrum 
of challenges that are predominantly influenced by shifts in demographics, economic 
dependencies, and vulnerabilities associated with climate change. Among the climatic 
concerns are the anticipated increases in temperatures, modifications in rainfall patterns, 
and the escalation of bushfire risks.   
Figure 3 - Drought impacts on social, environment and economy (Source: Adapted from Meridian Urban)  
The Far Northwest region is grappling with significant demographic transformations, 
including a projected population decline of 11% over the forthcoming 15 years4, an 
increasingly aging demographic, and the outward migration of younger generations. This 
migration is largely attributed to the pursuit of opportunities beyond the traditional 
agricultural sector, which is compounded by concerns regarding work-life balance and the 
uncertainties brought about natural disasters.   
3 Adapted from Crossman, 2018. Also see the United Nations Drought Resilience Adaptation and Management Policy 
Framework, (United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification) August 2019.  
4 NSW Government, Western Plains Regional Economic Development Strategy 2023 Update (February 2023), available at 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/Western-Plains-REDS-2023-Update.pdf.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 9  
These demographic shifts pose a considerable threat to the social and economic 
framework of the region, through reduced skilled workforce, aging workforce and pressure 
on volunteers and businesses to do more with less. Strategies are essential to not only 
retain the current youthful populace but also to attract new, younger residents to the 
region, thereby ensuring its long-term viability and prosperity.  
Among the climatic concerns are the anticipated increases in temperatures, modifications 
in rainfall patterns, and the escalation of bushfire risks.   
These factors collectively underscore the necessity for the implementation of robust 
adaptation and mitigation strategies.  Such strategies are essential to ensure the 
protection and sustainability of the region's agricultural productivity, biodiversity, and the 
overall health of the community.  
To provide a geographical context for the Far Northwest Region, RDR Plan-004:  
• 
Bourke Shire is located on the Darling River at the crossroads of the Mitchell and 
Kamilaroi highways and the Kidman Way. It is home to the Toorale and Gundabooka 
National Parks. Bourke Shire Council has a population of 2,348 people (ABS 2022), 
an area of 41,598 square kilometres, and includes the villages of Byrock, Enngonia, 
Fords Bridge, Wanaaring, and Louth. Additionally, Bourke is known for its small stock 
abattoir specifically built for processing goats, a rapidly growing commodity.  
• 
Brewarrina Shire, bordering the state line of Queensland in North Western NSW, is 
located on the Barwon River and intersected by the Kamilaroi Highway. Its 
agricultural land is predominantly used for livestock grazing, with cotton growing as a 
significant part of its irrigated production. Brewarrina Shire Council has a population 
of 1,431 people (ABS 2022), an area of 19,162 square kilometres, and includes the 
villages of Brewarrina, Goodooga, Weilmoringle, New Angledool, and Gongolgon.  
• 
Cobar Shire sits at the intersection of the Barrier Highway and Kidman Way in 
Western NSW and has road and air links to most of Australia’s capital cities. Notably, 
there is an air service to Sydney (Monday to Friday), providing further connectivity. 
The region has rich deposits of copper and a significant goldfield. Cobar Shire 
Council has a population of 4,046 (ABS 2022), an area of 45,575 square kilometres, 
and includes the town of Cobar and villages of Euabalong, Euabalong West, Mount 
Hope, and Nymagee. However, there is no passenger rail service; travel to Dubbo is 
serviced by coach.  
• 
Walgett Shire is situated on the banks of the Barwon River in Central West NSW. The 
Kamilaroi and Castlereagh highways travel through the Shire, which relies heavily on 
road freight for its agricultural products. Agriculture in Walgett focuses predominantly 
on livestock farming, complemented by a strong crop farming industry and valuable 
opal mining. Walgett Shire Council has a population of 5,516 people (ABS 2022), an 
area of 22,308 square kilometres, and includes the towns and villages of Walgett, 
Lightening Ridge, Collarenebri, Burren Junction, Carinda, Rowena, Cumborah, 
Cryon, Come by Chance, Glengarry, and Pokataroo.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 10  
BOURKE, BREWARRINA, COBAR AND 
WALGETT COUNCILS MAP  
Figure 4 - Map of NSW with Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shire Councils highlighted.  
(Google Maps, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 11

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 12  
VISION  
In the Far Northwest Region, our resilience against drought is forged through 
collaboration and co-design with our communities and councils.   
Our vision is to:  
• 
Cultivate a well-prepared and robust community, where every sector—agriculture, 
business, local governments, and community members—work together to sustain 
our way of life and enhance regional well-being.   
• 
Amidst the inherently arid and harsh landscape of our region, focus on actions that 
protect our natural environment, strengthen our local economy, and enrich the 
social fabric of our community.   
This vision is built on a foundation of innovative practices, nurtured by strong local 
networks, and shaped by the diverse voices of our region.   
Our strategy, to underpin the vision, is to be dynamic and inclusive, continuously refined 
through dialogue with our community and adaptive to changing climatic conditions. As a 
result, our plan prioritises adaptive strategies which equip and better prepare communities 
to respond to the changing conditions, future uncertainties and shocks which accompany 
periods of drought. This includes continuous monitoring of water resources, flexible 
infrastructure projects, and community-driven initiatives that can be adjusted as new 
information and technology becomes available. Strategic investments in water storage, 
connectivity and sustainable practices are designed to enhance capacity to adapt to future 
climatic variability.  
The vision for this plan was informed by significant input from members of the community, 
stakeholders, including local governments, community organisations and groups across a 
variety of sectors. Councillors, farmers, business owners and residents participated in 
early consultations, with ongoing feedback received through workshops, surveys and 
follow-up meetings.   
A collaborative, co-designed approach has resulted in a culmination of recommendations 
which prioritise both relevance and effectiveness, as well as emphasising local leadership 
and community engagement. By moving forward together, the intent is that we safeguard 
our region’s vitality, preserve our natural resources, and build enduring resilience to 
drought.   
Through this collective effort, we aim to convert challenges into opportunities for growth 
and adaptation, ensuring we emerge from each drought more connected and resilient 
than before.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 13  
DROUGHT RESILIENCE AT A GLANCE  
Drought resilience in our region is defined as the capacity of our communities, local 
governments and stakeholders to anticipate, prepare for, respond to and recover from 
drought conditions. This resilience is rooted in our ability to adapt, transition and transform 
our economic, social, and environmental systems in the face of changing climatic 
conditions. It reflects our commitment to maintaining and enhancing the vitality of our 
region through collaborative efforts and innovative practices.   
Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shires emphasised that resilience within the 
region should not just encompass the capacity to withstand drought, but also the ability to 
transition and transform their systems when maintaining the status quo is no longer 
viable. This includes exploring new economic opportunities, adopting sustainable 
agricultural practices, and fostering social cohesion and connectivity.  
The Drought Resilience Program ‘Logic Map’5 is a tool that solidifies our resilience plan 
into a clear, actionable sequence. It provides stakeholders with an immediate 
understanding of the steps we are taking to strengthen the region's ability to manage 
drought conditions. This map illustrates how specific inputs and planned initiatives 
translate into concrete outputs and measurable outcomes, directly linking back to the 
vision of a robust community, empowered by innovative practices and strong local 
networks. It outlines the causal relationships between each stage of the process, from 
initial situation assessments to the realisation of long-term resilience goals.  
The ‘Logic Map’ serves as a focused overview, ensuring that every element of the plan is 
aligned with key objectives—namely, preserving regional vitality and managing resources 
sustainably. It operates as both a planning guide and a communication framework, 
offering stakeholders a succinct visualisation of how their efforts support the region's 
overarching goal of achieving durable drought resilience. By presenting this at-a-glance 
summary, the Logic Map becomes a foundation of the plan's implementation, facilitating 
co-design across all levels of involvement. This plan recognises that resilience is not just 
about returning to pre-drought conditions but about evolving and strengthening our 
systems to better withstand future challenges.  
5 Investment logic mapping is an early-stage technique that assists in developing and documenting the logic that underpins 
a potential investment decision, before specific solutions are identified, and before a decision is made. Note: The program 
‘Logic Map’ does not represent a theory of change.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 14  
Figure 5 – Drought Resilience Logic Map (The Stable Group, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 15  
A PLAN FOR DROUGHT RESILIENCE  
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDR PLAN) program is one of the five focus 
areas of the Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought Fund. The NSW RDR Plan 
the NSW Government, supporting local governments to work together regionally to plan 
for drought resilience proactively and pragmatically. The resulting plans focus on 
innovative ways to build regional drought resilience, taking steps to plan now to stem the 
impact of future drought on our region.  
Objectives   
Consistent with the strategic priorities and objectives of the Future Drought Fund 
Agreement, the objectives of the RDR Plan for Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett 
Shire Councils are to:  
• 
Develop the agricultural sector’s self-reliance and economic performance:  
o Promote diversification within the agricultural sector to reduce dependence 
on traditional farming.   
o Strengthen local supply chains and improve infrastructure to support 
agricultural productivity and resilience.  
• 
Develop the environmental resilience and natural capital of agricultural 
landscapes:  
o Promote sustainable land management practices that protect and enhance 
natural ecosystems, such as the Macquarie Marshes and other critical 
habitats.  
o Enhance groundwater resources for agricultural and domestic use, 
ensuring equitable access to water across the region.  
• 
Strengthen the social capital and wellbeing of the communities:  
o Foster social cohesion to mitigate the impacts of isolation and mental 
health challenges.  
o Improve telecommunications and digital connectivity to reduce social 
isolation and support community and economic activities, particularly in 
remote areas.  
o Support volunteer networks and reduce volunteer fatigue by providing 
resources and recognition for community contributions.  
• 
Understand and plan for the region’s current and future drought resilience by 
identifying actions, pathways, and opportunities for mitigation, adaptation and 
improvement:  
o Engage with diverse community groups, including First Nations people, 
young families, and youth to co-develop and continuously refine resilience 
strategies.  
o Ensure ongoing consultation and engagement with stakeholders to adapt 
strategies to changing climatic conditions and emerging challenges.  
To further the collective efforts of the FNWJO and the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, and

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 16  
Walgett Shire Councils in preparing communities to manage future and extended periods 
of drought, as well as improving water security, there is a need to identify projects for 
inclusion in the RDR Plan.  
The objectives of this plan were derived from the initial extensive in-person consultation, 
with workshops held across 10 townships – Cobar, Euabalong, Bourke, Louth, Brewarrina, 
Hebel, Lightning Ridge, Walgett, Collarenebri and Come-By-Chance, attended by 92 
community representatives (~13% under 40). The attendance of representatives from 
NSW Farmers, Progress Associations, Chambers of Commerce, environmental groups, 
the mining industry and agricultural industry, as well as active community participants, 
meant that the objectives that guided the project reflect the wider community needs, rather 
than being constrained to a particular group.     
This plan identifies the priority projects (including an implementation pathway), to achieve 
the outcomes and objectives of the RDR Plan.  
Strategic Alignment  
The Far Northwest RDR Plan is consistent with National Framework for Drought Policy 
and Preparedness Plan. The Plan has a focus on long term resilience and preparedness.   
The Plan also has strong alignment with national, state, regional and local plans, 
strategies and policies6 including the:  
• 
NSW State Infrastructure strategy – guiding principles:  
o 
Strengthen service reliability and resilience – investments in existing 
assets should focus on lifting the reliability of those assets and resilience 
of communities most at risk of disruptive events.  
o 
Optimise existing assets and networks – opportunities to fully utilise 
existing assets should be prioritised, including through augmentation of 
existing networks, maintenance and upgrades.  
o 
Partner with local governments and communities – engagement and 
involvement of local governments, communities and other stakeholder 
groups should be embedded throughout planning, design, delivery and 
operation.  
• 
NSW Water Regions priorities and objectives.  
• 
Regional Economic Development Strategies (REDS) for the applicable Functional 
Economic Region (FER).  
• 
Local Government Area Integrated Water Cycle Management / Regulatory and 
assurance framework for the local government councils / water supply authorities 
exercising water supply and sewerage functions and the Local Government Act 
1993 or the NSW Water Management Act 2000.  
• 
Regional Water Strategy for the Local Government Area.  
Further, the development of the plan also included consideration of:   
6 Refer to Appendix 3 – Background Contexts and Key Inputs for the alignment and relevance of studies, Global academic and 
government derived strategies to the Plan.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 17  
• 
Investment logic mapping.   
• 
CSIRO Regional Drought Resilience Plans, Independent Review Guide.   
• 
NSW Department of Planning and Environment – Water guidance notes for 
options assessments.   
• 
Regional NSW – Business Case and Strategy Development Fund Regional 
Infrastructure Business Case Template.   
• 
Alignment to the competency of the local water authority (ability to fund and 
operate).   
• 
Fund.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 18  
ABOUT THIS REGIONAL DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN  
Purpose of the Plan  
The Far Northwest RDR Plan has been developed in accordance with the guidelines set 
within the NSW Government Regional Drought Resilience Program. Through co-design, 
knowledge sharing, and strategic action, with key stakeholders and the voices and 
experiences of the region’s people, the RDR Plan seeks to:  
• 
Build strong, resilient social and community networks that are essential for thriving 
in an uncontrollable and often harsh climate, through fostering the ability of the 
communities to adapt and transform in response to social, environmental, and 
economic shocks and uncertainties, ensuring continuity and support during times 
of crisis.  
• 
Foster connectivity within and across the communities in the region, contributing to 
great social capital, well-being, and security.   
• 
Empower these communities to implement transformative activities that enhance 
their resilience to drought and support sustainable natural resource management, 
through measures to adapt to changing conditions and mitigate the impacts of 
drought on industries beyond agriculture, such as tourism, local business, and 
services, thereby sustaining overall economic vitality of the region.  
• 
Mitigate the economic, social, and environmental impacts of drought, ensuring the 
long-term productivity and sustainability of the region.   
• 
Improve the region’s effective adaptability and maintain economic vitality through 
sustainable practices and careful stewardship of both human and commodity 
resources.  
The RDR Plan process is intended to be practical, implementable and ongoing. As the 
region undertakes the specified actions, this plan will assist with monitoring progress and 
future learning.  
The Process for RDR Plan Development  
The planning process for the Far Northwest region: incorporating Walgett, Bourke, 
Brewarrina and Cobar Shire Councils involved a four-stage process (Figure 4).  
1. A broad governance structure.  
2. A Regional Drought Assessment to provide a robust evidence base using wide 
consultation o Consultation with the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett 
communities.7  
▪ 
Engaged in widespread consultation with 92 diverse community 
representatives across the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, and Walgett 
7 Refer to the Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Consultation Report at Appendix 5.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 19  
regions, reflecting a multi-hat community spirit, evident from the 10 
community consultation gatherings.  
▪ 
Captured a broad range of interests, from Local Shire Councillors to 
cotton ginners, health workers, and environmental groups, among 
others.  
▪ 
Throughout the consultation period, various media channels 
encouraged community participation.  
o Initial identification of the Council’s priorities.  
o Review of related Federal and NSW Government policies, initiatives and 
potential assessment criteria related to potential projects under the 
program.  
o Review of over 40 community strategic plans, economic development 
strategies, drought management plans, regional water strategies, etc; to 
determine past and future impacts of drought and identify existing 
commitments. These included:  
▪ 
Council Community Strategic Plans.   
▪ 
NSW Government’s Regional Economic Development Strategies 
(REDS) for each of the Functional Economic Regions (FER).   
▪ 
Barwon – Darling Valley Annual Surface Water Quality Report.  
▪ 
Far West Enabling Regional Adaptation Report.  
▪ 
Far West Regional Plan.  
▪ 
Western Regional Water Strategy.  
▪ 
Macquarie – Castlereagh Water Strategy.  
3. The Regional Drought Resilience Plan, which provides a high-level summary of 
the findings. The Plan includes actions and interventions to mitigate drought 
impacts in the region.   
o Further engagement and visits to the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and 
Walgett regions.  
o Following the workshops, four written submissions and three telephone 
calls offered more insights, rounding out the understanding of the 
community's concerns.  
o Development of Technology Report, listing the Priority Drought Resilience 
Projects and information developed for each Project.  
4. An Investment Framework o Development of a pathway for each of the priority 
projects to be taken forward.  
o Provision of the draft plan for comment by the FNWJO and Councils. o 
Provision of the final plan to the FNWJO.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 20  
Figure 6 – Process for RDR Plan Development. (The Stable Group, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 21  
BACKGROUND CONTEXTS & KEY INPUTS  
This plan draws from, complements, and builds upon previous work in developing a 
regional profile and identifying the impacts of past and future droughts. (Refer to 
Appendix 3.)  
Other Important Linkages  
It is the intention of this Plan that it is considered and factored into a range of other 
strategies and plans – including (but not limited to) the following list.   
• 
regional plans,  
• 
regional economic development strategies,   
• 
regional transport and infrastructure plans,   
• 
natural resource management plans,   
• 
water resource plans,   
• 
local and district disaster management plans,   
• 
local asset management and capital works plans,   
• 
local corporate and community development plans,   
• 
land use planning schemes, and  
• 
local and regional health strategies.   
The intention is also, that this plan will be closely considered by charities; non-government 
organisations; not-for-profits; businesses; and government agencies with an interest in the 
region.  
Our Partners  
Broad stakeholder engagement was conducted in developing the RDR Plan. This included 
contributions from the Stable Group and the Far Northwest Joint Organisation. The Project 
Reference Group provided essential local insights, helping to refine strategies and define 
drought resilience actions.  
In February, from the 9th to the 19th, initial consultations with communities in Bourke,  
Brewarrina, Cobar, and Walgett led to the development of a long list of projects (Appendix 
4). These were further refined through a second round of consultations to align with 
community priorities, ensuring that the proposed actions met local needs. Further 
sessions, conducted via Microsoft Teams, engaged representatives from all four Shires, 
despite lower attendance compared to earlier meetings. Further community consultation 
was conducted, and a survey was circulated to gather additional input on project 
prioritisation, receiving feedback from nine community members.  
Community consultations, coordinated closely with local councils and regional 
management bodies, adhered to strategic priorities of economic, environmental, and 
social resilience. These sessions utilised the Drought Resilience Logic Map to focus 
discussions on understanding community perceptions, drought-related risks, and potential 
resilience actions.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 22  
The stakeholder engagement extended over a significant period, drawing on a broad 
spectrum of the community, which included a multitude of organisations and businesses. 
This was complemented by a commissioned review of drought innovation, identifying 
potential transformative projects across multiple resilience research areas such as water 
management, digital technology, and community development. (Refer to Appendix 5).  
Figure 7 – Process for RDR Plan Development. (The Stable Group, 2024)  
This early engagement facilitated the integration of diverse regional knowledge and 
expertise, culminating in a collectively owned, region-specific plan. This process not only 
identified key regional priorities but also ensured the plan was co-designed with the 
community and council to address the unique challenges and opportunities in Far 
Northwest NSW.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 23  
REGIONAL PROFILE  
The portion of the Far Northwest region which is covered by this plan covers an area of 
127,268 km2, and includes the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shire Councils 
(Figure 5). It is home to approximately 13,341 people.    
The region is located on Ngemba and Gamilaraay Country and resident Aboriginal 
language groups include the Ngiyampaa, Wangaaypuwan, Wayilwan and Gamilaroi 
people.   
Figure 8 – Map of Region that the RDR Plan covers with Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shire Councils 
labelled. (The Stable Group, 2024)  
The key-socio-economic statistics for the Far Northwest regions and each of the four 
LGAs.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 24  
Figure 9 – Socioeconomic Profile of Individual Local Government Areas (Source: ABS, REMPLAN, NEMA, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 25  
Natural Landscape of the Region  
The Far Northwest region of New South Wales encapsulates a rich tapestry of natural 
landscapes ranging from semi-arid desert plains to fertile farmlands, rangelands and 
wetlands. These landscapes not only define the physical character of the regions but also 
underpin their ecological, cultural, and economic vitality.  
Geographical Overview and Biodiversity  
This area includes diverse natural features that include:   
• 
Darling River: Acts as a vital water source and ecosystem supporting a variety of 
aquatic life.  
• 
National Parks and Conservation Areas: Protects significant biodiversity and offers 
sanctuary to numerous species.  
• 
Flora and Fauna: The region's flora and fauna have adapted to the arid conditions, 
showcasing a range of species that thrive in extreme environments. Endemic 
plants and animals contribute to the area's ecological diversity and resilience.  
The geographical diversity of these regions supports a wide range of ecosystems, each 
with unique biodiversity, as follows:  
• 
Bourke and Brewarrina are characterised by their semi-arid climate, expansive 
landscapes and vast flat plains.   
• 
Bourke shire is home to the Toorale and Gundabooka National Parks, featuring 
diverse ecosystems including vast grassy woodlands, significant rock formations 
and vital wetlands that host a variety of waterbirds, including internationally 
protected migratory species.   
• 
Brewarrina boasts unique ecological systems including the Brewarrina Ngemba 
Billabong; recognised as an Indigenous Protected Area and a World Conservation  
Union Category V and VI protected area. It is home to the Brewarrina Aboriginal 
Fish Traps, estimated to be over 40,000 years old, representing one of the oldest 
humanengineered structures and a critical heritage site.   
• 
Vegetation in Cobar primarily includes mulga woodlands, shrublands and native 
grasses, supporting diverse wildlife accompanied by rocky ranges which provide 
habitat for a range of native and endangered species.   
• 
Walgett Shire also features a mix of grasslands and woodlands and is further 
renowned for its wetland ecosystems found in the fertile plains of the Namoi, 
Barwon and Gwydir Rivers.   
Ongoing conservation efforts aim to protect and preserve the unique biodiversity of the 
Far Northwest. These include initiatives to manage invasive species, rehabilitate damaged 
ecosystems, and ensure sustainable water usage that supports both human and 
ecological needs.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 26  
Agricultural Land Use  
Agriculture forms the backbone of the Far Northwest Region economies with land 
predominantly used for cropping and grazing. Bourke Shire benefits from access to the 
Darling River, enabling diversification into irrigated agriculture, particularly cotton. Cobar 
and Walgett focus predominantly on broadacre, dryland farming and livestock grazing 
reflecting the adaptation to the semi-arid climate. A majority of Brewarrina’s agricultural 
land is used for livestock grazing, with broadacre cropping efforts predominantly focused 
on cereal crops. The harvesting of feral goats has provided a valuable source of income 
for graziers, particularly in Cobar and Bourke.  
The following tables outline the primary agricultural activities, along with the key crops or 
livestock associated with each Shire.   
Bourke Shire  
Total area of LGA (ha)   
4 159 837  
Primary Agricultural Activity   
Broadacre cropping, Irrigated cotton, sheep grazing and wool 
production.   
Total area of broadacre crops (ha)   
16 716  
Total gross value agricultural production ($m)  
77.7  
Brewarrina Shire  
Total area of LGA (ha)   
1 916 203  
Primary Agricultural Activity   
Sheep grazing, wool production, cereal cropping and a small 
cotton industry.  
Total area of broadacre crops (ha)   
93 650.3  
Total gross value agricultural production ($m)  
121.6

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 27  
Cobar Shire  
Total area of LGA (ha)   
4 557 535  
Primary Agricultural Activity   
Sheep and cattle grazing, broadacre dryland farming.   
Total area of broadacre crops (ha)   
46 339.3  
Total gross value agricultural production ($m)  
51.3  
Walgett Shire   
Total area of LGA (ha)   
2 230 825  
Primary Agricultural Activity   
Sheep and cattle grazing, broadacre dryland farming, cereal 
cropping.   
Total area of broadacre crops (ha)   
451 312.3  
Total gross value agricultural production ($m)  
465  
Figure 10 - Primary Agricultural Activities of each Local Government Area.  
(Source: ABS, REMPLAN, NEMA, 2024)  
Natural Water Resources and Management  
During the most recent drought, from January 2018 – January 2020, the Barwon-Darling 
Valley experienced extreme hot and dry conditions, which led to substantial reductions in 
river flow and water quality, as well as impacted community water and supplies and 
aquatic habitats.   
Availability of, and access to water from both groundwater and surface water resources is 
an essential enabler of diversity and prosperity of communities, agriculture and industry in 
the Far Northwest Region.  Given the variability of rainfall and historic droughts, current 
efficient water uses and sustainable management practices are an essential part of the 
lived experience.  
Existing strategic planning efforts and recent community consultations have endorsed 
water efficiency and water management as a critical concern across the Far Northwest 
Region. The Far Northwest Region supports strategic planning efforts which address the 
challenges of water security not only for communities, but for environmental, agricultural 
and industrial sustainability of their communities.    
Water is a highly valued and emotive resource, and the Far Northwest Region is under 
continuous threat from government plans to lower weir walls; perverse outcomes of water 
policy; inaction; and high costs and slow processes. Community have expressed a 
frustration caused by inactivity on water management during RDR Plan consultation. 
Examples include:

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 28  
• 
NSW Government Fish Passage. Reconnecting the Northern Basin Project: 
Plans to upgrade fish passages across the Northern Basin involves lowering and 
modifying weir walls to enable the construction of a variety of different fishways 
such as Fish Locks. The project will reduce the storage capacity of weir pools and 
resultant duration of water availability in subsequent droughts. In the 2018-19 
drought, without these weir adaptations, weir pools at Brewarrina and Collarenebri 
ran dry, and therefore these planned changes will exacerbate the frequency and 
speed at which the weir pools along the Northern Rivers are emptied.   
• 
Perverse outcomes of government Water Buyback Policy as part of the 
Murray Darling Basin Plan (MDBP). Under legislation that was updated in 2023, 
another 450 gigalitres of water must be bought back from Murray Darling irrigators 
by the government by 2027. To date, under the Basin Plan, 83GL have been 
recovered from the Macquarie Valley, above and beyond the legislated target of 
65GL, and dramatically higher than the 20GL originally proposed by the Murray 
Darling Basin Authority (MDBA) in 2010. Water buybacks have contributed to job 
losses, people departure and decreased water security in the Barwon-Darling 
Region and the continued over recovery of environmental water will have negative 
social, environmental and economic costs.   
• 
Inaction. Cobar receives water via the Albert Priest Channel from the Macquarie 
River. Evaporation rates are high and recommendations of the Water and Drought 
Security Report to line the channel or pipe the channel have not proceeded.  As 
demonstrated by the very effective Cap and Pipe the Bores Scheme, more efficient 
movement of water and conservation of water would give industry security into the 
future enabling investment and creating employment opportunities.   
Below is a table that provides an insight into the key natural water resources within each 
Shire:   
Shire  
Key Natural Water Resource  
Use  
Bourke  
Darling River   
Irrigated agriculture, Agriculture, Town 
Water supply  
Brewarrina  
Barwon River  
Agriculture, 
cotton 
farming, 
livestock 
watering, town water supply  
Cobar  
Bogan River and Macquarie River via 
Albert Priest Channel  
Mining, livestock watering, town water 
supply  
Walgett  
Namoi River and Barwon River  
Irrigated agriculture, cotton farming, town 
water supply  
Figure 11 – Key Natural Water Resources of each Local Government Area

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 29  
Regional Weather and Climate Characteristics  
The Far Northwest of New South Wales is experiencing significant changes in its weather 
and climate characteristics, which are expected to have profound impacts on the region's 
natural landscape, economy, and societal well-being. These changes are being driven by 
global climate change, manifesting in increased temperatures, altered precipitation 
patterns, and more extreme weather events.  
Far Northwest Regional Weather and Climate Characteristics include:  
• 
Average maximum temperatures during summer ~ 36°C.   
• 
In winter, the average minimum temperature ranges from 4-6°C  
• 
Over 70 hot days are experienced in the north-west of the region around Bourke.  
• 
Majority of the Far Northwest Region experiences fewer than 20 cold nights (<2°C) 
per year.   
Rainfall across the Northwest Region demonstrates a gradient from east to west. Walgett 
mean rainfall is 437.3mm annually, transitioning to approximately 390mm in Cobar and 
380mm in Bourke. This gradient is mirrored and exacerbated by evaporation rates, 
underscoring the challenges of water management in areas where evaporation outpaces 
rainfall.   
The following table describes the climate characteristics for different periods and their 
impacts on the Far Northwest Region:   
Period  
Characteristic  
Impact on Barwon–Darling Valley  
1900s to 1940s   
Dry Period  
Marked by short to decadal droughts, 
setting a precedent for dry conditions.  
1950s to 1990s  
Wet Period  
A relatively moist interval, providing relief 
and replenishing water sources.  
Post-Millennium Drought  
Return to Dry Period  
Illustrated by extreme variability, 
significant droughts and flooding events.  
Figure 12 - Key Natural Water Resources of each Local Government Area

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 30  
Society, Population and Demographics  
The Far Northwest region of New South Wales embodies a vast and sparsely populated 
area with a profound Aboriginal heritage. This unique demographic landscape is shaped 
by its remote and rural character, which significantly influences population distribution, age 
demographics, workforce participation, and socioeconomic status.  
Population Distribution and Trends:   
The Far Northwest region is characterised by significant logistical and socio-economic 
challenges, partly due to the extensive distances between communities and towns. The average 
travel time of three hours between main towns complicates service delivery, economic 
development, and community cohesion. This geographical isolation is a critical factor in the 
complex set of challenges the region faces, including ensuring sustainability and prosperity.  
The demographic trends in the Far Northwest region show a concerning trajectory, with an 
expected population decline of 11% over the next 15 years. Since 2018, there has been a 
noticeable decrease of 1.8% in the population. This downward trend is compounded by a 
significant shift within age demographics: a 16% decrease in young people, a 24% 
decrease in the working-age population, and a 48% increase in the proportion of the 
population over 65 years.  
Younger generations' attitudes towards agriculture and traditional livelihoods are 
changing, exacerbated by concerns over work-life balance and climate change 
uncertainty. There is a trend of seeking more stable and less stressful careers outside the 
region, leading to a drain of vital human capital. This is reflected in a 13.6% reduction in 
employment within the agricultural sector from 2001 to 2020 and a shift in primary industry 
from agriculture to public administration and safety.  
Demographic Asset  
Detail  
Population Trend (2018 – 2033)  
Expected decline of 11%.  
Population Change (Since 2018)  
Decrease of 1.8%.  
Age Demographics Change  
•  
Young People: -16%  
Demographic Asset  
Detail  
Working-age Population: -24%   
Over 65: +48%  
Workforce Participation (Aboriginal 
Communities)  
Cobar: Higher due to mining jobs.  
Brewarrina: Lower, limited to agricultural and administration sectors.  
Walgett and Bourke: Primarily in service and labour sectors.  
Migration Trends  
High outwards migration correlated with drought periods.  
Primary Industries Shift  
From agriculture to public administration and safety.  
Employment in Agriculture (2001 – 
2020)  
Decrease of 13.6%.  
Figure 13 - Population, industry and migration trends across Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shire  
Councils. (Source: ABS, REMPLAN, NEMA, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 31  
Census Information  
Population of 
Bourke LGA  
Population of 
Brewarrina LGA  
Population of 
Cobar LGA  
Population of 
Walgett LGA  
2001 Census Year  
3899  
2056  
4105  
8279  
2021 Census Year  
2340  
1356  
3369  
1781  
Total population loss  
- 1559  
- 700  
- 763  
- 6498  
Average change per annum   
-77.95  
-35  
-36.8  
324.8  
% loss over 20 years  
40%  
34%  
18%  
78%  
Figure 14– Population declines of the Far Northwest Region 2001-2021.  (Source: ABS, 2024)  
A key characteristic of the population in the Far Northwest Region is the aging population, 
placing additional pressure on aged care service delivery, healthcare, and community 
support structures. The Far Northwest Region is also challenged by the outmigration of 
younger people to regional centres such as Dubbo or to larger cities in search of 
education and employment opportunities.  
Despite the obvious trend, each Council remains optimistic and embraces opportunities to 
improve the liveability of their community and attract skilled workers. For example:   
• 
Bourke continues to undertake positive initiatives to encourage community growth, 
as demonstrated by the redevelopment in the agricultural sector and continued 
improvement in the tourism sector. Efforts to improve local infrastructure and the 
town’s amenity are also aimed at increasing the resident population.   
• 
Brewarrina and Walgett have both witnessed fluctuating population trends, largely 
influenced by employment opportunities in the agricultural and administration 
sectors.  
Efforts to diversify the local economy and business life, particularly related to 
agriculture, the service industries and tourism, aim to stabilise both community’s 
populations.   
• 
Cobar’s strong mining sector plays a key role in attracting skilled workers to the 
area. The Cobar Shire Council recognises the need to improve community

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 32  
services and facilities to attract new residents whilst also strengthening its key 
mining and agricultural business sectors.   
Aboriginal Communities:  
The region's significant Aboriginal population is deeply intertwined with the cultural and 
historical fabric of the area, exemplified by the Brewarrina Aboriginal Fish Traps. Despite 
the cultural significance of such sites, Aboriginal communities face challenges, including 
barriers to accessing water rights and issues impacting community cohesion.  
Workforce participation rates and employment sectors for the Aboriginal populations within 
the region reveal disparities and opportunities unique to each community. While Cobar 
benefits from the mining industry, offering employment opportunities to its Aboriginal 
population, communities in Brewarrina, Walgett, and Bourke face challenges related to the 
availability of jobs, particularly those not requiring specialised skills.  
Built Form and Infrastructure  
Transportation and Connectivity:  
The vast Far Northwest region relies heavily on its road network for transportation and 
connectivity, linking small, remote communities to key centres such as Bourke and Cobar. 
This network is vital for the movement of goods, access to services, and community 
interaction. Although primarily served by roads, all centres in the region are also linked by 
Public transportation options, while limited, include several air services that bolster 
connectivity for remote communities:  
• 
Cobar has direct flights to Sydney every weekday.  
• 
Walgett and Bourke have air services to Dubbo three days a week.  
• 
Lightning Ridge is served by flights two days a week.  
These services are crucial for reducing travel times and improving access to broader 
domestic networks. However, the primary challenge remains maintaining and upgrading 
road infrastructure to ensure safe and efficient travel. Seasonal weather conditions, such 
as heavy rains and floods, can quickly deteriorate road conditions, leading to closures and 
access issues. The lack of more extensive public transportation options further 
exacerbates the isolation of these communities, limiting access to essential services and 
opportunities.  
Enhancing road safety through upgrades and maintenance, alongside improving public 
transportation infrastructure, such as bus services between towns, could significantly 
benefit residents, especially those without personal vehicles. This is a key opportunity to 
support the region's connectivity and overall community well-being.  
Water Security:  
Water security is a critical issue in the arid Far Northwest region, where access to reliable 
and clean water sources underpins the health of communities, agriculture, and 
ecosystems. The region's current water infrastructure, is designed to manage the scarce 
water resources, and includes:  
o 
Dams and Weirs. The region relies on a network of dams and weirs to store and 
regulate water supply. These structures are crucial for capturing rainfall and runoff, 
providing water for towns, agriculture, and environmental flows. Major dams like

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 33  
the Menindee Lakes System play a vital role in water storage and management, 
though they also reflect the challenges of evaporative losses and managing water 
in times of drought.  
o 
Water Treatment Plants. Water treatment facilities are essential for ensuring that 
water drawn from dams, rivers, and borefields meets health standards for 
consumption. These plants use various processes to filter and disinfect water, but 
they require ongoing maintenance and upgrades to handle the demands of 
changing water quality and new health regulations.  
o 
Borefields. Groundwater accessed through borefields supplements surface water 
sources, particularly during periods of drought. The use of borefields requires 
careful management to prevent over-extraction, which can lead to declining water 
levels and quality.  
o 
Pipelines. A network of pipelines delivers treated water from dams, weirs, and 
treatment plants to communities. These pipelines are critical for distributing water 
across the vast distances of the Far Northwest but are subject to issues of aging 
infrastructure and leakage, which can lead to water loss.  
o 
Rainwater Harvesting Systems. In more remote areas, individual properties and 
some communities rely on rainwater harvesting systems to capture and store 
rainwater for use. While this method provides a degree of self-sufficiency, it is 
heavily dependent on rainfall patterns, which can be variable and unpredictable.  
However, these systems face increasing pressure from climate variability, population 
changes, and agricultural demands. The challenges in water security and management 
are multifaceted, including:  
o 
Aging Infrastructure. Much of the water infrastructure, including pipelines and 
treatment facilities, is aging and requires significant investment to upgrade and 
maintain.  
o 
Climate Variability. The increasing unpredictability of weather patterns and 
climate change poses challenges to managing water resources, with more frequent 
and severe droughts and floods.  
o 
o 
Evaporation Losses. High temperatures and sunlight contribute to substantial 
evaporation losses from open water storages, like dams and lakes, reducing the 
efficiency of water storage.  
The variability in rainfall exacerbates these challenges, making water management a 
complex task that requires careful planning and innovation. There are significant 
opportunities to improve water security in the Far Northwest, such as:  
o 
Infrastructure Upgrades. Investing in modernizing water treatment plants, 
pipelines, and dams can improve efficiency and resilience to climate impacts. 
Upgrades can include the introduction of advanced treatment technologies and 
leak detection systems in pipelines.  
o 
Sustainable Groundwater Use. Implementing more sophisticated monitoring and 
management of borefields can ensure sustainable groundwater use, preventing 
overextraction and maintaining water quality.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 34  
o 
Water Recycling and Reuse. Expanding water recycling and reuse projects can 
alleviate pressure on fresh water sources, particularly for agricultural and industrial 
use.  
o 
Rainwater Harvesting Innovations. Encouraging the use of advanced rainwater 
harvesting and storage solutions can enhance water security for remote and rural 
properties, making them less dependent on centralized water supplies.  
Digital Connectivity:  
Digital connectivity is crucial for the Far Northwest's economic development, access to 
services, and social inclusion. However, the region's remote and sparsely populated 
nature poses significant challenges to providing reliable and high-speed internet access. 
Coverage and service quality can be inconsistent, impacting businesses, healthcare, 
education, and communication. The vast distances and challenging terrain increase the 
cost and complexity of infrastructure development for broadband and mobile services.   
The digital divide between urban and rural areas remains a significant issue, with some 
remote communities having limited or no access to reliable digital services. There is a 
significant opportunity to improve digital connectivity through the expansion of broadband 
networks, including fixed wireless and satellite services, to reach the most remote areas. 
Investing in digital literacy and technology education programs can enhance the 
community's ability to benefit from digital services. Collaborations between government, 
industry, and communities to fund and deploy digital infrastructure projects can accelerate 
improvements in connectivity.  
“Poor connectivity has negatively impacted my business 
because I cannot respond quickly enough to jobs when 
driving in areas with no mobile coverage… by the time I 
reach mobile reception the job has already been given to 
someone else”. – Jack (Louth)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 35  
Future Investment Projects Shaping the Far 
Northwest Region  
Current planned or ongoing investment projects of note that will have a significant 
investment and disruptive effect in the Far Northwest Region are:   
• 
Inland Rail. A transformative infrastructure project enhancing freight efficiency, 
supporting over 21,500 jobs at peak construction, and providing long-term 
economic development opportunities.   
• 
Renewable Energy transition and Resource Sectors.The region's transition 
towards renewable energy, including solar, wind, and bioenergy projects, is pivotal 
in driving economic diversification and reducing carbon emissions. With 75% of the 
state's coal-powered electricity generation expected to reach the end of its 
technical life within 15 years, the transition to renewable energy sources is 
underway. This transition will require significant infrastructure development to 
connect new energy sources.   
• 
Digital Connectivity. Improvements in digital infrastructure to improve NBN and 
mobile services are vital for economic and social participation, particularly for 
smaller centres leveraging their locational advantages. “Black spots” are quite 
obvious to landowners and travellers between towns and villages   
• 
Mining. Continued investment into Cobar’s mining sector has resulted in 
increased mining jobs and spending in the Shire. Participating mining companies 
directly spent  
$133 million in Cobar in 2023, supporting over 638 local jobs.8   
Further water and energy security projects are critical for sustaining regional development, 
with projects aimed at ensuring reliable access to these essential resources.   
A coordinated approach to planning and infrastructure development is essential to 
maximise investment benefits for the region and minimising the disruptive impacts.  
Strategic land use planning, lifestyle blocks and housing development, and infrastructure 
is essential to support the needs of the changing demographic and economic 
opportunities. Disruptive impacts may include:   
• 
The increased reliance on a temporary workforce is impacting the economy of the 
Far Northwest Region towns. The proximity of some of the projects may provide 
drive-in-drive out opportunities for residents in competition with local job 
opportunities.     
• 
Extra competition may arise to provide suitable local housing choices and services 
that cater to both temporary and permanent residents. Housing reserves are often 
run down and efforts to provide housing that meets the diverse needs of the 
community are crucial in supporting the region's growth and prosperity.   
8 NSW Minerals Council (2024) https://www.nswmining.com.au/news/2024/2/survey-confirms-increased-mining-jobs-andspending-in-
cobar

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 36  
Economy  
The Far Northwest's economic landscape is significantly shaped by the activities within its 
towns, each contributing uniquely to the region's prosperity. Agriculture, mining, and public 
administration emerge as common threads, yet the scale and focus of these industries 
vary, influenced by each town's resources, heritage, and geographical context.  
Bourke LGA  
Brewarrina LGA  
Cobar LGA  
Walgett LGA  
Gross Regional Product ($M)  
194  
70  
491  
319  
Value of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fishing Economic Output ($M)  
77.68  
121.64  
51.28  
464.96  
Value of Mining Economic Output  
0  
0  
926 (2021)  
0  
Number of Jobs in Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fishing  
163  
86  
184  
444  
Number of Jobs in Mining  
0  
0  
638 (2023)  
0  
Total Jobs  
2033  
915  
3537  
3708  
Figure 15: Gross Regional Product (GRP) and the economy by Shire. (Source: ABS, REMPLAN, NEMA, 2024)  
Bourke's economy is deeply rooted in agriculture, with a strong emphasis on cotton, 
leveraging the town's access to irrigation systems. Livestock farming, particularly goat 
farming, also plays a crucial role. However, water security remains a persistent challenge, 
impacting agricultural productivity and sustainability. Public administration is vital in 
supporting the community's infrastructure and service needs, while tourism, particularly 
focusing on the town's rich cultural heritage and natural beauty, presents an opportunity 
for economic diversification. The development of eco-tourism and enhancements in 
agricultural practices offer pathways to bolster Bourke's economic resilience and growth.  
Cobar stands out for its significant mining sector, tapping into the region's rich deposits of 
copper, gold, lead, and zinc which contributed to an economic output of $926.4 million in 
2021. This industry not only drives Cobar's economy but also presents environmental and 
sustainability challenges that require innovative management and technology solutions. 
Agriculture, focusing on livestock, particularly goats, complements the mining sector, 
though it faces its own set of challenges, including workforce retention and sustainable 
water use. Public administration supports essential services and infrastructure, with

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 37  
opportunities for growth lying in exploring new mineral resources and improving public 
amenities and services to enhance the quality of life for residents.  
Brewarrina and Walgett share a focus on agriculture as a primary economic driver with 
an emphasis on livestock farming and Brewarrina has a small cotton industry, contributing 
to a GRP of $70 and $319 respectively. Agricultural activity, however, is heavily influenced 
by the region's climatic conditions and water availability, underscoring the importance of 
sustainable water management strategies. Public administration plays a crucial role in 
both towns, providing essential services and supporting community well-being. Tourism, 
particularly cultural and heritage tourism, offers a promising avenue for economic 
development, tapping into the rich Aboriginal heritage and natural landscapes of the area. 
Strengthening the tourism infrastructure and promoting these unique cultural experiences 
can attract visitors and stimulate local economies.  
The Far Northwest of New South Wales faces three main economic challenges that 
impede its growth and sustainability. These include:  
• 
Climate variability and water security exert a profound impact on the cornerstone 
industries of agriculture and mining, leading to increased production costs and 
reduced operational viability.   
• 
The region's geographical isolation exacerbates transportation and logistics costs, 
diminishing the competitiveness of local businesses on a broader scale.   
• 
A skilled workforce shortage also presents a critical challenge, particularly in vital 
sectors such as healthcare, education, and mining, making it difficult for these 
industries to attract and retain the talent necessary for their advancement and 
development.  
Conversely, the region harbours a wealth of opportunities that, if leveraged, could propel 
significant economic development. Renewable energy projects, for instance, are a 
promising avenue, with the Far Norhwest's expansive landscapes and high solar 
insolation rates making it an ideal candidate for large-scale solar and wind energy 
initiatives, thereby diversifying, and adding sustainability to the economy.   
The potential for tourism is vast, with the area's natural attractions, rich cultural heritage, 
and unique landscapes offering a solid foundation for sector growth. An investment in 
technology and innovation across key sectors like agriculture and mining promises to 
enhance efficiency and productivity while providing access to global markets. Additionally, 
focusing on infrastructure development, particularly in transportation, water, and digital 
connectivity, can catalyse economic growth by improving overall connectivity, ensuring 
water security, and broadening access to essential services.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 38  
Our History of Drought Impacts  
Of all the climate and weather-related conditions that affect 
Australia, drought is often the most challenging. New South 
Wales (NSW) in particular, is prone to periods of persistent 
drought.   
Droughts are a natural and recurring feature of the Australian 
climatic cycle. As such, droughts will come again, and they 
are anticipated to get worse. Droughts are challenging times, 
not just at the farm gate. Droughts do not appear suddenly 
like other natural disasters or events. They are incremental 
and start with a dry spell that becomes persistent.   
(Regional Drought Resilience Planning: Project Narrative, 
NSW Government)  
The impact of drought in the Far Northwest regions of Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, and 
Walgett, reveals a multifaceted challenge that spans environmental, economic, and social 
dimensions. Droughts are stressful for farmers, communities and those providing services 
in the region. Conversely, drought also highlights the resilience and adaptive measures 
being employed to mitigate these impacts.  
Figure 16 - Farm in drought conditions in the far north west of NSW (NSW Agriculture)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 39  
Drought Declaration   
Australia has highly variable rainfall records and highly variable periods of low rainfall. 
Drought is difficult to predict, and difficult to determine a start point as the creeping reality 
of a “dry period” becomes more severe and pervasive. Droughts are difficult to compare 
with differences in seasonality, extent, duration, severity, among other variables all 
contributing to the drought experience9. The end of a drought is also difficult to declare 
with the distressing economic and social impacts being felt long after the landscape has 
recovered.   
Drought in Australia, redefined in policy approaches since the 1990s from a 'natural 
disaster' to a 'manageable risk', places farmers in the role of risk managers tasked with 
planning for recurring drought events rather than as victims of unforeseeable 
catastrophes. This shift underscores the complexity of drought as not just a meteorological 
event but a socioeconomic crisis that requires a proactive and informed response from all 
sectors of society.   
The Bureau of Meteorology has four definitions of drought1011, which are meteorological, 
agricultural, hydrological and socio-economic.   
Figure 17 - Bureau of Meteorology Four Definitions of Drought (BoM)   
A key feature of the Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS) is the development of 
the NSW DPI Combined Drought Indicator (CDI). The CDI integrates a range of data and 
model outputs in a framework that is useful for decision makers. It combines 
meteorological, hydrological and agronomic definitions of drought using indexes for 
rainfall, soil and water and plant growth. From these, a fourth index, drought direction 
(DDI), is developed11.   
9 Bureau of Meteorology Drought Knowledge Centre on-line http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/  
10 Bureau of Meteorology Drought Knowledge Centre on-line http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/  
11 Enhanced Drought Information System on-line https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/cdi-drought-phases

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 40  
Used together, the indices classify six stages of drought. The six stages progress from a 
non-drought stage where all indicators suggest good conditions for production to recovery, 
drought affected and improving, drought affected and worsening to fully drought affected.   
Figure 18 – Stages of drought in NSW adapted from NSW DPI Combined Drought Indicator Drought Stages  
(Adaptation of source: Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS))

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 41  
Drought Impacts on Agriculture  
The onset of the drought in 2017, less than 10 years after 
the Millennium Drought, left little time for primary producers 
to recover and protect themselves against future crises, 
exacerbating the social and economic impacts of the current 
drought.   
(Regional Drought Resilience Planning: Project Narrative,  
NSW Government) 
The agricultural industry, vital to the Far Northwest Region, is deeply affected during 
drought. Initially in a “dry time” or Drought Affected (Intensifying) Phase, conditions are 
deteriorating; production is beginning to get tighter. Ground cover may be modest, but 
growth is moderate to low for the time of year. This phase is met with changes in 
productivity such as:   
• 
weaning and destocking, (selling livestock before they reach their potential),  
• 
purchasing fodder (to sustain the core herd),   
• 
changes in farming plans (eg choosing not to plant, spray, fertilise), or   
• 
reduced yields.   
During Drought Phase conditions become very dry and there is low soil moisture or plant 
growth. As Intense Drought Phase becomes apparent ground cover is low and soil 
moisture stores are exhausted, ongoing decisions are required to sustain the farming 
business such as:   
• 
Economic decisions to reduce spending on investment items, to renegotiate loan 
arrangements, or to seek off farm income. Flow on effects spending cutbacks are 
felt in the local towns with less money being spent on agricultural supplies and 
reduced employment opportunities for farm workers. The 2008 report by the 
agriculture, forestry, and fishing industries due to ongoing drought, predicting a 
gradual recovery but also an unprecedented skills and labour shortage.   
• 
Social decisions to reduce spending on discretionary items, to avoid social 
interactions and volunteer activities The framework of Social Impact Assessment 
(SIA) identifies key areas affected by drought, including people's way of life, 
culture, community cohesion, political systems, environmental quality, health and 
wellbeing, personal and property rights, and fears and aspirations.   
• 
Environmental sustainability decisions such as destocking to preserve 
groundcover, are brought forward as growth low for the time of the year. 
Maintaining fodder and water supply becomes a daily chore and thoughts turn to 
improving water access options.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 42  
The Recovering Phase is characterised by a sense of disbelief and uncertainty. Questions 
are raised as to whether the drought is over or there will be follow up rain to fill the soil 
profile and top up dams and rivers. Production is occurring but would be considered 
‘below average’. Full production recovery will not have occurred if this area has 
experienced drought conditions over the past six months. This recovery phase may take 
years given the need to scale up to full production and rebuild reserves such as stock on 
hand and financial reserves.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 43  
Understanding Drought Resilience in Far 
Northwest NSW  
Drought cannot be prevented nor avoided in our Australian environment, only managed.   
Effective Drought Resilience ensures maximising production, creating strong and cohesive 
communities and ensuring reliant and robust service delivery networks in good seasons, 
so there is a level of established preparedness when drought occurs.   
Waiting to take action and implement strategies of resilience in the midst of a drought is 
not effective and reflects ineffective crisis management. Putting strategies in place to 
reduce the depth and severity of the trough will ensure greater sustainability in the long 
term.   
Figure 19 - Drought management through created resilience

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 44  
Drought Impacts on Regional Communities  
The agricultural industry, vital to the Far Northwest, has been deeply affected by drought, 
with employment levels and the nature of work undergoing significant changes. Over 
recent decades, a trend towards larger, more mechanised farms has reduced the demand 
for local labour, exacerbating unemployment in small towns and communities. The 2008 
within the agriculture, forestry, and fishing industries due to ongoing drought, predicting a 
gradual recovery but also an unprecedented skill and labour shortage.  
The socioeconomic ripple effects of drought extend far beyond the agricultural sector. In 
Bourke, for example, the contraction of agricultural production led to a substantial loss of 
seasonal employment, impacting the broader economy. Businesses reported reduced 
customer spending and a decline in visitors, contributing to a downturn in local economic 
activity. These flow-on effects emphasise the interconnectedness of agriculture with the 
wider regional economy and the critical role of employment in maintaining community 
cohesion and resilience. Consultation undertaken with Cobar Shire Council, community 
members and businesses, for example, highlighted the way in which small businesses felt 
the impact of drought more acutely and rapidly than the agricultural sector as businesses 
were forced to close, further exacerbating unemployment rates and the cycle of poverty.   
Whilst all four shires have expressed a critical need to maintain water security, 
Brewarrina’s past experiences during drought have intensified council and community 
concerns about reduced water storage capacity due to planned weir modifications in the 
shire during the 2018-2019 drought.   
The narrative from Brewarrina and Walgett added another layer to the understanding of 
drought impacts, emphasising the psychological toll of recent drought periods which 
notably lacked the preventative pastoral care, early intervention for mental health and 
social support services compared to previous droughts.   
Drought Impacts on the Far Northwest Region  
During the most recent drought in 2018, the NSW Business Chamber conducted a 
comprehensive report to assess the impact of drought on businesses across the state, 
with a focused analysis on the Far Northwest and Orana regions. The findings revealed a 
stark reality: a staggering 98.3% of the 185 businesses consulted in these areas reported 
being affected by the drought, either directly or indirectly, a figure significantly higher than 
the NSW average of 83.7%. The impact varied, with 27% of the businesses, 
predominantly primary producers, unable to sustain production. Suppliers to these 
producers accounted for 34.5% of the affected, while a substantial 72.5% experienced the 
ripple effects due to a weakened local economy resultant from the drought conditions. 
Among these, 36.3% identified as moderately exposed, whereas a considerable 53.8% 
felt highly exposed to the drought's impacts.  
The economic toll was severe, with 96.5% of businesses witnessing a decrease in sales 
and revenue, marking an average revenue decline of 36%, the most significant drop 
observed across any NSW region. The sectors of agriculture, forestry, and fishing bore the 
brunt of this adversity, recording a 46% reduction in revenue and sales state-wide. 
Specifically, in the Far Northwest and Orana region, the financial strain manifested as 
31.8% of businesses struggled to pay invoices on time, necessitating extended payment

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 45  
periods, and 10.6% found themselves unable to repay suppliers. This data underscored 
the extensive economic fallout from drought conditions, highlighting the urgent need for 
targeted support and interventions.  
The resulting economic contraction was further exacerbated by volunteer fatigue, as the 
dwindling number of residents available to support community functions and emergency 
responses grew increasingly stretched.  
The questioning of why droughts were not considered "natural disasters" reflected a 
broader call for policy recognition and support, highlighting the need for a more robust 
framework to address the complexities of drought management and assistance.  
A concerning 18.7% of businesses admitted to feeling ill-equipped to mitigate risks 
associated with drought, highlighting a vulnerability to such climatic adversities. The long 
term sustainability of businesses was a significant concern, with 59.6% worried about the 
enduring impacts of the drought on their operations. In response to these challenging 
conditions, a whopping 85.5% of businesses were compelled to scale back on capital 
spending, deviating from earlier plans.   
This data paints a vivid picture of the economic devastation wrought by the drought on the 
Far Northwest and Orana businesses, underlining the critical need for strategies aimed at 
resilience and recovery in the face of environmental challenges.  
The Drought Impact Survey 2020, completed by the Royal Far West, reflected on the 
experiences of 36 rural families in NSW, starkly illustrates the multifaceted toll of 
prolonged drought.  It reports a nearly 50% rise in the number of individuals struggling 
with housing costs and a significant 40% of adults indicating poor or fair health, a figure 
that has doubled, exacerbating the financial and mental health strain on rural families. 
Lindsay Cane, CEO of Royal Far West, emphasised the compounded adverse effects of 
drought on the well-being of rural families, which are further intensified by concurrent 
crises such as bushfires and the COVID-19 pandemic.  
The survey quantitatively highlights the escalation in financial stress, with more than a 
third of families facing challenges in affording food, over half unable to meet health costs, 
and a notable deterioration in the ability to pay for health services and dental care. 
Transportation affordability has also suffered, affecting half of the respondents. This 
financial hardship contributes to job losses, elevated living costs, strained relationships, 
and heightened mental health needs among families and communities. The expressed 
need for enhanced access to health services, including mental health counselling, 
underscores the critical necessity for targeted support and services in rural areas.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 46  
Future Drought Projections and Impacts  
Overview  
The future impacts of drought in the Far Northwest Region of New South Wales are 
closely tied to the compound effects of various shocks and ‘megatrends’ that not only 
exacerbate the challenges posed by drought, but also present opportunities for action and 
improved resilience.   
Climate Projections and Impacts   
Factors such as climate change, with a predicted increase in temperature and variability in 
rainfall, have significant implications for the region.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 47  
Temperature Projections  
The region is witnessing a marked rise in both minimum and maximum temperatures. 
Projections indicate an average increase of approximately 0.7°C by 2030 and 2.1°C by 
2070 compared to baseline conditions. This warming trend is expected to result in an 
increase in the number of hot days annually, with significant implications for human health, 
water resources, agricultural productivity, and natural ecosystems.  
This table outlines temperature projections for future periods:  
Period  
Increase  
Near Future (2020 – 2039)  
+0.3°C + 1.0°C  
Far Future (2060 – 2079)  
+1.8°C to + 2.7°C  
Figure 20 - Temperature Projections (Source: CSIRO, 2024)  
A map representation of the mean surface temperature projections for the Far Northwest 
Region Local Government areas of Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett – 2030 to 
2090 follows.  
Figure 21- Mean Surface Temperature Projections (Source: CSIRO, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 48  
Rainfall Projections  
Changes in rainfall patterns are anticipated, with a decrease in rainfall during spring and 
an increase in autumn. This shift could affect water availability, agricultural cycles, and the 
natural habitats of many species. The variability in rainfall, coupled with increasing 
temperatures, is likely to exacerbate drought conditions and challenge water management 
strategies in the region.  
This table presents the projections for rainfall and evaporation:  
Factor  
Projection  
Rainfall Decrease  
Rainfall is expected to decrease, in dry seasons, by 30%, and increase, in wet 
seasons, by 17% by 2030.   
Rainfall is expected to decrease, in dry seasons, by 12%, and increase, in wet 
seasons, by 27%, by 2070.  
Seasonal Shifts  
Decrease in Spring rainfall, increase in Summer and Autumn rainfall.  
Figure 22 - Projects for rainfall and evaporation (Source: CSIRO, 2024)  
A map representation of the climate science rainfall projections for the Far Northwest Local 
Government areas of Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett – 2030 to 2090 follows.12   
Figure 23 - Rainfall Projections (Source: CSIRO, 2024)  
12 https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 49  
The reduction in average rainfall will have significant impact for many farmers and landholders, 
particularly in crop varieties reliant on irrigated agricultural land. The data below represents the 
irrigation requirements per crop type (ABS, 2022)13.  
Crop  
ML  
Ha  
ML / Ha  
Rice  
538,365  
45,084  
11.94  
Cotton  
1,326,321  197,401  
6.72  
Fruit and Nut (excluding grapes)  
1,127,108  196,906  
5.72  
Sugar Cane  
795,440  
157,521  
5.05  
Grapevines  
516,550  
130,534  
3.96  
Vegetables  
382,626  
98,785  
3.87  
Pastures and Cereal for Hay and Silage  
664,712  
210,391  
3.16  
Figure 24 - Irrigation requirements by Crop Variety (Source ABS, 2022)  
Significant quantities of irrigated cotton are grown in Walgett, and also to a great extent in 
Brewarrina and Bourke LGAs, with groundwater an important water source for this irrigation.  
Broadacre crops, specifically cotton lint, were valued at $55.65 M, $19.58 M and $18.91 M 
in Walgett, Brewarrina and Bourke, respectively. Irrigated cotton covers a land area of 
7,250 ha in Walgett, ranked 5 for land coverage in NSW.   
Livestock slaughtered for meat also contributes significantly to the economy across 
Walgett, Bourke, Brewarrina and Cobar LGAs. Within Walgett livestock slaughtered (meat) 
is valued at $49.3 M. In Bourke it is the primary agricultural activity by value at $38.98 M, 
responsible for the primary source of income for many farmers and landowners within the 
LGA. For livestock farming it is essential sheep and cattle have an adequate supply of 
good quality water, with up to 12L consumed per head per day for sheep and up to 140L 
for cattle. During drought, water requirements increase to maintain the movement of 
coarse, less digestible feed in the gut.14  
Wool production is also an important contributor to the economy in the region, valued 
at 38.51 M across all four LGAs. However, wool production and scouring is very water 
13 13 Water Use on Australian Farms, 
ABS, 2022.  
14 Water Requirements for Sheep and Cattle, Department of Primary Industries, 2014.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 50  
intensive, consuming approximately 2.3 – 2.5 tonnes of water per tonne of wool fibre 
produced. 15  
As a result, a future scenario involving a reduction in the average annual rainfall will have 
significant impacts on the value of agricultural production in the region, with the likelihood 
of cotton gin and wool scourer closure increasing due to a lack of water resources to 
maintain production and operation.   
Bushfire Risks and Erosion Concerns  
The Far Northwest is expected to see an increase in bushfire risks due to higher 
temperatures and changing rainfall patterns. Additionally, the region may experience 
heightened erosion rates, affecting soil health, water quality, and agricultural productivity. 
These environmental changes call for robust adaptation and mitigation strategies to 
protect communities, ecosystems, and the economy.  
Figure 25 - Climate change snapshot for near future (2020 - 2039) and far future (2060 - 2079). (Source: CSIRO, 
2024)  
15 Li et al, Water footprint assessment of wool products with a low-water footprint baseline, Institution of Chemical Engineers, 
2022  
Climate Aspect  
Near Future (2020 – 2039)  
Far Future (2060 – 2079)  
Average Temperature Increase  
Approx 0.7°C.  
Approx 2.1°C.  
Maximum Temperature Increase  
0.3 - 1°C  
1.8 – 2.7°C  
Minimum Temperature Increase  
0.4 – 0.8°C  
1.4 – 2.7°C   
Additional Hot Days Annually  
10 – 20   
30 – 40   
Fewer Cold Nights Annually   
5 – 10  
10 – 20  
Rainfall Change  
Decrease in Spring, increase in Summer and Autumn.  
Fire Weather  
Increase in the near future and far future, with most profound increases 
in average and severe fire weather in Spring.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 51  
Hot Days and Drought Frequency Projections  
The table below shows the projections for the frequency of hot days and drought 
conditions:  
Condition  
Projection  
Hot Days Increase  
More hot days and consecutive days above 38°C.  
Drought Severity  
2 – 3% probability of severe droughts (similar conditions to 2017 – 2020).  
Figure 26- Frequency of hot days and drought conditions  
The NSW Government's advanced climate data has unveiled the natural climatic 
variability extending beyond the observed records.  This data suggests that the region has 
historically experienced more severe wet and dry periods than recorded in the last 130 
years.  
Given the combination of changes in temperature and rainfall the evapotranspiration16 
projections follow.17   
Figure 27- Evapotranspiration Projections (Source: CSIRO, 2024)  
16 Evapotranspiration is defined as: ‘The combined effect of evaporation and transpiration.’ Evaporation is defined as: the 
process by which water or another liquid becomes a gas. Water from land areas, bodies of water and all other moist 
surfaces is absorbed into the atmosphere as a vapour, and Transpiration is defined as ‘the process where plants absorb 
water through their roots and then evaporate water.’  
17 https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 52  
Prolonged drought conditions result in increased pressure on water resources, adversely 
affecting agricultural productivity and leading to a cyclical pattern of economic hardship and 
population decline.   
Population Impacts  
The population rate in the Far Northwest region has decreased consistently from 2006 to 
2021, with the most substantial declines occurring during drought periods (see Graph 1). 
In the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shires, the current population trends are 
characterised by a declining and aging demographic, particularly in agricultural sectors.    
Drought exacerbates these trends, leading to increased migration to urban centres as 
younger residents seek more stable living conditions and employment opportunities 
elsewhere. This out-migration contributes to an aging population, workforce reductions, 
and challenges in maintaining economic stability and community services.    
Future droughts are likely to intensify these population impacts and create further 
economic challenges.  The aging population may lead to a further decline in the size and 
capability of the workforce, especially in agriculture, which is heavily dependent on 
physical labour. Continued drought could accelerate population decline as residents, 
especially the younger demographic, seek more stable living conditions and employment 
opportunities elsewhere. This out-migration will have long-term implications for the 
region’s demographic structure, reinforcing the trend to an aging population and a 
shrinking labour force, further constraining economic growth and community vitality. This 
trend suggests that droughts are a critical factor driving population decline, likely due to 
the associated economic and environmental hardships.  The ongoing challenge for these 
regions is to develop strategies that enhance liveability, drought resilience and economic 
diversity to mitigate the impact of future droughts on population trends.  
Outmigration also undermines the confidence needed to invest in and revitalise shrinking 
communities. This lack of confidence stifles local entrepreneurship and discourages new 
businesses from setting up, further accelerating economic decline. Decisions to invest in 
the community often become driven by emotional ties rather than sound economic 
rationale, as residents strive to improve their ‘home’ and attract like-minded people, 
despite the ongoing challenges.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 53  
2006 
2011 
2016 
2021 
Year 
Cobar 
PopulationBrewarrina Population 
Bourke 
PopulationWalgett Population 
Region 
PopulationCobar Unemployment 
Brewarrina 
UnemploymentBourke Unemployment 
Walgett 
UnemploymentRegion Unemployment 
Figure 28– Population and unemployment trends in the region between 2006 - 2021 (ABS).  
Economic Impacts   
Economic impacts of future droughts on employment are complex and influenced by 
several factors including government policy and funding, structural changes in agriculture, 
economic diversification and resource management and sustainability.   
•  
Economic impacts - Government Policy and funding   
The economic resilience of the region during drought periods has historically depended on 
emergency relief efforts, government subsidies, and temporary employment packages.   
While these measures can provide short-term relief, they are not sustainable options for 
long-term drought resilience and may not sustain long-term employment stability, with this 
impact likely exacerbated in future droughts, particularly because of tightened lending due 
to reduced national economic activity.   
“While the work done by drought support workers was great, 
this support finished once the drought was over”.  – Belinda 
(Cobar)  
0.00 % 
% 
2.00 
4.00 % 
6.00 % 
% 
8.00 
% 
10.00 
12.00 % 
14.00 % 
16.00 % 
18.00 % 
0 
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
10000 
12000 
14000 
16000 
18000

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 54  
Farmers can now access low interest loans to help prepare for, manage and recover from 
drought the:   
i.  
Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) Farm Investment Loan and RIC Drought 
Loan, make the farm business stronger, more resilient and more profitable.  ii. 
Drought Ready and Resilient Fund, a loan facility of up to $250 000 can be used 
for products, activities and services relating to animal welfare, farm preparedness, 
income diversification, environmental improvements as well as training and business 
development.   
iii.  
Drought Infrastructure Fund (previously known as the Farm Innovation Fund) the 
loan product can be used for drought preparedness and mitigation by investing in 
permanent on-farm infrastructure that will:   
o 
manage adverse seasonal conditions - improve water efficiencies with 
irrigation systems, cap and piping of bores, new dams, install water 
tanks and desilting of ground tanks   
o 
ensure long term sustainability - increase the viability of a farm 
business and improve pasture and soil health, plant trees for shade and 
wildlife corridors, eradicate weeds, flood proof property and fence 
riverbanks.  o  
improve farm productivity - reduce risks and 
improve efficiencies by building fodder and grain storage facilities, 
sheds, fencing, roadworks and solar power conversions.   
These initiatives were designed to bolster the resilience of NSW farmers to future adverse 
weather events and climatic conditions, such as drought. The absence of low interest 
loans like these during subsequent droughts would limit a farmers’ ability to adapt to 
drought conditions, to invest in necessary improvements or maintain operations. This 
could potentially lead to business closures and a significant reduction in the agricultural 
workforce.   
The downside of low interest loans is that repayment of the loan is contingent on return to 
more profitable outcomes which may be delayed in an extended drought. Low interest 
loans in addition to any pre-existing loans will put added pressure on the farming business 
especially in times of rising interest rates and inflation.   
A further drought would likely exacerbate economic vulnerabilities, leading to more 
significant reliance on external financial support and emergency relief measures. This 
dependency could strain regional and national resources, especially if drought 
conditions become more prolonged and severe due to climate change.  
 •  
Economic impacts - structural changes in agriculture   
Evident in the Far Northwest Region, employment in the agricultural sector shows a more 
consistent decline over the entire period, with the most significant drops occurring 
between drought periods. This trend suggests that the sector's downturn is not solely due 
to drought conditions but also to broader structural changes within the industry, such as 
increased automation, shifts towards less labour-intensive farming practices, and farm 
consolidation.  
These changes are often aimed at increasing efficiency and reducing reliance on variable 
human labour, but they also lead to a reduced agricultural workforce over time.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 55  
This is a common trend in drought scenarios globally, where prolonged drought conditions 
catalyse farm consolidation and the adoption of farming practices that are less dependent 
on human labour, thus leading to a persistent decline in agricultural employment outside 
of active drought periods.   
•  
Economic impacts – diversification   
Employment in the administration and public services sector often increases during 
drought periods due to heightened demand for public assistance and the implementation 
of drought relief programs. These programs, typically funded by government initiatives, 
aim to mitigate the immediate effects of drought on communities, leading to temporary job 
creation in local government and support services.   
This rise in administration and public services roles may occur but is more likely seen in 
regional centres such as Dubbo. Many drought relief programs are delivered out of Dubbo 
or other regional centres and access to the service is online or by travelling to Dubbo or 
by drive-in drive-out service. Remote delivery of services to the Far Northwest Region 
adds little to the community and puts extra pressure on the strained resources of the Far 
Northwest Region, especially when travel to a regional centre to access a service is 
required.   
Once these drought-specific programs conclude, the employment in this sector declines 
substantially, reflecting the temporary nature of such interventions. The observed decline 
in employment between drought periods in administration and public services can be 
attributed to the cessation of temporary drought relief programs and a return to pre-
drought governmental operations.   
This cycle indicates a reactive rather than proactive approach to drought management, 
where employment opportunities are directly tied to immediate drought response efforts 
rather than long-term resilience planning.   
This pattern may not be sustainable in future droughts. While temporary employment 
opportunities might arise from relief efforts, these jobs are not a replacement for the lost 
permanent positions in agriculture and related industries. Over time, repeated droughts 
could lead to a permanent shift in the job market, with an increased number of short-term, 
low-security jobs, further destabilising the region’s economy.   
A trend which started in the 2017-2020 drought and gained momentum during the Covid-
19 Pandemic was the rise in prominence of remote working and small business. Digital 
connectivity has enabled the people of Far Northwest Region to connect to with 
education, business and customers like never before.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 56  
Figure 29– Industry trends from 2006 - 2021 (ABS - Top 5 Industries).  
An off-farm income is an extremely valued defence for farming families against the 
boomand-bust cycle of drought and recovery. For example, the incredibly successful “Buy 
from the Bush” social media campaign promoted regional businesses was launched from 
a kitchen table on a property near Warren. It leveraged the enormous opportunity to 
connect city customers who really cared about the bush with over 250 bush retailers. It is 
estimated Buy from the Bush provided $14 million in revenue to regional businesses 
during its operation.   
Buy from the Bush founder Grace Brennan: “Often you get a 
very one- dimensional perspective, with rural issues only 
trending in times of crisis,” she said.   
“But we want to be able to provide a nuance beyond farmers 
in paddocks when times get tough ... we have this incredible 
untapped resource in the way rural Australia works to solve 
problems. For me, it’s like a secret sauce. We need to mine 
in and leverage it.”   
Sydney morning Herald 10/09/2023   
Regions with economies heavily dependent on agriculture will face increased vulnerability 
from drought, requiring improvements in digital connectivity to facilitate training 
opportunities for business diversification and sustainable farming practices. Also, the 
future success of small businesses in the Far Northwest Region is contingent on access 
to a larger market.   
Expansion of digital connectivity is vital for economic and social participation, particularly 
for smaller centres where “off-farm” income is a significant strategy in drought 
preparedness and drought resilience.   
0.00 
200.00 
400.00 
600.00 
800.00 
1000.00 
1200.00 
2006 2011 2016 2021 2006 2011 2016 2021 2006 2011 2016 2021 2006 2011 2016 2021 
Cobar 
Brewarrina 
Walgett 
Bourke 
Agriculture 
Mining 
Administration + Public Services

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 57  
• 
Economic Impacts - resource management   
Efficient management of resources including human resources, reserves of fodder and 
water are directly linked to productivity and profitability. When a business is thriving, more 
money can be spent on resource management and confidence is high.   
Conversely, droughts result in reduced capacity to earn an income and result in a rundown 
of reserves or resources. Not only reserves of pasture, fodder and water are depleted: 
human reserves of energy and confidence are also depleted giving rise to physical and 
mental health issues. As the Far Northwest Region relies on the goodwill of volunteers to 
run events such as school carnivals, sporting fixtures and agricultural shows, social 
activities are curtailed further compounding the issue. Suicide or mental illness deeply 
affects the community whose lives are deeply entwined through business or social 
activities.   
Unemployment and loss of income not only affects those directly involved in agriculture, 
but also ripples through the local economy, impacting sectors like retail, services, and 
manufacturing that rely on the spending power of these primary sector employees. The 
impacts on local business was exemplified in the most recent 2017 – 2019 / 2020 drought, 
where the inability for non-primary producers to access subsidies resulted in significant 
business closures, many of which have not reopened since.  
• 
Economic impacts - employment   
The economic impacts of future droughts on employment in regions like Bourke, 
Brewarrina, Cobar, and Walgett. can be significant, affecting various sectors differently 
based on their reliance on natural resources and government interventions. The 
fluctuating employment trends in these regions, particularly in the administration, public 
services, and agriculture sectors, reflect the broader economic vulnerabilities and 
structural adjustments that occur in response to drought conditions.   
During drought, the changes in agricultural employment are minimal, possibly due to the 
necessity to maintain operations despite reduced water availability and productivity. 
Government subsidies and support during these periods can help sustain agricultural 
employment temporarily, but they do not address the underlying trend of workforce 
reduction in the sector.   
Following the 2017-2020 drought farmers have demonstrated a propensity to de- stock 
based on BoM dry seasonal forecasts, thereby reducing the workload to feed stock and 
reducing constraints on their time possibly freeing up time to pursue an off-farm income.   
Addressing these challenges will require integrated-long term strategies that enhance 
regional resilience to drought while supporting sustainable employment and economic 
growth.   
The economic impacts of future droughts on employment in Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, 
and Walgett regions, will likely continue to reflect the complex interplay between 
temporary government interventions, structural changes in agriculture, and the need for 
greater economic diversification and sustainable resource management.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 58  
Social Impacts  
The Drought Impact Survey 202018 conducted by Royal Far West on rural families in NSW 
paints (responses recorded by 36 rural families staying at Royal Far West in February and 
March of 2020) a distressing picture of the broad-reaching consequences of prolonged 
drought, which has severe implications for predicting the social impacts of future droughts.   
The survey’s findings on financial stress, where over a third of families struggled to afford 
food, and more than half faced difficulties meeting health costs, suggest a significant 
decline in living standards and access to basic needs. The deterioration in the ability to 
afford essential services like health and dental care, coupled with transportation 
challenges affecting half of the respondents, reflects the extensive economic strain and 
social isolation experienced by these communities.   
Studies have shown that droughts exert long-term psychological and social effects, 
leading to increased rates of depression, anxiety, and other mental health disorders in 
affected populations. The loss of livelihoods, uncertainty about the future, and the 
degradation of the natural environment can lead to a sense of hopelessness and 
helplessness among community members.   
Predicting the social impacts of future droughts based on these findings suggests a 
continuing and possibly worsening trend of financial hardship, health issues, and social 
disintegration in rural areas. The compounded stress of successive droughts and other 
overlapping crises can erode community resilience, weaken social bonds, and lead to a 
breakdown in social cohesion.   
The expressed need for better access to health services, including mental health 
counselling, highlights the urgent requirement for comprehensive support systems that 
address the multifaceted challenges posed by drought.  
18 West, R. F. (2020). Cumulative effects of drought show sustained hardship – survey.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 59  
Impacts on Indigenous Communities  
The future drought impacts on Indigenous communities in the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, 
and Walgett regions, as evidenced during the 2018-2020 drought, are profound and 
multifaceted. These impacts go beyond the immediate environmental and economic 
effects, touching the very core of cultural identity and community well-being.   
• 
Environmental impacts   
The decline in native flora and fauna during drought, alongside the loss of breeding 
grounds for birds and fish, signifies a broader ecological crisis affecting the entire 
ecosystem's health and sustainability.   
The ongoing struggle for water rights and the impact of large-scale agricultural and mining 
operations, underscore the challenges of managing water resources in a way that respects both 
the environmental needs and the rights of Indigenous communities. The upstream water 
extraction for irrigation highlights a critical need for equitable water management policies that 
consider the cultural, ecological, and economic needs of all communities along these river 
systems.   
• 
Economic impacts   
The drought's economic impact on these communities, particularly those engaged in 
traditional land and water-based activities, is severe. With rivers drying up, activities like 
fishing, swimming, and hunting, which are not only cultural practices but also vital sources 
of sustenance and income, are no longer feasible.   
Drought also reduces casual and seasonal employment opportunities such as harvest or 
planting operations.   
• 
Cultural impacts   
Water sources in these regions are not merely physical resources but hold cultural 
significance for Indigenous communities. They are places of cultural practices, storytelling, 
and spiritual solace. The drought's severity, leading to dry rivers and disappearing 
wetlands, disrupts these cultural practices, severing the connections that these 
communities have with their land and water.   
The distress expressed by community members of the Gamilaraay and Yuwaalaraay 
elders and residents like Rhonda Ashby and Brenda McBride speaks to a profound sense 
of loss, not only of water but of culture, heritage, economic stability, and environmental 
health. The ongoing challenges faced by these communities call for urgent and inclusive 
water management strategies that recognise and integrate the cultural, spiritual, and 
ecological significance of water to Indigenous Australians.   
• 
Community impacts   
Their communities, which are deeply connected to the land and water for cultural 
practices, livelihood, and identity, will face increasing challenges as droughts become 
more frequent and severe.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 60  
Access to water is a critical concern, with drought conditions reducing river flows and 
water levels, thereby affecting not only daily life but also the health of sacred and culturally 
significant sites such as the Barwon River which hosts the Baiame’s Ngunnhu. This 
situation threatens to disrupt traditional activities and cultural heritage.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 61  
Environmental Impacts  
The diverse impacts of drought on ecosystems, as noted by Bond et al. (2008), 
underscore the multifaceted nature of drought effects on environmental and ecological 
systems.   
The Murray Darling Basin has experienced significant ecological stress due to drought 
conditions, with notable events such as toxicity in the lakes at the end of the Murray River 
and large-scale mortality of floodplain forests. These incidents, driven by low river inflows 
and the absence of flooding, highlight the critical link between water flow and ecosystem 
health.   
For Far Northwest NSW, the insights gained from studies and modelling of changing 
conditions within the Murray Darling Basin can be used to predict the impact of future 
droughts. Prolonged and future droughts will likely have significant impacts on aquatic 
ecosystems, which are particularly vulnerable to reduced river flows and lower water 
levels in natural bodies. As a result, fish populations and other aquatic life forms may face 
decline due to the reduced availability of habitat and water quality issues.   
Similarly, terrestrial ecosystems will suffer from decreased moisture availability, causing 
vegetation stress, higher mortality rates in plant species, and adverse effects on wildlife 
dependent on these habitats.   
Soil erosion and land degradation are additional concerns during drought periods. The 
absence of vegetation cover can lead to increased erosion by wind and water, leading to 
the loss of fertile land, which is detrimental to agricultural productivity and natural 
ecosystems. Drought conditions also exacerbate climate change feedback loops. For 
example, stressed vegetation due to drought captures less carbon, and soil erosion can 
release the carbon stored in the soil, thus contributing to increased greenhouse gas 
emissions.   
These interconnected impacts of drought highlight the need for comprehensive strategies to 
mitigate environmental degradation and promote sustainability in Far Northwest NSW.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 62  
Unpredictable Future Scenarios that may Affect 
Future Drought Response  
The Economic, Environmental and Social scenarios that may arise and affect responses to 
future Droughts are summarised as follows.  
Future Scenario  
Factors Contributing  
Effects  
References  
Economic  
Economic Decline  
Reduction in tourism 
due to weather.  
Decrease in agricultural 
productivity.  
High unemployment 
rates.  
•  
•  
•  
Loss of income for local 
businesses, reduced investment 
in the region.  
Lower tax revenues for local 
government, reduced funding for 
public services.  
Increased social welfare costs, 
potential rise in poverty and 
crime, decreasing community 
stability needed for coordinated 
drought response.  
Far West Regional  
Economic  
Development  
Strategy 2023  
Update  
Infrastructure  
Damage  
Severe weather events  
(e.g. floods, fires).  
Aging infrastructure. 
Limited funding for 
infrastructure projects.  
•  
•  
•  
High costs of repair and 
maintenance, disruption of 
economic activities.  
essential services and markets, 
hindering the distribution of 
drought relief resources.  
Increased vulnerability to future 
climate events, reducing overall 
resilience against droughts.  
Far West Regional  
Plan 2036  
Brewarrina Strategic 
Planning Statement  
Policy Shift  
Change in government 
or policy direction.  
New environment 
regulations.  
•  Potential funding reduction or 
change in prioritisation for 
drought response programs, 
leading to inadequate  
Bourke Shire Strategy 
2012

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 63  
Future Scenario  
Factors Contributing  
Effects  
References  
Altered economic 
policies.  
Shifts in social policies.  
•  preparation and mitigation 
efforts.  
Increased costs for 
environmental compliance, 
reducing available funds for 
drought resilience projects.  
•  Uncertainty for businesses and 
investors, hindering long-term 
planning for drought resilience.  
•  Impact on delivery and 
governance of community 
support programs, affecting 
social cohesion and collective 
action during droughts.  
Water Shortages  
Prolonged droughts. 
Over-extraction of water 
resources.  
Inefficient irrigation 
systems.  
•  
•  
•  
Reduced agricultural output, loss 
of income for farmers, higher 
food prices.  
Competition for water resources 
among different sectors, 
complicating water allocation 
during droughts.  
Need for investment in 
watersaving technologies and 
practices, challenging the 
financial stability needed for 
effective drought response.  
Water and Drought  
Security Report  
Brewarrina Strategic  
Planning Statement  
Environmental  
Climate Change  
Increasing 
temperatures. Changing 
rainfall patterns.  
Extreme weather 
events.  
•  
•  
More severe and frequent 
droughts, water scarcity, loss of 
biodiversity.  
Greater demand for water 
management and adaptation 
strategies, increasing costs and 
complexity of drought response.  
Far West Climate  
Change Snapshot  
Brewarrina Strategic  
Planning Statement  
Increased  
Frequency of  
Floods  
Climate change leading 
to unpredictable rainfall 
patterns.  
Inadequate flood 
management 
infrastructure.  
•  
•  
Destruction of homes and 
infrastructure, displacement of 
communities.  
Increased recovery costs, 
longterm economic disruption, 
diverting resources from drought 
preparedness efforts.  
Far West Regional  
Economic  
Development  
Strategy 2023  
Update  
Brewarrina Strategic 
Planning Statement  
Water Quality 
Degradation  
Pollution from 
agricultural runoff, 
industrial activities.  
Inadequate waste 
management systems. 
Climate change 
impacts.  
•  
•  
•  
Threat to public health, loss of 
aquatic life, increased water 
treatment costs.  
Reduced availability of safe 
drinking water, negative impact 
on tourism, complicating 
community health during 
droughts.  
Long-term degradation of natural 
water sources, reducing 
resilience of water supplies 
during droughts.  
Barwon-Darling 
Valley Annual  
Surface Water Quality 
Report  
Brewarrina Strategic 
Planning Statement

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 64  
Future Scenario  
Factors Contributing  
Effects  
References  
Social  
Aging Population  
Declining birth rates. 
Outmigration of younger 
population.  
• 
Higher dependency ratio, 
increased demand for healthcare 
services.  
• 
Strain on social services, reduced 
economic growth, fewer 
physically capable individuals to 
aid in drought efforts.  
Far West Regional  
Economic  
Development  
Strategy 2023  
Update  
Digital Divide  
Inadequate internet and 
telecommunication 
infrastructure. Removal 
of specific categories of 
network coverage e.g. 
3G. High costs of 
technology adaptation. 
Shifting geographic 
distribution of population.  
• 
Limited access to online 
education, healthcare and 
business opportunities.  
• 
Wider economic and social 
inequality, reduced 
competitiveness, limiting 
innovative drought mitigation 
strategies.  
• 
Increased difficulty in retaining 
and attracting skilled workers, 
affecting the region’s ability to 
plan and implement drought 
responses.  
Bourke Shire Strategy 
2012  
Health Crises   
Increased temperatures 
and extreme weather. 
Limited access to 
healthcare services in 
remote areas. Expected 
increased frequency of 
viral outbreaks.  
• 
Higher prevalence of heat related 
illnesses, leading to strain on 
healthcare services.  
• 
Increased mortality and morbidity 
rates, reduced quality of life, 
impacting community morale and 
ability to cope with droughts.  
Far West Climate  
Change Snapshot  
Brewarrina Strategic  
Planning Statement  
Housing Shortages  
Population growth without 
corresponding  
infrastructure 
development. Increased 
number of temporary 
workers for construction 
jobs and REZ work.  
Natural disasters 
damaging existing 
housing.  
• 
Increased homelessness and 
higher rental and property prices 
leading to outmigration.  
• 
Pressure on local governments to 
provide emergency housing, 
reducing focus and resources 
available for drought relief.  
Far West Regional  
Economic  
Development  
Strategy 2023  
Update  
Outmigration  
Lack of employment 
opportunities.  
Insufficient access to 
essential services. Poor 
educational facilities.  
• Reduced workforce for agriculture 
and other industries.  
• Decreased community resilience.  
• Increased pressure on remaining 
residents to maintain community 
functions.  
• Reduced resources to assist with 
drought response.  
• Disruption to community cohesion 
and support structures.  
Brewarrina Shire  
Economic  
Development and  
Tourism Plan  
Figure 30 – Summary of potential Economic, Environmental and Social scenarios

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 65  
The analysis of the future drought projections and impacts, demonstrates the 
interconnected nature of the natural, economic and social environments.  
Figure 31 - Viewing Resilience as a System  
The interconnected nature of those environments reinforces the requirement for the 
initiatives and projects that contribute to improving the drought resilience of the region to 
be considered as a system, and not in isolation.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 66  
Our Drought Resilience Journey  
The plan:  
• 
Recognises the proactivity of farmers and communities in regard to drought 
preparedness.  
• 
Highlights that further preparedness is required to continue to address the 
currently identified and future impacts of drought, and the associated climate 
trends.  
Councils, community members, industry leaders and technical stakeholders have 
identified strategic initiatives and projects with the corresponding actions for the Far 
Northwest Region which are required to improve the drought resilience of the region.  
The projects and initiatives detailed were distilled from the ‘long list of projects’ arising 
from the initial stakeholder consultation processes.   
The conduct of and outcomes from the stakeholder consultation following the 
development of the ‘long list of projects’ informed the construct of the projects defined 
under each initiative – the ‘short list’.  
The initiatives:  
• 
Form a pathway towards improving the resilience of the region to the impact of 
drought and its related stresses and shocks.  
• 
Contribute to maintaining, modifying and transforming existing systems and 
functions within the region.   
It should also be considered that drought is dynamic in nature and that there is not specific 
point at which resilience of a Region is attained. Therefore, it should be expected that as a 
project or an initiative progresses, that further opportunities will arise that might be 
pursued and incorporated within the plan to further improve the drought resilience of the 
region.  
This plan incorporates a series of projects under four initiatives:  
• 
Long-Term Water Security Projects. The initiatives include Groundwater, 
offstream storage, and water reuse projects.  
• 
Telecommunication security. The initiative is aimed at improving the 
telecommunications connectivity across the region.  
• 
Stronger Communities Program. The initiative is aimed at improving the 
community cohesion, well-being and financial resilience in region.  
• 
Sustainable Recreation & Tourism Strategy. The initiative is aimed at 
developing and implementing a tourism strategy across the region on a 
sustainable basis.  
The project and initiatives in this Plan are aligned to the Key Outcome Areas to foster a 
more resilient, innovative and united region:  
• 
People, Culture, and Community,  
• 
Economy,  
• 
Landscape and Natural Environment, and   
• 
Infrastructure and Built Environment.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 67  
Project / Initiative 
People, Culture, 
and Community 
Economy 
Landscape and 
Natural 
Environment 
Infrastructure 
and Built 
Environment 
Enhance regional 
liveability, foster a 
robust and attractive 
community, and 
improve social 
resilience and 
wellbeing. 
Expanding the business 
and agricultural sector's 
self-reliance and 
performance, ensuring 
stability and growth within 
the region’s economy. 
Improving the 
environmental 
resilience of the entire 
regional landscape, 
including agricultural 
lands and river 
systems. 
Strengthening 
infrastructure to 
support economic 
and 
environmental 
sustainability. 
Long-Term Water 
Security Projects  
✓    
✓    
✓    
✓    
Telecommunication 
security  
✓   
✓    
✓    
✓    
Stronger  
Communities  
Program  
✓   
✓    
Sustainable  
Recreation &  
Tourism Strategy  
✓    
✓   
✓   
 ✓   
Figure 32 – Alignment of Project / Initiatives by Outcome Area  
As an outcome of future droughts, and implementation of drought resilience projects and 
the evaluation of the outcomes and impact over time, the plan across the four outcome 
areas will need to adapt, transform and change over time.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 68  
The plan for each initiative includes:  
• 
A description of the initiative and project.  
• 
Scope of the initiative and projects.  
• 
Pathway to implementation.  
• 
Analysis of how the initiative / projects supports ‘Broader Drought Resilience.’  
• 
Actions required under the three pillars of the Drought Resilience, Adaptation and 
Management model to implement them: o Pillar 1 – Planning and Monitoring.  
o Pillar 2 – Responding to Drought Events.  
o Pillar 3 – Building Future Resilience.  
• 
A Timeline for implementation.  
• 
An economic analysis of the initiative.  
• 
A governance structure to support the implementation of each initiative.  
• 
An analysis of the responsiveness to potential future scenarios and uncertainties 
on the implementation and delivery of each project.  
• 
An evaluation approach to the implementation, outcomes and impact of each 
project.   
The program logic described in the following diagrams:  
• 
underpins the investment decisions for the initiatives, and  
• 
reflects the linkage of the various components through the Plan responding to 
future uncertainty and change around:  
o Situation (if).  
o Initiatives / Projects, Inputs and Planning, Outputs (then).  
o Outcomes (has the impact of). o Impact (contributes to the vision of).  
.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 69  
Figure 33 - Drought Resilience Program Logic Map at a Project Level (Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett LGAs) (The Stable Group, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 70  
Figure 34 - Drought Resilience Program Responding to Future Uncertainty and Change (The Stable Group, 2024)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 71  
Long-Term Water 
Security Projects

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 72  
Project Description  
The shortlisted long-term projects to improve water security include the provision of:  
• 
Improved ground water monitoring to enable treatment of groundwater to provide 
an improved level of secure water supply to the region.  
• 
Off-stream storage at Walgett to address water reliability, given the releases from 
Keepit Dam for the town supply have had to cease in drought periods and to 
reduce the need for reverse osmosis treatment of groundwater sources.  
• 
A water reuse capability in the Cobar Shire, to supplement the Regional Water 
Strategy Macquarie – Castlereagh – Implementation Plan.  
Scope of water security projects  
Water Security Groundwater – Proving of Groundwater Resources (Quality and Flow) and 
Installation of Standpipes  
Improve groundwater quality monitoring through auditing the current bore network, 
implementing regular sampling programs and collating groundwater quality data from 
industry and government sources into one database.   
Investment in technology and research to understand how treated groundwater can 
support towns, landholders and industries to secure a water supply.  
Off-Stream Storage at Walgett  
Establishing an off-stream storage capability at Walgett.  
Water Reuse Project in Cobar Shire Council  
Install a wastewater re-use treatment and supply distribution system within Cobar.  
Pathway to implementation  
The pathway to the delivery of the projects includes (as required):  
1. Conduct of feasibility and technical / geotechnical investigation and studies to 
assess the viability, sustainability, and environmental impact of proposed water 
projects.   
2. Survey and Detailed design.  
3. Environmental assessments.  
4. Detailed cost estimate.  
5. Complete full business case.  
6. Funding applications and regulatory approvals.  
7. Tender for construction.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 73  
Supporting Broader Resilience  
The water security projects will contribute to improving drought resilience of the Far 
Northwest Region through:  
• 
Modifying the existing system for the provision of water from ground water 
sources.  
• 
Transforming the existing water supply capability to Walgett.  
• 
Transforming the existing water source capability to Cobar.  
The projects support the pillars of drought resilience as follows:  
Pillar 1: 
Planning and Monitoring 
Pillar 2: 
Responding to Drought 
Events 
Pillar 3: 
Building Future 
Resilience 
• Carry out feasibility 
studies to identify the most 
effective water security 
projects, such as new 
groundwater sources or 
reservoirs.  
•Implement monitoring 
systems for existing water 
sources to proactively 
manage water levels and 
quality. 
•Designate and support 
vulnerable sectors with 
alternative water supplies 
and conservation measures 
during drought.  
•Activate contingency plans 
based on monitoring data 
to mitigate the immediate 
impact on water availability. 
• Construct resilient water 
infrastructure projects that 
ensure long-term 
availability and quality of 
water for all sectors. 
Launch initiatives that 
promote sustainable water 
use and educate the 
community on water 
conservation practices to 
protect this vital resource. 
Figure 35 - Drought Resilience, Adaption and Management Model Pillars – Water Security Projects  
Timeline 
 Figure 36 - Timeline – Water Security Projects

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 74  
Economic Analysis  
An economic analysis for the Water Security Projects follows. The analysis included 
identification of the Costs and Benefits of the projects, and the completion of a Cost 
Benefit Analysis.   
This Cost Benefit Analysis methodology employed, was consistent with the real options 
methodology of the NSW Treasury Guidelines and remained within the cash flow 
framework of Treasury’s recommended rapid cost-benefit analysis technique.  
Accordingly, the nature of the technique, is to assess benefits and costs at a high level, 
using readily available secondary data, but not undertaking primary research. Where 
primary research is lacking, the assessment proceeds by estimating through a decision 
tree the likely costs and benefits of each “known unknown” in the project logic and 
incorporating this assessment on a risk (probabilistic basis) in the analysis.  
To deliver on this methodology economic data needs included:  
• 
Available secondary data sources, including past assessments of proposals, or of 
related projects; and  
• 
Rapid assessment, using those sources, of the project logic as integrating within 
the plan logic.  
Additional specific project-related data was also utilised:  
• 
Water Security o Groundwater assessments and water reliability studies for the 
region and its member Councils. This may include aquifer assessments, bore 
monitoring programs, or water supply assessments including groundwater. Key 
data sources were the respective Councils and the NSW State planning bodies 
(Regional Water Plans).   
• 
Water Security Planning o Existing water planning for the wider region, including 
Western Regional Water Strategy, and identifying from Councils. The key sources 
were existing water plans.   
For the shortlisted water security options, five options were deduced for analysis:  
• 
Base Case – Planning without Options – It is assumed for the sake of clarity, that 
considering a program with up to six projects will incorporate a base level of 
expenditure on planning.  
• 
Option 1 – Groundwater – Investigation and development of bore fields in the 
region.  
• 
Option 2 – Off Stream Storage at Walgett – A proposed off stream storage near the 
Namoi Barwon River Junction.  
• 
Option 3 – Weir Raising – As part of the second option, a benchmarked weir 
upgrade.  
• 
Option 4 – Off Stream Storage Generic – As part of the second option, an 
alternative.  
• 
Option 5 – Cobar Water Reuse – A water recycling project in the town with the 
greatest industrial demand for water in the region.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 75  
Costs  
Groundwater  
The costing for the groundwater project has been developed using dispersed investment 
of exploratory and production bore drilling, repeated across a three-phase project at a 
total cost of $0.6 M. Test drilling and field development will contribute $120,000. 
Productions is based on three production bores, each with a drilling and lining cost of 
$15,000, and a pump and piping cost (near to treatment plant) of $35,000.  
Water Security   
The main report shortlists a number of projects on strategic water planning. To scope how these 
might be implemented, a range of storage options are evaluated in Options 2 to 5. The costs 
have been benchmarked from Queensland and NSW Studies.  
Capital Cost 
per Unit 
Capacity 
Benchmark 
Capacity 
Cost 
Notes 
$/ML 
Location 
ML 
$ 
Offstream Storage   
$37,000  Walcha (Apsley)   
300  
$11,000,000    
Offstream Storage   
$43,000 
Tuross River Study  
3,000  $130,000,000  Cost was revised 
as part of a 
variation.   
$/M of wall     
Weir 
Rehabilitation   
$400,000  
Darling weirs 
program   
30  
$12,000,000  See also Qld weir 
upgrades of $3m 
to $11M)   
Figure 37 Capital Cost Benchmarks

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 76  
Benefits  
The impact charts illustrate the likely benefits from the major options:  
• 
Groundwater  
o Avoided emergency drinking water supply costs – typically valued in the 
literature at above $7 per kL.  
o Irrigation benefits – typically valued at crop gross margins of $3 per ML.  
• 
Water Planning o Improved reliability of drinking water supply from better 
matching of storage and transmission. Values in terms of emergency supply 
costs avoided at $7 per kL.  
 Bourke   
Brewarrina   Cobar   
Walgett   
Population   
2,340   
1,356 
4,059
5,253  
Projected Population [2041]   
1,556   
931 
2,555
3732  
Drought Water Consumption (kL pa 2023)   
101,739   
40,478 
176,478
228,391  
Drought Water Consumption (kL pa 2041)   
67,652   
58,957 
111,087
162,261  
Household Water Consumption (kL per household pa)   
597   
400 
203
300  
Potable Water Consumption (kL per household pa)*   
100   
100 
100
100  
Figure 38 Population and Water Demand  
Source: NSW Department of Planning Population Projects & NSW Department of Local Government 
Water Supply Statistics  
*Estimated using urban individual use metering studies.  
Groundwater  
Groundwater is a significant variable in managing water security in the Far West Councils 
in this plan. Groundwater is used in town water supplies to ensure volume in droughts by 
providing supplementary water when for example, in drought, regulated releases cease 
from upstream storages (or in dry periods more generally, surface water quality declines 
with reduced flows).  
Borefields are described as one of the key system assets in delivering Water Security. 
Groundwater accessed through borefields supplements surface water sources, 
particularly during periods of drought. The use of borefields requires careful management 
to prevent over-extraction, which can lead to declining water levels and quality.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 77  
Cost Benefit Analysis  
The outcomes of the Cost Benefit Analysis, including a sensitivity analysis for each Water 
Security Option follows.  
Results  
The following tables show the results after costs are netted off from benefits.  
Option   
Net Present 
Value (NPV)  
Benefit Cost 
Ratio (BCR)  
NPV Rank out 
of 5   
BCR Rank out  
of 5  
Base Case: Planning without projects   
-$195,238   
-   
-   
Option 1: Water security: Groundwater   
$1,258,513   
5.131   
2   
1   
Option 2: Water security: Offstream 
storage Walgett   
$4,671,546   
1.811   
1   
3   
Option 3: Water security: Weir Raising   
-$1,367,581   
0.884   
5   
5   
Option 4: Water Security: Offstream 
storage generic   
-$470,114   
0.957   
4   
4   
Option 5: Water security: Cobar Water 
Reuse    
$793,840   
2.014   
3   
2  
Figure 39 Rapid Cost Benefit Analysis Results  
Source: Analysis using NSW Treasury Rapid BCA Model  
Options 1, 2 and 5 have benefit cost ratios greater than 1 at 5% discount rate, while 
options 3 and 4 do not.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 78  
Sensitivity and Distributional Analysis  
The results are sensitive to discount rate in that all options have positive Net Present 
Values at a lower discount rate (3%), but options 3 and 4 retain a negative Net Present 
Value at a higher discount rate (7%).  
Sensitivity  
3% Discount Rate 
7% Discount Rate 
10% Discount Rate    
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case  
-$197,087  
-$193,458  
-$190,909  
0.000  
Option 1  
$1,391,675  
5.111  
$1,142,186  
5.146  
$993,765  
5.158  
Option 2  
$7,616,135  
2.319  
$2,596,053  
1.452  
$500,297  
1.087  
Option 3  
$1,342,659  
1.114  
-$3,303,646  
0.720  
-$5,289,190  
0.552  
Option 4  
$2,494,661  
1.229  
-$2,564,603  
0.765  
-$4,687,059  
0.570  
Option 5  
$1,115,599  
2.227  
$566,258  
1.815  
$335,208  
1.554  
Figure 40 Sensitivity Testing - Discount Rate  
The results are insensitive to cost and benefits variance up to +/- 20%.  
Costs +20% 
Costs  -20%  
Benefits +20% 
Benefits  -20%  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR 
Base Case  
-$234,286  
-$156,190  
-$195,238  
-$195,238  
Option 1  
$1,197,579  
4.276  
$1,319,447  6.413  $1,571,150  6.157  
$945,877  
4.105 
Option 2  
$3,520,118  
1.510  
$5,822,975  2.264  $6,757,284  2.174  
$2,585,808  1.449 
Option 3  
-$3,728,533  
0.737  
$993,371  
1.105  
$719,855  
1.061  
-$3,455,017  0.707 
Option 4  
-$2,651,066  
0.797  
$1,710,839  1.196  $1,616,816  1.148  
-$2,557,043  0.766 
Option 5  
$637,196  
1.678  
$950,484  
2.517  $1,109,252  2.416  
$478,428  
1.611  
Figure 41 Sensitivity to Cost and Benefit Variance

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 79  
If costs fall and benefits rise by 20%, all projects become Net Present Value positive (BCR 
> 1).  
Scenario  
Low Case Scenario  
High Case Scenario  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case  
-$234,286  
-$156,190  
Option 1  
$884,943  
3.420  
$1,632,084  
7.696  
Scenario  
Low Case Scenario  
High Case Scenario  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Option 2  
$1,434,380  
1.208  
$7,908,713  
2.717  
Option 3  
-$5,815,969  
0.589  
$3,080,808  
1.326  
Option 4  
-$4,737,996  
0.638  
$3,797,768  
1.435  
Option 5  
$321,784  
1.342  
$1,265,896  
3.020  
Figure 42 Sensitivity to Negatively Correlated Benefit/Cost Variance  
The Low Case Scenario assumes a cost increase of 20% and a benefit decrease of 20% 
with a social discount rate of 5%.  
The High Case Scenario assumes a cost decrease of 20% and a benefit increase of 20% 
with a social discount rate of 5%.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 80  
Distributional Results  
The proposed project principally impacts the following groups:  
• 
Ratepayers through costs and avoided costs, and reliability benefits of urban water 
supply;  
• 
Farmers and graziers through the costs and benefits of irrigation and stock and 
domestic water supply; and  
• 
Aboriginal Communities through the potential for improved water supply.  
There will also be impacts on commercial and industrial businesses from such things as 
water recycling, but the numbers of these will be small.  
Estimates of impact, separately for benefit and cost, for these groups were made as 
follows:  
Stakeholder  
Ratepayers  
Farmers and graziers  
Aboriginal communities  
Option  
Costs  
Benefits  
NPV  
Costs  
Benefits  
NPV  
Costs  
Benefits  
NPV  
Base Case  $195,238  
$0  
-$195,238  
$0  
$0  
$0  
$0  
$0  
$0  
Option 1  
$149,973  $485,982  $531,247  $299,945  $923,316  $623,371  
$49,991  $153,886  $103,895  
Option 2  $4,761,905  $7,300,082 $2,733,416 $595,238  $2,085,738 $1,490,500 $595,238  $1,042,869 $447,631  
Option 3  $4,800,000  $6,262,309 $1,657,547 $6,000,000 $3,131,154 -
$2,868,846 $1,200,000 $1,043,718 -$156,282  
Option 4  $4,440,000  $6,260,789 $2,016,027 $5,550,000 $3,130,394 -
$2,419,606 $1,110,000 $1,043,465 -$66,535  
Option 5  
$782,766  $1,419,354 $831,825  $147,846  $78,853  
-$68,993  
$78,853  
$31,007  
Figure 43 Estimates of impact, separately for benefit and cost

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 81  
Governance Structure  
The ‘owner’ of the initiative, and therefore the Chair of the Steering Committee for each 
project within the initiative will be at the discretion of the Far Northwest Joint Organisation 
and the respective Councils within the region.  
Governance Structure for the project would comprise the following:  
Figure 44 – Governance Structure – Water Security Projects  
• 
Steering Committee: responsible for strategic direction, oversight, decision-
making, and ensuring that the project aligns with the Regional Water Strategies. It 
could include representatives from the key stakeholders such as:  
o Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment, and Water 
(DCCEEW) – Water.  
o Water NSW. o Agriculture NSW. o NSW Farmers Association.  
o Representatives of identified agriculture industries.  
• 
Funding Body: Representatives from the funding body such as o Future Drought 
o NSW Government Representatives from DCCEEW – Water.  
• 
Project Control Group (PCG): Responsible for monitoring progress, managing 
project risks, making decisions about day-to-day operational issues, and ensuring 
the project stays on schedule and within budget.  
• 
Project Team: Comprising of Project Manager, Technical Team Members and 
Administrative Support.  
• 
Technical Advisors: Experts in water management, agriculture, environmental 
science, and community engagement, would provide technical advice to feasibility 
studies  
• 
Community Engagement Team: Manage stakeholder communications and 
engagement activities  
• 
Environmental Approval Advisors: Oversee all environmental assessments, ensure 
compliance with regulations, and manage the environmental impact studies and 
development approvals process.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 82  
A proposed adaptive framework for monitoring and updating the project / initiative follows.  
Figure 45: Framework for monitoring and updating the Long Term Water Security Project delivery (TSG 2024).

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 83  
Responsiveness to Future Scenarios and 
Uncertainties  
An analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties on the 
implementation and delivery of each project follows.  
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Aging Population  
Higher dependency ratio may limit the 
availability of active participants in 
project activities.  
Increased demand for healthcare 
services may divert resources from 
project needs.  
Incorporate automation and advanced  
technologies to reduce labour 
dependency.  
Secure dedicated funding for 
healthcare to ensure it does not affect 
project resources.  
Climate Change  
Increased severity of droughts may 
strain project’s water supply solutions.  
Greater demand for water 
management may require additional 
investment.  
Enhance water-saving technologies 
and infrastructure to withstand extreme 
weather conditions.   
Plan for scalable infrastructure that can 
be expanded as demand increases.  
Digital Divide  
Limited access to technology could 
hinder project management and 
communication.  
Variation in technology and network 
coverage types could affect the 
implementation and compatibility of 
water security solutions on-farm. 
Invest in improving digital infrastructure 
and training for local population.  
Ensure that water security solutions 
are compatible with all network types 
or software is available that can be 
upgraded to suit.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 84  
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Economic Decline  
Loss of income for local businesses 
and reduced investment may lower 
project funding and support.  
Higher unemployment rates could 
reduce community resilience and 
cooperation.  
Loss of agricultural income could 
lower the economic benefits projected.  
Diversify funding sources and create 
economic incentives for local 
businesses to engage with the project.  
Create job opportunities through the 
project e.g. for installation of bores, etc, 
to boost local employment and 
economic stability,  
Promote diversified and sustainable 
agricultural practices to enhance 
resilience.  
Health Crises  
Increased health issues may divert 
attention and resources away from the 
project.  
Strain on healthcare services could 
reduce overall community resilience.  
Implement health and safety protocols 
to protect project participants and the 
community.  
Housing Shortages  
Increased homelessness or poor 
housing conditions could affect 
community stability and project 
participation.  
Higher rental and property prices may 
reduce disposable income for other 
essential needs.  
Develop affordable housing solutions in 
conjunction with the project to support 
community stability.  
Secure funding for affordable housing 
and provide support for low-income 
families.  
Increased Frequency of 
Floods  
Flood damage could disrupt project 
timelines and increase costs.  
Displacement of communities may 
reduce the project’s reach and 
effectiveness.  
Design flood-resistant infrastructure 
and create comprehensive flood 
response plans.  
Include flood mitigation measures and 
relocation plans in project design.  
Infrastructure Damage  
High repair costs and maintenance 
may divert funds from other project 
activities.  
Disruption of economic activities could 
reduce project effectiveness.  
Invest in resilient infrastructure and 
regular maintenance to mitigate 
damage risks.  
Establish emergency response plans 
and contingency funding for 
infrastructure repair.  
Outmigration  
Reduced workforce may hinder project 
execution and maintenance.  
The number of people benefited from 
each bore, and the prioritisation of 
bore projects may be affected.  
Develop training programs for local 
workforce to ensure skills availability.  
Frequently assess and adjust the 
prioritisation order of bore  
implementation before installation to 
ensure that the bores are installed in 
order of greatest demands and service.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 85  
Future Scenario 
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes 
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention 
Policy Shift  
Changes in policy could affect funding 
and regulatory support for the project.  
New environmental regulations may  
increase project costs and 
complexities.  
Altered economic policies could 
create uncertainty for project planning 
and implementation.  
Shifts in social policies may impact 
community support and participation.  
Engage with policymakers to ensure 
continued support and adapt project 
plans to align with new policies.  
Plan for regulatory compliance and 
budget for potential cost increases due 
to policy changes.  
Develop flexible project plans that can 
adapt to policy changes and maintain 
stakeholder engagement.  
Increase community outreach and 
education to align project goals with 
social policy changes.  
Water Quality Degradation  
Reduced agricultural output may 
impact economic benefits expected 
from the project.  
Higher water prices could affect 
community affordability and support.  
Poor water quality could undermine 
the benefits of improved water supply.  
Health risks may lower community 
support and participation.   
Implement robust water management 
practices and promote efficient water 
use in agriculture.  
Subsidise water costs for vulnerable 
populations and ensure fair water 
pricing mechanisms.  
Enhance water treatment facilities and 
monitoring systems to ensure high 
water quality.  
Conduct regular water quality 
assessments and maintain transparent 
communication with the community.  
Figure 46: - Analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 86  
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning – Pillar 
Implementation  
Success measures and indicators that might be used by the Project Steering / Control 
Group for the project to measure the extent of progress towards the outcomes expressed 
in the program logic and delivery of the project follow.  
Pillar 1: Planning and Monitoring  
• 
Groundwater Quality and Flow Auditing: Implement a comprehensive auditing 
system for the existing bore network, focusing on both groundwater quality and 
flow rates.  
• 
Centralised Database Development: Create a centralised database to collate 
groundwater quality data from various sources, including industry and government, 
for unified monitoring and analysis.  
• 
Regular Sampling Programs: Establish regular groundwater sampling programs to 
continuously monitor and update water quality and flow data.  
• 
Technology Investment: Invest in advanced technologies and research to enhance 
understanding of treated groundwater’s potential for supporting towns, 
landholders, and industries.  
• 
Feasibility Studies and Environmental Impact Assessments: Conduct thorough 
feasibility studies and environmental impact assessments for each proposed water 
security project, ensuring sustainability and viability.  
• 
Community and Stakeholder Engagement: Engage with local communities and 
stakeholders to gather input and ensure the projects meet local needs and gain 
necessary support and approvals.  
Pillar 2: Responding to Drought Events  
• 
Emergency Groundwater Supply Systems: Develop and maintain emergency 
groundwater supply systems, including the installation of standpipes for immediate 
water access during drought periods.  
• 
Off-Stream Storage Solutions: Implement off-stream storage solutions in critical 
areas like Walgett to provide reliable water supply during droughts, reducing 
dependence on emergency measures.  
• 
Water Reuse Initiatives: Promote and implement water reuse projects, to maximise 
available water resources, especially in high-demand areas like Cobar.  
• 
Drought Resilient Infrastructure: Upgrade existing water infrastructure to ensure it 
is resilient to drought conditions, including raising weirs and improving leakage 
reduction programs.  
• 
Rapid Response Teams: Establish rapid response teams equipped with the 
necessary tools and resources to address water supply disruptions promptly 
during droughts.  
• 
Public Awareness Campaigns: Conduct public awareness campaigns to educate 
the community about water conservation practices and the importance of efficient 
water use during drought periods.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 87  
Pillar 3: Building Future Resilience  
• 
Sustainable Water Management Practices: Promote sustainable water 
management practices among local farmers, industries, and communities to 
ensure long-term water security.  
• 
Innovative Water Storage Solutions: Develop innovative water storage solutions, 
such as off-stream storage and advanced borefields, to enhance the region’s 
capacity to store and manage water.  
• 
Groundwater Research and Development: Support ongoing research and 
development efforts to explore new methods for utilising groundwater resources 
effectively and sustainably.  
• 
Infrastructure Investment: Invest in durable and adaptable infrastructure that can 
withstand variable climate conditions and ensure a reliable water supply.  
• 
Economic Diversification Initiatives: Encourage economic diversification through 
support for local entrepreneurship in tourism and other industries less dependent 
on water.  
• 
Community Education and Training: Implement educational programs and training 
sessions to build community knowledge and skills in water management, 
conservation, and drought resilience.  
• 
Policy Development and Advocacy: Advocate for policies that support sustainable 
water management and provide funding for resilience-building projects, ensuring 
long-term water security for the region.  
Monitoring Against Objectives  
The applicable objectives of the Future Drought Fund Agreement, and relevant project 
level indicators to track outcomes and how the project is contributing to drought resilience 
outcomes follow.  
Objective 1: Develop the environmental resilience and natural capital of agricultural 
landscapes.  
1. Reduction in Water Extraction Rates – 20% reduction in water extraction from 
aquifers within 5 years of the completion of the bore installation.  
2. Increase in Groundwater Quality – 15% improvement in groundwater quality 
parameters e.g. reduction in contaminants, within three years of project 
completion.  
3. Expansion of Off-Stream Storage Capacity – Additional off-stream storage capacity 
installed and operational within two years of project initiation.  
4. Implementation of Water Reuse Systems – 75% of Cobar Shire’s industrial water 
use to be supplied by water reuse systems within 10 years of project delivery.  
5. Positive feedback from community stakeholders on the effectiveness and 
environmental benefits of the new water infrastructure.  
6. Adoption of best practices in sustainable water management by 50% of local 
farmers within three years of project initiation, evidenced by participation in training 
programs and implementation of recommended techniques.  
7. High level engagement and satisfaction from environmental groups and local 
communities regarding project activities and outcomes.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 88  
Objective 2: Understand and plan for the region’s current and future drought resilience by 
identifying actions, pathways, and opportunities for mitigation, adaptation and improvement.  
1. Implementation of Drought-Resilient Infrastructure – 60% of planned drought-
resilient infrastructure projects completed within five years of project 
commencement.  
2. Reduction in Emergency Water Supply Costs – 25% reduction in costs associated 
with emergency water supply measures within five years of project completion.  
3. Increase in Water Supply Reliability – 30% drought-on-drought improvement in the 
reliability of water supply to towns e.g. Walgett, during drought periods.  
4. Stakeholder Awareness and Preparedness – Increased awareness and 
preparedness among stakeholders and community members, assessed through 
surveys and participation rates in educational workshops.  
5. Effectiveness of Drought Mitigation Strategies – Positive feedback from local 
farmers and industries on the effectiveness of implemented drought mitigation 
strategies.  
6. Integration of Community Input in Planning – Successful incorporation of 
community feedback and local knowledge into the planning and execution of water 
security projects.  
7. Resilience of Local Economies – Perceived resilience and adaptability of local 
economies to drought conditions, based on interviews and focus groups with local 
businesses and residents.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 89 
Telecommunications 
Security

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 90 
Project Description  
Improve the 4G and 5G telecommunications infrastructure in the rural region to support 
the operational continuity of local businesses, community and agricultural activities and 
improve the community's confidence in their economic stability.   
The initiative arises from significant challenges currently faced by the region, where 
existing telecommunications infrastructure fails to meet the growing demands for digital 
connectivity and is vulnerable to disruptions caused by natural disasters.   
In late 2023, telecommunication service providers announced the departure of 3G 
networks across Australia. The current 3G network coverage experienced by the region is:   
Figure 47: Telstra 3G Network Coverage Cobar Region  
Figure 48: Telstra 3G Network Coverage Bourke  
(prior to termination).  
Region (prior to termination).  
Figure 49: Telstra 3G Network Coverage Walgett 
Region (prior to termination).  
The effect to be achieved and outcome from the project, arising from the shutdown of the 
3G network is to:   
• 
Reduce the network disruption experienced by emergency services, decreasing 
healthcare access and increase emergency response times.  
• 
Address the impact of the Agtech devices, applications and software within the 
agricultural sector that will no longer be operational.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 91 
Scope  
The scope of the telecommunications security projects includes:  
• 
Assessment of the viability, sustainability, and environmental impact of the 
proposed telecommunications strategy.  
• 
Identification of partner telecommunications providers.  
• 
Development of a telecommunications plan to address gaps within the 
telecommunications strategy.  
• 
Upgrade of existing and installation of new telecommunications infrastructure to 
extend and enhance 4G and 5G coverage throughout the region.   
• 
Conduct of technical / feasibility study to identify the measurement of water 
productivity and water sustainability indices for cotton production systems, to 
identify potential changes to water use, productivity and sustainability, particularly 
through use of Agtech technologies.  
• 
Establishment of a grant program to assist agricultural producers to purchase 
functioning Agtech devices and applications.  
Pathway to implementation  
The pathway to the delivery of the initiative includes:  
1. Conduct of the assessment related to the proposed telecommunications strategy, 
and the associated feasibility and technical studies.  
2. Identification of partner telecommunications providers.  
3. Development of a telecommunications plan to address identified shortfalls in the 
telecommunications strategy 4. Environmental assessments.  
5. Detailed cost estimate.  
6. Complete full business case.  
7. Funding applications / arrangements and regulatory approvals.  
8. Tender (as requried) for construction of new and upgrade of existing infrastructure.  
9. Establishment of the ‘agtech’ grant program (including associated education and 
training programs).  
Supporting Broader Resilience   
The telecommunications projects will contribute to improving drought resilience of the Far 
Northwest Region through:  
• 
Transforming the emergency services and ‘agtech’ communications infrastructure 
and capability.  
• 
Modifying the existing water monitoring capability of the agricultural sector.  
• 
Maintaining sustainability of local businesses, tourism and agricultural operations, 
through the provision of a resilient telecommunications system.   
Additionally, the relevance of the project to improving the resilience of the region to 
identified challenges follows.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 92 
Challenge  
Telecommunications Security Relevance  
Economic Hardship  
Secure telecommunications allow families facing economic hardship to access  
financial services remotely, such as online banking, applying for aid, or 
seeking employment opportunities. It also enables e-commerce for 
businesses trying to reach wider markets outside drought-impacted areas, 
helping sustain local economies.  
School Closures or Reduced 
Services  
With schools and health facilities potentially closing (decreased demand, 
operational challenges or funding) or reducing services (due to downsize from 
families moving away), reliable telecommunications is required for continuing 
education through online platforms and accessing telehealth services. This 
ensures that education and healthcare services are uninterrupted, bridging the 
gap caused by physical service disruptions.   
Labour Needs on Farms  
As labour demands increase on farms, telecommunications can facilitate the 
use of smart farming techniques, which can be monitored remotely, reducing 
the need for constant physical presence. This allows families to balance 
educational and health priorities alongside agricultural responsibilities.  
Health Issues  
Secure telecommunications networks ensure that individuals facing health 
issues can continue to access health information and Telehealth services 
without needing to travel. This is important in managing both emergency and 
health conditions when local health resources are strained or inaccessible.  
Transportation  
When transportation is unreliable or inaccessible, telecommunications provide 
a link to the outside world. Secure networks ensure that virtual meetings, 
remote schooling, and digital healthcare consultations are possible, mitigating 
the impact of disrupted physical mobility.  
Psychological Stress  
Reliable telecommunications support mental health by enabling access to 
online counselling and support groups, which are more common during times 
of increased stress and isolation caused by drought. These services help 
maintain mental well-being and provide coping mechanisms for individuals 
and communities facing prolonged drought conditions.  
Figure 50: Analysis of Resilience Challenges as associated with the project

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 93 
The projects support the pillars of drought resilience as follows:  
Pillar 1: 
Planning and Monitoring 
Pillar 2:  
Responding to Drought Events 
Pillar 3:  
Building Future Resilience 
•Identify 
telecommunications 
blackspots of 4G and 5G 
networks. 
•Plan for the upgrade and 
expansion of 4G and 5G 
networks. 
•Monitor current network 
usage and predict future 
demands to inform 
infrastructure 
improvements.  
•Identify and prioritise network 
support for critical agricultural 
operations and essential 
businesses during drought 
conditions. Timely data about 
weather changes, soil moisture, 
and crop conditions can 
significantly mitigate the impact 
of drought on agricultural 
productivity. 
•Implement emergency 
communication protocols to 
maintain connectivity for critical 
services when standard 
infrastructure fails. For 
droughtstricken areas, this means 
ensuring that critical updates 
regarding water availability, relief 
programs, and health advisories 
reach all community members 
reliably and quickly. 
•Invest in resilient 
telecommunications 
infrastructure capable of 
withstanding extreme 
weather events. 
•Foster innovative tech 
solutions to ensure 
uninterrupted connectivity 
and support the digital 
needs of businesses and 
agriculture. 
Figure 51 - Drought Resilience, Adaption and Management Model Pillars – Telecommunications Projects  
Timeline  
Figure 52 - Timeline – Telecommunications Security Projects  
Economic Analysis  
An economic analysis for the Telecommunications Project follows. The analysis included 
identification of the Costs and Benefits of the projects, and the completion of a Cost 
Benefit Analysis.   
This Cost Benefit Analysis methodology employed, was consistent with the real options 
methodology of the NSW Treasury Guidelines and remained within the cash flow 
framework of Treasury’s recommended rapid cost-benefit analysis technique.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 94 
Accordingly, the nature of the technique, is to assess benefits and costs at a high level, 
using readily available secondary data, but not undertaking primary research. Where 
primary research is lacking, the assessment proceeds by estimating through a decision 
tree the likely costs and benefits of each “known unknown” in the project logic and 
incorporating this assessment on a risk (probabilistic basis) in the analysis.  
For the cost-benefit analysis, the telecommunications strategy was assessed against a 
base case.  
• 
Base Case – Planning without Projects – A base level of expenditure based on 
current planning for water security and telecommunications within the regions is 
assumed.  
• 
Telecommunications Upgrade – Improve telecommunications connectivity (4G and 
5G) in the region to support business and agricultural productivity.   
Costs  
The costs have been calculated on benchmark estimates by area and scope.  
The principal tasks of the Telecommunications Security project was to investigate 
significant areas of non-connection to the mobile broadband network and to implement 
“black spot” investments to locate new towers so that there is a continuity of coverage. 
There have been a number of similar programs that can be used to benchmark costs.  
Telecommunications    
Cost per town/ 
community   
Location   
Number  of 
communities   
Total cost   
Black spot review   
$684,000  Remote Aboriginal 
communities   
19  
$13,000,000  
Black spot review   
$960,000  Outback Australia    
43  
$41,300,000  
Figure 53 - Mobile Phone Coverage Investment  
In addition, the project would have an optional extension to provide Agtech devices and 
appropriate support and training.  
Item   
Unit cost  
Source  
Water quality and agtech probes   
$2,000  
Market Price  
Figure 54 – Agtech Cost

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 95 
Benefits  
The impact charges illustrate the likely benefits of the major options:  
• 
Improved telecommunications offer safety and health benefits to the region. As 
permanent infrastructure, these benefits accrue both in and outside emergency 
situations like drought or flood.  
• 
Safety: Emergency response time savings valued using risk and value of life.  
• 
Health: Reduced transport cost to nearest health centre. Improved pre-care for 
emergency patients.  
• 
Supporting the operational continuity of local businesses, community and 
agricultural activities.  
• 
Improving the community’s confidence in their economic stability.  
These benefits can be further broken down into:  
• 
Local business and community operational continuity benefits;  
• 
Benefits for non-local users, either as receivers of telecommunications in other 
regions, or as visitors to the far-west region;  
• 
Health related benefits for the local community;  
• 
Technological benefits fo the proposed device program being used by farmers to 
give a more efficient water use.  
Many of the benefits are driven by the town, regional or state population.   
Bourke  
Brewarrina  
Cobar  
Walgett  
Population  
2,340  
1,356  
4,059  
5,253  
Projected Population [2041]  
1,556  
931  
2,555  
3732  
Figure 55: Population  
Source: NSW Department of Planning Population Projections and NSW Department of Local 
Government Water Supply Statistics

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 96 
Measuring these benefits includes calculating the time savings from better 
telecommunications and valuing them using average earnings. The following Table shows 
the calculation of business and community continuity benefits:  
General Telecommunications benefits   
Notes   
Black spots addressed   
5   
Population Impacted   
100%   
Time saving (hours per annum per person)   
0.1   
Estimate.   
Value    
$1,958   
Average Weekly Earnings   
Value per hour   
$56   
35-hour week   
Value of time saving per annum   
$5.59   
Total population Impacted   
21,757    
Population of the region   
Impact on state population (hours per person)   
  0.001    
Value of times savings per annum per person   
$0.06   
Total population Impacted   
8,144,000    
State Population   
Figure 56 General Telecommunications Benefits  
The total value in the Rapid Cost Benefit Analysis Model is calculated as the value of local 
time saving ($5.59 per person) times the local population, plus the value to the population 
as a whole per person, $0.06 times the state population.  
Cost Benefit Analysis  
The outcomes of the Cost Benefit Analysis, including a sensitivity analysis for the 
telecommunications security project follows.  
Results  
The following tables show the results after costs are netted off from benefits.  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case: Planning without projects  
-$195,238  
Telecommunications Upgrade  
$9,424,809  
4.709  
Figure 57 Rapid Cost Benefit Analysis Results  
Source: Analysis using NSW Treasury Rapid BCA Model  
The telecommunications upgrade has a benefit cost ratio greater than 1 at 5% discount 
rate.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 97 
Sensitivity and Distributional Analysis  
The telecommunications upgrade is sensitive to discount rate; however, remains positive 
at both the lower (3%) and higher (7%) discount rates assessed.  
Sensitivity  
3% Discount Rate  
7% Discount Rate  
10% Discount Rate  
Option  
NPV  
BCR   
NPV  
BCR 
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case  
-$197,087  
-$193,458  
-$190,909  
0.000  
Telecommunications Upgrade  
$12,715,485  
6.008  
$7,089,257  
3.788  
$4,707,761  
2.850  
Figure 58 Sensitivity Testing - Discount Rate  
The results are insensitive to cost and benefit variance up to +/- 20%.  
Costs +20%  
Costs -20%  
Benefits +20%  
Benefits -20%  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR
Base Case  
-$234,286  
-$156,190  
-$195,238  
-$195,238  
Telecommunications Upgrade  $8,916,656  3.925  $9,932,961  5.887 $11,817,923  5.651  $7,031,695 3.768  
Figure 59 Sensitivity to Cost and Benefit Variance  
If costs fall and benefits rise by 20%, the telecommunications strategy remains with a 
positive Net Present Value (BCR > 1).  
Scenario  
Low Case Scenario  
High Case Scenario  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case  
-$234,286  
-$156,190  
Telecommunications Upgrade  
$6,523,542  
3.140  
$12,326,075  
7.064  
Figure 60 Sensitivity to Negatively Correlated Benefit / Cost Variance  
The Low Case Scenario assumes a cost increase of 20% and a benefit decrease of 20% 
with a social discount rate of 5%.  
The High Case Scenario assumes a cost decrease of 20% and a benefit increase of 20% 
with a social discount rate of 5%.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 98 
Distributional Results  
The proposed project principally impact the following groups:  
• 
Ratepayers through costs and avoided costs, and reliability benefits of urban water 
supply;  
• 
Farmers and graziers through the costs and benefits of irrigation and stock and 
domestic water supply; and  
• 
Aboriginal Communities through the potential for improved water supply.  
There will also be impacts on commercial and industrial businesses from such things as 
water recycling, but the numbers of these will be small.  
Estimates of impact, separately for benefit and cost, for these groups were made as 
follows:  
Stakeholder   
Ratepayers   
Farmers and graziers   
Aboriginal communities   
Option   
Costs    
Benefits    
NPV   
Costs    Benefits    
NPV   
Costs    Benefits   
NPV   
Base Case   
$195,238   
$0   
-$195,238   
$0   
$0   
$0   
$0   
$0   
$0  
Telecommunications 
Upgrade  
$1,641,600  $3,475,538  $2,029,176  $547,200  $1,223,353  $676,153  $547,200  $802,331  $255,131  
Figure 61 Estimates of impact, separately for benefit and cost  
Governance Structure  
The ‘owner’ of the initiative, and therefore the Chair of the Steering Committee for each 
project within the initiative will be at the discretion of the Far Northwest Joint Organisation 
and the respective Councils within the region.  
Governance Structure for the project would comprise the following:  
Figure 62 – Governance Structure – Telecommunications Security Projects  
• 
Steering Committee: responsible for strategic direction, oversight, decision-
making, and ensuring that the project aligns with funding program. It could include 
representatives from the key stakeholders such as:  
o Federal/State Governments o Telecommunications 
Regulators o Mobile Network Operators  
o Mobile Network Infrastructure Providers

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 99 
• 
Project Control Group (PCG): Responsible for monitoring progress, managing 
project risks, making decisions about day-to-day operational issues, and ensuring 
the project stays on schedule and within budget.  
• 
Project Team: Comprising of Project Manager, Technical Team Members and 
Administrative Support.  
• 
Technical Advisors: Experts in telecommunications, environmental science, and 
community engagement, would provide technical advice to feasibility studies  
• 
Community Engagement Team: Manage stakeholder communications and 
engagement activities  
• 
Environmental Approval Advisors: Oversee all environmental assessments, ensure 
compliance with regulations, and manage the environmental impact studies and 
development approvals process.  
A proposed adaptive framework for monitoring and updating the project / initiative follows.  
Figure 63: Framework for monitoring and updating Telecommunications Strategy delivery (TSG 2024).

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 100 
Responsiveness to Future Scenarios and 
Uncertainties  
An analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties on the 
implementation and delivery of each project follows.  
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Aging Population  
Higher dependency ratio may limit the 
availability of active participants in project 
activities.  
Reduced human – technology 
compatibility.  
Incorporate automation and advanced  
technologies to reduce labour 
dependency.   
Ensure that technology interfaces are 
simple and accessible for all.  
Provide additional on-farm and off-farm 
training for residents in how to utilise 
software.  
Climate Change  
Increased severity of natural disasters 
(e.g. floods, bushfires) may damage 
telecommunications infrastructure.  
Greater demand for reliable 
communication during emergencies.  
Enhance infrastructure to withstand 
extreme weather conditions.  
Implement disaster-resistant designs and 
materials for new installations.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 101 
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Digital Divide  
Limited access to technology could hinder 
project benefits for remote areas.  
Changing network coverage types e.g. 3G 
to 4G to 5G, may affect the compatibility of 
on-farm and off-farm devices.  
Focus on expanding coverage to remote 
and underserved areas.  
Ensure 
that 
devices 
available 
are 
compatible with all network types.  
Implement digital literacy programs to 
ensure effective use of new 
telecommunications technology.  
Economic Decline  
Decreased local investment and spending 
could impact the funding and expansion of 
telecommunications infrastructure.   
Higher unemployment may reduce 
demand for high-speed internet and 
related services.  
Reduced income from agriculture could 
lower the investment capacity of farmers 
for Agtech solutions dependent on 
telecommunications  
Secure diversified funding sources 
including government grants and private 
investments.   
Offer flexible pricing plans and financial 
assistance programs to maintain service 
uptake.  
Provide financial incentives and subsidies 
for farmers to adopt Agtech.  
Health Crises  
Increased demand for remote healthcare 
services could strain network capacity and 
impact service quality.  
Heightened need for reliable 
communications during health 
emergencies.  
Prioritise network enhancements in 
healthcare connectivity and bandwidth 
allocation.  
Develop specialised telehealth platforms 
with optimised performance during peak 
usage.  
Housing Shortages and 
Conditions  
Displacement of people due to housing 
shortages could disrupt project 
implementation and community support.  
Increased pressure on 
telecommunications infrastructure due to 
higher density living.  
Integrate telecommunications 
infrastructure planning with housing 
development projects.  
Ensure scalable network solutions to 
accommodate fluctuating population 
densities.  
Increased Frequency of 
Floods  
Flooding could disrupt telecommunications 
services, particularly in low-lying areas, 
impacting emergency communications 
and daily activities.  
Potential loss of critical equipment and 
infrastructure.  
Elevate critical infrastructure above flood 
levels and use waterproof housing for 
equipment.  
Implement flood sensors and automated 
alerts within the telecommunications 
network.  
Infrastructure Damage  
Damage to telecommunications 
infrastructure could lead to prolonged 
service outages, affecting businesses and 
emergency services.  
Increased repair and maintenance costs.  
Develop a proactive maintenance 
schedule and rapid response teams for 
infrastructure repairs.  
Invest in advanced diagnostic and repair 
technologies to minimise downtime.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 102 
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Outmigration  
Reduced local population could lower the 
demand for telecommunications services, 
affecting revenue and sustainability.  
Limited workforce for ongoing 
maintenance and upgrades.  
Implement a remote monitoring and 
maintenance system to reduce 
dependency on local workforce.  
Develop incentives and partnerships with 
local businesses to boost economic activity 
and retain population.  
Policy Shift  
Regulatory changes could alter funding 
availability and project priorities.   
New policies might impose additional 
compliance costs and operational 
adjustments.   
Shifts in economic policies could create 
uncertainty for long-term project planning.  
Changes in social policies may influence 
community engagement and support for 
the project.  
Engage with policymakers regularly to stay 
informed and influence supportive policies.   
Develop adaptable project plans that can 
quickly respond to regulatory changes.   
Allocate a contingency budget to address 
potential compliance costs.   
Enhance community outreach to ensure 
continued support despite policy shifts.  
Water Quality Degradation 
and Shortages  
Limited water availability could hinder the 
cooling systems for telecommunications 
equipment.  
Reduced agricultural productivity could 
affect the economic benefits of enhanced 
telecommunications for Agtech.  
Implement water-efficient cooling 
technologies and systems.  
Develop integrated water management 
solutions with telecommunications 
infrastructure to support agriculture.  
Figure 64: - Analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties  
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning – Pillar 
Implementation  
Success measures and indicators that might be used by the Project Steering / Control 
Group for the project to measure the extent of progress towards the outcomes expressed 
in the program logic and delivery of the project follow.  
Pillar 1: Planning and Monitoring  
• 
Comprehensive Connectivity Audit: Conduct thorough audits of current 4G and 
5G coverage and identify areas with connectivity gaps, particularly focusing on 
‘black spots’ and underserved communities.  
• 
Centralised Data Management: Develop a centralised database to monitor the 
progress of infrastructure upgrades and track connectivity improvements across 
the region.  
• 
Feasibility Studies and Environmental Impact Assessments: Perform detailed 
feasibility studies and environmental impact assessments for proposed 
telecommunications projects to ensure sustainability and minimal ecological 
disruption.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 103 
• 
Stakeholder Collaboration: Engage with telecommunications providers, local 
businesses, and community groups to gather input and ensure the projects meet 
the specific needs of the region.  
• 
Scenario Analysis and Forecasting: Use predictive models to assess the impact of 
various scenarios, such as natural disasters or economic shifts, on 
telecommunications infrastructure and plan accordingly.  
• 
Transport Reporting: Maintain transparency by regularly publishing progress 
reports and updates for any stakeholders, highlighting improvements and 
addressing any issues encountered.  
Pillar 2: Responding to Drought Events  
• 
Emergency Communication Systems: Establish robust emergency communication 
systems  to ensure reliable connectivity during droughts and other natural 
disasters.  
• 
Agtech Support Programs: Implement grant programs to help farmers transition 
from 3G to more advanced Agtech devices and applications compatible with 4G 
and 5G networks.  
• 
Mobile Connectivity Solutions: Deploy mobile cell towers and temporary 
infrastructure to maintain connectivity in affected areas during drought 
emergencies.  
• 
Community Support Initiatives: Develop support initiatives to provide immediate 
assistance to communities during droughts, ensuring they have access to critical 
information and resources through reliable telecommunications.  
• 
Partnerships with Emergency Services: Collaborate with emergency services to 
ensure they have the necessary telecommunications support for efficient 
operations during drought events.  
• 
Public Awareness Campaigns: Conduct campaigns to educate the community on 
how to utilise the upgraded telecommunications infrastructure during emergencies 
for accessing essential services and information.  
Pillar 3: Building Future Resilience  
• 
Sustainable Infrastructure Development: Invest in telecommunications 
infrastructure designed to withstand extreme weather conditions and ensure long-
term reliability.  
• 
Technological Innovation: Promote the adoption of cutting-edge technologies and 
smart farming solutions that enhance water productivity and sustainability in 
agricultural practices.  
• 
Economic Diversification Programs: Encourage economic diversification by 
supporting local entrepreneurship in digital services and remote work 
opportunities facilitated by improved connectivity.  
• 
Community Training and Education: Implement training programs to educate the 
community and local businesses on the benefits and uses of advanced 
telecommunications technologies.  
• 
Research and Development: Support R&D initiatives to explore new 
telecommunications solutions and innovations that can further enhance the 
region’s resilience to drought and other environmental challenges.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 104 
• 
Policy Advocacy and Development: Advocate for policies that support the 
expansion and maintenance of telecommunications infrastructure, ensuring 
continuous funding and regulatory support.  
• 
Long-term Funding Strategies: Develop long-term funding strategies, including 
public/private partnerships and government grants, to ensure sustained 
investment in telecommunications infrastructure and services.  
Monitoring Against Objectives  
The applicable objectives of the Future Drought Fund Agreement, and relevant project 
level indicators to track outcomes and how the project is contributing to drought resilience 
outcomes follow.  
Objective 1: Develop the agricultural sector’s self-reliance and economic 
performance.  
1. Increase in Agricultural Productivity – 25% increase in crop yield per hectare within 
five years of telecommunication upgrade roll-out due to improved water 
management and Agtech adoption.  
2. Adoption of Agtech Devices – 80% of local farmers using advanced Agtech 
devices and applications with three years of project delivery.  
3. Reduction in Water Use per Unit of Output – 30% reduction in water use per unit of 
agricultural output within five years of project delivery.  
4. Increase in Market Access – 20% increase in the number of local agricultural 
products reaching national and international markets within three years of project 
delivery.  
5. Farmer Satisfaction – Positive feedback from farmers on the effectiveness and 
usability of Agtech devices and applications, collected through biannual survey.  
6. Innovation in Farming Practices – Increase in innovative farming practices and 
techniques adopted, based on annual reports from agricultural advisors.  
7. Community Engagement – High levels of engagement and participation in training 
sessions and workshops related to Agtech and water management.  
Objective 2: Strengthen the social capital and wellbeing of the communities.  
1. Community Event Participation – 50% increase in participation rates at community 
events and social gatherings within three years of project completion (result of 
greater awareness from digital communication around events).  
2. Access to Telehealth Services – 90% of residents having reliable access to 
telehealth services within two years of project initiation.  
3. Reduction in Social Isolation – 25% decrease in reported cases of social isolation 
and loneliness within the community within five years of project initiation.  
4. Community Wellbeing – Improved community wellbeing and cohesion, assessed 
through regular surveys and focus groups.  
5. Resident Satisfaction – High levels of satisfaction with communication and support 
networks, based on biannual survey results.  
Objective 3: Understand and plan for the region’s current and future drought 
resilience by identifying actions, pathways, and opportunities for mitigation, 
adaptation and improvement.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 105 
1. Implementation of Resilient Infrastructure – 70% of planned resilient 
telecommunications infrastructure projects completed within four years of project 
initiation.  
2. Reduction in Service Disruptions – 40% reduction in telecommunications service 
disruptions after project completion.  
3. Increase in Emergency Response Efficiency – 50% improvement in emergency 
response times facilitated by enhanced telecommunications infrastructure.  
4. Effectiveness of Mitigation Strategies – Positive feedback from local businesses 
and communities on the effectiveness of implemented mitigation and adaptation 
strategies.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 106 
Stronger 
Communities 
Program

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 107 
Project Description  
Residents of the Far Northwest region frequently experience increased stress during 
drought conditions. During Droughts the situation is worsened:  
• 
By the departure of key services and community members, which puts additional 
strain on the remaining volunteers and community leaders.   
• 
As there is a noticeable lack of support or awareness of the available aid during 
these times.   
• 
As various social events were organised with a primary focus on drought-related 
themes. This approach often limited opportunities for community members to 
engage and interact without the constant overshadowing of drought conditions.  
• 
As the sole reliance of farming for a large majority of businesses within the region, 
increases vulnerability of businesses during periods of drought.  
The community has expressed a significant need for better data on the social effects of 
drought and the effectiveness of mental health interventions to address these issues 
effectively.  
The Stronger Communities Program is designed to improve community cohesion, well-
being and financial resilience in the Far Northwest Region through:  
• 
A series of targeted activities and frameworks specifically designed to maintain 
and improve the social fabric of rural and regional communities, and the resilience 
of businesses, particularly during challenging periods of drought.  
• 
Events held regularly (monthly), in different towns across the region, regardless of 
‘drought’ periods, to foster and promote social connectivity and stronger 
communities. These events  
aim to provide opportunities for community members to engage with each other in 
a relaxed environment, with a focus on interaction rather than drought discussion.  
• 
Events designed to coincide with existing regional events (shows, festivals, etc), 
and will have some reliance on partnerships with local businesses and services. 
While not intended to be a counselling service, counselling representatives will be 
in attendance to establish trust and connections for those experiencing mental 
health challenges.  
• 
The incorporation of Rural Financial sessions and mentoring to improve the 
knowledge, skills and strategies of local farmers and businesses to better plan for, 
respond to, and recover from drought events.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 108 
Scope  
The scope of the ‘stronger communities‘ program includes:  
• 
Activities and events aimed at promoting social cohesion and connectivity, 
supported by council-led initiatives.  
• 
Regular, targeted consultations with key demographic groups, (including First 
Nations people, young families, and the youth), to incorporate their insights into 
resilience planning  
• 
Community sports activities and events designed to counter social isolation and 
bolster mental health, particularly among young men.  
• 
Provision of administrative support roles to alleviate the workload on volunteers 
and community leaders during droughts.  
• 
Content development for financial resilience sessions e.g. government assistance, 
debt mediation, risk management, business diversification, etc.  
• 
Delivery of financial resilience sessions.  
• 
Provision of community resources to serve as innovation hubs for developing 
drought resilience solutions.  
• 
Development of a socially focused drought resilience framework to evaluate the 
impact of drought and the effectiveness of support programs.  
• 
Development and delivery of educational programs, direct business mentoring, 
and the promotion of innovative practices that enhance drought resilience.  
Pathway to implementation  
The pathway to the delivery of the initiative includes:  
1. Formation of a Steering and Project Control / Working Group under the respective 
Council.  
2. Development of a plan (that includes stakeholder engagement) to underpin the 
implementation of activities and events aimed at promoting social cohesion and 
connectivity (targeted consultations, community events and activities).  
3. Development of a socially focused drought resilience framework to evaluate the 
impact of drought and the effectiveness of the support programs.  
4. Detailed cost estimate (activities, (including the financial resilience sessions) and 
administrative support roles).  
5. Design of the administrative support roles.  
6. Funding applications and approvals.  
7. Content development for financial resilience sessions.  
8. Development of the detailed program of events / activities.  
9. Scheduling and advertising of events / activities.  
10. Conduct and evaluation of activities.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 109 
Supporting Broader Resilience   
The ‘stronger communities’ program projects will contribute to improving drought resilience 
of the Northwest Region through:  
• 
Modifying the existing system for the provision of support during periods of 
drought.  
• 
Maintaining the social cohesion and connectivity of the region.  
Additionally, the relevance of the project to improving the resilience of the region to 
identified challenges follows.  
Challenge  
Stronger Communities Program Relevance  
Social Isolation and Mental Health  
Programs aimed at enhancing social cohesion and providing mental 
health support reduce the strain on community members, improving 
overall community well-being during drought periods.  
Reduced Community Services  
Increasing the capacity of local services and supporting volunteer 
leaders, the program helps maintain essential community functions 
during challenging times.  
Reduced Community Knowledge 
Sharing Opportunities  
Encourages connection among community members, enabling them to 
share effective coping strategies and support each other through the 
collective experiences of managing drought impacts.  
Sports Facility Maintenance  
Supports the maintenance of sports facilities which suffer during 
droughts, ensuring they remain operational. This maintains opportunities 
for physical activity and social interaction, important for mental and 
physical health during challenging periods.  
Decline in agricultural productivity  
By providing educational programs and strategic management tools, the 
program helps farmers make informed decisions during critical phases of 
drought, such as destocking or modifying farming plans to preserve 
resources, thereby mitigating the severity of productivity losses.  
Economic contraction and loss of 
employment  
The program promotes diversified income sources, such as tourism and 
alternative agricultural practices, reducing the sole reliance on traditional 
farming. This diversification helps stabilise local economies and retain 
populations during droughts, thereby sustaining employment and 
economic activity.  
Environmental degradation  
Training and support in innovative farming practices and environmental 
management are central to the program, helping farmers adopt 
sustainable practices that maintain soil health and reduce environmental 
impact during drought conditions. 
Figure 65: Analysis of Resilience Challenges as associated with the project  
The projects support the pillars of drought resilience as follows:

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 110 
Pillar 1: 
Planning and Monitoring 
Pillar 2:  
Responding to Drought Events 
Pillar 3:  
Building Future Resilience 
•Engage in data collection and 
regular community 
consultation to inform 
resilient planning and support 
system development. 
•Support the development of 
regional drought resilience 
and 
management 
plans, 
ensuring they reflect the 
community's needs.  
•Educate farmers and business 
owners on proactive decision 
making using facts and figures 
through workshops and one-
on-one mentoring. 
•Incorporate responsive 
planning and agricultural 
practices. 
•Launch community activities 
and support services quickly 
during drought periods to 
maintain social networks and 
well-being. 
•Implement administrative 
support roles to alleviate 
pressures on community 
leaders and volunteers. 
•Identify vulnerable sectors 
within agriculture and local 
businesses 
that 
require 
support during drought. 
•Develop targeted support 
mechanisms for these groups. 
•Develop enduring community 
facilities and infrastructure 
that contribute to long-term 
drought 
resilience 
and 
community well-being. 
•Foster local leadership and 
entrepreneurship, particularly 
among the youth, to drive 
community initiatives that 
build resilience.  
•Encourage the adoption of 
innovative farming practices 
and diversification strategies. 
•Collaborate with stakeholders 
to develop infrastructure and 
business models that can 
withstand drought conditions. 
•Undertake measures such as 
workshops and consultations 
to mitigate the impacts of 
drought and enhance long 
term resilience. 
Figure 66 - Drought Resilience, Adaption and Management Model Pillars – Stronger Communities Program  
Timeline  
Figure 67 - Timeline – Stronger Communities Program  
Budget  
Specific budgets to be allocated post-consultation phase for each activity, with 
considerations for infrastructure, personnel, and marketing.  
Accordingly, an economic analysis for this program has not been able to be completed 
within this plan.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 111 
Governance Structure  
The ‘owner’ of the initiative, and therefore the Chair of the Steering Committee for each 
project within the initiative will be at the discretion of the respective Council within the 
region.  
Governance Structure for the project would comprise the following:  
Figure 68 – Governance Structure – Stronger Communities Program  
The Steering Committee is responsible for the strategic direction, oversight, decision-
making, and ensuring that the project aligns with a funding program. A proposed adaptive 
framework for monitoring and updating the project / initiative follows.  
Figure 69: Framework for monitoring and updating the Stronger Communities Program (TSG 2024).  
Events Schedule  
Events should be aligned to existing community events where possible, particularly 
sporting/cultural events that are already in the calendar.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 112 
Western Local Health District – Primary Health Network sponsoring events like these:  
Date  
Location  
Event Title  
Event Description  
Sponsor  
October 13, 
2024  
Bourke  
Racecourse  
Back of Bourke Rodeo  
A fun-filled day with BBQ, sack 
races, tug-of-war, and face painting.  
Bourke Footy Club  
October 15, 
2024  
Bourke  
Community Hall  
Financial Basics for 
Rural Families  
Workshop covering financial literacy, 
budgeting, and saving strategies for 
families in rural areas.  
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
December 5, 
2024  
Online  
Managing Finances 
During Drought  
Webinar focusing on strategies to 
manage finances during drought 
periods, including emergency funds 
and resource allocation.  
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
December 
TBC, 2024  
Cobar   
Christmas Party  
All Community 
Christmas Party  
Partner with Council and local 
organisations to throw a Christmas 
Street Market and Parade  
Cobar Council  
January 15, 
2025  
Walgett  
Recreation  
Reserve  
Family Picnic Day  
A relaxed picnic day with food stalls, 
live music and kids’ activities.  
Walgett Shire 
Council  
February 20, 
2025  
Cobar  
Swimming Pool  
Beach Party (Poolside)  
A poolside party with beach-themed 
decorations, music and snacks.  
Cobar Swimming 
Pool Committee  
March 14, 
2025  
Koori Aboriginal  
Knockout Footy  
Comp  
Walgett Footy Oval  
Family BBQ and Jumping Castle   
Primary Health 
Network (PHN)  
March 20, 
2025  
Bourke Town  
Hall  
Tax Planning and  
Preparation for  
Farmers  
Workshop on tax planning, 
preparation, and understanding 
deductions for the upcoming 
financial year.  
Bourke Shire 
Council partner 
with local 
accounting firm  
May 14, 
2025  
Online  
Succession Strategies 
for Rural Communities  
Online workshop discussing the 
importance of succession planning 
and effective strategies for rural 
families.  
Pro-Agtive  
June 19, 
2025  
Bre-Big Fish  
BBQ Masters Fish 
Cooking Competition  
A cooking competition to go 
alongside the Bre-Big Fish  
Bre Emergency 
Services

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 113 
Date  
Location  
Event Title  
Event Description  
Sponsor  
July 11, 2025  Brewarrina Weir 
Park  
Baiame’s Ngunnhu 
Festival  
A day of rides, games, food stalls, 
and entertainment for the whole 
family.  
Brewarrina Rural  
Emergency  
Services  
July 14-18, 
2025  
Cobar,  
Brewarrina,  
Bourke, Walgett,   
Barefoot Investor onTour Workshops to individuals and 
families with money management  
Local Banks and  
The Barefoot  
Investor  
August 14, 
2025  
Bourke Sports 
Complex  
Teen Sports Tournament  A day of competitive sports including 
soccer, basketball, and volleyball for 
teens.  
Local Schools  
September 
11, 2025  
Walgett Wine Bar  Adults’ Wine and 
Cheese Evening  
A sophisticated evening of wine 
tasting and cheese pairing.  
Pub  
September 
18, 2025  
Walgett High 
School  
Money Matters for Kids  
Fun and interactive session for kids 
to learn the basics of money 
management, saving, and budgeting.  
Walgett Shire  
Schools and  
TAFE  
October 16, 
2025  
Bourke  
Community Hall  
Effective Tracking of 
Farm Finances  
Workshop on tracking income and 
expenses, managing cash flow, and 
financial planning for farms.  
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
November 20, 
2025  
Brewarrina Town 
Hall  
Teen Talent Show  
A talent show for teenagers to 
showcase their skills and win prizes.  
Brewarrina Youth 
Centre  
December 10, 
2025  
Online  
Depreciation: What  
Farmers Need to Know  
Webinar explaining depreciation, its 
benefits, and how to apply it to 
farming equipment and infrastructure. 
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
December 12, 
2024  
Cobar Civic 
Centre  
Adults’ Comedy Night  
A night of laughter with performances 
by renowned comedians.  
Cobar Business 
Network

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 114 
Date  
Location  
Event Title  
Event Description  
Sponsor  
January 15, 
2026  
Walgett, Cobar,  
Bourke,  
Brewarrina   
Swimming Pool  
Surf Life Saving Festival  Bring Lifesaving and Water Safety 
Festival to the local community with 
prizes  
NSW Life Saving 
and WaterWise 
and local council  
February 19, 
2026  
Bourke Art Centre Teen Art Workshop  
An art workshop for teenagers to 
explore their creativity.  
Bourke Art Society  
March 11, 
2026  
Brewarrina Pub  
Adults’ Trivia Night  
Another round of engaging trivia for 
adults with great prizes.  
Brewarrina Pub

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 115 
Date  
Location  
Event Title  
Event Description  
Sponsor  
March 18, 
2026  
Online  
Grazing for Profit and 
Budgeting FY2026  
Workshop to help farmers prepare 
for the end of the financial year, 
focusing on maximising Returns 
from livestock enterprises and 
pasture utilisation and impact on 
budgeting  
Brewarrina Shire  
Council and KLR  
Marketing  
April 16, 
2026  
Cobar Sports 
Ground   
Family Sports Day  
A day of family-friendly sports 
activities including races and games.  
Cobar Sports Club  
May 13, 2026  Online  
Investment Strategies 
for Rural Communities  
Online session covering investment 
options and strategies suitable for 
rural families and businesses.  
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
June 17, 
2026  
Bourke  
Community Hall  
Drag Adults’ Bingo Night  A fun bingo night with prizes and 
refreshments.  
Bourke Senior 
Citizens Club  
July 14, 2026  Cobar Civic 
Centre  
Managing Debt and 
Understanding Credit  
Workshop to help individuals 
manage debt, understand credit 
scores, and improve financial 
health.  
Local Banks  
July 15, 2026  Brewarrina  
Open Garden  
Day  
Community Gardening 
Day  
A day dedicated to community 
gardening and health awareness.  
Brewarrina  
Garden Club and  
Hospital Auxiliary  
August 19, 
2026  
Cobar Skate 
Park  
Teen Skateboarding 
Competition  
A competition for teenagers to 
showcase their skateboarding skills.  
Cobar Youth and  
Community  
Centre   
September 9, 
2026  
Walgett Music  
Hall  
Adults' Live Music Night  An evening of live music by local 
bands and musicians.  
Walgett Music 
Society  
September 
16, 2026  
Walgett High 
School  
Smart Savings for Kids  
Interactive workshop teaching kids 
about the importance of saving and 
how to set financial goals.  
Walgett Shire  
Schools and TAFE 
NSW

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 116 
Date  
Location  
Event Title  
Event Description  
Sponsor  
October 15, 
2026  
Bourke  
Community Hall  
Budgeting and Cash  
Flow Management for  
Farmers  
Workshop on creating effective 
budgets and managing cash flow for 
agricultural businesses.  
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
October 30, 
2026  
Bourke  
Community  
Centre  
Family Halloween Party  A spooky and fun Halloween party 
with costumes, games, and treats.  
Bourke Retailers 
Association  
November 
18, 2026  
Brewarrina 
Dance Hall  
Teen Dance 
Competition  
A dance competition for teenagers 
with exciting prizes.  
Brewarrina Dance 
Academy  
December 9, 
2026  
Walgett  
Grants and Community 
Loans – a grant writing 
workshop  
1 day grant writing workshop  
RIC or RAA  
December 
10, 2026  
Cobar Town 
Square  
Adults' Christmas 
Market  
A festive Christmas market with 
stalls, food, and holiday music.  
Cobar Business 
Association  
February 24, 
2027  
Bourke High 
School  
Teen Science Fair  
A science fair for teenagers to 
present their projects and 
innovations.  
NSW Education  
March 17, 
2027  
Brewarrina Town 
Hall  
Long-Term Financial 
Planning for Farmers  
Workshop on long-term financial 
planning, retirement, and succession 
planning for farms.  
Brewarrina Shire 
Council  
May 11, 2027  Online  
Using Financial Tools 
and Apps for Better 
Management  
Online session introducing useful 
financial tools and apps to help 
manage finances efficiently.  
Rural Financial  
Counselling  
Service NSW  
Figure 70 – Stronger Communities Program - Events

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 117 
Responsiveness to Future Scenarios and 
Uncertainties  
An analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties on the 
implementation and delivery of each project follows.  
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project 
Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Aging Population  
Increased demand for social and 
healthcare services could divert 
attention from community cohesion 
activities.  
Higher participation in events but 
with a need for age-appropriate 
activities.  
Tailor community events to cater to an older 
demographic while ensuring inclusivity for 
all ages.  
Provide accessible transport to events for 
elderly participants.  
Climate Change  
Extreme weather events could 
disrupt scheduled community 
events and activities.  
Increased stress on communities 
may heighten the need for mental 
health support.  
Develop contingency plans for event 
rescheduling and relocation.  
Integrate climate resilience education and 
resources into community programs.  
Digital Divide  
Limited access to digital tools and 
internet could hinder virtual 
community engagement and access 
to online resources.  
Difficulty in promoting events and 
programs digitally. 
Establish community tech hubs with free 
internet access and digital training 
sessions. 
Utilise traditional media and local networks 
to promote events.   
Economic Decline  
Lower economic activity could 
reduce sponsorship and funding for 
community events.  
Higher unemployment may limit 
community participation.  
Reduced income from agriculture 
could lower financial contributions to 
community programs.  
Economic stress on farmers may 
decrease their participation in 
community events.  
Offer free or low-cost community events to 
encourage participation.  
Develop economic resilience programs that 
include job fairs and skills workshops.  
Integrate agricultural support sessions into 
community events to provide direct 
assistance.  
Health Crises  
Increased health concerns could 
reduce attendance at community 
events.  
Higher demand for health services 
may limit resources for community 
engagement and reduce capacity of 
healthcare workers to offer support 
or attend the events.  
Implement health and safety protocols at 
all events, including provisions for social 
distancing and hygiene.  
Partner with health organisations to deliver 
health services at community events.  
Incorporate special events with specialists 
that are not able to be accessed in the 
region typically.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 118 
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project 
Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Housing Shortages and Poor 
Quality  
Housing instability could lead to 
decreased community cohesion and 
event participation.  
Higher population density in certain 
areas may strain event resources.  
Provide housing support information and 
resources at community events.  
Plan events in various locations to distribute 
participation evenly and manage resources 
effectively.  
Increased Frequency of Floods  
Flooding could disrupt access to 
event locations and displace 
community members.  
Potential loss of event equipment 
and resources.  
Schedule events in flood-safe locations and 
create portable event setups.  
Infrastructure Damage  
Damage to community infrastructure 
could prevent events from taking 
place, reducing opportunities for 
social cohesion.  
Increased costs for repairs may 
divert funds from community 
programs.  
Prioritise maintenance and upgrades of key 
community infrastructure.  
Establish emergency funds to quickly repair 
and restore damaged infrastructure.  
Outmigration  
Reduced population could lower 
participation in community events, 
affecting their success and impact.  
Fewer volunteers available for 
program support.  
Implement outreach programs to attract and 
retain residents.  
Develop partnerships with local 
organisations to ensure continuous 
volunteer support.  
Policy Shift  
Changes in policy could affect 
funding and regulatory support for 
community programs.  
New regulations may require 
adjustments to event planning and 
execution.  
Altered social policies could impact 
community engagement and 
support.  
Engage with policymakers to ensure 
alignment with new policies and secure 
support.  
Adapt event plans to comply with new 
regulations.  
Enhance community outreach to ensure 
continued engagement and support despite 
policy shifts.  
Water Quality Degradation and 
Shortages  
Stress on water resources could limit 
the availability of amenities for 
events.  
Economic impacts on agriculture 
could reduce funding for community 
initiatives.  
Diversify funding sources to include grants 
and private donations to sustain community 
programs.  
Figure 71: - Analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 119 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning – Pillar 
Implementation  
Success measures and indicators that might be used by the Project Steering / Control 
Group for the project to measure the extent of progress towards the outcomes expressed 
in the program logic and delivery of the project follow.  
Pillar 1: Planning and Monitoring  
• 
Comprehensive Needs Assessment: Conduct regular assessments to identify the 
social, economic, and mental health needs of the community, particularly during 
drought conditions.  
• 
Data Collection and Analysis: Develop a robust system for collecting and analysing 
data on community well-being, participation in events, and the effectiveness of 
interventions.  
• 
Stakeholder Involvement: Engage with key demographic groups, including First 
Nations people, young families, and the youth, to gather insights and ensure their 
needs are addressed in resilience planning.  
• 
Regular Reporting: Publish regular reports on the state of community cohesion, 
well-being, and the impact of the program, ensuring transparency and 
accountability.  
• 
Event Scheduling and Coordination: Plan and schedule community events in 
coordination with existing regional events to maximise participation and impact.  
• 
Resource Allocation Monitoring: Monitor and adjust resource allocation to ensure 
that support is provided where it is most needed, especially during times of 
increased stress.  
Pillar 2: Responding to Drought Events  
• 
Emergency Support Services: Establish a network of support services to provide 
immediate assistance to community members, during drought events, including 
mental health counselling and financial advice.  
• 
Regular Social Events: Organise regular social events that provide a respite from 
the stress of drought, fostering social connectivity and community support.  
• 
Financial Resilience Sessions: Conduct sessions on financial literacy, government 
assistance, debt mediation, and business diversification to help individuals and 
businesses manage their finances during droughts.  
• 
Volunteer Support Programs: Develop programs to support volunteers and 
community leaders, ensuring they have the resources and assistance needed to 
continue their work during challenging times.  
• 
Enhanced Communication Channels: Improve communication channels to ensure 
community members are aware of available support and resources during drought 
events.  
• 
Collaboration with Local Services: Partner with local health, education and 
financial services to provide integrated support during drought periods.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 120 
Pillar 3: Building Future Resilience  
• 
Educational Programs: Implement educational programs focused on building long-
term resilience, including sustainable farming practices, mental health awareness, 
and financial planning.  
• 
Community Resource Hubs: Expand community resources to serve as innovation 
hubs for developing and sharing drought resilience solutions.  
• 
Youth Engagement Initiatives: Develop targeted initiatives to engage youth in 
community activities and resilience building, ensuring the next generation is 
prepared to face future challenges.  
• 
Economic Diversification Strategies: Promote and support economic diversification 
to reduce reliance on agriculture, encouraging the development of tourism, local 
crafts, and other industries.  
• 
Infrastructure Development: Invest in infrastructure that supports social cohesion 
and community resilience, such as sports facilities, community centres, and 
communication networks.  
• 
Policy Advocacy: Advocate for policies that support sustainable community 
development and provide funding for resilience-building projects.  
• 
Community Training Programs: Offer training programs for community members 
on leadership, project management, and resilience planning to build local capacity.  
Monitoring Against Objectives  
The applicable objectives of the Future Drought Fund Agreement, and relevant project 
level indicators to track outcomes and how the project is contributing to drought resilience 
outcomes follow.  
Objective 1: Develop the agricultural sector’s self-reliance and economic 
performance.  
1. Agricultural Industry Attendance at Financial Resilience Sessions: 70% of local 
farmers attending at least 50% of financial resilience sessions each year.  
2. Adoption of Diversified Income Sources: 40% of farmers adopting at least one 
alternative income source (e.g. agritourism, value-added products) within three 
years of project initiation.  
3. Reduction in Farm Debt – 25% reduction in average farm debt levels within five 
years due to improved financial planning and resilience strategies.  
4. Increase in Use of Sustainable Farming Practices: 30% increase in the use of 
sustainable farming practices among local farmers within three years.  
5. Farmer Confidence in Financial Planning – Improved confidence in financial 
planning and management among farmers, assessed through discussions and 
biannual drought resilience program survey.  
6. Engagement with Support Services – High levels of engagement with financial 
counselling and support services, assessed through service usage statistics and 
feedback.  
Objective 2: Strengthen the social capital and wellbeing of the communities.  
1. Increase in Participation in Community Events – 60% increase in participation 
rates at community events and social gatherings within three years.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 121 
2. Reduction in Reported Cases of Social Isolation – 30% reduction in reported cases 
of social isolation and loneliness within the community within five years.  
3. Volunteer Engagement – 40% increase in the number of active community 
volunteers within three years, highlighting improved social connectivity.  
4. Access to Support Services – 90% of residents reporting having access to at least 
one community support network or service within two years.  
5. Community Wellbeing and Cohesion – Improved community wellbeing and 
cohesion, assessed through regular surveys and focus groups.  
6. Quality of Life Improvements – Perceived improvements in quality of life among 
residents, assessed through biannual drought resilience survey.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 122 
Sustainable 
Recreation & 
Tourism Strategy

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 123 
Project Description  
Develop and implement a tourism strategy:  
• 
That focuses on sustainable recreational access to regional destinations such as 
rivers and marshes, with a special emphasis on adapting to drought conditions.  
• 
Tailored for the Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes (inspired by successful 
models like the Darling River Run) regions.  
• 
To implement infrastructure for the sustainable management of tourist facilities and 
explore agri-tourism to diversify economic opportunities.  
The strategy will facilitate the creation of recreational infrastructure that can adjust to 
fluctuating water levels and promote activities suitable for dry seasons.   
The initiative aims to boost local economies, particularly in areas where recreational 
access is limited due to variable climate conditions, such as frequent droughts.   
It will support local entrepreneurship through tourism-related businesses such as Airbnbs 
and Farm Stays and include town planning strategies to enhance attractiveness to 
visitors.   
Scope  
The scope of the ‘sustainable recreation and tourism strategy’ includes:  
• 
Development of a tourism strategy.  
• 
Development of a framework and mechanisms to support local entrepreneurship 
for tourism related businesses (such as Airbnbs and Farm Stays).  
• 
Development of infrastructure (facilities / support arrangements) to support the 
management and sustainability of tourism and recreational facilities.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 124 
Pathway to implementation  
The pathway to the delivery of the initiative includes:  
1. Development of a draft tourism strategy.  
2. Review of town planning strategies and identification of policy and regulatory 
constraints.  
3. Development of a framework and support arrangements for local entrepreneurship 
in tourism-related businesses.  
4. Amendments to regulatory and policy town planning Implementation of town 
planning strategies to enhance town attractiveness for visitors.  
5. Detailed design and cost estimates for infrastructure projects for the sustainable 
management of tourist and recreational facilities.  
6. Business Case development and regulatory approvals.  
7. Tender for construction or implementation of support arrangements (as required).  
Supporting Broader Resilience   
The ‘sustainable recreation and tourism strategy’ will contribute to improving drought 
resilience of the Far Northwest Region through:  
• 
Maintaining the existing system of the local economy during times of drought.  
• 
Modifying the town planning strategies to enhance tourist visitation.  
Additionally, the relevance of the project to improving the resilience of the region to 
identified challenges follows.  
Challenge  
Sustainable Recreation & Tourism Strategy Relevance  
Economic Dependence 
on Agriculture  
The strategy aims to diversify the local economy by introducing alternative income 
streams through tourism, which is less dependent on seasonal variability than agriculture.  
This helps mitigate economic risks associated with farming during drought periods.  
Impact of Drought on 
Agriculture  
Tourism provides an alternative economic activity that can continue during drought when 
agricultural productivity declines. This helps maintain cash flow and employment in the 
community, reducing the severe economic impacts of drought on farming.  
Reduced Local  
Spending and  
Employment  
By promoting tourism, the strategy can stimulate local spending and create jobs, 
counteracting the economic downturn caused by drought. This includes supporting small 
businesses and encouraging new ventures in the tourism sector.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 125 
Challenge  
Sustainable Recreation & Tourism Strategy Relevance  
Social Isolation and  
Community Well-being  
Tourism fosters greater community engagement and well-being by providing recreational 
opportunities and events that bring people together, countering the social isolation often 
experienced during tough economic times like droughts.  
Environmental 
Degradation  
Sustainable tourism practices emphasise the preservation and careful management of 
natural resources, which is important during drought conditions. This can lead to 
improved environmental stewardship and resilience against future ecological challenges.  
Volunteer Fatigue and  
Reduced Community  
Services  
Tourism can help revitalise community spirit and increase the number of visitors and 
residents who can contribute to community services and volunteer efforts, thus alleviating 
the strain on the remaining local population during challenging times.  
Infrastructure Strain 
and Water Management  
Part of the tourism strategy includes developing infrastructure that is resilient to drought, 
such as water-efficient facilities and services. This not only supports tourism but also 
improves the overall community's resilience in managing scarce resources.  
Psychological Impact of 
Drought  
Tourism and recreational activities can improve mental health by providing escape and 
relaxation opportunities for residents, mitigating the psychological toll of enduring drought 
conditions and economic uncertainty.  
Figure 72: Analysis of Resilience Challenges associated with the project  
The projects support the pillars of drought resilience as follows:  
Pillar 1: 
Planning and Monitoring 
Pillar 2:  
Responding to Drought Events 
Pillar 3  
Building Future Resilience 
•Conduct 
destination 
management 
planning 
that 
accounts for drought scenarios 
and 
promotes 
sustainable 
recreational access.  
•Gather 
data 
and 
coordinate 
resources to improve community 
and regional planning for building 
drought resilience in tourism. 
•Implement tourism strategies that 
allow for continued visitation and 
recreational activities during 
drought conditions, mitigating 
economic impacts. 
•Facilitate workshops to develop 
community-led tourism initiatives 
that adapt to and manage the 
challenges presented by 
drought.  
•Support small-scale 
infrastructure projects that 
enhance the sustainability and 
appeal of tourist facilities, 
considering future drought 
scenarios. 
•Encourage community leadership 
and entrepreneurship in 
developing drought-resilient 
tourism and recreational 
activities. 
Figure 73 - Drought Resilience, Adaption and Management Model Pillars - Sustainable Recreation & Tourism 
Strategy

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 126 
Timeline 
Figure 74 - Timeline – Sustainable Recreation & Tourism Strategy  
Budget  
Preliminary budgets will be determined following the planning phase and are anticipated to 
encompass strategy development, workshop execution, infrastructure enhancement, and 
promotional activities.   
Accordingly, an economic analysis for this strategy has not been able to be completed 
within this plan.  
Governance Structure  
The ‘owner’ of the initiative, and therefore the Chair of the Steering Committee for each 
project within the initiative will be at the discretion of the Far Northwest Joint Organisation 
and the respective Council within the region.  
Governance Structure for the project would comprise the following:  
Figure 75 – Governance Structure – Sustainable Recreation & Tourism Strategy  
• 
Steering Committee: responsible for strategic direction, oversight, decision-
making, and ensuring that the project aligns with funding program.  
• 
The supporting organisations will be involved in contributing to the design, 
construct and management of the strategy.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 127 
A proposed adaptive framework for monitoring and updating the project / initiative follows.  
Figure 76: Framework for monitoring and updating the Sustainable Tourism and Recreation Strategy (TSG 2024).

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 128 
Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes Run  
The Route:  
Day  
Route  
Stops  
1  
Walgett  
2  
Walgett to Coonamble  
Follow the Castlereagh River, stopping via:  
• 
‘Burrima’ Boardwalk in Upper Macquarie Marshes  
• 
Quambone – Marsh Meanders Kayaking  
Coonamble Outback Arts Gallery  
3  
Coonamble to Warren  
Gulargambone – Stop to see the iconic Two Eight Two Eight Cultural and 
Community Hub  
Warren – Window on the Wetlands Centre and Oxley Park  
4  
Warren to Nyngan  
Roundtrip from Warren to Macquarie Marshes Nature Reserve.  
Gin Gin Weir  
Trangie – Explore the Trangie Agricultural Research Centre  
Nyngan – Nyngan Museum and Mid-State Shearing Shed  
5  
Nyngan to Cobar  
Travel along the Bogan River  
Cobar – Discover the mining heritage at the Great Cobar Heritage Centre and Fort 
Bourke Hill Lookout.  
6  
Cobar to Bourke  
Cobar Regional Park  
Mount Grenfell Historic Site – Explore the indigenous rock art site near Cobar  
Bourke – Visit the Back O’Bourke Exhibition Centre and take a paddleboat cruise on 
the Darling River.  
7  
Bourke to Walgett  
Brewarrina – Aboriginal Fish Traps  
Figure 77 - Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes Run Route (Table)  
Figure 78 - Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes Run Route

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 129 
The Natural Highlights on Route include:  
• 
Macquarie Marshes  
• 
Macquarie Valley trails  
• 
Pilliga Forest  
• 
Mount Grenfell Historic Site Nominal Costs:  
Phase 1 – Nominal Capital Costs  
Nominally:  Year 0  
Year 1  
Year 2  
Capital Costs  
Project & Operations Manager - Tourism (0.5 FTE of Grade 7 
equivalent)  
$34,072  
$34,072  
Webspace (content, purchase-to-pay, design, hosting, payment 
service, maintenance contract)  
$15,000  
$15,000   
Computer and Software (Microsoft licenses, CANVA)  
$4,200  
$4,200  
Graphic Design and Brand Logos  
$2,000  
$2,000  
Printing (brochures, fact sheets, information booklets, etc)  
$1,500  
$1,500  
Route Signage  
$3,300  
$3,300  
Outdoor displays – construction and design (total 8 signs 
across main locations – overnight stay locations or stops – 
Walgett, Coonamble, Gulargambone, Warren, Nyngan, Cobar, 
Bourke, Brewarrina)  
$16,000  
$16,000  
Content – 50 hours at $100 per hour  
$5,000  
$5,000  
Phase 1 – Nominal Capital Costs  
Nominally:  Year 0  
Year 1  
Year 2  
Nominal Capital Investment  
$81,072  
$81,072  
Contingency (10%)  
$8,107  
$8,107  
Nominal Total Capital Investment  
$89,179  
$89,179  
Figure 79 - Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes Run Route (Indicative Investment)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 130 
Outcomes Achieved from the Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes Run:  
Category  
Derived Benefits  
Economic  
Growth and Job  
Creation  
• 
Increased tourism and subsequent spending in the region (accommodation, 
food, fuel, services).  
• 
Increased demand for services subsequently increases jobs in hospitality, 
tourism and retail.  
• 
Opportunities for business diversification for sustainable operation – tour guides, 
agritourism, AirBnBs, cultural tours, etc.  
Infrastructure 
Development  
•  
Increased regional investment to improve roads, signage, rest stops and other 
infrastructure to support access to the regions.  
Environmental 
Conservation  
• 
Encouraging sustainable tourism practices can lead to the preservation of 
natural habitats and wildlife.  
• 
Increased awareness and education about the importance of conservation.  
• 
Preservation and promotion of cultural heritage sites, indigenous art, and 
historical landmarks.  
Regional 
Additions  
• 
Tourism Infrastructure – Development of visitor centres, information kiosks, and 
interactive maps to guide tourists through the route.  
• 
Outdoor Activities – Development of outdoor recreational activities such as hiking 
trails, birdwatching tours, camping sites and water sports along the rivers.  
Opportunities for  
Regional Council  
Revenue  
• 
Entry Fees – Charging entry fees for access to certain sites on Council land.  
• 
Collaborate with private businesses to develop tourism infrastructure, such as 
hotels, restaurants, and recreational facilities.  
• 
Tourist Services – Offering services such as guided tours, shuttle services, and 
equipment rentals, either directly or through partnerships with local businesses.  
• 
Ticketed events and festivals to increase visitation.  
• 
Tour Packages – Collaboration with travel agencies to create packages that 
include multiple attraction and services within the region.  
• 
Government Grants – State and Federal grants aimed at tourism development, 
infrastructure improvement, and cultural preservation.   
• 
Development Funds – Setting up tourism development funds that attract 
investment from stakeholders interested in the region’s growth.  
These funds can be utilised to support investment in water security infrastructure e.g. 
bores, off-river storage, etc.  
Figure 80 - Three Rivers and Macquarie Marshes Run Route (Outcomes)

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 131 
Responsiveness to Future Scenarios and 
Uncertainties  
An analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties on the implementation 
and delivery of each project follows.  
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  
Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Aging Population  
Increased demand for age-friendly 
recreational activities and amenities. 
Higher participation in events but with a 
Ensure infrastructure and activities are 
designed to be accessible for older adults. 
Develop specialised tours and recreational 
programs catering to senior visitors.  
Utilise age of residents to provide historical 
cultural experiences of the region.  
Climate Change  
Extreme weather events could disrupt 
tourism activities and damage 
infrastructure.  
Variability in water levels may affect 
water-based activities.  
Implement adaptive infrastructure that can 
withstand extreme weather and fluctuating 
water levels.  
Promote off-season tourism and activities 
that are less dependent on weather 
conditions.  
Digital Divide  
Limited digital connectivity could hinder 
online promotion and sales for tourism 
activities.  
Challenges in utilising digital tools for 
managing tourism operations.  
Invest in improving digital infrastructure and 
providing training for local businesses. Use 
traditional marketing methods to 
complement online strategies and reach a 
broader audience.  
Have a region-based site that is centrally 
managed to support the online booking 
system for all businesses and 
accommodation and service providers.  
Economic Decline  
Reduced disposable income could lower 
spending on tourism and recreational 
activities.  
Higher unemployment may limit local 
support for tourism initiatives.  
Reduced income from agriculture could 
lower investment in agri-tourism 
initiatives.  
Offer affordable tourism packages and 
discounts to attract budget-conscious 
travellers.  
Create job opportunities within the tourism 
sector to stimulate the local economy. 
Diversify tourism offerings to include 
cultural and historical tours, reducing 
reliance on agri-tourism.  
Health Crises  
Increased health concerns could deter 
travel and participation in group 
activities.  
Higher demand for health and safety 
measures at tourist sites.  
Partner with healthcare providers to ensure 
the availability of medical support for 
tourists.  
Housing Shortages  
Lack of accommodation options could 
limit the region's ability to host visitors.  
Encourage the development of diverse 
accommodation options, including 
ecofriendly and budget-friendly lodgings.  
Increased Frequency of 
Floods  
Flooding could damage tourist sites and 
disrupt travel plans, affecting visitor 
experiences.  
Potential loss of infrastructure and 
natural attractions.  
Develop flood-resistant infrastructure and 
create flood diversion systems.  
Infrastructure Damage  
Damage to roads, trails, and facilities 
could limit access to tourist sites, 
reducing visitor numbers.  
Increased repair costs may divert funds 
from promotional activities.  
Prioritise the development of resilient 
infrastructure with regular maintenance 
schedules.  
Establish contingency funds for quick 
repairs to minimise disruption.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 132 
Future Scenario  
Effect on Intended Project Outcomes  Changes to Project Implementation or 
Delivery for Prevention  
Outmigration  
Reduced local population could lower 
visitor numbers and participation in 
tourism activities.  
Fewer local businesses to support 
tourism infrastructure.  
Develop targeted marketing campaigns to 
attract visitors from outside the region. 
Provide incentives for local businesses to 
engage in tourism-related activities.  
Policy Shift  
Changes in policy could affect funding 
and regulatory support for tourism 
development.  
Engage with policymakers to ensure 
alignment with tourism development goals 
and secure support.  
Adapt project plans to comply with new 
environmental and economic regulations.  
New environmental regulations may 
impose additional costs and operational 
adjustments.  
Altered economic policies could impact 
tourism planning and investment. Shifts 
in social policies may influence 
community engagement and support for 
tourism initiatives.  
Allocate contingency budgets to address 
potential compliance costs and adapt to 
policy changes.  
Increase community outreach and 
education to align tourism initiatives with 
social policies and gain local support.  
Water Quality Degradation  
Poor water quality could reduce the 
attractiveness of water-based 
recreational activities.  
Limited water availability may affect the 
maintenance of tourism facilities.  
Develop and promote land-based 
recreational activities to reduce 
dependency on water bodies.  
Implement water conservation measures 
and sustainable water management 
practices for tourism facilities.  
Figure 81: - Analysis of the impact of potential future scenarios and uncertainties  
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning – Pillar 
Implementation  
Success measures and indicators that might be used by the Project Steering / Control 
Group for the project to measure the extent of progress towards the outcomes expressed 
in the program logic and delivery of the project follow.  
Pillar 1: Planning and Monitoring  
• 
Detailed Feasibility Studies: Conduct in-depth feasibility studies to assess the viability 
and sustainability of proposed tourism activities, ensuring they can withstand drought 
conditions.  
• 
Environmental Impact Assessments: Perform rigorous environmental impact 
assessments to ensure tourism activities do not harm natural resources and 
biodiversity.  
• 
Stakeholder Consultations: Engage with local stakeholders, including community 
members, businesses, and environmental groups, to gather insights and ensure the 
tourism strategy meets local needs and expectations.  
• 
Regular Monitoring Programs: Develop and implement regular monitoring programs to 
track the environmental and economic impacts of tourism activities, making 
adjustments as needed.  
• 
Data-Driven Decision Making: Utilise data collected from monitoring programs to 
inform strategic decisions and continuously improve the tourism offerings.  
• 
Transparent Reporting: Maintain transparency by regularly publishing progress reports 
and updates on the sustainability and impact of the tourism strategy.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 133 
Pillar 2: Responding to Drought Events  
• 
Adaptive Tourism Infrastructure: Design and build tourism infrastructure that can adapt 
to fluctuating water levels and extreme weather conditions, ensuring continuous 
operation during droughts.  
• 
Water Efficient Facilities: Implement water efficient practices and technologies in all 
tourist facilities to minimise water usage and ensure sustainability during drought 
periods.  
• 
Emergency Response Plans: Develop comprehensive emergency response plans to 
address disruptions caused by droughts, ensuring the safety and well-being of visitors 
and local communities.  
• 
Community Support Systems: Establish support systems for local businesses and 
communities to help them cope with the economic impacts of droughts, including 
financial aid and marketing support.  
• 
Drought-Resilient Activities: Promote and develop tourism activities that are less 
dependent on water resources, such as hiking, cultural tours and wildlife watching.  
• 
Public Awareness Campaigns: Conduct public awareness campaigns to educate 
tourists about drought conditions and encourage responsible behaviour to minimise 
their impact on local resources.  
Pillar 3: Building Future Resilience  
• 
Diversified Tourism Offerings: Develop a diverse range of tourism activities and 
attractions that are resilient to climate variability, reducing dependence on any single 
type of activity.  
• 
Sustainable Business Practices: Encourage and support local businesses in adopting 
sustainable practices to enhance their resilience to environmental changes and 
economic fluctuations.  
• 
Economic Diversification Programs: Promote economic diversification by supporting 
agritourism and other innovative tourism-related businesses that provide alternative 
income streams for local communities.  
• 
Community Education and Training: Implement educational programs and training 
sessions to build community knowledge and skills in sustainable tourism practices and 
resilience building.  
• 
Research and Innovation: Invest in research and innovation to explore new 
sustainable tourism practices and technologies that can enhance the region’s 
resilience to drought and other environmental challenges.  
• 
Policy Advocacy and Development: Advocate for policies that support sustainable 
tourism development and provide funding for resilience-building projects.  
• 
Long-Term Funding Strategies: Develop long-term funding strategies, including 
publicprivate partnerships and government grants, to ensure sustained investment in 
tourism infrastructure and services.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 134 
Monitoring Against Objectives  
The applicable objectives of the Future Drought Fund Agreement, and relevant project 
level indicators to track outcomes and how the project is contributing to drought resilience 
outcomes follow.  
Objective 1: Develop the agricultural sector’s self-reliance and economic 
performance.  
1. Increase in Agri-Tourism Businesses: Establish 20 new agri-tourism businesses (e.g. 
farm stays, guided tours, etc) across the region, within three years.  
2. Revenue Growth from Agri-Tourism: Achieve a 30% increase in revenue from agri-
tourism activities within five years.  
3. Participation in Agri-Tourism Training Programs: 70% of local farmers participating in 
agritourism workshops and training programs within two years.  
4. Visitor Number to Region Attractions – 40% increase in visitation numbers to activities 
e.g. farms, markets, cultural sites, etc, within three years.  
5. Diversification of Agricultural Products – 50% of participating farms offering diversified 
products and services (E.g. accommodation, local crafts, cultural excursions) within three 
years.  
6. Perception of Economic Stability – Improved perception of economic stability among 
local farmers due to additional income from tourism, assessed in biannual drought 
resilience program survey.  
7. Community Engagement in Tourism Activities: High levels of community engagement 
and participation in tourism activities, assessed through event attendance and feedback.  
Objective 2: Strengthen the Social Capital and Wellbeing of the Communities  
1. Increase in Community Event Participation – 50% increase in participation rates at 
community events and social gatherings within three years.  
2. Volunteer Engagement in Tourism Projects – 40% increase in the number of 
volunteers supporting tourism projects and events within three years.  
3. Visitor Satisfaction with Community Amenities – Achieve an 80% visitor 
satisfaction rate with community amenities and services within two years.  
4. Effectiveness of Social Programs – Positive feedback from community members 
on the effectiveness of social programs and events in fostering connectivity, 
collaboration and support.

Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning  
The following table describes Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning framework for this Plan.  
KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS  
How effectively are the councils integrating drought resilience initiatives into their BAU activities?  
What measurable progress is being made towards the objectives set within the Initial Resilience Assessments for priority agricultural areas?  
How are the interventions influencing the community, economic stability, environmental resilience, and infrastructure within the region?  
PROJECTS  
Long Term Water Security Projects  
Telecommunications Strategy  
Stronger Communities Program  
Sustainable Recreation and Tourism Strategy  
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING FRAMEWORK  
PILLAR 1 Pillar and 
Monitoring  
PILLAR 2  
Respond to Drought Conditions  
PILLAR 3  
Building Future Resilience  
Councils will embed the Drought Resilience Logic Map within 
their strategic planning frameworks to ensure a systematic 
approach to drought monitoring and early warning system 
deployment. This tool will guide the assessment of initial 
situations and the alignment of planning efforts with broader 
resilience goals.  
The monitoring process will focus on the effectiveness 
of response mechanisms activated during drought  
alerts. This includes evaluating the support provided to 
identified vulnerable sectors and groups, ensuring rapid  
and effective aid  
Councils will periodically review and update their strategies 
to enhance long-term drought resilience based on the  
feedback and data collected through the Logic Map and  
other MEL activities. These updates will aim to strengthen 
the economic, environmental, social, and infrastructural 
pillars of the region.  
Assumptions Underpinning the Implementation of the Plan  
Councils will regularly update and refine MEL processes to align 
with state and national guidelines.  
Stakeholder engagement remains proactive and 
constructive, ensuring that feedback loops are 
operational and inform continuous improvement.  
Sufficient resources (financial, human, informational) are 
allocated for the ongoing support of MEL activities.  
Key Assumptions Affecting Outputs to 1–2 Year Outcomes  
Early identification and mitigation of drought impacts will 
stabilize the regional economy and protect vulnerable sectors.  
Enhanced infrastructure and community support 
systems will improve immediate disaster response and 
recovery capabilities.  
Initial community and stakeholder engagement will 
establish a strong foundation for sustained cooperation and 
collaboration.  
Key Assumptions Affecting Outcomes from 2+ Years  
Long-term planning and regular reassessment of strategies will 
adapt effectively to changing environmental conditions and 
emerging economic trends.  
Ongoing education and community engagement will 
elevate the general understanding and proactive 
management of drought impacts.  
Strategic partnerships and investments will continue to 
evolve, driving innovation and resilience in agricultural 
practices and broader economic activities.  
Continuous Improvement and Reporting  
Progress against the MEL Plan will be reported through regular updates at council meetings and public forums, ensuring transparency and community involvement. (People, Culture, and 
Community, Economy, Landscape and Natural Environment, Infrastructure and Built Environment)  
Biannual and annual reports will detail the short and long-term impacts of the initiatives, supported by data from the Logic Map and additional quantitative and qualitative metrics.  
Successes and learnings from the pilot year and subsequent phases will inform adjustments in strategies and actions, aligning with the evolving needs of the Northwest region.  
By aligning the Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning activities with these frameworks, councils will ensure that drought resilience planning is not only integrated into their Business As 
Usual activities but also dynamically supports the region's ability to manage and adapt to drought conditions effectively.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 136  
Appendices

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 137  
Appendix 1: Glossary of Key Terms  
Absorptive capacity  
The ability of individuals and groups to continue without adapting or 
changing their behaviour in response to environmental and 
socioeconomic changes (Béné et al., 2012).  
Adaptation  
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response 
to actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce 
vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities (CSIRO, 2022).  
Adaptive capacity  
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to 
environmental and socioeconomic changes (CSIRO, 2022).  
Adaptive governance Coordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between 
systems when designing interventions and for their implementation and 
evaluation.  
Co-design  
The process of partnership to develop and formulate project delivery and 
agreed objectives and needs, using participatory methods. A process of 
working together utilising generative and explorative processes.  
Drought  
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, 
abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient 
to meet our normal use (BoM, 2022).  
Economic resilience  
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and 
stressors without changing the economic status or outcomes (CSIRO, 
2022).  
Environmental resilience  
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range 
of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural processes and 
ecosystem services (CSIRO, 2022).  
Governance  
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups 
and agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be 
formally institutionalised, or informal (CSIRO, 2022).  
Intervention options  
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, 
initiatives and investments that are planned to bring about change in the 
system (Maru et al., 2017).  
Local knowledge  
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of 
lived experience within a landscape, bearing witness to the operation of  
2004). Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic 
resilience, environmental resilience and social resilience.  
Risk  
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, 
recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated with such 
systems (IPCC, 2020).  
Shock  
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples 
include major storms, floods, bush fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, 
terrorism and cyber-attacks’ (Resilient Sydney, 2018).

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 138  
Social resilience  
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and 
stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions 
(CSIRO, 2022).  
Stressor  
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse 
effect, e.g., drought (CSIRO, 2022).  
Systems  
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a 
complex ‘whole’.   
Theory of change  
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain how 
and why outcomes and impacts will be achieved through use, systems. It 
includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people interact with 
surroundings and as part of communities and processes.  
Resilience  
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to 
maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacks (Walker et al., 
implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities and outputs 
(Maru et al., 2018).  
Trends  
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and 
are expected to shape change into the future (Taylor et al., 2017).  
Threshold  
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable 
causes a system to shift to a qualitatively different regime. Also referred to 
as a tipping point (Folke et al., 2010).  
Transform  
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different 
structure, functions, feedbacks and identity (Folke et al., 2010).  
Trigger point  
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management 
intervention. Trigger points are usually defined in the planning phase (Wise 
et al., 2014).  
Drought resilience   
Means the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing 
temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed 
seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, environmental and social  
2020 - 2024).  
Public Good  
For infrastructure and other capital investment or on-ground works, 
'public good' is taken to mean that the project would not otherwise be 
able to recover costs—for example, utility pricing—and should deliver 
significant spill-over benefits for society and the economy, well beyond 
Resilience Funding Plan 2020 - 2024).  
The following terms are adopted from the NSW Regional Water Strategies - Guide:  
Catchment   
A natural drainage area, bounded by sloping ground, hills or mountains 
from which water flows to a low point. Flows within the catchment 
contribute to surface water sources as well as to groundwater sources.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 139  
Climate variability   
Describes the way key climatic elements, such as temperature, rainfall, 
evaporation, and humidity, differ from the average over time. Variability can 
be caused by natural or man-made processes.  
Environmental water  Water allocated to support environmental outcomes and other public 
benefits. Environmental water provisions recognise environmental water 
requirements and are based on environmental, social, and economic 
considerations, including existing user rights.  
Evaporation   
The process by which water or another liquid becomes a gas. Water from 
land areas, bodies of water and all other moist surfaces is absorbed into 
the atmosphere as a vapour.  
Evapotranspiration   
The combined effect of evaporation and transpiration.  
Floodplain   
Flat land bordering a river or stream that is naturally subject to flooding and 
is made up of alluvium (sand, silt and clay) deposited during floods. 
Floodplain harvesting is the collection or capture of water flowing across 
floodplains.  
Groundwater   
Water located beneath the surface of the ground in the spaces between 
sediments and in the fractures of rock formations.  
Inflows   
The amount of water coming into a surface water source or groundwater 
source.  
Stochastic climate datasets Stochastic climate datasets are extended climate sequences that 
are synthesised using statistical methods applied to observed data of 
rainfall and evapotranspiration and can include paleoclimatic data. These 
extended sequences include a more complete sample of climate 
variability, part of which describes more severe drought sequences.  
Storage  
A state-owned dam, weir or other structure which is used to regulate and 
manage river flows in the catchment. There are also a range of storages 
owned by local water utilities. Also refers to the water bodies impounded by 
these structures.  
Stormwater   
Flow generated from rainfall falling on hard (impervious) surfaces.  
Surface water  
All water that occurs naturally above ground including rivers, lakes, 
reservoirs, creeks, wetlands, and estuaries.  
Transpiration   
The process where plants absorb water through their roots and then 
evaporate water vapour through pores in their leaves.  
Water security  
In the context of regional water strategies refers to the acceptable chance 
of not having town water supplies fail. This requires community and 
government to have a shared understanding of what is a ‘fail event’ (for 
example, no drinking water or unacceptable water quality) and the level of 
acceptability they will pay for.  
Water reliability  
Refers to how often an outcome is achieved. It is often considered to be the 
likelihood, in percentage of years, of receiving full water allocations by the 
end of a water year for a licence category.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 140  
Resilient regional centres  
Means water users are able to withstand extreme events, such as 
drought and flood, and/or adapt and respond to changes caused by 
extreme events.  
The following term is adopted from the CSIRO Drought Resilience Planning, Independent 
Review Guide:  
Resilience planning  
Resilience planning is about more than developing a plan to improve the 
state and trajectory of a region. Resilience plans focus on developing the 
capacities of a system to absorb, adapt, or transform, and to deal with 
specified stresses or shocks, such as drought, as well as unspecified 
stresses or shocks.  
Appendix 2: References  
Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework’.  
Béné, C., Wood, R. G., Newsham, A., & Davies, M. (2012). Resilience: New Utopia or New 
Tyranny? Reflection about the Potentials and Limits of the Concept of Resilience in 
Relation to Vulnerability Reduction Programmes. IDS Working Papers, 2012(405), 1-61.  
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x   
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., & Rockström, J. (2010). Resilience Thinking:  
Integrating Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability. Ecology and Society, 15. 
https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-03610-150420   
Future Drought Fund: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework. (2020). Australian 
Government Retrieved from  
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf  
National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA). Brewarrina - LGA profile [Document]. 
Retrieved August 10, 2024, from  
https://nema.gov.au/sites/default/files/LGAProfiles/NSW/Brewarrina%20%20LGA%
20profile.docx  
O’Connell, D., Maru, Y., Grigg, N., Walker, B., Abel, N., Wise, R., Cowie, A., Butler, J., 
StoneJovicich, S., Stafford-Smith, M., Ruhweza, A., Belay, M., Duron, G., Pearson, L., & 
Meharg, S. (2019). Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach: A 
guide to designing, implementing and assessing interventions for sustainable futures. 
https://researchsystem.canberra.edu.au/ws/portalfiles/portal/55385772/19_00418_LW_R
E PORT_RAPTAGuide_WEB_190829.pdf  
Reisinger, A., Howden, M., Vera, C., Garschagen, M., Hurlbert, M., Kreibiehl, S., Mach, K. 
J., Mintenbeck, K., O’Neill, B., Pathak, M., Pedace, R., Pörtner, H.-O., 
Poloczanska, E.,  
Corradi, M. R., Sillmann, J., Aalst, M. v., Viner, D., Jones, R., Ruane, A. C., & 
Ranasinghe, R. (2020). The concept of risk in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report: A 
summary of crossWorking Group discussions.   
REMPLAN. Bourke economy summary. Retrieved July 4, 2024, from 
https://app.remplan.com.au/bourke/economy/summary?state=yr6KF45NyHPnVg6izKkk8
X HLSdSr7m

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 141  
Resilient Sydney: A strategy for city resilience (2018). C. o. Sydney.  
https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2018-07/apo-nid184921_29.pdf  
Taylor, A. L., Dessai, S., & Bruine de Bruin, W. (2014). Public perception of climate risk 
and adaptation in the UK: A review of the literature. Climate Risk Management, 4-
5, 1-16. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2014.09.001   
Understanding Drought. (2022). 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledgecentre/understanding.shtml#:~:text=Dr
ought%20is%20a%20prolonged%2C%20abnormally 
,to%20meet%20our%20normal%20use.   
Walker, B., Holling, C. s., Carpenter, S., & Kinzig, A. (2004). Resilience, Adaptability and 
Transformability in Social-Ecological Systems. Ecol. Soc., 9. 
https://doi.org/10.5751/ES00650-090205   
Whitten, S., Verikios, G., Kitsios, V., Mason-D’Croz, D., Cook, S., & Holt, P. (2022). Exploring 
Climate Risk in Australia: The Economic Implications of a Delayed Transition to Net Zero  
Emissions. https://ecos.csiro.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Technical-
Report__ExploringClimate-Risk-in-Australia__20220204.pdf  
Wise, R. M., Fazey, I., Stafford Smith, M., Park, S. E., Eakin, H. C., Archer Van Garderen, E. R. 
M., & Campbell, B. (2014). Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as part of 
pathways of change and response. Global Environmental Change, 28, 325-336.  
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.002

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 142  
Appendix 3: Background Context and Key 
Inputs  
The background contexts (BC), review of prior strategies, and relevance of Global academic and 
government strategies and reports considered, in the identification of existing drought initiatives, 
within NSW, Australia and International regional and rural contexts, for potential implementation 
within the regions considered in this plan follow.  
Background Contexts    
1.  
On 12 December 2018 the Australian, state and territory governments signed the National 
Drought Agreement (NDA), replacing the 2013 agreement. The NDA commits the Australian, 
state and territory governments to develop policies and programs that position farmers to plan 
for and manage risk; and prepare for, manage and recover from drought. It is in place until 30 
June 2024 and will be reviewed approximately two years before expiry.  
effect arises from the NDA:  
• 
Has a prime focus on preparing farm businesses and rural communities to manage 
drought in pursuit of a prosperous and sustainable future.  
• 
Is supported by the Future Drought Fund Act 2019. The:  
o  
Purpose of the Fund is to enhance the public good by building drought 
resilience. This means the benefits generated by the funding must be able to be 
accessed and/or shared by many (public benefits), rather than be captured solely by 
individual businesses or industries solely for private commercial gain (private benefits). 
It also means the benefits achievable from the funding should outweigh the costs. o 
 Fund has three interconnected strategic priorities and objectives focused economic 
resilience, environmental resilience and social resilience of communities.  
The Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 sets out an approach for making 
arrangements or grants in relation to drought resilience, or entering into agreements in relation 
to such grants, under the Future Drought Fund. A Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) 
Framework has been developed to outline the rationale, scope and approach for monitoring and 
evaluating the activities carried out under the Funding Plan, and for the generation and sharing 
of knowledge gained through funded activities about how to build drought resilience.  
• 
providing a further $94.5 million over six years from 2022-23 to consolidate the 
Drought Resilience Funding Plan in place under the Future Drought Fund Act 
2019.  
• 
investing $6.6 million over two years from 2022-23 to support work to prepare for 
future droughts. This includes work to review and revise the National Drought 
Agreement with the states and territories and the Commonwealth Drought Plan.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 143  
The background contexts (BC) considered, in developing a regional profile and identifying 
the impacts of past and future droughts include:  
• 
(BC.1) Barwon-Darling Valley Annual Surface Water Quality Report  
• 
(BC.2) Bourke Shire Council Drought Management Plan  
• 
(BC.3) Bourke Shire Strategy  
• 
(BC.4) Brewarrina Community Development Plan  
• 
(BC.5) Brewarrina Local Environment Plan  
• 
(BC.6) Brewarrina Shire Council Operational Plan  
• 
(BC.7) Brewarrina Shire Economic Development and Tourism Plan  
• 
(BC.8) Brewarrina Strategic Planning Statement  
• 
(BC.9) Draft Far West Regional Plan  
• 
(BC.10) Far West Climate Change Snapshot  
• 
(BC.11) Far West Enabling Regional Adaptation Report  
• 
(BC.12) Far West Regional Economic Development Strategy – 2023 Update  
• 
(BC.13) Far West Regional Plan (2036)  
• 
(BC.14) Louth Floodplain Risk Management Study and Plan  
• 
(BC.15) Northern Connectivity Update  
• 
(BC.16) Revised Community Strategic Plan Brewarrina Shire 2026  
• 
(BC.17) Walgett Community Drought Documents  
• 
(BC.18) Water and Drought Security Report  
• 
(BC.19) Water Management Plan Chapter 3.7 – Barwon-Darling River  
• 
(BC.20) Western Regional Water Strategy  
The background contexts (BC) considered, in the identification of existing drought initiatives, 
within NSW, Australia and International regional and rural contexts, for potential implementation 
within the regions considered in this plan, include:  
• 
• 
(BC.22) Baselining Drought – Developing a Baseline Understanding of Farmer and 
Community Perceptions of Drought  
• 
(BC.23) Building Climate Resilience Through Nature Based Solutions in Europe  
• 
(BC.24) Climate Change in the North-West and Local Land Services Region  
• 
(BC.25) Coordinated Strategic Plan to Advance Desalination for Enhanced Water 
Security  
• 
(BC.26) Draft Inquiry Report – Government Drought Support  
• 
(BC.27) Enhanced Aquifer Recharge of Stormwater in the United States: State of 
the Review Science  
• 
(BC.28) EU Strategy on Adaptation to Climate Change  
• 
(BC.29) Far West Enabling Regional Adaptation Report  
• 
(BC.30) Final Report – Support for Drought Affected Communities in NSW  
• 
(BC.31) Interim Report – Support for Drought Affected Communities in NSW  
• 
(BC.32) Macquarie – Castlereagh Regional Water Strategy  
• 
(BC.33) Managing and Preparing for Drought   
• 
(BC.34) Regional Strengths and Infrastructure Gaps Regional Analysis: NSW  
• 
(BC.35) Regional Water Strategy: Western Implementation Plan  
• 
(BC.36) Resilience Strategies for Drought

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 144  
• 
(BC.37) Social and Economic Impacts of Drought on Farm Families and Rural 
Communities  
• 
(BC.38) Strengthening Agricultural Resilience in the Face of Multiple Risks – 
Resilience to Drought in Australia  
• 
(BC.39) The Role of Conservation Programs in Drought Resilience  
• 
(BC.40) Water Efficiency and Infrastructure Technical Brief

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 145 
Desktop Review and Strategic Alignment   
The review of prior strategies focused on ensuring the alignment of strategic priorities and projects for this Plan, with the Western Regional Water 
Strategy and the Macquarie Castlereagh Water Strategy. Below are the region-specific documents, plans and reports that were assessed, analysed 
and incorporated into this Plan.  
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
Barwon-Darling  
Valley Annual  
Surface Water 
Quality Report  
[2022]  
NSW  
Government -  
Planning and  
Environment  
Collection, analysis and 
report of the ambient and 
surface water quality 
condition in the 
BarwonDarling Valley from 
July 2021 to June 2022.  
Yes – Analysis of 
surface water  
quality in the  
Barwon-Darling 
Valley showed an 
increase in sites 
with a “poor” 
rating coinciding 
with drought 
followed by 
repeated flooding 
since 2021.  
No  
Yes – Monitoring 
sites included Barwon 
River at  
Brewarrina and  
Darling River at 
Bourke in the Barwon 
and Upper Darling 
water quality zones.  
Yes – Analyses Surface 
Water Quality, 
addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
flooding and hypoxic 
blackwater events, 
including discussion of 
management of inflows 
and monitoring of 
dissolved oxygen levels 
throughout the river 
system.  
Bourke Shire  
Council Drought  
Management  
Plan [2006]  
The Council of  
the Shire of  
Bourke  
The Bourke Drought 
Management Plan  
meticulously outlines the 
strategic approach and 
considerations for 
addressing water supply 
challenges in the face of 
drought or other 
emergency conditions. 
Central to the document 
is the recognition of water 
carting as a crucial, albeit 
expensive, response 
measure, necessitated 
under extreme 
circumstances such as 
the depletion of weir  
No  
Yes – Describes the  
Water Supply 
Strategy for Bourke 
and North Bourke 
and the Water Supply 
Strategy for Villages 
within Bourke Shire.   
Yes – Addresses 
community water 
infrastructure, 
services and 
requirements, 
including natural 
resources and impact 
on economic sectors.  
Yes - Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions, 
population growth, and 
infrastructure needs, 
including the need for  
water conservation and  
management 
strategies.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 146 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
pools, failure of Water 
Treatment Plants (WTPs), 
or contamination events 
affecting water quality. It  
explores the feasibility of 
sourcing emergency water 
from alternate river pools 
as a potentially more cost-
effective solution.  
Bourke 
Shire 
Strategy [2012]  
The Council of  
the Shire of  
Bourke  
Document provides a 
description of the physical, 
social and economic 
environment of the Shire 
as well as the planning 
context. This includes the 
development pattern, list 
and analysis of issues 
facing the region, and a 
vision for a sustainable 
future for the Bourke 
Shire.  
Yes – Discusses 
impact of drought 
on outmigration, 
unemployment, 
economic sectors 
including a 
decrease in 
agriculture and 
farming.   
Yes – Challenges: 
Reducing water 
supply risks, 
protecting water 
quality in the Darling 
River and improving 
quality where 
possible in water 
bodies and 
underground water 
resources; Priorities: 
Safe and reliable 
water supply, to 
embody the concept 
of Catchment  
Management  
(Western Catchment 
Action Plan).   
Yes – Describes 
social, economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics, 
including population, 
location, land use, 
natural resources, 
and economic 
sectors.  
Yes - Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions, 
population growth, and 
infrastructure needs.   
Brewarrina  
Community  
Development  
Plan [2021]  
Regional Aid 
Australia  
The Brewarrina  
Community Development  
Program, funded by Rural 
Aid, details the region's 
characteristics, history, 
and culture. It identifies 
community goals based 
on consultation with the 
community completed by  
Rural Aid and the  
Yes – Discusses 
community 
challenges as a 
result of the 7year 
drought period, 
including decline 
in  
population,  
difficulties 
attracting and  
No – The plan 
focuses on 
community impacts 
and does not directly 
link to the regional 
water strategy’s 
challenges or 
priorities.   
Yes – Describes 
social and economic 
characteristics, 
including population, 
Indigenous history 
and culture, social  
networks, institutions, 
and economic 
sectors.    
No

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 147 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
Brewarrina Historical 
Society. The program 
highlights guiding 
principles, challenges 
over the past 20 years, 
and current regional 
assets. It also outlines 
strategies, actions, and 
activities planned to 
achieve community 
aspirations.  
retaining skilled 
staff,  
unemployment, 
low income, 
intergenerational 
poverty, business 
loss and lack of 
water efficiency.  
Brewarrina Local  
Environmental  
Plan [2012]  
NSW  
Government - 
Environmental  
Planning and  
Assessment Act  
The Plan targets 
environmental planning 
for Brewarrina land, 
aligning with standard 
instruments per section 
33A of the Act. Its goals 
are multifaceted: to 
manage Brewarrina's 
resources by 
safeguarding agricultural 
land, natural resources, 
conservation areas, 
scenic/recreational areas, 
and heritage sites; to 
foster ecologically 
sustainable development; 
to secure agriculture's 
future by broadening the 
economic base and 
preventing agricultural 
land loss; to reduce land 
use conflicts; to ensure 
development suits land 
capability; to offer diverse 
living options and 
settlement types; and to 
protect arterial road  
No   
No  
No  
No

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 148 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
efficiency from adjacent 
development impacts.  
Brewarrina Shire 
Council  
Operational Plan  
[2023]  
Brewarrina Shire 
Council  
The Brewarrina Shire 
Council Operational Plan 
for 2023/2024 details the 
activities and tasks to 
achieve objectives from 
the Community Strategic  
Plan and Delivery 
Program. It includes 
progress metrics, 
responsible parties, and 
financial information like 
estimates, policies, and 
fees, aligning with both 
the Delivery Program and 
Operational Plan.  
No   
No - The plan focuses 
on community 
impacts and does not 
directly link to the 
regional water 
strategy’s challenges 
or priorities.  
No  
No  
Brewarrina Shire  
Economic 
Development and 
Tourism Plan 
[2011]  
Blackadder 
Associates  
The EDT Plan aims to 
promote economic growth 
and tourism across the 
Brewarrina Shire, not just 
benefiting individual 
enterprises or the town 
itself but fostering a 
positive business 
environment throughout 
the Shire. Its objectives 
include identifying unique 
economic and tourism 
opportunities, selecting 
those with the highest 
success potential, and 
enhancing community 
economic sustainability. 
Blackadder Associates 
emphasised the 
importance of focusing on 
implementing ideas  
No  
No - The plan focuses 
on economic and 
tourism opportunities 
and does not directly 
link to the regional 
water strategy’s 
challenges or 
priorities.  
Yes - Describes social 
and economic 
characteristics, 
including economic 
sectors, employment, 
and population.    
No

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 149 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
during consultations with 
the Council and 
community, rather than 
merely generating them.  
Brewarrina  
Strategic  
Planning  
Statement [2020]  
Brewarrina Shire 
Council  
The LSPS gives effect to 
the Far West Regional 
Plan, implementing the 
directions and actions at a 
local level. The LSPS 
planning priorities, 
directions and actions 
provide the rationale for 
decisions about how we 
will use our land to 
achieve the community’s 
broader goals.  
Yes – Discusses 
negative effect the 
prevailing drought 
has had on 
agribusiness and 
the demographic 
changes it has 
influenced.   
No – the statement 
does not directly link 
to the regional water 
strategy’s challenges 
or priorities.  
Yes – Location, 
topography, land 
use, economic  
activity, population, 
Indigenous 
significance, natural 
ecosystems e.g. 
Culgoa National Park 
and the 
DarlingBarwon River.  
Yes – Discusses the 
need for future 
development to 
consider potential for 
extreme weather 
events and the need to 
reduce reliance on non-
renewable energy and 
water consumption.   
Central West and  
Orana Climate  
Change  
Snapshot [2014]   
Central West and  
Orana [NSW  
Government –  
Office of  
Environment and  
Heritage]  
The report provides 
detailed projections on 
the impacts of climate 
change in the Central 
West and Orana regions, 
focusing on temperature, 
rainfall, and fire weather 
changes. This document 
serves as a critical 
resource for 
understanding climate 
trends and preparing for 
future conditions.  
No  
No  
Yes – Location, 
population, natural 
ecosystems e.g.  
Macquarie Marshes.  
Yes – Climate  
Projections  
(temperature, rainfall, 
fire weather).    
Central West and  
Orana Regional  
Plan 2036 [2017]  
Central West and  
Orana [NSW  
Government –  
Planning and  
Environment]  
The plan outlines the 
vision, goals, and actions 
for the Central West and 
Orana region by 2036, 
focusing on economic 
diversification, 
environmental 
sustainability, 
infrastructure  
Yes – The plan 
discusses the 
impacts of past 
droughts on 
agriculture and 
water resources.  
Yes – Challenges: 
Reducing water 
supply risks, 
maintaining and 
improving river 
health, supporting a 
growing regional 
economy; Priorities: 
Safe water supply,  
Yes – Describes 
social, economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics, 
including population, 
land use, natural 
resources, and 
economic sectors.  
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions, 
population growth, and 
infrastructure needs.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 150 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
development, and 
community well-being.  
natural system 
resilience.  
Central West and  
Orana Regional  
Plan 2041 [2022]  
Central West and  
Orana [NSW  
Government –  
Planning and  
Environment]  
The plan provides a 
strategic framework for 
the region, focusing on 
sustainable growth, 
economic diversification, 
infrastructure 
development, and 
community well-being up 
to the year 2041.  
Yes – Discusses 
impacts of past 
droughts on water 
resources and 
agriculture.  
Yes – Challenges: 
Reducing water 
supply risks, 
supporting a growing 
regional economy;  
Priorities: Safe water 
supply.  
Yes – Describes 
social, economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics, 
including population, 
land use, natural 
resources, and 
economic sectors.  
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions, 
population growth, 
infrastructure needs, 
and the shift to 
renewable energy 
sources.  
Draft Far West  
Regional Plan  
2041 [2022]  
NSW  
Government -  
Planning and  
Environment  
20-year land use plans 
with a focus on the next 5 
years. They are prepared 
under the Environmental 
Planning and  
Assessment Act 1979 
(EP&A Act).Since the 
release of the Far West 
Regional Plan 2036, 
amendments to planning 
legislation elevated the 
importance of strategic 
planning at a regional and 
local level. This planning 
is essential to managing 
changes in the population 
and economy while 
guiding the development 
of local strategic planning 
statements.  
Yes – Discusses 
impact of past 
droughts on the 
natural 
environment, 
community 
wellbeing, 
infrastructure and 
the economy.   
No  
Yes - Describes 
social, economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics, 
including people and 
communities, 
environment, and 
economic sectors.  
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions, 
population growth, and 
infrastructure needs.  
Far West Climate  
Change  
Snapshot [2014]  
NSW  
Government -  
Office of  
Environment and  
Heritage  
Detailed information on 
the projected climate 
changes to the Far West 
region.  
No  
No  
Yes - Location, 
topography, 
population, and 
natural ecosystems.   
Yes - Climate  
Projections  
(temperature, rainfall, 
fire weather).    
Far West 
Enabling  
NSW  
Government -  
The 
report 
seeks 
to 
describe factors that  
No  
Yes - Challenges: 
Reducing water  
Yes – Location, 
population,  
No

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 151 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
Regional  
Adaptation  
Report [2017]  
Office of  
Environment and  
Heritage  
participants identified as 
contributing to sectoral 
and regional vulnerability, 
and the consideration of 
factors that contribute to 
regions' ability to cope 
with change, or 'adaptive 
capacity'.  
supply risks, 
supporting a growing 
regional economy;  
Priorities: Safe water 
supply, improved 
infrastructure to 
deliver water, secure 
regional water 
supplies.   
topography, and 
economic sectors.   
Far West  
Regional  
Economic  
Development  
Strategy - 2023  
Update [2023]  
NSW  
Government 
- 
Department of  
Regional NSW  
This strategy recognises 
the imperative to face the 
region’s challenges and 
does this by supporting 
current strengths, as well 
as exploring opportunities 
to give the region the best 
chance of achieving 
longterm, permanent, 
sustainability and 
vibrancy. The 2023 REDS 
update builds on the 
strong foundation created 
by the 2018 REDS and 
includes for each FER:  
updated data and 
economic analysis, 
reflecting new data 
releases and analysis of 
the impact of key events 
that have occurred since 
2018; discussion of the 
key opportunities and 
challenges facing regional 
NSW and individual 
communities; and 
updated strategies and 
enabling actions to  
No  
Yes – Challenges: 
long term water 
security, reducing 
water supply risks, 
supporting a growing 
regional economy;  
Priorities: Implement 
recommendations 
from the Draft  
Western Regional 
Water Strategy to 
improve the resilience 
of future flows and 
storage in the region 
and develop greater 
community 
understanding.   
Yes – Location, 
population, size of the 
economy, housing,  
employment, primary 
and emerging 
industries.   
Yes – Addresses 
significant events 
impacting major 
industries and identifies 
future strategic 
opportunities for 
economic resilience, 
including strengths and 
vulnerabilities in 
mining, energy, health 
care, agriculture, and 
tourism.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 152 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
guide 
and 
support 
economic development  
priorities for regional  
NSW.  
Far West  
Regional Plan  
(2036) [2017]  
NSW  
Government -  
Planning and  
Environment  
Encompasses a vision, 
goals and actions geared 
towards delivering greater 
prosperity in the years 
ahead for those who live, 
work and visit the region.  
No  
No  
Yes – economic 
sectors, topography 
and land use, 
population and 
community 
demographics.   
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions, 
population growth, 
infrastructure needs, 
and the shift to 
renewable energy 
sources.  
Louth Floodplain  
Risk  
Management  
Study and Plan  
[2020]  
Bourke Shire 
Council  
The Floodplain Risk  
Management Study 
(FRMS) aimed to 
evaluate flooding impacts, 
review Council policies on 
flood-prone land 
development,  
explore management 
options for affected areas, 
and create a Floodplain 
Risk  
Management Plan  
(FRMP). The FRMP aims 
to adjust Council policies 
for development 
compatibility with flood 
risks, establish Flood 
Planning Levels for 
different land uses, 
recommend a works 
program to lessen 
flooding's social, 
environmental, and 
economic impacts, and  
No  
Yes – Challenges:  
floodplain risk  
management;   
Priorities: develop a  
Floodplain Risk  
Management Plan 
(FRMP) for the 
management of flood 
affected land.   
No  
No

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 153 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
outline an implementation 
program for these 
measures. Initial steps 
included gathering flood 
data and updating flood 
modeling based on the 
Rural Flood Study for the 
Darling River Floodplain. 
The FRMS concentrated 
on flooding from the 
Darling River and local 
catchment flooding in 
Louth, incorporating 
detailed flood behavior 
analysis.  
Northern  
Connectivity  
Event Update  
[2018]  
Commonwealth  
Environmental  
Water Office  
This Update details the 
initiatives and actions that 
were undertaken as part 
of The Northern 
Connectivity Event in 
reponse to several critical 
environmental and 
community needs arising 
from prolonged periods of 
reduced or ceased water 
flow in parts of the Murray-
Darling Basin, particularly 
the BarwonDarling river 
system. This lack of flow 
had several causes, 
including extended 
drought conditions, water 
extraction for agriculture, 
and climate variability, 
which significantly 
impacted the river's  
Yes – Discusses 
the impact of 
drought on river 
flows, causing 
flows to stop more 
often and for 
longer in the  
Darling between 
Bourke and 
Wilcannia. 
Focuses primarily 
on the 
environmental 
impact and the  
vulnerability of  
the endangered 
native fish 
community.   
Yes – Challenges: To 
benefit native fish 
along rivers in the 
northern 
MurrayDarling Basin 
by improving 
longitudinal 
connectivity;  
Priorities: to better  
manage  
environmental water 
across NSW, 
coordinating the work 
of State and  
Commonwealth 
agencies, enhancing 
community 
understanding and 
engagement.   
Yes – Location, 
topography, natural 
resources and 
ecosystems.    
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change and 
periods of drought on 
river flows, primarily for 
native fish species in 
the northern 
MurrayDarling Basin.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 154 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
health and the 
ecosystems it supports.  
NSW Business  
Chamber  
Drought Survey  
[2018]  
NSW [NSW  
Business  
Chamber]  
The survey evaluates 
the impact of drought on 
businesses across 
various regions in NSW, 
highlighting revenue 
losses, cash flow issues, 
staffing reductions, and  
concerns about business 
viability. It provides an 
overview of how different 
industries and regions 
are affected by the 
drought conditions.  
Yes – Provides 
detailed analysis 
of the impact of 
the current 
drought on 
businesses, 
including 
economic and 
operational 
challenges.  
No – The survey 
focuses on business  
impacts and does 
not directly link to the 
regional water 
strategy's challenges 
or priorities.  
Yes – Describes 
social and economic 
characteristics, 
including revenue 
impact, cash flow 
challenges, staffing 
issues, and regional  
economic 
weaknesses.  
Yes – Addresses 
future uncertainties 
related to prolonged 
drought conditions, 
economic stability, 
business viability, and 
potential need for 
business closures or 
scaling back 
operations.  
Regional Water  
Strategy – 
MacquarieCastlereagh  
[2023]  
Macquarie –  
Castlereagh  
Region [NSW  
Government –  
Planning and  
Environment]  
The strategy identifies 
key water-related 
challenges in the  
Macquarie–Castlereagh 
region and outlines 
actions to address them, 
ensuring secure, reliable, 
and resilient water 
supplies for regional and 
remote communities 
over the next 20 years 
and beyond.  
Yes – The 
strategy 
addresses the 
impacts of past 
droughts on 
water availability, 
agriculture, and 
community 
wellbeing.  
Yes – The report sets 
the priorities and 
challenges in the 
region relating to 
water security and 
drought.  
Yes – The strategy 
describes social, 
economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics of the 
region, including 
water use, climate 
snapshot, and 
cultural connections 
to Country.  
Yes – The strategy 
addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
reduced water 
availability, and the 
need for climate 
adaptation for industry 
and communities.  
Revised  
Community  
Strategic Plan  
Brewarrina Shire  
2026 [2022]  
Brewarrina Shire 
Council  
The Brewarrina Shire  
Council's Community  
Strategic Plan, targeting 
developments up to 
2026, outlines key 
priorities and objectives 
for the area's social, 
environmental, 
economic, and civic 
leadership future. 
Emphasising a 
community-centric  
Yes – Addresses 
challenges and 
issues related to 
drought that have 
influenced the 
composition of 
the community’s 
environmental 
strategies.   
Yes – Challenges: 
Reducing water 
supply risks, 
supporting a growing 
regional economy;   
Priorities: adequate 
and safe water 
supply that is 
appropriately priced, 
manage  
environmentally  
Yes – The plan 
describes social, 
economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics of 
Brewarrina shire, 
including roads, 
infrastructure, 
population, 
education, 
employment.   
No

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 155 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
approach, the plan's 
implementation and 
updates fall under the 
Council's responsibility. 
Developed through 
workshops, surveys, and 
analysis, it represents a 
collaborative effort 
involving the Council, 
state agencies, community 
groups, and individuals, 
addressing wide-ranging 
issues pertinent to the 
entire community.  
responsible drainage 
works.   
Walgett  
Community  
Drought  
Documents  
[2015]  
NSW Farmers and 
North West Plains  
Sustainability  
Group  
In late May 2015, six 
meetings were held 
across the Walgett Shire 
to address the impacts of 
long-term drought on 
landholders and business 
owners. Over 130 
attendees participated in 
discussions led by NSW 
Farmers and the North  
West Plains Sustainability 
Group, focusing on 
identifying critical issues 
and seeking practical 
solutions. These 
documents detail the 
challenges, concerns and 
solutions raised during this 
consultation.  
Yes – Discussion 
of the impacts of 
past droughts on 
water availability,  
agriculture,  
economy and 
community 
wellbeing.  
Yes – The report sets 
the priorities and 
challenges in Walgett 
relating to water 
security and drought, 
focusing on 
agricultural 
production, local 
businesses and 
social and community 
wellbeing.   
Yes - The plan 
describes social, 
economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics of 
Walgett Shire, 
including location, 
population, 
employment, land 
use and regional 
economic challenges.  
Yes - Discusses 
concerns over future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
economic transitions 
and infrastructure 
needs, including the 
need for water  
conservation and 
management strategies. 
Water and  
Drought Security  
Report  
Lower Macquarie  
Water Utilities  
Alliance  
This plan provides an 
indepth look at water 
management strategies for 
each region within the  
Yes – Discusses 
the issues of water 
insecurity for 
irrigation,  
Yes –   
Challenges: minimise 
transporting water to 
avoid evacuation of  
Yes – Describes water 
sources, infrastructure 
for water supply, and  
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
prolonged periods of 
drought, including the

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 156 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
Lower Macquarie Water  
Utilities Alliance. This 
includes an overview of 
the regions, relevant  
studies and management 
plans relating to the 
region’s water security, 
background information 
on their current supply 
system, factors affecting 
their current level of water 
security, alternative water 
supplies available and 
recommendations for 
improved water security.  
mining 
companies, and 
communities, 
including water 
restrictions.   
urban centres and to 
reduce frequency and 
severity of water 
restrictions;  
Priorities; improving 
reliability of water 
supply during extreme 
drought.   
villages of each shire.  need to improve 
emergency supplies in 
shires primarily in 
relation to water 
infrastructure.   
Water  
Management  
Plan Chapter 3.7  
- Barwon-Darling  
River [2021]  
Commonwealth  
Environmental  
Water Office  
This document sets out 
the plans for managing 
within a multi-year context 
the Commonwealth 
environmental water 
portfolio in the Barwon– 
Darling River for 2019-20. 
It outlines water delivery 
scenarios, carryover 
potential and trade 
options, which will inform 
decisions by the  
Commonwealth  
Environmental Water 
Holder on how to best 
use the available water to 
benefit the environment of 
the Murray–Darling Basin.  
Yes – Addresses 
impact of drought 
on ecosystem 
functions and 
productivity, 
including the 
impact of a 
reduction in 
extent and quality 
of drought refuges 
on aquatic 
communities in  
the 
BarwonDarling 
river system.     
Yes – Challenges: 
Protect and maintain 
the condition of 
natural ecosystems 
in the BarwonDarling 
system including 
vegetation,  
waterbirds, native 
fish;   
Priorities: supporting 
connectivity along the 
Barwon and Darling 
rivers and between 
the rivers and their 
floodplains, 
supporting key 
ecosystem functions 
and maintaining both 
water quality and 
drought refuge 
habitat.   
Yes – Describes 
location, 
environmental 
conditions and 
natural ecosystems in 
the Barwon- 
Darling river system.   
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to 
climate change, 
prolonged periods of 
drought, extreme 
weather conditions and 
flooding.   
Western Enabling  NSW  
Government –  
The report outlines 
vulnerabilities to climate  
Yes – Discusses 
impacts of past  
Yes – Challenges:  
Climate resilience,  
Yes 
– 
Describes 
social, economic,  
Yes – Addresses future 
uncertainties related to

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 157 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Description  
Assessment of 
past drought 
impact?  
Links to Regional 
Water Strategy?  
Addresses  
Regional  
Characteristics?  
Address future 
shocks or 
uncertainties?  
Regional  
Adaptation – 
Central West and  
Orana Region  
Report [2017]  
Office of  
Environment and  
Heritage  
change in the Central 
West and Orana region 
and identifies adaptive 
strategies to build 
resilience across various 
sectors, including  
agriculture, water 
management,  
infrastructure, and 
community health.  
droughts on water 
resources, 
agriculture, and 
community 
wellbeing.  
water security, 
sustaining regional 
economies; Priorities: 
Integrated water 
management, 
enhancing adaptive 
capacity, fostering  
resilient communities.  
and environmental 
characteristics, 
including population 
demographics, land  
use, natural 
resources, and 
economic sectors.  
climate change, water 
availability, economic 
stability, infrastructure 
resilience, and 
community health and 
well-being.  
Western  
Regional Water  
Strategy [2022]  
NSW  
Government -  
Planning and  
Environment  
Identifies the key regional 
challenges we need to 
tackle over the coming 
decades and outlines the 
actions we will undertake 
to respond to those 
challenges. The best and 
latest climate evidence, 
along with a wide range 
of tools and solutions, 
has been used to chart a 
progressive journey for 
water needs over the next 
20 years.  
Yes – Discusses 
impact of drought 
on water 
connectivity, the 
health of natural 
systems, water  
quality, viability of 
businesses, and 
community 
wellbeing.   
Yes – Challenges: 
Improve water 
security, quality and 
flood management for 
regional towns and 
communities, 
enhancing economic 
prosperity, protecting 
the environment and 
improving  
affordability;  
Priorities: Deliver and 
manage water for 
local communities, 
improving water 
access reliability.   
Yes - Describes 
social, economic, and 
environmental 
characteristics, 
including population, 
land use, towns, 
climate, natural 
resources, natural 
ecosystems and 
economic sectors.  
No  
Relevance of Global academic and government strategies and 
reports  
Global academic and government derived strategies and reports were also reviewed, with their relevance assessed against the strategic 
priorities and objectives identified by regional stakeholders the initial round of consultation for this plan.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 158 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Australian  
Government  
Drought  
Response Plan  
[2019]  
Australia  
[Australian  
Government  
– Department  
of Agriculture]  
Y  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
Y  
Y  
N  
Y  
Baselining  
Drought 
Developing a  
Baseline 
Understanding 
of Farmer and 
Community  
Perceptions of  
Drought [2022]  
Southern  
NSW  
[Southern  
NSW  
Innovation  
Hub – 
Sustainable  
Agriculture, 
Landscapes 
and  
Communities]  
Information relevant to challenges only.  
Building  
Climate  
Resilience  
Through  
Nature Based  
Europe  
[Academic  
Journal – 
Climate Risk  
Management]  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 159 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Solutions in 
Europe [2022]  
Climate  
Change in the 
North-West and 
Local Land 
Services  
Region [2015]  
North West  
Region [NSW  
Government  
– Local Land  
Services  
North West]  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
Coordinated 
Strategic Plan 
to Advance 
Destination for  
Enhanced  
Water Security  
[2019]  
US [US  
National  
Science and  
Technology  
Council]  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Draft Inquiry  
Report –  
Government  
Drought  
Support [2008]  
Australia  
[Australian  
Government  
– Productivity  
Commission]  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
Y

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 160 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Enhanced  
Aquifer  
Recharge of 
Stormwater in 
the United 
States: State of 
the Review 
Science [2021[  
US [US EPA]  N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
EU Strategy on  
Adaptation to  
Climate  
Change [2021]  
Europe  
[European  
Commission]  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
Far West  
Enabling  
Regional  
Adaptation  
Report [2017]  
Far West  
NSW [NSW  
Government -  
Office of  
Environment 
and Heritage]  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
Final Report - 
Support for  
NSW  
[Legislative  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 161 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities 
in NSW [2021]  
Assembly 
Committee 
on  
Investment,  
Industry and  
Regional  
Development]  
Interim Report  
- Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities 
in NSW [2020]  
NSW  
[Legislative  
Assembly 
Committee 
on  
Investment,  
Industry and  
Regional  
Development]  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
Macquarie - 
Castlereagh  
Regional  
Water Strategy  
[2023]  
NSW [NSW  
Government - 
Department 
of Planning 
and  
Environment]  
Y  
Y  
Y  
Y  
Y  
Y  
N  
N  
N

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 162 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Managing and  
Preparing for  
Drought [2018]  
NSW [NSW  
Government - 
Department 
of Primary 
Industries]  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Is a  
literacy 
resource to 
aid  
Regional 
and Rural 
Farmers.  
N  
N  
Provides 
strategies 
for 
individual 
farmers 
and 
businesse 
s to  
manage 
drought.  
Regional  
Strengths and  
Infrastructure  
Gaps Regional 
Analysis: NSW  
[2022]  
NSW  
[Australian  
Government - 
Infrastructure  
Australia]  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
Regional Water  
Strategy:  
Western  
Western  
NSW [NSW  
Government - 
Department 
of Planning  
N  
Y  
Y  
Y  
N  
Y  
N  
Y  
N

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 163 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Implementation 
Plan [2022]  
and  
Environment]  
Resilience  
Strategies for  
Drought [2018]  
US [Center 
for Climate 
and Energy 
Solutions]  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Social and  
Economic  
Impacts of  
Drought on 
Farm Families 
and Rural 
Communities  
Australia  
[Australian  
Institute of  
Family  
Studies]  
Information relevant to challenges only.  
Strengthening  
Agricultural 
Resilience in 
the Face of 
Multiple Risks - 
Resilience to  
Drought in  
Australia 
[Organisation 
for Economic 
Co-operation 
and  
Development]  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Y

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 164 
Strategy [Year]  
Region 
[Organisation]  
Enduring  
Level of  
Supply 
for  
Regional 
and  
Rural  
Towns  
Coordination 
Across  
Government 
levels  
Management 
of Extreme  
Events  
Rural Water  
Conservation 
and  
Efficiency  
Access to  
Additional  
Water  
Entitlements 
or Alternate  
Measure  
Utilisation  
Improved 
Water  
Literacy,  
Drought  
Education 
and Greater 
Community  
Engagement  
Enhanced  
Financial  
Support for  
Drought  
Affected  
Communities  
Reduced  
Skills  
Shortage for  
Effective  
Water  
Management  
Enhanced  
Understandi 
ng and  
Management 
of Climate  
Risk  
Relevant to the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the RDRP (Yes [Y]/ No [N])  
Australia 
[2020]  
The Role of  
Conservation  
Programs in  
Drought  
Resilience  
[2013]  
US [United  
States  
Department  
of Agriculture]  
N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N  
Water  
Efficiency and  
Infrastructure  
Technical Brief  
[2016]  
US [US EPA]  N  
N  
N  
Y  
N  
N  
N  
N  
N

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 165 
Appendix 4 Long List of Projects  
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
All  
1  
Government Job 
Tenure  
Government jobs to be 
contracted to for min 5 
years to provide income 
security for communities.  
(People are not “job 
shopping” and have a 
commitment to put roots 
in a community i.e buy a 
house, become a 
member of a sporting 
organisation.)  
Economy  
(Maintaining 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
Not  
Applicable  
Long Term - 
Government  
Policy  
NSW and  
Federal  
Governments.  
Councils.  
No  
Actions required:  
1. Initiate discussions 
with NSW State 
Government and 
Commonwealth 
Departments.  
Supporting Drought  
Resilience Technical  
Studies: Nil  
1  
2  
Drought Resilience 
Officers  
Paid advocates /  
Representative (part time 
or full time) in the 
community to identify 
and access services grants 
focussed on Drought 
Resilience and 
Community building  
activities  
Economic,   
Social,  
To be 
identified  
Economic - Initiative 
would contribute to an 
off-farm income stream 
for a person. Social - 
Increased community 
cohesion. 
Environmental - Not 
directly identified.   
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Maintaining 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
Not 
identified  
12 Months  
NSW  
Government  
Council(s)  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. 
Initiate 
discussions with NSW 
State Government.  
2. 
Council(s) / 
Regional Organisation 
development a position 
description and fund.   
Supporting Drought  
Resilience Technical  
Studies: Nil  
1  
3  
Tax Incentives / 
Economic Zone  
Tax incentives / economic 
zone:  
1.A exemptions, 
incentives to work / live / 
create businesses in 
regions that address 
inadequate infrastructure 
available in other regions 
eg – communications, 
access to energy or 
alternate energies, access 
to water   
2. re-instate / encourage 
increase of population – 
reward those that decide  
to stay   
Economy  
 (Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
Not  
Applicable  
Australian  
Government   
NSW  
Government  
No  
Actions required:  
1. Initiate discussions 
with NSW State 
Government and 
Commonwealth 
Departments.  
Supporting Drought  
Resilience Technical  
Studies: Nil  
3

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 166 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
4  
Water Security Plan  
Develop a regional water 
security, 
(including 
infrastructure) plan for 
the  Walgett, Brewarrina,  
Bourke and Cobar Shires  
(To incorporate river and 
bore water options, and 
include town, village, 
stock, industrial, irrigation 
and domestic usage)  
(To allow for a strategy / 
plan to access water for 
dust suppression and road 
maintenance to reduce 
financial burded on Local 
Government).  
Note: Bore options, 
included below at Serial 
5.a.  
(Also conside the plan 
would need to include a 
description of the extant 
water supply systems, 
secure yield study 
5/10/10 rule)  actions to 
be taken during each 
drought response level, 
actions that should be 
taken in preardness for 
future drought periods).  
Economic,   
Social,  
Environmental  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water 
resources  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of bores on 
the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
Obtain funding 
to conduct the 
studies and 
develop the 
plan, 6 months.  
Drought  
Resilience  
Technical Studies 
6  
months  
Development  
and finalisation  
of plan 3 - 6 
months  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW Regional  
Growth Fund  
Murray River  
Basin  
Authority  
Yes  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed cost 
estimate (business case / 
funding application.  
3. 
Development of 
the plan.  
4. 
Discussion with 
stakeholders and 
community.  
5. 
Finalisation of 
plan. 6. Identification of 
business case 
requirements for 
subsequent priority 
initiatives / plans / 
actions.  
7. Progression of 
business cases / 
implementation actions.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies:  
1. Conduct a water 
demand study aligned to 
Agriculture and 
domestic uses. 2. 
Community  
consultation to facilitate 
concept for the plan, 
prior to detailed 
development.  
5

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 167 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
5  
Water security -  
Groundwater  
Increase the number of 
water bores for stock and 
domestic use and dust 
suppression for road 
maintenance / 
construction activities.   
The proving of ground 
water resources (quality 
and flow) and installation 
of standpipes (connected 
to a supervisory control 
system to provide a 
capability for standpipes 
to be switched on / off, to 
cross level usage 
between locations to 
adjust for changes in 
quality and flow rates) in 
up to five locations, to 
provide greater resilience 
for the agriculture and 
town water supplies of 
local towns.  
Economic,  
Environmental  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water 
resources  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of bores on 
the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW Future  
Drought 
Fund (for 
technical  
studies)  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
Pre- 
Construction - 16 
months  
Construction 6 
months  
NSW DPE - 
Water   
Agriculture  
NSW  
NSW Farmers 
association  
Identified  
Agriculture  
Industries  
Yes  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed design 
of selected bore 
locations.  
3. 
Detailed cost 
estimate.  
4. 
Complete full 
business case.  
5. 
Funding 
applications and 
approvals 6. Tender for 
construction.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies:  
1. 
Conduct a 
ground water resource 
study aligned to 
Agriculture  and local 
use.  
2. 
Prove (drill and 
assess) bores (quality 
and flow) in an agreed 
number of locations  
(e.g. five).  
3. 
Community 
consultation.  
5  
6  
Stronger 
communities 
program  
Series of activities of 
events to promote 
"support groups" for 
social cohesion and 
connectness that  
Councils support /initiate 
during periods of  
droughts   
Note: If staff required to 
support - then they are 
paid for by the Council 
(reduce load on  
'volunteers' to organise, 
conduct and clean up)  
Social  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Stronger 
communities 
and diverse 
regional 
economies  
Economic - Initiatives 
would contribute to an 
off-farm income stream.  
Social - Increased 
commmunity cohesion, 
reduced demand for 
mental health services. 
Environmental - Not 
directly identified.   
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
Maintain 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth 
Fund  
2 - 3 Months  
Regional NSW  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. 
In conjuction 
with  
Community organisations 
develop a program of 
activities.  
2. 
Develop a plan 
for the conduct of each 
activity. 3. Deliver the 
scheduled activities.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies: Nil.  
7

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 168 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
7  
Business education  
workshops – 
financial  
management  
Provision of business 
mentoring to support 
'proactive decision 
making' (livestock trading, 
decision making based on 
facts and figures) 
(Workshops / one-on- 
one)  
Economy  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Stronger 
primary 
industries 
prepared for 
drought  
Economic - Improved 
ability to maintain 
livestock nutrition 
Social - Improved 
resilience of farmers in 
managing through 
drought.  
Environmental - Not 
directly identified.  
Planning and  
Monitoring  
(Pillar 1)  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Maintain 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW  
Department  
of  
Agriculture, 
Fisheries 
and Forestry  
Immediate  
Regional NSW  
NSW Rural  
Financial 
Counselling 
service  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. Identify topics to be 
covered (e.g.   
    Succession planning   
    Farm budgeting      
Forecasting and cash 
flow analysis   
    Farm debt mediation      
Bank reviews and 
relationships   
    Help refinancing debt     
Access government 
assistance and rural  
loans   
    Understand farm loan  
interest rates       
Understand your 
financials \Build a 
business plan   
    Identify areas of risk   
    Benchmarking      
Referrals   
    Debt relief and 
negotiation)  
2. Develop a schedule. 3. 
Advertsie program and 
call for participants.  
4. Deliver the program.  
8  
8  
Telecommunications  
Security  
Improve 
telecommunications 
connectivity (4G and 5G) 
in the region to support 
business and agricutlural 
productivity  
Economy  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on 
telecommunications, 
within the community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are 
telecommunications 
options to support their 
business operations.  
Planning and  
Monitoring  
(Pillar 1)  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
transform 
and improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW and  
Federal  
Governments.  
Councils.  
Yes  
Actions required:  
1. Initiate discussions 
with NSW State 
Government and 
Commonwealth 
Departments.  
Supporting Drought  
Resilience Technical  
Studies: Nil  
11

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 169 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
9  
Water Security  
Strategy - Barwon /  
Darling  
Development water 
security strategy to 
ensure sustainable water  
management and  
availability in the Barwon-
Darling catchment area.  
Economic,   
Social,  
Environmental  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water 
resources  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of bores on 
the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
Obtain funding 
to conduct the 
studies and 
develop the 
plan, 6 months.  
Drought  
Resilience  
Technical 
Studies,  6 
months  
Development  
and finalisation  
of plan 3 - 6 
months  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW Regional  
Growth Fund  
Murray River  
Basin  
Authority  
Yes  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed cost 
estimate (business case / 
funding application.  
3. 
Development of 
the plan.  
4. 
Discussion with 
stakeholders and 
community.  
5. 
Finalisation of 
plan. 6. Identification of 
business case 
requirements for 
subsequent priority 
initiatives / plans / 
actions.  
7. Progression of 
business cases / 
implementation actions.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies:  
1. Conduct a water 
demand study aligned to 
Agriculture and 
domestic uses. 2. 
Community  
consultation to facilitate 
concept for the plan, 
prior to detailed 
development.  
NA

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 170 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
10  
Additional  
Consultation and  
Community  
Connection  
Regular consultation 
focused on the impacts of 
drought on key 
demographic groups, 
including First Nations 
people, young families, 
and the youth, to 
integrate their 
perspectives and solutions 
into community 
development.  
Social  
Social - Increased 
community cohesion  
Planning and  
Monitoring  
(Pillar 1)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
2 - 3 Months  
Council(s)  
First Nations  
Youth  
Young  
Families  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. 
In conjuction 
with Community develop 
a consultation schedule.  
2. 
Develop a plan 
for the  
conduct of each 
consultation.  
3. 
Deliver the 
engagment log of the 
consultation.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies: Nil.  
NA

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 171 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
11  
Mental Health  
Awareness in Young  
Men  
Increase community 
sporting activities and 
events, like community 
BBQs, to enhance social 
connections, thereby 
addressing isolation 
among farmers and 
improving mental health 
among young men.  
Social  
Social - Increased 
commmunity cohesion  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Maintaing 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
2 Months  
Community  
members  
Local sports 
clubs  
Mental health 
organisations  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. 
In conjuction 
with  
Mental Health  
Organisations develop  
program content.  
2. 
Develop a plan 
to conduct program. 3. 
Deliver the program. 4. 
Provide follow-up after 
the program. 
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies: Nil.  
NA

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 172 
Bourke  
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
1  
Additional Water  
Supply for Bourke    
Improve Capacity for 
Bourke  
Economic,  
Environmental  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water 
resources  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of water 
usage on the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
NSW Future  
Drought 
Fund (for 
technical  
studies)  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
NSW Safe 
and Secure 
Water 
program  
Pre- 
Construction - 24 
months  
Construction 12 
months  
NSW DPE - 
Water   
NSW Dams  
Safety  
Agriculture  
NSW  
NSW Farmers 
association  
Australian  
Government  
National  
Water Grid  
To be 
determined  
Actions required: 1. 
Geotechnical 
investigation.   
2. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
3. 
Detailed 
design. 4. Detailed cost 
estimate.  
5. 
Complete full 
business case.  
6. 
Funding 
applications and 
approvals. 7. Tender for 
construction.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies:  
1. Geo-Technical and 
raw water remediation 
options study. 2. 
Community 
consultation.  
26

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 173 
Cobar  
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
1  
Water Security Plan  
Develop a regional water 
security infrastructure 
plan for the Macquarie  
River  
Economic,  
Environmental  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Modifying 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought) 
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW Regional  
Growth Fund  
Murray River  
Basin  
Authority  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed cost 
estimate (business case / 
funding application.  
3. 
Development of 
the plan.  
4. 
Discussion with 
stakeholders and 
community.  
5. 
Finalisation of 
plan. 6. Identification of 
business case 
requirements for 
subsequent priority 
initiatives / plans / 
actions.  
7. Progression of 
business cases / 
implementation actions.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies:  
1. Conduct a water 
demand study aligned to 
Agriculture and 
domestic uses. 2. 
Community  
consultation to facilitate 
concept for the plan, 
prior to detailed 
development.  
32

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 174 
No  
Initiative / Project  
Name  
Description (Short)  
LGA Key 
Outcome area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience  
Benefit  
(Economic, Social, 
Environmental)  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar (1,2,3)  
Funding  
Source  
Availability  
Implementation 
Timeframe  
Key 
Stakeholders  
Recommended 
for Shortlist  
(Yes / No)  
Drought Technical  
Study(s) Required / 
Priority Actions  
Cross  
Reference to 
Community  
Consultation 
'Possible 
Projects'  
(004)  
2  
Water Security   
Increase the storage of 
the Burrendong Dam by 
an additional 20%  
Economic,  
Environmental  
NSW Future  
Ready  
Regions  
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water  
resources  
2023/2024  
Operational  
Plan &  
Estimates  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of water 
usage on the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Transform 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought) 
NSW Future  
Drought 
Fund (for 
technical  
studies)  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
NSW Safe 
and Secure 
Water 
program  
Pre- 
Construction - 36 
months  
Construction 18 
months  
NSW DPE - 
Water   
NSW Dams  
Safety  
Agriculture  
NSW  
NSW Farmers 
association  
Australian  
Government  
National  
Water Grid  
To be 
determined  
Actions required: 1. 
Geotechnical 
investigation.   
2. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
3. 
Detailed 
design. 4. Detailed cost 
estimate.  
5. 
Complete full 
business case.  
6. 
Funding 
applications and 
approvals. 7. Tender for 
construction.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies:  
1. Geo-Technical and 
raw water remediation 
options study. 2. 
Community 
consultation.  
26  
3  
Nyngan to Cobar  
Pipeline Project  
(Stage 2)  
Albert Priest Channel  
Improvement and  
Pipeline Augmentation  
Project (Nyngan to Cobar 
Pipeline Project). The 
project involves upgrading 
existing water 
infrastructure between 
Nyngan and Cobar to 
provide long-term water 
supply reliability and 
involves technical, 
environmental, and 
cultural heritage studies.  
Economic,  
Environmental  
Final business 
case 
developed, 
with 
stakeholder 
and 
community 
engagement.  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of water 
usage on the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience  
(Pillar 3)  
(Transform 
aspects of 
the Region to 
improve 
resilience to 
drought)  
$45.5M 
secured for  
Stage 1  
Australian 
Government 
national  
Water Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth  
Fund  
Stage 1 urgent 
pump station  
replacement,   
Stage 2 pipeline 
replacement, 
with final 
business case 
due second half 
of 2023.  
NSW DPE - 
Water   
Council(s)  
Industry &  
Mining  
Sectors  
First Nations  
Local  
Communities  
To be 
determined  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct 
Drought Resilience 
technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed 
design. 3. Detailed cost 
estimate.  
4. 
Complete full 
business case.  
5. 
Funding 
applications and 
approvals. 6. Tender for 
construction.  
Supporting Drought 
Resilience Technical 
Studies: 1. 
Community 
consultation.  
NA

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 175 
 Appendix 5: Stakeholder Engagement 
Plan & Community Consultation Report  
SUMMARY  
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is designed to enable local governments and their 
communities to better prepare for, respond to and recover from drought. Community level 
drought resilience depends upon strong primary industries and agricultural supply chain 
sectors, as well as other businesses, community organisations and local government.   
The consultation process with the Brewarrina, Bourke, Cobar and Walgett Shires as part 
of the Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP) was comprehensive, engaging a broad 
spectrum of the community including local government councils (Brewarrina Shire 
Council, Bourke Shire Council, Cobar Shire Council and Walgett Shire Council), 
community members, and various stakeholders such as local organisations and 
businesses. The engagement was structured around initial assessments, community and 
council sessions focused on drought resilience, and follow-up meetings to refine 
strategies and gather additional feedback.  
Key themes identified during the consultations in Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar, and Walgett 
included water security, with discussions around the impact of weir modifications on water 
storage and advocacy for differentiated treatment of the Northern River systems 
compared to others like the Hume. Economic development was emphasized with 
initiatives to attract and retain residents through tax incentives and financial supports like 
the RIC Farm Investment Loan and Drought Loan, and a Drought Keeper program to 
support those losing income due to drought. Community and social cohesion saw 
suggestions for increased access to clinical psychiatric support and improving digital 
connectivity for remote areas.  
Community and council feedback underscored the challenges of persistent aridity and the 
exacerbation of these conditions by drought, affecting the economic and social fabric of 
the region. Water security was notably precarious, with concerns about reduced water 
storage capacity due to planned weir modifications potentially leading to significant water 
scarcity as seen during the 2018-2019 drought at Brewarrina and Collarenebri.  
Feedback from councils highlighted varying priorities across the region: Brewarrina 
expressed a critical need to maintain water security and is pursuing research into the 
socio-economic impacts of water buybacks. Cobar emphasised the importance of 
infrastructure support for economic and environmental sustainability, while Walgett 
pointed to the significant need for community projects like road works and infrastructure 
developments, which could employ local workers during drought periods.  
Overall, the consultation process was pivotal in shaping the strategic direction of the 
RDRP, aligning it with community needs and leveraging local insights to forge effective 
drought resilience strategies. This approach highlighted a community preference for 
practical and impactful projects that promise sustainable and resilient community 
development.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 176 
INTRODUCTION  
This report provides the results from an interpretation of the consultations conducted to 
understand the communities experiences of drought and their insights for enhancing 
drought resilience.   
The aim of the consultations and the subsequent co-design process with community 
stakeholders is to:  
1. Inform the community and stakeholders about the RDRP project;  
2. Generate great ideas, solutions, options, opinions and stories;  
3. Form relationships with community members who have capacity to champion and 
lead projects;  
4. Understand gaps in prior responses to drought resilience; and   
5. Finalise a long list of potential drought resilience projects.  
The aim of the consultation and review process with Council stakeholders, including 
Mayors and General Managers, is to:  
1. Understand the services previously delivered by Council during drought to improve 
drought resilience, and the limitations to their success or reasoning for success;  
2. Understand projects currently in development that aim to deliver improvements to 
drought resilience;  
3. Gather feedback on the long list of projects developed through consultation with 
community members, in relation to projects that have been previously actioned or 
projects that are missing;  
4. Co-prioritise the projects to develop the short list of priority projects for further 
detail and analysis; and  
5. Gather feedback on the overall drought resilience report to ensure that it aligns 
with Council expectations and visions.  
Drought operates cyclically, which means that at any given moment, the community is 
engaged in preparation, recovery, and adaptation. These phases can be segmented into 
four main stages: the good period, the uncertain period, the drought period, and the 
recovery period. While the specific impacts of these stages may differ from one drought to 
another, the goal is to implement measures, training, and strategies during the good 
periods. These proactive efforts are designed to lessen the severity and destruction 
experienced during the uncertain and drought periods, thereby supporting a more rapid 
and efficient recovery.  
Good Period  
During periods of average or above average rainfall, the communities in the Northwest 
Region experience a relative sense of stability. These are the times when agricultural 
production stabilises, and there is less strain on water resources, allowing the community 
and businesses to operate under ‘normal’ conditions. However, as emphasised in the 
consultation, harsh arid conditions are a perennial state and therefore even during 
‘normal’ conditions, water efficiency and water saving is still a paramount concern.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 177 
Uncertain Period  
During uncertain periods, where growing conditions are below average, there is a heightened 
sense of anxiety and cautiousness among farmers and businesses. These periods challenge the 
community to adapt to less predictable conditions, potentially leading to a reduced agricultural 
output and increased monitoring of resource allocations, especially water and feed for livestock.  
Drought Period  
During official drought periods, where rainfall is consistently below average, feedback highlighted 
substantial challenges. The region, being inherently arid, faces acute water shortages that 
severely impact agricultural productivity and local industries. Consultation responses emphasised 
the critical nature of water security, with a focus on long-term solutions like dam enhancements 
and improved water management systems. There was a notable concern regarding the late 
declaration of drought periods, which often come after businesses and the agricultural sector have 
already encountered significant hardships.  
Recovery Period  
In the recovery phase, while rainfall might increase, the community and businesses still face the 
lingering effects of the drought. Feedback suggested that this period is crucial for rebuilding and 
planning for future resilience. Initiatives such as the implementation of more sustainable 
agricultural practices, investments in infrastructure to better manage future droughts, and 
continued support for affected businesses and communities are vital. The emphasis is on not just 
returning to pre-drought conditions but improving the overall resilience and sustainability of the 
region to better withstand future droughts.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 178 
INITIAL CONSULTATION – COMMUNITY GROUPS  
Consultation Workshops  
Town  
Male  
Female  
Under 40  
TOTAL  
Cobar  
8  
7  
3  
15  
Euabalong  
4  
0  
1  
4  
Bourke  
6  
6  
3  
12  
Louth  
6  
3  
2  
9  
Brewarrina  
7  
8  
1  
15  
Hebel  
1  
4  
0  
5  
Lightning Ridge  
4  
6  
1  
10  
Walgett  
6  
6  
1  
12  
Collarenebri  
3  
2  
0  
5  
Come-By-
Chance  
1  
4  
0  
5  
46  
46  
92  
In small communities, residents wear many hats to ensure community cohesiveness and 
activity. This is reflected in the diversity of business interests and community group 
representation present at the 10 community consultation gatherings across RDRP004 
area that included; Local Shire Councillors, NSW Framers Local Councillors, ICPA 
Members and Life Members , town and village Progress Associations and Chamber of 
Commerce, cereal and cotton growers, wool producers, goat producers, cattle producers, 
retail businesses, trades people, health workers and nurses, cotton ginners, Tourism 
operators, Educators, Environmental Groups (Bush Heritage / Narran Wet Lands), Local 
Lands Services, BDBA, Western Lands Trustees and NSW Crown Reserve Trustees, 
Sustainable Agriculture and Water Management groups, past Drought Resilience workers, 
NSW Office of Regional Youth, junior and senior sporting clubs.   
Additional Consultation Activities and Access  
Throughout the consultation period print, radio and social media invited community to 
reach out to the Drought Plan Officer co-ordinating the consultation to ensure open and 
transparent consultation access. Post consultation, 4 written submissions and 3 telephone 
calls were received from attendees, and as a result they provided additional thoughts and 
evidence to further provide a comprehensive understanding of issues raised.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 179 
Consultation with the Bourke, Brewarrina, Cobar and Walgett Shires took place across 
multiple destinations and towns from 9th – 19th of February. Some of the key discussion 
topics included:  
Discussion Topic  
Information and Details  
Paid Advocates in the 
Community to Access 
Services 
(Long Term) 
Extension/ commitment to Rural Financial Counselling services or 
Drought Resilience Officers is crucial.  Pathways for support services 
must reflect local needs and knowledge, contrasting with the less 
effective centralised services.  Long-term contracts are necessary to 
foster behavioural changes and stability within communities.  
Government roles should be designed for a minimum of 5 years to 
provide income security and encourage community integration.  
Value, Reward and 
Acknowledge our  
Volunteers (Short to  
Mid-Term)  
Funding for OH&S and RSA’s, workshops to make volunteering easier 
and safer.  
Workshops for volunteer renewal and succession planning, adapting 
values from the past to the present.  
Activities to Increase 
Investment  
Confidence in Rural 
and Remote Areas  
(Long-Term)  
Economic zones with DA exemptions, and incentives for living, 
working, or starting businesses in regions with inadequate 
infrastructure.  
Tax concessions and financial benefits to encourage people to settle 
and contribute long-term, not just for transient work.  
Awareness  
Campaign  
(Long- 
Term)  
Awareness campaign between those that live in populated areas and 
those from rural and remote areas.  
Educate the public on the realities of rural life, highlighting the 
challenges posed by drought and counteract ignorance that can 
lead to frustration and mental health challenges.  
Promote a positive image of regional and remote Australia, 
educating children and encouraging visits to the bush.  
Develop  a  Water  
Security Plan 
(LongTerm)  
Develop a water security plan for Walgett, Brewarrina, Bourke and 
Cobar Shires.   
Strategies encompassing river and bore water options, considering 
town and agricultural needs, and tackling issues like dust 
suppression and road maintenance during drought.  
Mental Health 
Awareness in the  
Bush (Short to Mid- 
Term)  
Leverage existing networks to enhance mental health awareness 
and provide essential mental health resources and training, 
especially in remote areas without full-time mental health services.  
Community  
Gatherings 
(ShortTerm)  
Continue the support groups and events that occurred during the 
drought to maintain networks and address isolation, but without 
overburdening volunteers.  
Business Education /  
Workshops (Short to 
Mid-Term)  
Continue practical, on-farm workshops and provide mentoring for 
proactive decision-making in business and mental health, including 
understanding markets and financial decision-making.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 180 
Telecommunications 
Review (Mid-Term)  
Collect data on the impacts of inadequate communication on 
mental health, safety, and productivity. Assess the potential 
benefits of new solutions like “Starlink” in improving connectivity.  
Local Economy  
Stimulation (Short  
Term)  
Stimulate local economies and increase main street shop front 
activity.  
Develop ‘Community Hubs’ and support small business succession 
planning to rejuvenate local economies and promote community 
benefits.  
Councils to Review 
LEP’s to Encourage  
Industry and  
Development (Mid  
Term)  
Review provisions to make it easier for additional lifestyle blocks and 
on-farm worker accommodations, acknowledging the resource 
constraints of some councils.  
Assistance with 
Education Expenses 
to “Grow Our Own 
Program” (Long  
Term)  
Incentivise local youth to develop skills and bring them back to the 
bush, creating a sustainable and locally knowledgeable workforce.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 181 
LONG LIST OF PROJECTS DEVELOPED  
Based on the initial consultation with communities, a long list of projects was developed. 
#  
Initiative /  
Project Name  
Description  
LGA  
Key 
Outco 
me 
Area  
Program  
Strategic  
Alignment  
Drought Resilience 
Benefit  
Drought  
Resilience  
Pillar  
Funding  
Source 
Availabili 
ty  
Impleme 
ntation 
Timefra 
me  
Key 
Stakeh 
olders  
Short 
list?  
Drought Technical Studies 
Required  
1  
Government Job 
Tenure  
Government jobs to be 
contracted to for min 5 
years to provide 
income security for 
communities.  
(People are not “job 
shopping” and have a 
commitment to put 
roots in a community 
i.e buy a house, 
become a member of a 
sporting organisation.)  
Econo 
my  
Not  
Applicabl 
e  
Long  
Term - 
Governm 
ent Policy  
NSW 
and 
Federal 
Govern 
ments.  
Council 
s.  
No  
Actions required:  
1. Initiate discussions with NSW  
State Government and  
Commonwealth Departments.  
Supporting Drought Resilience  
Technical Studies: Nil  
2  
Drought  
Resilience 
Officers  
Paid advocates / 
Representative (part 
time or full time) in the 
community to identify 
and access services 
grants focussed on 
Drought Resilience and 
Community building  
activities  
Econo 
mic,  
Social,  
To be 
identified  
Economic - Initiative 
would contribute to an 
off-farm income stream 
for a person. Social - 
Increased community 
cohesion. 
Environmental - Not 
directly identified.   
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience 
(Pillar 3)  
Not 
identifie 
d  
12 
Months  
NSW 
Govern 
ment  
Council 
(s)  
TBD  
Actions required:  
1. 
Initiate discussions with 
NSW State Government.  
2. 
Council(s) / Regional 
Organisation development a 
position description and fund.   
Supporting Drought Resilience  
Technical Studies: Nil  
3  
Tax Incentives / 
Economic Zone  
Tax incentives / 
economic zone:  
1.A exemptions, 
incentives to work / live 
/ create businesses  
Econo 
my  
Not  
Applicabl 
e  
Australi 
an  
Govern 
ment   
No  
Actions required:  
1. Initiate discussions with NSW  
State Government and  
Commonwealth Departments.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 182 
in regions that address 
inadequate  
infrastructure available 
in other regions eg – 
communications, 
access to energy or 
alternate energies, 
access to water  2. re-
instate / encourage 
increase of population 
– reward those that 
decide to stay   
NSW 
Govern 
ment  
Supporting Drought Resilience 
Technical Studies: Nil  
4  
Water Security 
Plan  
Develop a regional 
water security, 
(including  
infrastructure) plan for 
the 
Walgett, 
Brewarrina, Bourke  
and Cobar Shires  
(To incorporate river 
and bore water 
options, and include 
town, village, stock, 
industrial, irrigation  
and domestic usage)  
(To allow for a strategy 
/ plan to access water 
for dust suppression 
and road maintenance 
to reduce financial 
burded on Local 
Government).  
Econo 
mic,  
Social, 
Environ 
mental  
NSW Future  
Ready Regions 
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water 
resources  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing 
the impact of bores on 
the natural 
environment.  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience 
(Pillar 3)  
Australia 
n  
Governm 
ent 
national 
Water  
Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth 
Fund  
Obtain 
funding 
to 
conduct 
the 
studies 
and 
develop 
the plan,  
6 
months.  
Drought 
Resilienc 
e  
Technical 
Studies 6  
months  
Develop 
ment  
and  
finalisati 
Australi 
an  
Govern 
ment 
nationa 
l Water  
Grid  
NSW 
Region 
al  
Growth  
Fund  
Murray  
River  
Basin  
Authori 
ty  
Yes  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct Drought 
Resilience technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed cost estimate 
(business case / funding 
application.  
3. 
Development of the plan.  
4. 
Discussion with 
stakeholders and community.  
5. 
Finalisation of plan.  
6. 
Identification of business 
case requirements for subsequent 
priority initiatives / plans / 
actions.  
7. 
Progression of business 
cases / implementation actions.  
Supporting Drought Resilience 
Technical Studies:  
1. Conduct a water demand study  
aligned to Agriculture and 
domestic uses.  
2. Community consultation to

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 183 
Note: Bore options, 
included below at 
Serial 5.a.  
(Also consider the plan 
would need to include 
a description of the 
extant water supply 
systems, secure yield 
study 5/10/10 rule)  
actions to be taken 
during each drought 
response level, actions 
that should be taken in 
preparedness for future 
drought periods).  
on of  
plan 3 - 6  
months  
facilitate concept for the plan, 
prior to detailed development.  
5  
Water security - 
Groundwater  
Increase the number of 
water bores for stock 
and domestic use and 
dust suppression for 
road maintenance / 
construction activities.   
The proving of ground 
water resources 
(quality and flow) and 
installation of 
standpipes (connected 
to a supervisory control 
system to provide a 
capability for 
standpipes to be 
switched on / off, to 
cross level usage 
between locations to  
Econo 
mic, 
Environ 
mental  
NSW Future  
Ready Regions  
Strategy - 
Sustainable, 
secure and 
healthy water 
resources  
Economic - Provides for 
the continued 
operation of agriculture 
and businesses that 
rely on the supply of 
water, within the 
community,  
to sustain their 
economic activity. 
Social - Provides a level 
of confidence to the 
local community, that 
there are options for 
the supply of water to 
support their business 
operations. 
Environmental - 
Supports decision 
making in managing  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience 
(Pillar 3)  
NSW  
Future  
Drought 
Fund (for 
technical  
studies)  
Australia 
n  
Governm 
ent 
national 
Water  
Grid  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth 
Fund  
Pre- 
Construc 
tion - 16 
months  
Construc 
tion 6  
months  
NSW  
DPE - 
Water   
Agricult 
ure  
NSW  
NSW 
Farmer 
s  
associa 
tion  
Identifi 
ed 
Agricult 
ure  
Yes  
Actions required:  
1. 
Conduct Drought 
Resilience technical studies.  
2. 
Detailed design of 
selected bore locations.  
3. 
Detailed cost estimate.  
4. 
Complete full business 
case. 5. Funding applications and 
approvals  
6. Tender for construction.  
Supporting Drought Resilience 
Technical Studies:  
1. 
Conduct a ground water 
resource study aligned to 
Agriculture  and local use.  
2. 
Prove (drill and assess) 
bores  
(quality and flow) in an agreed

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 184 
adjust for changes in 
quality and flow rates) 
in up to five locations, 
to provide greater 
resilience for the 
agriculture and town 
water supplies of local 
towns.  
the impact of bores on 
the natural 
environment.  
Industri 
es  
number of locations (e.g. five).  
3. Community consultation.  
6  
Stronger 
communities 
program  
Series of activities of 
events to promote 
"support groups" for 
social cohesion and 
connectedness that 
Councils support 
/initiate during periods 
of droughts   
Note: If staff required 
to support - then they 
are paid for by the 
Council (reduce load 
on 'volunteers' to 
organise, conduct and 
clean up)  
Social  
NSW Future  
Ready Regions 
Strategy - 
Stronger 
communities 
and diverse  
regional 
economies  
Economic - Initiatives 
would contribute to an 
off-farm income 
stream.  
Social - Increased 
community cohesion, 
reduced demand for 
mental health services. 
Environmental - Not 
directly identified.   
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience 
(Pillar 3)  
NSW  
Regional  
Growth 
Fund  
2 - 3  
Months  
Region 
al NSW  
TBD  
Actions required:  
1. 
In conjunction with 
Community organisations develop 
a program of activities.  
2. 
Develop a plan for the 
conduct of each activity.  
3. 
Deliver the scheduled 
activities.  
Supporting Drought Resilience 
Technical Studies: Nil.  
7  
Rural Financial 
Program  
Provision of business 
mentoring to support 
'proactive decision 
making' (livestock 
trading, decision 
making -based on facts 
and figures)  
(Workshops / one-on- 
one)  
Econo 
my  
NSW Future  
Ready Regions  
Strategy - 
Stronger 
primary 
industries 
prepared for 
drought  
Economic - Improved 
ability to maintain 
livestock nutrition 
Social - Improved 
resilience of farmers in 
managing through 
drought.  
Environmental - Not 
directly identified.  
Planning and  
Monitoring  
(Pillar 1)  
Respond to 
Drought  
events (Pillar  
2)  
Build future 
resilience 
(Pillar 3)  
NSW 
Departm 
ent of 
Agricultu 
re,  
Fisheries 
and 
Forestry  
Immedia 
te  
Region 
al NSW  
NSW  
Rural 
Financi 
al  
Counse 
lling 
service  
TBD  
Actions required:  
1. Identify topics to be covered 
(e.g.   
    Succession planning   
    Farm budgeting   
    Forecasting and cash flow  
analysis   
    Farm debt mediation   
    Bank reviews and relationships   
    Help refinancing debt   
    Access government assistance 
and rural loans

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 185 
    Understand farm loan interest 
rates    
    Understand your financials  
\Build a business plan   
    Identify areas of risk   
    Benchmarking   
    Referrals   
    Debt relief and negotiation) 2. 
Develop a schedule.  
3. 
Advertise program and 
call for participants.  
4. 
Deliver the program.  
8  
Communication 
s Security  
Improve connectivity in 
the region to support 
business and  
agricultural productivity  
Econo 
my  
NSW 
and 
Federal 
Govern 
ments.  
Council 
s.  
TBD  
Actions required:  
1. Initiate discussions with NSW  
State Government and  
Commonwealth Departments.  
Supporting Drought Resilience  
Technical Studies: Nil

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 186 
SECONDARY COMMUNITY CONSULTATION  
A second round of community consultation was undertaken to gain feedback surrounding the long 
list of projects developed and understand the community priorities. This was to ensure that the 
long list of projects, presented to Council for prioritisation, accurately reflected the needs, 
perspectives, and insights of the respective communities.  
This consultation was undertaken via Microsoft Teams with representatives across all three 
communities present at the one meeting, facilitating region-based discussion.  
Based on the long list of projects the following priorities were raised by the community:  
Priority Project  
Commentary  
Water Security  
- 
Weirs  
Weirs  
Unregulated water system downstream from Walgett is a critical 
concern – is there a potential for dam construction?  
State Government has initiated a project ‘Fish passage: 
Reconnecting the Northern Basin project’ which involves the 
lowering of weir walls in order to enable the construction of fish 
passages e.g. Fish Locks. Phase 1 will include the modification to 
the Banarway Weir, Calmundi Weir and Louth Downstream Weir. 
The impact of dropping the weir wall heights, or removing the 
suggested 22 weirs across the region, will have critical 
implications on water security as the storage capacity of dams 
along the river passage will be significantly reduced. At the end 
of the 2018-19 drought alone (with current weir structure), there 
was no water in weir pool at Brewarrina and weir pool at 
Collarenebri.  
Project Suggestion: Advocacy piece for the regions – perception 
that currently the ‘scientists’ and ‘bureaucracy’ do not 
differentiate the problems associated with the Hume fishway 
and the Northern River system. Because it worked in the Hume 
river does not mean it will work in the Northern Rivers.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 187 
Water Security  
-  Buybacks  
Water Buybacks  
A report was produced in 2010 by Judith Stubbs – ‘Social and 
Economic Impacts of Reduced Irrigation Water’ – that assigned 
monetary values to the costs associated with the social, 
environmental and economic impacts, job losses and people 
departure as a result of implementation of water buybacks in 
20052006. Because the report was not written by Council, it 
received no support. Bourke and Warren Shire Councils are 
exploring a joint venture (with support of RDA) to gain funding 
to conduct extensive research within the region to develop a 
database of both data and information that examines the 
economic and social impacts on decision making within the 
region. Walgett Shire Council highlighted a desire to be involved 
in this project too. It has also been observed that the water 
buyback was a significant trigger for population decline at an 
accelerated rate.  
Project Suggestion: Funding of an officer to complete this body 
of work across the interested LGAs to develop the database 
that could then be presented alongside business cases, etc, 
when seeking further funding in future. Or support/ 
development of business case to obtain funding for the 
Councils to complete in house.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 188 
Tax Incentives  
And Economic 
Zones to 
Encourage 
People to  
Move to  
Region and  
Stay in Region  
 Taxation incentives are critical for rural and remote regions to keep people 
in the region. Declining population is the most significant concern and has 
been escalated by water takebacks and water buybacks within the 
community.  
There are currently some programs already available:  
- 
RIC Farm Investment Loan – Interest only for first five years of loan, 
then principal and interest for remainder of ten-year loan (max 
duration). Maximum amount is $2 M.  
- 
RIC Drought Loan – For primary production industries only (e.g. 
agriculture, horticulture, pastoral, beekeeping or aquaculture 
industry). Similar monetary value to Farm Investment Loan.  
- 
RAA Drought Ready and Resilient Fund – for eligible primary 
producers (earn at least 50% of gross income or at least $75,000 
from primary production). Can not be used directly for labour 
instead for products, activities or services. Valued at $250,000 and 
a low interest loan.  
During the last drought, the mining industry was in demand, and therefore 
a lot of the farmers who were put out of work as a result of drought were 
able to be employed within mining industry. Councils are frequently 
understaffed and under resourced, which offers the opportunity for them 
to draw upon community members who are out of work to complete 
projects within the region.  
A significant concern is the local industries that are not primary producers 
as they do not have access to the drought fund packages but indirectly 
suffer from the loss of financial security within the region.  
Project Suggestion 1: ‘Minimum Wage’ (Drought Keeper Program) to be 
applied to those experiencing job loss (and consequential income loss) 
as a result of drought.  
Project Suggestion 2: Develop employment packages for community 
members who lose their job during drought, and can instead work for 
Councils to complete projects that have not been completed due to lack 
of resources e.g. road works, infrastructure developments, etc.  
Project Suggestion 3: Economic support and incentives for local 
industries to ensure that they are able to remain working in the region 
during drought periods.  
Project Suggestion 4: Further research and data collection into strategies 
implemented with success, that have increased retention within rural 
communities and also increased the number of people entering the 
region. Risk: It was raised that we need to be aware of the existing 
economic packages that are already available as detailed above. It may be 
better to explore options for mapping when people need the support, and 
developing exit strategies for those financial support packages.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 189 
Healthcare 
and 
Connectivity  
Promotion and awareness of mental health is no longer the most significant 
concern – this has transitioned to clinical psychiatrist availability. The closest 
psychiatrists available are in Dubbo and they have closed books. Financial 
security and job loss was a significant contributing factor to the experienced 
mental health concerns.  
Access to internet is a significant problem and affects connectivity within the 
regions to medical support and industry assistance.  
Project Suggestion 1: Increased opportunities for individuals to access 
clinical support (not only in closer proximity to region but also with 
increased availability).   
Project Suggestion 2: Improved network connectivity.  
Regional and Rural 
Skill Building   
– Ensuring  
Ongoing Capacity 
and Diversification  
Historically, the rigid requirements around paperwork, etc, for 
subcontractor work within the regions was minimal. As a result, individual 
contractors were able to complete work on a per job cost (instead of an 
hourly or daily rate) and could organise the staff they wanted from the 
community to complete the project. The paperwork and developed 
legislation has become a significant challenge that is affecting the ability for 
contractors to deliver projects. In the last drought the Bourke region were 
saved by Carbon Farming and the Goat industry. Small businesses (local 
businesses not primary producers) in the town suffered more than graziers. 
Project Suggestion: Workshops and opportunities for individuals to 
develop the skills required for carbon farming and working within carbon 
markets, getting their businesses online, skill building – developing 
alternate ‘sidehustles’ that can be leveraged into primary income sources 
during drought periods when their usual income source is jeopardised.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 190 
SURVEY FEEDBACK  
While the secondary community consultation raised crucial information relating to the prioritisation 
of the long list of projects, due to the breadth of the region and pre-existing commitments, in 
comparison to the initial consultation, the attendance was significantly reduced. In order to ensure 
that all initial members of the community had the opportunity to comment on project prioritisation, 
a survey was developed which contained the long list of projects presented within the table in 
Section 6 of this report. 9 responses were recorded.  
Project Name and Description  
Average  
Score (1-10)  
Water Security - Weirs:  
State Government has initiated a project ‘Fish passage: Reconnecting the 
Northern Basin project’ which involves the lowering of weir walls in order 
to enable the construction of fish passages e.g. Fish Locks. Phase 1 will 
include the modification to the Banarway Weir, Calmundi Weir and Louth 
Downstream Weir. The impact of dropping the weir wall heights, or 
removing the suggested 22 weirs across the region, will have critical 
implications on water security as the storage capacity of dams along the 
river passage will be significantly reduced. At the end of the 2018-19 
drought alone (with current weir structure), there was water in the weir 
pools at Brewarrina and Collarenebri, but between these two points there 
were many parts where the river was completely dry.  
Project Suggestion:   
Advocacy piece for the regions – perception that currently the ‘scientists’ 
and ‘bureaucracy’ do not differentiate the problems associated with the 
Hume fishway and the Northern River system. Because it worked in the 
Hume river does not mean it will work in the Northern Rivers.  
5.8  
Water Security - buybacks:  
A report was produced in 2010 by Judith Stubbs – ‘Social and Economic 
Impacts of Reduced Irrigation Water’ – that assigned monetary values to the 
costs associated with the social, environmental and economic impacts, job 
losses and people departure as a result of implementation of water 
buybacks in 2005-2006. Because the report was not written by Council, it 
received no support. Bourke and Warren Shire Councils are exploring a joint 
venture (with support of RDA) to gain funding to conduct extensive research 
within the region to develop a database of both data and information that 
examines the economic and social impacts on decision making within the 
region. Walgett Shire Council highlighted a desire to be involved in this 
project too. It has also been observed that the water buyback was a 
significant trigger for population decline at an accelerated rate.  
Project Suggestion:   
Funding of an officer to complete this body of work across the interested 
LGAs to develop the database that could then be presented alongside 
business cases, etc, when seeking further funding in future. Or support/  
6.2

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 191 
development of business case to obtain funding for the Councils to complete 
in house.  
Tax Incentives and Economic Zones to Encourage People to move to region 
and stay in region:  
Taxation incentives are critical for rural and remote regions to keep people 
in the region. Declining population is the most significant concern and has 
been escalated by water takebacks and water buybacks within the 
community.  
Project Suggestion:   
‘Minimum Wage’ (DroughtKeeper Program) to be applied to those 
experiencing job loss (and consequential income loss) as a result of drought. 
6.1  
Tax Incentives and Economic Zones to Encourage People to move to region 
and stay in region:  
Taxation incentives are critical for rural and remote regions to keep people 
in the region. Declining population is the most significant concern and has 
been escalated by water takebacks and water buybacks within the 
community.  
Project Suggestion:   
Develop employment packages for community members who lose their job 
during drought, and can instead work for Councils to complete projects that 
have not been completed due to lack of resources e.g. road works, 
infrastructure developments, etc.  
5.8  
Tax Incentives and Economic Zones to Encourage People to move to region 
and stay in region:  
Taxation incentives are critical for rural and remote regions to keep people 
in the region. Declining population is the most significant concern and has 
been escalated by water takebacks and water buybacks within the 
community.  
Project Suggestion:   
Economic support and incentives for local industries to ensure that they are 
able to remain working in the region during drought periods.  
6.4  
Tax Incentives and Economic Zones to Encourage People to move to region 
and stay in region:  
Taxation incentives are critical for rural and remote regions to keep people 
in the region. Declining population is the most significant concern and has 
been escalated by water takebacks and water buybacks within the 
community.  
Project Suggestion:   
Further research and data collection into strategies implemented with 
success, that have increased retention within rural communities and also 
increased the number of people entering the region.  
5.4

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 192 
Healthcare and Connectivity:  
Promotion and awareness of mental health is no longer the most significant 
concern – this has transitioned to clinical psychiatrist availability. The closest 
psychiatrists available are in Dubbo and they have closed books. Financial 
security and job loss was a significant contributing factor to the experienced 
mental health concerns.  
Project Suggestion:   
Increased opportunities for individuals to access clinical support (not only 
in closer proximity to region but also with increased availability). 
6.6  
Healthcare and Connectivity:  
Ongoing consultation around the impacts of drought on population and 
community development needs to be a regular activity, especially in key 
demographic groups such as First Nations people, young families and the 
youth. Their view on drought, the connection to it and the solutions around 
it, should not be underestimated.  
Project Suggestion:   
Throughout the life of the Regional Drought Resilience Plan, energy is 
invested in ensuring that underrepresented groups have the opportunity to 
contribute to the future of the region.  
6.6  
Healthcare and Connectivity:  
Access to internet is a significant problem and affects connectivity within the 
regions to medical support and industry assistance.  
Project Suggestion:   
Improved network connectivity.  
5.6  
Regional and Rural Skill Building - Ensuring ongoing capacity and 
diversification:  
Historically, the rigid requirements around paperwork, etc, for 
subcontractor work within the regions was minimal. As a result, individual 
contractors were able to complete work on a per job cost (instead of an 
hourly or daily rate) and could organise the staff they wanted from the 
community to complete the project. The paperwork and developed 
legislation has become a significant challenge that is affecting the ability for 
contractors to deliver projects.   
In the last drought the Bourke region were saved by Carbon Farming and 
the Goat industry. Small businesses (local businesses not primary 
producers) in the town suffered more than graziers.  
Project Suggestion:   
Workshops / capacity development to provide individuals with skills to 
identify alternate business opportunities in drought situations that can be 
leveraged into primary income sources during drought periods when their 
usual income source is under threat.  
6.2

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 193 
COUNCIL REVIEW  
The RDRP Program requires Councils to:  
• 
Consider both water security and environmental and social resilience needs.  
• 
Collaborate across Local Government boundaries.  
• 
Encourage active community participation to capture ideas and thoughts related to drought 
preparation, management and recovery.  
The aim of the hybrid (in-person and online) Council review meeting was to:  
• 
Collect Council feedback, and reach an agreeable position across the region, on 
previously completed sections of the RDRP.  
• 
Gain Council input and perspectives on observations and lessons from prior droughts, 
current or planned economic initiatives and responses to drought, and key organisations 
and community groups to be engaged during the project.  
• 
Review the current compiled list of potential projects and initiatives, and received feedback 
on whether they align with any Council project plans and/or whether any projects/initiatives 
are absent from the list.  
• 
Provide Councils with the planned next steps for the completion of the RDRPs.  
Based on the discussions completed during this meeting the following feedback was received, 
which guided the prioritisation of projects and feedback.  
Bourke Shire Council  
Bourke Shire Council underscores the continuous cycle of drought and the critical nature of water 
as a scarce resource, even outside of drought periods. They advocate for framing drought as a 
persistent condition rather than an occasional event, emphasising the need for community 
empowerment and economic strengthening to mitigate drought impacts. The council also 
suggests that while drought support for agriculture is crucial, the broader business community 
needs more timely support to prevent economic decline.  
Brewarrina Shire Council  
Brewarrina Shire Council focuses on the critical need for water security and mental health support 
during drought. They stress the importance of early intervention for mental health and drought 
preparedness training to enhance community resilience. The council reflects on successful 
government initiatives that maintained employment and business during drought, yet points out 
the challenges of ensuring uniform water restrictions and providing critical water supplies for 
safety and infrastructure maintenance.  
Cobar Shire Council  
Cobar Shire Council discusses the limitations in agricultural-focused drought support, highlighting 
the need to support small businesses that often feel the impacts of drought more acutely and 
rapidly than the agricultural sector. They emphasize the importance of creating a timeline with 
indicators for councils to gauge economic resilience and respond appropriately, also 
acknowledging the private sector's role in providing employment opportunities during drought 
periods.  
Walgett Shire Council

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | PAGE 194 
Walgett Shire Council comments on the social cohesion efforts during drought periods, including 
holding small community gatherings. The council notes the lack of preventative pastoral care and 
social support services compared to previous droughts, suggesting this may have contributed to 
increased population loss. They also highlight the minimal government support for cross-sector 
employment and the necessity of broader applications beyond agriculture due to the 
interconnected nature of regional economies and resources like water.  
Discussion Insights  
Discussions suggest a pivot from the heavy focus on agriculture to a broader consideration of 
regional resilience, incorporating the environmental realities of arid conditions. A need for more 
inclusive engagement strategies is noted, especially with Aboriginal communities and the pivotal 
30-40 age demographic. The vision and objectives of the Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
(RDRPs) should reflect the economic, social, and environmental impacts while removing any 
narrow focus on agriculture to encompass the wider landscape and community needs.  
CONSULTATION OVERVIEW  
Combining all insights, it is evident that all three shires seek more than just short-term fixes; they 
demand robust, integrated strategies that address both immediate and long-term needs. Water 
security emerges as a common thread of concern, albeit with different priorities and proposed 
solutions reflecting each council's specific circumstances. The feedback also underscores a 
universal desire for improved economic, social, and environmental resilience that can sustain 
these communities through the unpredictable challenges posed by drought and other climatic 
variabilities.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 1 
Appendix 6: Project Economic Feasibility 
Assessment and Cost Benefit Analyses

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 2 
CONTENTS  
Contents .................................................................................................................................................. 6 
1.  Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 4 
2.  Background ........................................................................................................................................ 4 
3.  Project Reports ................................................................................................................................... 4 
4.  Economic Assessment ....................................................................................................................... 4 
5.  Data needs ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
5.1.  Projects for Analysis ........................................................................................................... 5 
5.1.1.  Projects for RDRP 004 ........................................................................................... …… 6 
5.2.  Project Logic ....................................................................................................................... 8 
5.3.  Decision Analysis ................................................................................................................ 9 
6.  Costs ................................................................................................................................................. 12 
6.1.  Groundwater ..................................................................................................................... 12 
6.2.  Telecommunications ......................................................................................................... 12 
6.3.  Water security ................................................................................................................... 13 
7.  Benefits ............................................................................................................................................. 13 
7.1.  Groundwater ..................................................................................................................... 14 
7.2.  Telecommunications ......................................................................................................... 14 
7.3.  Water Planning ................................................................................................................. 15 
8.  Net Benefit ........................................................................................................................................ 15 
8.1.  Results .............................................................................................................................. 16 
8.2.  Sensitivity and Distributional Analysis .............................................................................. 17 
9. Conclusions ....................................................................................................................................... 18 
Appendix: Cash Flow Tables

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 3 
Figures  
Figure 1: Initiatives and Projects Overview Logic Map ........................................................................... 8  
Figure 2: Projects Logic Map .................................................................................................................. 8  
Tables  
Table 1: Mobile phone coverage investment ........................................................................................ 12  
Table 2: Water and Agtech devices ...................................................................................................... 12  
Table 3: Capital Cost Benchmarks ....................................................................................................... 13  
Table 4: Population and Water Demand ............................................................................................... 14  
Table 5: General Telecommunications Benefits ................................................................................... 15  
Table 6: Rapid Benefit Cost Analysis Results....................................................................................... 16  
Table 7: Sensitivity testing – Discount Rate .......................................................................................... 17  
Table 8: Sensitivity to Cost and Benefit Variance ................................................................................. 17  
Table 9: Sensitivity to Negatively Correlated Benefit/Cost Variance .................................................... 18

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 4 
1. Introduction  
This report contains an assessment using rapid economic appraisal of the options shortlisted for 
the  Regional Drought Resilience Plan for the Far North West Joint Organisation.   
2. Background  
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDR Plan) (‘The Program’) is designed to 
enable local governments and their communities to better prepare for, respond to, endure and 
thrive during, and recover from drought.    
3. Project Reports  
There are two completed reports for the project under the Program:  
• 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan-016) covering Coonamble Shire Council, 
Warren Shire Council, Bogan Shire Council which together make up the Northwest NSW 
Region; and  
• 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan-004) covering Bourke Shire, Brewarrina Shire, 
Cobar Shire and Walgett Shire, which together make up the Far Northwest Region19.  
One of the outcomes of each report is the development of initiatives and projects to improve the 
drought resilience of the region across four outcome areas:   
• 
People, Culture, and Community  
• 
Economy  
• 
Landscape and Natural Environment  
• 
Infrastructure and Built Environment  
Each report contains a long list of considered projects, and each project proposal is marked 
according to whether it was recommended for shortlisting.   
This economic assessment addresses the second Plan (RDR Plan-004) covering Bourke Shire, 
Brewarrina Shire, Cobar Shire and Walgett Shire, which together make up the Far Northwest 
Region.  
4. Economic Assessment  
The assessment phase of the project is for The Stable economics team to do a rapid assessment 
of the shortlisted projects.   
It is proposed that this assessment comprise:  
• 
A logic structure that expands at the project level, that structure developed for the plan20;  
19 This region is not to be confused with the Far North West Joint Organisation (FNWJO), which is a representative 
body for Bourke, Cobar and Walgett Shire Councils as proclaimed. The FNWJO lodged successful applications to 
develop these two Regional Drought Resilience Plans on behalf of the seven Councils of Bogan, Bourke, Brewarrina, 
Cobar, Coonamble, Walgett, and Warren Shire. All seven councils are part of the Western Plains Functional Economic 
Region.  
20 Pg. 20-21, TPG23-08 NSW Government Guide to Cost-Benefit Analysis

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 5 
• 
A decision tree for each shortlisted project that determines the steps to assess and realise 
the net benefits of the project proposed21; and  
• 
A rapid cost-benefit analysis22, inputting cost and benefit data to the NSW Treasury proforma, 
estimated utilising the data calculated in previous two tasks.  
The “rapid” nature of the technique, is to assess benefits and costs only at a high level, using 
readily available secondary data, but not undertaking primary research. Where primary data is 
lacking, the assessment proceeds by estimating though a decision tree the likely costs and 
benefits of each “known unknown” in the project logic, and incorporating this assessment on a 
risk (probabilistic basis) in the analysis.  This methodology follows broadly the real options 
methodology in the NSW Treasury Guidelines, while remaining within the cash flow framework 
of Treasury’s recommended rapid costbenefit analysis.   
5. Data needs  
To deliver on the above methodology there are simple economic data needs:  
• 
Available secondary data sources, including past assessments of proposals, or of related 
projects;  
• 
Rapid assessment, using these sources, of the project logic as integrating with the plan logic.  
5.1 Projects for Analysis  
The study used detailed consultation techniques to shortlist projects for potential investment.  
The following project types were shortlisted across both reports:  
• 
Water security - Groundwater  
• 
Telecommunications Security  
• 
Water Security Plans  
These three project types can be described generically as:  
• 
Water security: Including Groundwater assessments and water reliability studies for the 
two regions or their member councils.  This may include aquifer assessments, bore 
monitoring programs or water supply assessments incorporating groundwater.  Key data 
sources were the Councils themselves and state planning bodies (regional water plans).   
• 
Telecommunications planning, including mobile service areas, programs to identify 
communications gaps and post proposals to address telecommunications issues in these 
regions.  Key sources were past telecommunications projects and their project managers.  
21 See Scenario Planning, as an input to Real Options Assessment, Pg. 81 ff. TPG23-08 NSW Government Guide to 
Cost-Benefit Analysis  
22 See A8.1 Preliminary Cost-Benefit Analysis, Pg. 100, TPG23-08 NSW Government Guide to Cost-Benefit  
Analysis

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 6 
• 
Water Security Planning: Existing water planning for the wider region, including Western 
Regional Water Strategy, and identifying complementary plans from within Councils. The 
key sources were existing water plans.   
In addition, some of the “To be considered” projects (not shortlisted in the first round, but ranking 
highly) were selected for further analysis. These are projects that did not make the cut, but were 
thought worthy of further consideration.  A panel reviewed these projects and chose a selection. 
In some cases these aligned with existing projects, providing expansion or more details scope – 
eg. Improving bore water quality, rather than quantity. 
5.1.1 Projects for RDRP 004  
The final shortlisted projects for Regional Drought Resilience Plan 004 for Far Northwest NSW - 
Bourke Shire Council, Brewarrina Shire Council, Cobar Shire Council and Walgett Shire Council 
are listed below.  
The following specific projects in Area 004:  
Water Security:  
Water Security Groundwater - Proving of groundwater resources (quality and flow) and 
installation of standpipes  
• 
Improve groundwater quality monitoring through auditing the current bore network, 
implementing regular sampling programs and collate groundwater quality data from 
industry and government sources into one database. Invest in technology and research to 
understand how treated groundwater can support towns, landholders and industries to 
secure a water supply.  
Off-stream storage at Walgett   
• 
The Namoi Draft Regional Water Strategy23 included an identification that Walgett township 
had issues with water reliability. The town relies on in-stream water supply from a weir. In 
recent years, releases from Keepit dam for the town supply have had to cease in drought 
periods, and emergency supply measures put in place. One of these is supplementing the 
surface supply by groundwater, though that supply has aesthetic water quality issues that 
have required reverse osmosis treatment to reduce sodium  levels in previous droughts.  
An off stream water storage offers the potential to reduce the need for this extra water 
treatment and other emergency water supply measures when dam releases cease in 
drought.  
Develop a water reuse project in Cobar Shire Council  
• 
Regional Water Strategy Macquarie–Castlereagh – Implementation Plan24 identified the 
Nyngan Cobar Pipeline as a specific strategy for Cobar. In addition, the Strategy stressed 
the importance of water conservation and reuse.  However, there were no implementation 
proposals in this area specifically for  
23 NSW Department of Planning, Industry and Environment (2021) Draft Regional Water Strategy Namoi: Strategy 
March PUB20/313  
24 NSW Department of Planning, Industry and Environment (2023) Regional Water Strategy Macquarie–Castlereagh – 
Implementation Plan October

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 7 
Cobar, with the focus on boosting leakage reduction programs. As a mining town, there’s 
potential for recycling that may not be available to other towns and which could be 
theoretically be implemented relatively cost effectively.   
Telecommunications Security  
• 
Grant program to help farmers purchase Agtech devices and applications. Measure 
water productivity and water sustainability indices for cotton production systems, identifying 
potential changes to water use, productivity and sustainability.  
Water Planning  
Two relevant projects, under the heading Long Term Water Security Projects were shortlisted in 
the 004 Region with water planning objectives  
• 
Development [of a] water security strategy to ensure sustainable water management and 
availability in the Barwon-Darling catchment area.  
• 
Develop a regional water security, (including infrastructure) plan for the Walgett, 
Brewarrina, Bourke and Cobar Shires  
In conceptualising these projects, the plan including a scope of feasibility studies, community 
engagement and development of funding proposals.  It is difficult in an economic analysis to 
measure the benefits of regional or basin plans per se, so we have taken the approach of 
assuming that the two proposed plans would occur as part of the base case, but the development 
of the plans into particular options has been measured by representative case studies of weir 
raising, off stream storage and reuse, in particular the Cobar reuse project which was proposed 
elsewhere.    
From these shortlisted options, we deduce six options for analysis:  
• 
Base Case: Planning without projects: it is assumed for the sake of clarity, that considering 
a program with up to six projects will incorporate  a base level of expenditure on water 
security planning, and we’ve focused the water planning net benefit estimates on projects 
that might develop from that planning.   
• 
Option 1: Water security: Groundwater – investigation and development of bore fields in 
the region   
• 
Option 2: Telecommunications Upgrade – investigation of mobile signal blackspots and 
developing a plan to address this issue, including a grants program for agtech devices.  
• 
Option 3: Water security: Off stream storage Walgett – a proposed off stream storage near 
the Namoi Barwon river junction.  
• 
Option 4: Water security: Weir Raising – as a part of the third option, a benchmarked weir 
upgrade   
• 
Option 5: Water Security: Off stream storage generic - as a part of the third option, an 
alternative   
• 
Option 6: Water security: Cobar Water Reuse – a water recycling project in the town with 
the greatest industrial demand for water in the region.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 8 
5.2 Project Logic  
This task consists of adapting the program logic diagrams down to the project level by identifying 
key benefits and costs and the logic of how they will be delivered.   
For Project 004, the following Logic Map was presented:  
Figure 1: Initiatives and Projects Overview Logic Map  
For the shortlisted individual projects, the draft project logic maps proposed are:  
Figure 2: Projects Logic Map

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 9 
5.3 Decision Analysis  
In the absence of detailed planning and information, decision analysis allows a risk based 
assessment of likely costs and benefits of strategies. Decision analysis incorporates step 
wise probability estimates of costs and benefits of each decision identified as necessary 
to reach the project objective. A groundwater example is shown.   
It has been used in this analysis where investigations are incomplete and the yield or 
viability of a groundwater aquifer or the density of and area of mobile phone towers are 
unknown, and will be only known after the investigations are complete.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 10 
Telecommunications Decision Tree

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 11 
Groundwater Decision Tree

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 12 
6. Costs  
The costs have been calculated on benchmark estimates by area and scope.  This section breaks 
down the costs for each option to achieve the benefits listed in Section 6 Error! Not a valid 
bookmark selfreference..    
6.1 Groundwater  
The costing for the groundwater project has been developed using dispersed investment of 
exploratory and production bore drilling, repeated across a three phase program at a total cost of 
$0.6M. Test drilling and. field development cost of $120,000.Productions is based on three town 
production bores, each with a drilling and lining cost of $15,000, and a pump and piping cost (near 
to treatment plant) of $35,000.  
6.2 Telecommunications  
The principal tasks of the Telecommunications Security project was to investigate significant areas 
of non-connection to the mobile broadband network and to implement “black spot” iinvestments 
to locate new towers so that there is continuity of coverage.  
There have been a number of similar programs that can be used to benchmark costs.   
Table 1: Mobile phone coverage investment  
Telecommunications   
Cost per 
town/ 
community  
Location  
Number  of 
communities  
Total cost  
Black spot review  
Black spot review  
$684,000  Remote Aboriginal 
communities  
Outback Australia   
19  
43  
$13,000,000  
$960,000  
$41,300,000  
In addition, the project would have an optional extension to provide agtech devices and 
appropriate support and training.  
Table 2: Water and Agtech devices  
Item  
Unit cost  Source  
Water quality and agtech 
probes  
$2,000  Market price

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 13 
6.3 Water security  
The main report shortlists a number of projects on strategic water planning. To scope how these 
might be implemented, a range of storage options are evaluated in Options 3 to 6. The costs have 
been benchmarked from Queensland and NSW studies.   
Table 3: Capital Cost Benchmarks  
Capital  
Cost per  
Unit  
Capacity  
Benchmark  
Capacity  Cost  
Notes  
$/ML  
Location  
ML  
$  
Offstream Storage  
$37,000  Walcha 
(Apsley)  
300   $11,000,000  
Offstream Storage  
$43,000  
$/M of wall  
Tuross River 
Study  
3,000   
$130,000,000  
Cost was 
revised as part 
of a variation.  
Weir Rehabilitation  
$400,000  
Darling weirs 
program  
30  
$12,000,000  
See also Qld weir 
upgrades of $3m 
to $11M)  
7. Benefits  
The impact charts illustrate the likely benefits of the major options:  
• 
Groundwater o  Avoided emergency drinking water supply costs – typically valued in the 
literature at above $7 per kL;  
o 
Irrigation benefits – typically valued at crop gross margins of $3 per ML.   
• 
Telecommunications:  
o 
Improved telecommunications offer safety and health benefits to the region. As 
permanent infrastructure, these benefits accrue both in and outside emergency 
situations like drought or flood.   
o 
Safety: emergency response time savings valued using risk and value of life.  
o 
Health: reduced transport cost to nearest health centre. Improved pre-care for 
emergency patients.   
• 
Water planning  
o 
Improved reliability of drinking water supply from better matching of storage and 
transmission.  
Values in terms of emergency supply costs avoided at $7/kL.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 14 
In this section, these benefits are broken down in more detail for input to the cash flow analysis.  
It’s important to first set down that many of the benefits are driven by the town, regional or state 
population.  The following table, adapted from the main report, sets the key values for this 
region:  
Table 4: Population and Water Demand  
 Bourke  
Brewarrina  
Cobar  
Walgett  
Bogan  
Coonamble  
Warren  
Population  
2,340  
1,356  
4,059  
5,253  
2,467  
3,732  
2,550  
Projected  
Population  [2041]  
1,556  
931  
2,555  
3732  
1,581  
2,965  
1,755  
Drought Water  
Consumption (kL pa 
2023)  
101,739  
40,478  176,478  228,391  
68,739  
162,261  110,870  
Drought Water  
Consumption (kL pa 
2041)  
67,652  
58,957  111,087  
162,261  
107,261  
128,913  
76,304  
Household Water 
Consumption (kL 
per household pa)  
597  
400  
203  
300  
314  
165  
231  
Potable Water 
Consumption (kL per 
household pa)*  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
100  
Source: NSW Department of Planning Population Projections & NSW Department of Local 
Government Water Supply Statistics   
* Estimated using urban individual use metering studies  
7.1 Groundwater  
Groundwater is a significant variable in managing water security in the far west councils in this 
plan. Groundwater is used in town water supplies to ensure volume in droughts by providing 
supplementary water when for example, in drought, regulated releases cease from upstream 
storages, or in dry periods more generally, surface water quality declines with reduced flows.  
In the main report, borefields are described as one of the key system assets in delivering Water 
Security:  
• Borefields. Groundwater accessed through borefields supplements surface water 
sources, particularly during periods of drought. The use of borefields requires careful 
management to prevent over-extraction, which can lead to declining water levels and 
quality. The result is Option 5  
7.2 Telecommunications  
In the main report, Telecommunications Security is proposed as a project because of the likely 
benefits that are described as:  
• 
supporting the operational continuity of local businesses, community and agricultural 
activities and

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 15 
• 
improving the community's confidence in their economic stability.  
These benefits can be further broken down into:  
• 
local business and community operational continuity benefits;  
• 
benefits for non-local users, either as receivers of telecommunications in other regions, or 
as visitors to the far west region;  
• 
health related benefits for the local community.  
To these can be added the technological benefits of the proposed device program being used by 
farmers to give a more efficient water use.   
That is, by the types of users and their location.   
Measuring these benefits includes calculating the time savings from better telecommunications 
and valuing them using average earnings.   
The following Table shows the calculation of business and community continuity benefits:  
Table 5: General Telecommunications Benefits  
General Telecommunications benefits  
Notes  
Black spots addressed  
5  
Population Impacted  
100%  
Time saving  (hours per annum per person)  
0.1  
Estimate.  
Value   
$1,958  
Average Weekly Earnings 
Value per hour  
$56  
35 hour week  
Value of time saving per annum  
$5.59  
Total population Impacted  
21,757   
Population of the region  
Impact on state population (hours per person)  
  0.001   
Value of times savings per annum per person  
$0.06  
Total population Impacted  
8,144,000   
State Population  
The total value in the Rapid CBA Model is calculated as the value of local time saving ($5.59 per 
person) times the local population, plus the value to the population as a whole per person, $0.06 
times the state population.   
7.3 Water Planning  
8. Net Benefit  
The following tables show the results after costs are netted off from benefits.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 16 
8.1 Results  
Table 6: Rapid Benefit Cost Analysis Results  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV Rank 
out of 6  
BCR Rank out  
of 6  
Base Case: Planning 
without projects  
-$195,238  
-  
-  
Option 1: Water 
security: Groundwater  
$1,258,513  
5.131  
3  
1  
Option 2:  
Telecommunications 
Upgrade  
$9,424,809  
4.709  
1  
2  
Option 3: Water 
security: Offstream 
storage Walgett  
$4,671,546  
1.811  
2  
4  
Option 4: Water 
security: Weir Raising  
-$1,367,581  
0.884  
6  
6  
Option 5: Water 
Security: Offstream 
storage generic  
-$470,114  
0.957  
5  
5  
Option 6: Water 
security: Cobar Water 
Reuse   
$793,840  
2.014  
4  
3  
Source: analysis using NSW Treasury Rapid BCA Model  
Options 1, 2 3 and 6 have benefit cost ratios greater than 1 at 5% discount rate, while options 4 
and 5 do not.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 17 
8.2 Sensitivity and Distributional Analysis  
The results are sensitive to discount rate in that all options have positive Net Present Values at 
a lower discount rate (3%), but Options 4 and 5 retain a negative Net Present Value at a higher 
discount rate (7%).   
Table 7: Sensitivity testing – Discount Rate  
Sensitivity  
3%  
Discount 
Rate  
7%  
Discount 
Rate  
10%  
Discount 
Rate  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case  
-$197,087  
-$193,458  
-$190,909  
0.000  
Option 1  
$1,391,675  5.111  
$1,142,186  5.146  
$993,765  
5.158  
Option 2  
$12,715,485  6.008  $7,089,257  3.788  $4,707,761  
2.850  
Option 3  
$7,616,135  2.319  $2,596,053  1.452  
$500,297  
1.087  
Option 4  
$1,342,659  1.114  -$3,303,646  0.720  -$5,289,190  
0.552  
Option 5  
$2,494,661  1.229  -$2,564,603  0.765  -$4,687,059  
0.570  
Option 6  
$1,115,599  
2.227  
$566,258  
1.815  
$335,208  
1.554  
The results are insensitive to cost and benefits variance up to +/- 20%.  
Table 8: Sensitivity to Cost and Benefit Variance  
Costs 
+20%  
Costs 
20%  
Benefits 
+20%  
Benefits 
20%  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Base  
Case  
-$234,286  
-$156,190  
-$195,238  
-$195,238  
Option 
1  
$1,197,579  
4.276  
$1,319,447  
6.413  
$1,571,150  
6.157  
$945,877  
4.105  
Option 
2  
$8,916,656  
3.925  
$9,932,961  
5.887  
$11,817,923  
5.651  
$7,031,695  
3.768  
Option 
3  
$3,520,118  
1.510  
$5,822,975  
2.264  
$6,757,284  
2.174  
$2,585,808  
1.449  
Option 
4  
-$3,728,533  
0.737  
$993,371  
1.105  
$719,855  
1.061  
-$3,455,017  
0.707  
Option 
5  
-$2,651,066  
0.797  
$1,710,839  
1.196  
$1,616,816  
1.148  
-$2,557,043  
0.766  
Option 
6  
$637,196  
1.678  
$950,484  
2.517  
$1,109,252  
2.416  
$478,428  
1.611  
If costs fall and benefits rise by 20%, all projects become Net Present Value positive (BCR >1).

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 18 
Table 9: Sensitivity to Negatively Correlated Benefit/Cost Variance  
Scenario  
Low Case 
Scenario  
High Case 
Scenario  
Option  
NPV  
BCR  
NPV  
BCR  
Base Case  
-$234,286  
-$156,190  
Option 1  
$884,943  
3.420  
$1,632,084  
7.696  
Option 2  
$6,523,542  
3.140  
$12,326,075  
7.064  
Option 3  
$1,434,380  
1.208  
$7,908,713  
2.717  
Option 4  
- 
$5,815,969  
0.589  
$3,080,808  
1.326  
Option 5  
- 
$4,737,996  
0.638  
$3,797,768  
1.435  
Option 6  
$321,784  
1.342  
$1,265,896  
3.020  
The Low Case Scenario assumes a cost increase of 20% and a benefit decrease of 20% with a 
social discount rate of 5%  
The High Case Scenario assumes a cost decrease of 20% and a benefit increase of 20% with a 
social discount rate of 5%  
9. Conclusions  
This report contains the analysis of a range of remote regional drought projects using rapid cost 
benefit techniques. The conclusion is it is quite plausible for these projects to have benefit cost 
ratios greater than one, and would be recommended for a full cost benefit analysis as part of 
funding and approval processes.

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 19 
Appendix: Cash Flow Tables

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 20

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | Appendix 6 PAGE 21

FAR NORTH WEST JOINT ORGANISATION | REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN  | 
Appendix 6 PAGE 22