Goulburn Mulwaree Council 
and Wingecarribee Shire Council
REGIONAL 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

This map is indicative only (as of September 2024).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
OF COUNTRY 
Goulburn Mulwaree Council and Wingecarribee Shire Council 
acknowledges and pays our respects to the Aboriginal elders 
both past and present and acknowledge the traditional 
custodians of the land on which we all live. We acknowledge, 
in particular, the Gundungurra, Ngunawal, Tharawal and 
Dharug peoples as the traditional custodians of the lands that 
are addressed within this report.
While every care has been taken in preparing this publication, the State of New South Wales, Goulburn Mulwaree Council and Wingecarribee 
Shire Council accepts no responsibility for decisions or actions taken as a result of any data, information, statement or advice, expressed or 
implied, contained within. To the best of our knowledge, the content was correct at the time of publishing.
Further, any and all actions identified within this plan for further consideration and implementation are subject to securing external funding 
for Council facilitation.
Front Cover Image Source: AzmanJaka, iStock, 2024

CONTENTS
Introduction...............................................................6
Our Region...................................................................7
Vision...........................................................................9
A plan for drought resilience ................................... 10
Purpose of the GMC and WSC RDRP.........................12
The Process...............................................................12
Following footsteps...................................................20
What do we mean by drought and resilience?..........28
Our Region and Our Droughts.................................. 32
Lived Experience........................................................36
Future Drought Projections and Impacts..................38
Our Drought Resilience ........................................... 40
Adaptive Capacity .....................................................40
Exposure to drought .................................................49
Associated Hazard Shocks.........................................52
Local Drought Impact Pathways and Sensitivity........52
Drought Resilience Assessment.................................53
Our Drought Resilience Action Plan.......................... 55
Resilience theme 1: Resilient local communities......62
Resilience theme 2: Resilient local economies .........66
Resilience theme 3: Resilient landscapes..................70
Resilience theme 4: Resilient regional 
water supply..............................................................74
Implementation Requirements.................................78
Lasting Governance ..................................................78
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL).............. 80
Monitoring................................................................80
Evaluation .................................................................80
Learning ....................................................................81
References............................................................... 82
APPENDIX................................................................ 84
Appendix A: RDRP Stakeholder Engagement List......85
Appendix B: Performance and Outcome 
Indicators...................................................................86
Appendix C: CSIRO Suggestions for future 
plan updates..............................................................90
Figures
Figure 1: Goulburn Mulwaree Council 
and Wingecarribee Shire Council RDRP Area..............8
Figure 2: RDRP development process........................13
Figure 3: The multiple dimensions of drought 
vulnerability ..............................................................29
Figure 4: Components of drought adaptive 
capacity.....................................................................30
Figure 5: Millennium Drought Rain Deciles...............34
Figure 6: 2017-2019 Rain Deciles..............................35
Figure 7: Change in annual mean precipitation.........38
Figure 8: Change in annual mean soil moisture 
percentiles.................................................................38
Figure 10: Projected changes in number of days 
with max temperature above 35oC...........................39
Figure 11: Change in annual mean drought index 
(Keetch-Byram index values).....................................39
Figure 9: South East Climate Change Snapshot.........39
Figure 12: January and July Rainfall: Goulburn 
(Goulburn TAFE AWS) and Wingecarribee.................49
Figure 13: January and July Temperature: 
Goulburn (Goulburn TAFE AWS) and 
Wingecarribee (Moss Vale AWS)...............................49
Figure 14: Combined Drought Indicators for South 
East NSW - 12 Months to December 2019................50
Figure 15: Vegetation Index for South East NSW 
as at December 2019.................................................51
Figure 16: RDRP Action Plan Program Logic..............59
Figure 17: Resilience pathway ..................................61
Figure 18: Governance system..................................79
Tables
Table 1: Depth of engagement..................................19
Table 2: Strategic alignment......................................21
Table 3: Literature, Tools and Studies .......................26
Table 4: Adaptive capacity dimensions of Goulburn 
Mulwaree Council.....................................................41
Table 6: SWOT assessment........................................54
Table 7: Sequential priority criteria...........................58

KEY TERMS 
AND ACRONYMS
KEY TERMS
Key Terms
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual or 
expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial 
opportunities. 
Adaptive 
capacity
The ability of a system to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and 
extremes) to moderate potential damages, take advantage of opportunities or cope with the 
consequences.
Climate change
Large-scale, long-term shift in the planet's weather patterns and average temperatures.
Drought 
Refer to page 28.
Economic 
resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors without 
changing the economic status or outcomes.
Environmental 
resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors 
while maintaining natural processes and ecosystem services.
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a 
society share power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or informal.
Hazard
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event or trend that may 
cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, 
infrastructure, livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems and environmental resources.
Hazard, 
exposure, 
vulnerability, 
and resilience
Terms commonly used among practitioners in the disaster and risk management and climate 
resilience communities; however, they can have different interpretations. This report uses 
definitions provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and, when 
applicable, the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR).
Intervention 
options
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, initiatives and investments 
that are planned to bring about change. 
Local 
Knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporate elements of lived experience 
within landscape, bearing witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects of people, 
landscape, culture-how people interact with surroundings and as part of communities and 
processes.
Preparation
Action to prepare for and protect against natural hazards and reduce impacts when events 
occur.
Prevention
Action to understand and mitigate natural hazard risk.
Recovery
Action to assist communities, organisations and other stakeholders to recover from natural 
hazards and reduce future risk.
Resilience
The ability of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, 
accommodate, adapt to, transform and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and 
efficient manner, including through the preservation and restoration of its essential basic 
structures and functions through risk management.
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, recognising the 
diversity of values and objectives associated with such systems.
4

Key Terms
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city or region. Examples include major storms, 
floods, bush fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism.
Social 
Resilience
The ability of human society to cope with diverse range of shocks and stressors, while 
maintaining existing social and community functions.
Standardised 
Precipitation 
Index
Uses precipitation only; can characterise drought or abnormal wetness at different time scales 
which correspond with the time availability of different water resources (e.g. soil moisture, 
snowpack, groundwater, river discharge and reservoir storage).
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect. 
Succession 
planning
The term succession planning refers to a strategy to pass leadership roles down to another 
employee or group of employees within a business. Succession planning ensures that 
businesses continue to run smoothly and without interruption, after important people move on 
to new opportunities, retire, or pass away.
Threshold
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable causes a system to shift 
to a qualitatively different regime.
Transform
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, functions, 
feedback and identity.
Trigger point
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management intervention.
Vulnerability
The propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected by hazards. Vulnerability 
encompasses multiple elements including exposure to risk, sensitivity or susceptibility to 
harm, and differential patterns of capacities to cope and adapt. It is the opposing definition of 
Resilience characterising system weaknesses as opposed to its strengths. 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
BoM
Bureau of Meteorology
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation
DRR
Disaster Risk Recovery
EPA
Environmental Protection Authority
FDF
Future Drought Fund
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GHG
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
GMC
Goulburn Mulwaree Council
Acronyms and Abbreviations
KPI
Key Performance Indicators
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LLS
Local Land Services
LGA
Local Government Area
NGO
Non-Government Organisation 
NSW
New South Wales
NSW 
DPIRD
NSW Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development
RDRP
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
WSC
Wingecarribee Shire Council
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
5

INTRODUCTION
Source: Goulburn Australia Website, 2024
6

Goulburn Mulwaree Council (GMC) and Wingecarribee Shire Council 
Drought Fund and the NSW Government to prepare a Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan (RDRP) for the region. 
The RDRP is focused on empowering our communities 
to be resilient to the impacts of drought; effectively 
preparing in advance so that when drought does occur 
its impacts during are minimised as are the time and 
costs associated with recovery. A drought resilient 
community is one that has the capacity to resist, 
absorb, accommodate, recover, transform and thrive 
in a timely and effective manner in response to the 
effects, shocks and stressors of drought, and in doing 
so enable positive economic, social, environmental and 
governance outcomes.  
Achieving resilience needs to start by recognising two 
key factors:
•	Drought is not simply low rainfall; if it was, much 
of inland Australia would be in almost perpetual 
drought. Drought is typified by abnormal periods 
of dryness, but the definition of “abnormal” and 
“dryness” varies across communities and with their 
associated land use and economies.
•	Drought is not simply an agricultural issue. 
While farmers often feel its impacts most directly, 
drought is unique amongst natural hazards as it 
is typically a slow onset disaster that permeates 
through communities as it develops, affecting not 
only agricultural productivity, but upstream and 
downstream supply chains, individual and community 
health and wellbeing, and the condition and quality 
of the natural environment and community places. As 
it is slow onset, it is also often slow in recovery, with 
the scars of drought on communities often lasting 
long after its incidence.
The RDRP approach recognises the multi-dimensional 
impacts and significance of drought to communities 
and seeks to provide a holistic planning framework 
to prepare communities for future droughts through 
building economic, environmental, and social resilience.
A key element of the RDRP is that it is a community 
responsive and community integrated plan. Ultimately, 
it is the practices of individuals and communities that 
will define their level of resilience to drought and the 
actions recommended within this plan are focussed 
on enabling behavioural and cultural change regarding 
drought within the two LGAs (hereafter ‘the region’). 
The actions themselves have been identified through 
an engagement program across our region, focussed on 
understanding the lived experience of drought in all its 
dimensions, and how this experience can be improved 
into the future.
OUR REGION
The Goulburn Mulwaree and Wingecarribee Shire Local 
Government Areas cover a combined area of 5,900 
square kilometres, encompassing large portions of 
both the Southern Tablelands and Southern Highlands 
regions of NSW. 
The Southern Tablelands is located west of the Great 
Dividing Range and is geographically characterised by 
high, flat country that has been extensively grazed since 
European settlement in the early 1820’s. The Southern 
Highlands is located to the south-west of Sydney and 
sits on a plateau of the Great Dividing Range, between 
500 – 900 metres above sea level. Distinct from 
the intensively grazed Southern Tablelands region, 
the Southern Highlands has a high percentage of 
mountainous nature conservation land including the 
Morton National Park. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
7

Just as the two LGAs are distinct in their geography and landform, they have distinct land uses, demographics, 
economies and communities (Figure 1). The combined population is approximately 86,600 people, with the major 
urban centres of Moss Vale, Mittagong, Bowral and Goulburn hosting approximately 60% of this population.
This plan primarily seeks to address commonalities in drought vulnerabilities between the two LGAs while 
recognising and responding to their differences where practicable. 
Figure 1: Goulburn Mulwaree Council and Wingecarribee Shire Council RDRP Area
This diversity across the LGAs is mirrored in its First Nations stewardship. The traditional custodians of the Goulburn 
Mulwaree and Wingecarribee Shire region are the Gundungurra, Ngunawal, Tharawal and Dharug peoples. The 
Goulburn Mulwaree region is also a traditional meeting place for many First Nations groups, having cultural 
significance to a number of Aboriginal peoples beyond its local custodians. 
It is important to note for a drought planning document, that water is not merely a resource for our Aboriginal 
peoples; it is a living entity intertwined with their existence, spirituality, and cultural heritage. There are numerous 
locations of high importance across the region used by our communities that have a strong connection with water, 
such as the Wollondilly River, Wingecarribee River and Mulwaree Flats. 
Our Aboriginal peoples possess a wealth of traditional knowledge that can contribute to drought resilience 
strategies, including a deep understanding of sustainable natural resource management. This knowledge and their 
demonstrable perpetual commitment to the good stewardship of Country makes their ongoing involvement within 
this RDRP of first order importance. 
8

VISION
Our vision for drought resilience was informed by community views on the need for drought 
awareness in the context of a shifting demographic; the importance of community-led support and 
cooperative action; and an acknowledgement of the experience-based knowledge of our agricultural 
and land care communities in building drought resilience. 
Our vision is that the communities of our region:
•	Are aware of the drought hazards to the region and the many ways it impacts upon our people, 
our environment and economy
•	Integrate and implement drought responsive actions in the way they carry out their work, live their 
lives and plan their futures
•	Foster social cohesion through taking personal responsibility for the management of water 
resources, while recognising water is a common resource shared within a community 
•	Are aware of, and have access to, an array of public and private support networks that can be 
called upon before, during and after drought events.
Ultimately, we seek to develop communities that are aware, 
active and structured in such a way that, when under the stress 
of drought, our economies remain prosperous, our communities 
remain connected, and our environment is protected.
The actions earmarked within this RDRP and developed through consultation with the affected 
communities seeking to progress the region towards this vision. Just as the frequency and 
magnitude of drought continues to shift with forecast climate change impacts, so too the nature 
and composition of our communities is shifting in response to broader cultural, economic and 
development drivers. The achievement of this resilience vision will be incremental and adaptive over 
time and its proposed actions will need to be reviewed, updated and expanded to respond to this 
resultant evolving landscape of drought exposures, sensitivities and vulnerabilities. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
9

A PLAN FOR 
DROUGHT RESILIENCE 
Australia is recognised as one of the driest continents and countries on earth. So much so that living amidst drought 
and harsh conditions has now formed part of our culture, heritage and international standing. Yet, the economic, 
social and environmental impacts of drought are far-reaching, complex and often disastrous at a personal, local, 
regional and even national level. The forecast climate change trajectory for the country (and for our region) is one 
of both increased frequency of drought and increased intensity of drought (AdaptNSW, 2024).
The impacts of such increases will flow through to the households and communities of our region. Those 
businesses with high water dependency and those households with limited access to water, will be the first to 
be affected, resulting in a decline in productivity and personal financial and emotional stresses. Ultimately, the 
increased exposure to drought as a result of climate change may lead to the closure of currently viable businesses 
or incidence of associated mental health issues and self-harm. From such localised impacts, the impacts of drought 
can flow out into a myriad of interdependent social, environmental and economic systems through various 
pathways. For example:
•	Loss of environmental amenity where a browning 
environment decreases tourism and affects the 
viability of tourism-based industries
•	Reduced local feed/water availability requires 
purchasing of feed/water from other regions; 
affecting local transport, logistics and supply chains 
and associated costs, as well as the introduction of 
invasive weeds and insects with imported feed
•	Limited rainfall increases demand for lower quality 
water sources, elevating health risks particularly 
within ageing populations
•	Limited water availability for public space 
maintenance diminishes community wellbeing 
•	Financial restrictions and familial stresses encourages 
anti-social behaviour, or increased truancy amongst 
school children, leading to lowered educational 
outcomes
•	Dry conditions contribute to higher risk of bushfire 
and associated direct and indirect damages
•	Drought conditions encourage pest and weed 
migration at a time in which individuals and councils 
have limited resources for control.
was established in September 2019 to provide continuous funding for drought resilience initiatives, seeking to 
build drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural sector, the agricultural landscape and communities. The FDF 
(2020-2024) has four priority focus areas:
•	Better climate information – enabling farmers, businesses and communities to better understand climate risk
•	Better planning – helping Australian farmers and agricultural regions plan for drought
•	Better practices – Promoting the adoption of farming and natural resource management (NRM) practices and 
technologies to improve drought resilience 
•	Better prepared communities – enabling and empowering community leaders, networks and organisations that 
reinforce community resilience. 
10

The NSW Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
(The Program), delivered under the ‘Better planning’ 
priority, represents a joint initiative between the NSW 
agricultural regions in the development of Regional 
Drought Resilience Plans that can be implemented 
by councils and their communities to manage future 
drought risk. The resulting plans seek to focus on 
innovative ways to build regional drought resilience, 
taking steps to plan now to stem the impact of future 
drought on our region.
The overarching purpose of The Program is to delivery 
RDRPs which:
•	Create stronger connectedness and greater social 
capital within communities, contributing to wellbeing 
and security
•	Empower communities to implement transformative 
activities that improve their resilience to drought
•	Support more primary producers to adopt whole-of-
system approaches to natural resource management 
to improve the natural resource base for long-term 
productivity and landscape health.
The Program recognises that drought is not solely 
an issue for the agricultural sector, and takes a 
triple-bottom line approach to deliver against three 
inter-connected strategic priorities:
•	Economic resilience of the regional economy and an 
innovative and profitable agriculture region
•	Environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscapes
•	Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities.
The RDRPs focus is on the community as a system to 
enhance economic, built, environmental, and social 
capacity to endure, respond and evolve to current and 
changing drought conditions. 
Source: Russell102 , iStock 2024
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
11

PURPOSE OF THE GMC AND WSC RDRP
A drought resilient region is one that is prepared, active and structurally resourced to respond to drought if and 
when it occurs, so that our economy remains prosperous, our communities remain connected and our environment 
is protected. This plan seeks to support realisation of our drought resilience vision by:
•	Directly preparing our communities by providing a useful starting point for the understanding of drought and its 
impacts
•	Supporting an active and engaged community to be encouraging participation in the development of the plan and 
identifying actions and responsibilities for the community to take up into the future
•	Supporting development of structures and services to strengthen drought resilience in the region by identifying 
existing short-comings or opportunities for improvement. 
Source: Lauren McLaughlin Photography
THE PROCESS
To achieve these aims, a three-phase approach has been adopted, including:
PHASE ONE: 
a desktop review of key regional 
strategic plans, drought impact 
literature and regional data to 
inform a preliminary assessment 
of local economic, social and 
environmental drought resilience.
PHASE TWO: 
stakeholder consultation to 
encourage community co-design 
and RDRP ownership, as well as 
identify priority resilience themes 
and actions.
PHASE THREE: 
development of an action 
plan to enhance the drought 
resilience of the local economy, 
community and environment, 
as well as the monitoring and 
evaluation framework to support 
implementation.  
12

Figure 2 provides an overview of the process adopted. The critical component to the entire process has been 
the community engagement activities to extract drought lived experience, issues and concerns, and community 
suggestions for how resilience may be improved.
The overall development of the RDRP was guided by the Project Control Group, comprised of representatives from 
Goulburn Mulwaree Council, Wingecarribee Shire Council, and NSW DPIRD.   
THE JOURNEY TO DROUGHT RESILIENCE
Figure 2: RDRP development process
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
13

Community Engagement 
A fundamental premise in the preparation of the report has been the understanding that drought is ultimately 
experienced most deeply at the individual and community level, and that the nature of that experience varies 
greatly between, and even within, communities. Any RDRP that is not based upon the experience and knowledge of 
the communities it seeks to address, risks misguided application and planning.
Accordingly, this RDRP has considered community and stakeholder feedback (including feedback obtained from 
other previous and ongoing projects) to help understand and respond to the key community concerns and 
already identified opportunities to improve the preparedness and resilience of the community to drought. For 
example, following the 2020 droughts and fires WSC has established community integrated planning groups to 
advance Southern Highlands Farming Community Resilience and Preparedness, which have periodic workshops 
to advance resilience, including activities such as the Response Recovery and Resilience Expo in 2021. The results 
of this engagement provided key stakeholder insights and contacts from the community, agricultural industry, and 
government partners which has contributed to the engagement approach for this RDRP. 
To inform the engagement program design a stakeholder list was prepared followed by an analysis of the 
methodology appropriate for the engagement with key stakeholders using the International Association for Public 
Participation (IAP2) spectrum.
Various stakeholders have shared their perspectives 
on how the drought has impacted them and has 
influenced their local environment and their livelihood. 
A complete list of organisations engaged is provided at 
Appendix A. The community has been engaged through 
various approaches, including:
•	Project Control Group (PCG) and Community Leaders 
meeting – project direction meeting held in April 
2024 to discuss local drought impacts, opportunities 
and barriers for enhancing regional resilience and 
potential resilience actions. Attendees included:
	- Representatives from GMC and WSC
	- Representatives from NSW DPIRD 
	- Tablelands Farming Systems 
	- Agribusiness and Equine Strategic Working Group, 
Wingecarribee 
	- Goulburn Chamber of Commerce & Industry
	- Marulan Region Chamber of Commerce.
•	Community survey - seeking broad community 
feedback from across both LGA’s via the online 
drought resilience survey open for feedback during 
April and May 2024. The survey was also circulated to 
over 150 stakeholders from community and industry 
groups and organisations, government agencies, and 
media outlets and through both Council’s Facebook 
pages and shared on LinkedIn.
•	Targeted stakeholder meetings (six) with key 
community groups and organisations, including:
	- Local Land Services
	- Water NSW
	- Business representative groups
	- Southern NSW Local Area Health District
	- NSW Health Rural Adversity Mental Health Program 
(RAMHP) 
	- Goulburn Mulwaree Sustainability Hub 
	- Community Voice for Hume 
	- Landcare Goulburn Mulwaree – Regenerative 
Grazing and Framing Group
	- The Southern Highlands Farming Community 
Resilience and Preparedness Working Group
	- The Interagency Group.
•	Community Focus Groups (two) were held in May 
2024 for interested community members and 
invitations were extended to village representatives 
from across both Councils. The participants at 
these sessions included the members of the 
Wingecarribee Community Reference Panel (including 
representatives from the community in the Climate 
Change and Environment, Community, and Economy 
sectors) and from the Southern Highlands Landcare 
Network.
14

The survey was distributed to 
162 
DISTRIBUTION LISTS 
67 
SURVEY RESPONSES
9 
STAKEHOLDER MEETINGS
3 WORKSHOPS, 
40 PARTICIPANTS 
4 FACEBOOK POSTS 
by both Goulburn Mulwaree and 
Wingecarribee Shire Councils promoting 
the opportunity to provide feedback 
through the survey
3,123 REACH
3,371 IMPRESSIONS
11 LIKES 
3 SHARES
2 
MEDIA ARTICLES 
1 
E NEWSLETTER ARTICLE 
distributed, 27 link clicks, 3596 recipients, 
2019 newsletter opens
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
15

Learnings from community engagement
The engagement activities focused on capturing learnings from the Millennium Drought and the 2017-19 Drought. 
The engagement sessions were broadly targeted at understanding stakeholders: 
•	Lived experiences during the previous drought periods
•	Perceptions of the region’s drought resilience
•	Experiences of drought support mechanisms
•	Ideas for, and barriers to, increasing drought resilience of the region in the future
•	Perceptions on the outcomes of effective drought management planning.
The engagement sessions were structured to capture stakeholder 
groups across the RDRP pillars of social, economic and environmental 
resilience. The engagement sessions were also timed to suit relevant 
stakeholder groups, for example business representative sessions were 
held out of business hours (6:00pm). Of the six targeted stakeholder 
group meetings and two Community Focus Groups, three targeted 
stakeholder meetings and one Community Focus Groups were well 
attended, with the remaining sessions having low attendance. To 
capture the input of stakeholders not attending the planned sessions a 
series of one-on-one conversations were held virtually. A small number 
of stakeholders were also engaged via email correspondence. 
In total, more than 100 individuals, and community, agency, and 
industry organisations and groups contributed their feedback in the 
development of the actions and recommendations of this RDRP.
Community Focus Group Meeting, 
Wingecarribee Shire Council, 
16 May 2024
16

A Snapshot of Key Stakeholder Insights on the RDRP
“ Each drought, or the longer drought goes on, diminishes one’s 
ability to thrive - it can seem hopeless, and we just survive and 
get through, frustrated that we weren’t able to better prepare. “ 
Community member 
“ We need to be pragmatic and look 
ahead at the weather. We need to be 
positive and proactive and look 6-12 
months ahead. If it says it will be a horrific 
period of drought ahead then you need to 
start selling sheep, you don’t suddenly get 
drought, you have time to plan.’
I like the word resilience; you need to be 
resilient mentally, but you also need to 
plan and take steps. “
Local Farmer
“ Things like water 
restrictions and watching 
the area become drier and 
drier made me and my family 
anxious over an extended 
period and made us question 
whether we should live in a 
regional area. “
Community member
“ Drought affects farmers 
mentally, it puts stress on the 
brain, and diminishes good 
decision making as drought 
progresses. Therefore, access 
to help is critical and can assist 
farmers so they are not making 
decisions when under the 
pump. “ 
Health Representative
“ Habitat resilience 
is important to the 
community through 
preservation and tree 
planting on properties to 
prepare for drought. Also, 
protecting the habitats of 
our iconic animals such 
as the platypus and Rakali 
(Australian otter) so they 
can survive drought “ 
Landcare Representative 
“ Feeding stock was a challenge as hay and silage was in short supply, poor 
quality and very expensive “
Local farmer
“ Farmers are not necessarily social people, and this contributes to their isolation and 
poor mental health. Especially during droughts when the going gets tough “ 
Farming representative 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
17

Managing perspectives
Community engagement encountered a diverse range of perspectives on drought in the region and appropriate 
actions to build the resilience of the community, economy and environment. The diversity of views was both 
a strength and challenge for plan development. A diverse range of perspectives has resulted in a broad array 
of complementary actions which aim to build the resilience systems of the region. Conflicting perspective on 
individual themes and actions were resolved by referring to the RDRP Program objectives and vision, where 
conflicts were resolved by refocusing towards achieving common outcomes. Ultimately, all stakeholders consulted 
were united in a desire to increase the overall resilience of the region and conflicting perspectives were rare. 
Impact on Local Economies
Community Information and Support
Feed Supply for Livestock
Water Supply and Management
Depth of engagement
In terms of depth of engagement with key 
stakeholder groups, Table 1 summarises the 
level of engagement with key stakeholder 
groups and resulting recommendations for 
future updates of the RDRP. 
18

Table 1: Depth of engagement
NO. STAKEHOLDER 
ATTENDANCE 
ENGAGEMENT 
LEVEL 
WHY?
RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR FUTURE 
ENGAGEMENT 
1
Environmental 
Representatives
7
High
Representation from this group was high 
due to their high interest in the outcomes 
and actions to be included in this report. 
Feedback was provided through the 
stakeholder meetings, workshops and 
survey. 
These stakeholders possess local 
knowledge of landholder and property 
owners land management practices 
and the impact of drought on the local 
environment.
Engage these 
representatives early 
to ensure identification 
of the appropriate 
key environmental 
representatives and 
methods for engagement.
2
Health 
Representatives
4
High
Representation from this group was high 
due to their high interest in the outcomes 
and actions to be included in this report. 
Feedback was provided through the 
stakeholder meetings, workshops, and 
survey. 
Participation by various health 
representatives has provided valuable 
feedback on the impact of drought on 
the health and wellbeing of farmers and 
property owners in both Council areas. In 
addition, we have a greater understanding 
of the local services and programs 
available to support the community.
Engage these 
representatives early to 
ensure identification of key 
health representatives and 
methods for engagement.
3
Business 
Representatives 
4
Moderate
Representatives from the business 
community were interested in providing 
their feedback during the engagement 
program, and we tailored our program 
to ensure we were providing accessible 
opportunities to engage with the business 
community. We received feedback from 
business representatives through the 
workshops, stakeholder meetings, and 
survey. 
Identify alternate 
methods for engagement 
in consultation with the 
business community to 
increase the participation 
and ownership of the 
actions for inclusion with 
the RDRP. 
4
Farmer 
Representatives 
3
Moderate
Farmers and NSW Farmers were interested 
in providing their feedback through the 
engagement program however were 
limited in their capacity to provide this 
feedback. Farmers provided their feedback 
over the phone and at stakeholder 
workshops. 
Engage with farmers and 
NSW Farmers early to 
identify the preferred 
approach for engagement 
with other farmers and the 
method of engagement. 
This may include 
stakeholder interviews and/ 
or attendance at key events 
that farmers attend to 
solicit greater participation. 
5
Government 
Agencies 
3
Moderate
There was moderate interest from 
those representing various Government 
Agencies, and this could be attributed 
to their capacity to provide feedback. 
We received feedback from these 
representatives through the workshops, 
stakeholder meetings, and survey. 
Increase the timeframe for 
consultation to allow for 
increased review time for 
Government Agencies. 
6
Village 
Representatives 
2
Low
Various attempts were made to engage 
with village representatives to ensure 
their feedback was captured. We received 
lower engagement from these groups, 
this could be attributed to some village 
representatives being members of various 
groups and providing their feedback as a 
representative of an alternate group. 
Identify key community 
leaders who can indicate 
their level of interest 
in the outcomes of the 
RDRP report and provide 
feedback throughout the 
engagement program 
in consultation with key 
community leaders. 
7
First Nations 
Representatives 
1
Low
Feedback was sought from both the 
Pejar and Illawarra LALCs and assistance 
was provided by Aboriginal Partnerships 
Managers who sought feedback from the 
LALCs on the RDRP, with the Pejar LALC 
consulted through their board, however, 
no detailed feedback from either LALC was 
received. 
Engage earlier with the 
Aboriginal Partnerships 
Managers and allow for an 
extended timeframe for 
feedback to be gathered 
from the Local Aboriginal 
Land Council’s (LALCs).
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
19

FOLLOWING FOOTSTEPS
It is important to note that the RDRPs and FDF, while bringing focus and activity to the issue, 
are the latest but not the first piece of planning in response to drought and its impacts. This 
is true at a local, regional level and at a national level. Table 2 summarises the key local, 
regional and national strategies into which the GMC and WSC RDRP will integrate, while Table 3 
summarises some of the significant literature, tools and studies undertaken that have informed 
the understanding of current and future drought hazard to the region and potential actions in 
response. It is important that the RDRP, where possible, seeks to find synergies with the regional 
strategic plans, to enhance drought resilience while simultaneously contributing to the broader 
economic, environmental, and social objectives of the region.
It is recognised that several drought specific studies have recently been undertaken within 
the region, including the Baselining Drought study undertaken by the Southern NSW Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub (2022). This broad and consultation intensive study 
sought to describe and define the experience of drought across southern NSW and form the basis 
for assessing changes required, barriers to overcome and potential opportunities to improve 
drought resilience within the farming community. This RDRP is not seeking to rework ground 
previously covered, but rather supplement previous contributions to regional drought resilience 
(e.g. whereas the Baseline Drought study is focussed on farmer impacts, this RDRP seeks to 
expand out the application across the broader economic, environmental and social disciplines). 
Where potential actions/recommendations identified as part of this RDRP have been/will be 
addressed as part of other initiatives, the relevant actions were not taken forward for further 
implementation.
Source: Panoramic views of Bowral in NSW Southern Highlands, Elias Bitar, iStock, 2024
20

Table 2: Strategic alignment
STRATEGY/PLAN
ALIGNMENT AND RELEVANCE TO THE RDRP
National/State Drought Plan
National Drought Agreement
current National Drought Agreement (NDA). The NDA sets out a joint 
approach to drought preparedness, responses and recovery, with a focus 
on accountability and transparency. The NDA identifies the need to support 
farming businesses and farming communities to manage and prepare for 
climate variability and strengthen risk management practices to enhance 
long-term preparedness and resilience. The current NDA expires on 30 
June 2024 and is being reviewed ahead of the implementation of the next 
intergovernmental agreement on drought. 
Key NDA objectives supported by this RDRP are:
•	Enable farming businesses, farming families and farming communities 
to manage and prepare for drought, climate change and variability, by 
supporting their long-term sustainability and resilience, the adoption of 
robust risk management practices and sound natural resource management. 
•	Increase the adoption by farming businesses and the farming sector of 
self-reliant, sustainable and resilient approaches to manage business risks, 
through improved skills and business decision-making, and the adoption of 
new knowledge and tools from research and development.
•	Ensure services to mitigate the effects of drought on health and wellbeing 
are accessible to farming families and farming communities.
•	Ensure support measures are accessible and clear information is available 
for those in need, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders.
•	Provide decision makers, industry and the public with access to common 
sources of quality, drought-related data to improve policy and business 
decision making.
CSIRO Drought Resilience 
Mission
In September 2021, the CSIRO launched three “missions” to guide the 
investment of $150 million in research and development collaborations 
targeted at tackling Australia’s biggest agriculture and food challenges, 
including: drought resilience; trusted agrifood exports; and future protein.
The CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission (Mission) is to reduce the impact of 
Australian droughts by 30 per cent by 2030.
The aim of the Mission is to protect jobs and agricultural profitability, 
strengthen the economic resilience and water security of regional 
communities, and improve environmental outcomes.
This RDRP seeks to support the Mission by identifying practical and 
measurable solutions to reduce the impact of drought on our communities, 
primary producers, and the environment by 2030. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
21

Water Security Strategy/Plan
The NSW Water Strategy
Department of Planning, Industry and Environment
NSW Water 
Strategy
August 2021
www.dpie.nsw.gov.au
The NSW Government has developed the NSW Water Strategy, a 20-year, 
state-wide strategy to improve the security, reliability and quality of the state’s 
water resources over the coming decades. The NSW Water Strategy addresses 
key challenges and opportunities for water management and service delivery 
across the state and set the strategic direction for the NSW water sector over 
the long-term.
The NSW Water Strategy sets the overarching vision for 12 regional and two 
metropolitan water strategies
The NSW Water Strategy defines 7 priorities for the state’s water resources. 
This RDRP supports the priorities of:
•	Priority 4 – Increase resilience to changes in water availability (variability 
and climate change).
•	Priority 5 – Support economic growth and resilient industries within 
a capped system.
•	Priority 6 – Support resilient, prosperous and liveable cities and towns.
The Greater Sydney Drought 
Response Plan
Greater Sydney 
Drought Response 
Plan Overview 
Being prepared for drought  
August 2022 
The Greater Sydney Drought Response Plan (GSDRP) sets out how Sydney 
Water, WaterNSW and the NSW Government will work together to respond 
to droughts in the future. Both GMC and WSC are within the Greater Sydney 
catchment and source water from the WNSW operated Wingecarribee 
Reservoir. Actions implemented under the GSDRP are likely to have 
implications for water supply in the region, via any drought response triggers 
included in the Greater Sydney Water Sharing Plans. 
The GSDRP introduces the framework of a staged drought response by 
defining actions and decisions that are required pre drought, as drought 
conditions develop and intensify, and during recovery. 
The GSDRP also identifies a need to develop rainfall independent supply to 
enhance drought resilience. An action that is supported by this RDRP. 
22

Regional Strategy/Plan
Southern Tablelands Regional 
Economic Development 
Strategy (REDS) + 2023 Update
SOUTHERN TABLELANDS REgiONAL EcONOmic DEvELOpmENT STRATEgy 2018-2022
2018-2022 
Southern 
Tablelands 
Regional
Economic 
Development 
Strategy 
VISION 
To grow the region’s 
core strengths in 
agriculture, energy, 
extractive 
industries, aged care, 
transport, and 
tourism and deliver a 
highly liveable 
community which 
attracts and rewards 
residents and 
visitors. 
Developed with the support of the NSW Government as part of the 
Regional Economic Development Strategies program to assist local 
councils and their communities in regional NSW. June 2018. 
The Southern Tablelands REDS articulate a framework for identifying 
actions crucial to achieving the regional vision aims to leverage the Region’s 
endowments: its topography, water, climate and soils, natural resources, 
proximity to Sydney and Canberra (including the road and rail access), 
extractive and mineral resources, lifestyle advantages, historic heritage and 
villages, public order and safety institutions, hospitals, local institutions and 
strong leadership, labour supply and specialist labour skills.
The identified endowments are the basis of the Region’s specialisations in 
Sheep and Beef Cattle Farming, Meat and Meat Product Manufacturing, 
Public Order and Safety Services, Construction Material Mining, Road Freight 
Transport, Residential Care Services and Tourism, as well as the potentially 
emerging specialisation in renewable energy generation. 
The Southern Tablelands REDS identify priorities to sustain, build, realise 
and enhance. Of relevance to the development of the RDRP, the Southern 
Tablelands REDS seeks to identify opportunities to:  
•	Sustain the Region’s agriculture and agricultural processing advantage, 
especially in livestock 
•	Build on the Region’s core strength in energy generation and natural 
resource extraction.
The 2023 update provides an updated evidence base to guide governments in 
making policy and investment decisions to enhance resilience.
Wingecarribee Regional 
Economic Development 
Strategy – 2023 Update
The Wingecarribee REDS was first developed in 2018 and reviewed in 2023. 
The 2023 update identified that despite recent shocks (drought, bushfire, 
covid) impacting many endowments, key endowments remain, such as:
•	Proximity to Sydney, Canberra, and Illawarra 
•	Water, climate and soil 
•	Education & healthcare infrastructure 
•	Substantial labour supply 
•	Local institutions and strong leadership 
•	Aboriginal & historic heritage 
The Wingecarribee REDS – 2023 update also discussed strengths, 
vulnerabilities, and opportunities. For example, identifying agriculture 
opportunities in emerging specialist industries such as horse breeding, niche 
produce such as truffles and garlic, and flexible approaches to land use 
planning to alleviate constraints on agriculture. 
Department of Regional NSW 
Southern Tablelands Regional Economic Development 
Strategy – 2023 Update 
regional.nsw.gov.au 
Department of Regional NSW 
Wingecarribee Regional Economic Development Strategy 
– 2023 Update
regional.nsw.gov.au 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
23

Regional Strategy/Plan
Wingecarribee 2040 Local 
Strategic Planning Statement
The Wingecarribee Local Strategic Planning Statement (LSPS) sets out the 
20-year land use vision for the region and provides a long-term planning 
framework to meet the economic, housing, social and environmental needs of 
the community.
The LSPS outlines six key land use themes including: our environment and 
sustainability, our rural lands, our economy, our housing, our infrastructure, 
and our place. Each land use theme includes a set of planning priorities and 
actions to achieve the communities’ vision for the Wingecarribee Shire.
The LSPS identifies key water priorities as:
•	Increase of alternative water supplied to decrease dependency on 
distributed water
•	Increase uptake in rainwater tanks and dual reticulation recycled water in 
new development and alternations and additions to existing developments
•	Reduced potable water used for non-potable uses.
This RDRP identifies water savings actions to support the listed water 
priorities. 
Community Strategic Plan - 
Wingecarribee 2041
Community Strategic Plan
Wingecarribee 2041
We're with you
The Community Strategic Plan - Wingecarribee 2041 (Wingecarribee 2041) is a 
community-led long-term plan which considers the community’s current and 
future needs and aspirations. Wingecarribee 2041 is divided into five themes: 
leadership, people, places, environment and economy. Of relevance to the 
RDRP, Wingecarribee 2041 has the stated overarching goals of:
•	Goal 2.1: A healthy, happy, active and resilient community
•	Goal 4.4: A resilient Shire that takes action on climate change
Goulburn Mulwaree 
Community Strategic Plan 2042
Goulburn Mulwaree
Community Strategic Plan 2042
The Goulburn Mulwaree Community Strategic Plan (CSP) is Informed by 
community input and sets out a long-term vision for the region to 2042 and 
identifies priorities and strategies for achieving this. The CSP is currently in the 
draft community consultation phase. 
Priorities that are relevant to the RDRP include:
C.8 Improve community understanding of ways to care for yourself and others 
during extreme weather events and natural disasters
C.9 Plan for and maintain climate resilient community facilities that cater to 
community needs in changing conditions 
C.10 Plan, respond and recover from natural disasters
C.11 Maintain a balance between growth, development, environmental 
protection, and agriculture through sensible planning
D.13 Ensure high quality water supply options for the towns in the region
D.15 Investigate safe and secure water supply and sewer collection options to 
accommodate regional growth and drought.
WINGECARRIBEE 2040
LOCAL STRATEGIC PLANNING STATEMENT
WSC .N SW.GOV.AU
Working with you
24

Regional Strategy/Plan
Southeast NSW Resilience 
Blueprint
South East NSW
Adapting to a changing world
This project is jointly funded by the Commonwealth 
and the New South Wales Government.
ATTACHMENT 11.3
The South-East NSW Resilience Blueprint (Resilience Blueprint) is a high-
level regional framework seeking to address a wide array of natural hazards, 
including drought, and identify ways in which the South-East NSW region 
(including GMC and WSC) can mainstream resilience into the everyday 
activities of its communities. The Resilience Blueprint and its priorities are 
opportunities that can be explored and taken forward by those with a role 
in contributing to resilience to embed its consideration as part of day-to-day 
processes. 
Different stakeholders can use the resilience directions that follow to filter 
those that are relevant to different roles, responsibilities, circumstances and 
needs.
Source: Heritage Goulburn Courthouse, Tahlia Aubusson
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
25

Table 3: Literature, Tools and Studies 
TOOL
DESCRIPTION
Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hubs
adoption and innovation hubs in 2021, with the aim of connecting farmers 
with agricultural experts in their region to harness innovation and adopt new 
practices.
A Southern NSW Innovation Hub (see below) provides local resources within 
in NSW. However, the broader hubs provide resources and data relating to the 
experience of drought more broadly across Australia.
Southern NSW Innovation Hub
Led by Charles Sturt University, the hub seeks to combat drought and form 
the epicentre of user-driven innovation, research and adoption and facilitate 
transformational change through the co-design of research, development, 
extension, adoption and commercialisation activities. 
The Baselining Drought (2022) study was undertaken to establish a shared 
understanding of what constitutes drought in the current context across 
southern and central NSW. The purpose of establishing a drought baseline was 
to understand what drought means for communities and primary producers 
of the region as a basis for assessing required changes, barriers to change, and 
opportunities to improve drought resilience. The baselining study provides 
valuable insights into drought impacts in the GMC and WSC region. 
NSW Government DroughtHub
An online assistance and information portal for NSW primary producers to 
prepare for and manage drought.
26

TOOL
DESCRIPTION
NSW Government AdaptNSW 
website
An online assistance and information portal to inform and empower 
communities, businesses, households and government to adapt to climate 
change.
Farming Forecaster
Managed by a consortium comprised of Monaro Farming Systems, South 
East / ACT Local Land Services, Tablelands Farming Systems and Bookham 
Agricultural Bureau, Farming Forecaster is an online dashboard providing 
soil moisture content and landscape health data captured from regional soil 
moisture probe networks.
While the wealth of knowledge regarding drought and drought management is extensive, perhaps the largest 
knowledge base is held by our Aboriginal peoples. This knowledge base is recognised in other elements of natural 
resource planning within NSW, including the establishment of the Aboriginal Water Programs, focussed on 
establishing a future where water for Aboriginal people is embedded in water planning and management in NSW 
to improve access to, and ownership of, water for cultural, spiritual, social, environmental and economic benefit 
to Aboriginal communities. A key element of this program is the establishment of Regional Aboriginal Water 
Committees for Aboriginal people across NSW to provide advice on water planning and management, as well the 
“Yarning with Communities” and engagement program for water resources at a local level. The potential to tap this 
knowledge bank in the specific context of drought resilience has not been fully explored at this point in time.
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
27

WHAT DO WE MEAN BY DROUGHT 
AND RESILIENCE?
What is drought? 
There is no universal definition of drought, nor is there a single type of drought. At a high-level, the 
Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) defines drought as a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the 
amount of available water is insufficient to meet our normal use1 and states Drought is not simply 
low rainfall; if it was, much of inland Australia would be in almost perpetual drought.
Each drought period is accompanied by a range of factors that impact the environment, people, 
and the economy in different ways. For this reason, drought is measured in different ways and at 
different timescales:
•	Meteorological drought occurs when there is a deficiency in current rainfall compared to the long-
term seasonal average (negative deviation from the mean).
•	Agricultural drought occurs when there is a moisture deficit in the soil during critical growing 
seasons or there is a long-term impact on the producer’s capacity to produce feed for livestock.
•	Hydrological drought occurs when there a prolonged moisture deficit leading to shortages in 
surface water, groundwater and depleted dam and reservoir levels. 
•	Socio-economic drought is the combined impacts of insufficient water supply on the flow of 
economic goods and human wellbeing. 
•	Snap droughts or flash droughts occur when there is an acute decline in rainfall coupled with a 
rapid spike in temperatures causing soils to dry out quickly. 
This RDRP does not adopt a strict single definition of drought when referring to abnormal periods 
of dryness, rather it seeks to adopt a broad concept of drought which incorporates all the measures 
above to examine the different pathways by which an abnormally dry period can impact on society, 
the economy, and the environment. 
1 http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought
Source: John Carnemolla, iStock, 2024
28

What is resilience? 
As with “drought”, there are similarly many potential definitions of resilience. For the purposes of this RDRP, the 
United Nations Officer for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR, 2022) definition of resilience has been adopted:
The ability of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to 
resist, absorb, accommodate, adapt to, transform and recover from the 
effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through 
the preservation and restoration of its essential basic structures and 
functions through risk management. 
This definition highlights the multifaceted components of drought resilience. This is in accordance with standard 
resilience frameworks that provide a conceptual framework for considering the various indicators contributing 
to drought resilience or, conversely, drought vulnerability. The UN (2019) multiple dimensions model (Figure 3) 
provides one such model, identifying vulnerability / resilience to drought as a function of two main elements:
•	The adaptive capacity 
•	The impact of drought
A resilient region is one that has high adaptive capacity. It has the capacity to resist, absorb, accommodate, recover, 
transform and thrive through a range of drought impacts.
Figure 3: The multiple dimensions of drought vulnerability (Source: UN, 2019)
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
29

Adaptive Capacity 
Adaptive capacity is a critical component of 
understanding the potential resilience of the region 
because it considers and represents the resources 
available to adapt to and absorb the impacts of drought 
(ABARES, 2022). The UN (2019) describes these 
resources as various forms of capital:
•	Social capital – factors that impact social 
connectedness (such as government, access to 
services, employment and income distribution)
•	Human capital – influences on the productivity of 
people and labour (such as education and health)
•	Financial capital – access to income, savings and 
credit (such as income and debt level) 
•	Manufactured capital – infrastructure and the built 
environment 
•	Natural capital – land, water and biological resources 
of the region.
Essentially, areas with greater capital resources are 
likely to have higher adaptive capacity as the resources 
are available to either moderate direct impacts or 
redistribute capital as needed (i.e. a person with a 
larger water tank is less likely to worry about a short 
dry spell).
This RDRP applies a similar consolidated lens, 
viewing adaptive capacity across three inter-related 
characteristics of our region:
•	Economic adaptive capacity – The ability of the 
economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks 
and stressors without change the economic status 
or outcomes (i.e. elements of financial capital, 
manufactured capital, and social capital)
•	Environmental adaptive capacity – The ability of the 
natural environment to cope with a diverse range 
of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural 
processes and ecosystem services (i.e. natural capital, 
elements of manufactured capital)
•	Social adaptive capacity – The ability of human 
society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and 
stressors while maintaining existing social and 
community functions (i.e. social capital, human 
capital)
In contrast to many other natural hazards, drought 
typically represents a chronic stressor (i.e. a long-term, 
slow burning issue that can incrementally overwhelm 
the adaptive capacity of a region) rather than a shock 
(i.e. a sudden large-scale event that disrupts the 
economic, social and environmental systems). Based on 
the engagement activities undertaken, the developing 
stressors within the region are typically associated with 
diminishing productivity, diminishing financial reserves 
and income, diminishing water and feed supplies, 
diminishing emotional reserves. The shocks of drought 
are typically indirect in nature and associated with joint 
probabilities of other hazards (e.g. bushfire, heatwaves 
and flood). However, community engagement did 
identify some direct drought shocks arising (e.g. mass 
sudden vegetation die-back or fish kills) where certain 
viability trigger levels are reached. The adaptive 
capacity of a region needs to be able to handle both 
shocks and stressors for the region to be considered 
resilient.
Figure 4: Components of drought adaptive capacity
30

Absorptive and Transformative capacity 
While adaptive capacity is the focus of the UN (2019) framework, the resilience dimensions of absorptive capacity 
and transformative capacity will also contribute to the resilience of the Goulburn Mulwaree and Wingecarribee 
Shire Communities. It is important to acknowledge that resilience actions will not always relate to capacity to 
adapt (availability of capital resources) but also the capacity to absorb and transform, and that all three resilience 
dimensions will contribute to a systems-based approach to increasing drought resilience. 
Oxfam (2017) describes absorptive and adaptive capacity as:
•	Absorptive capacity – is the capacity to ‘bounce back’ from shocks and stressors such as extreme weather events. 
Absorptive capacity involves the capacity of a community to anticipate, plan for, and cope with shocks and 
stressors
•	Transformative capacity – relates to fundamental changes in structures that cause vulnerability to a shock or 
stressor, as well as the mechanisms for sharing risk amongst a community so that marginalised members are 
not inequitably impacted. Transformative capacity typically relates to long-term structural changes and ongoing 
changes. 
Drought impact
The consequence of a drought upon a community or region can be divided into two elements:
•	Exposure – the exposure of the region to drought conditions (e.g. how common an occurrence is drought within 
our region and will this change into the future). A brief history of our regions previous exposure to drought and 
potential drought future is provided below.
•	Sensitivity – the responsiveness of a region to a drought when it occurs (e.g. a house that only has a small water 
tank may quickly and severely notice a reduction in rainfall). The challenge with drought is that the impact 
pathways are numerous and complex. A description of the major impact pathways and associated sensitivities for 
our region is provided below.
Typically, the exposure of a community to drought hazard and the sensitivity of a community to drought hazard are 
used to describe the potential for adverse impacts to arise as result of drought. Against such impacts, the adaptive 
capacity of the community can be overlain to manage and mitigate these impacts, revealing ultimately the true 
resilience/vulnerability of the community to drought.
Applying the theory
For the purpose of this RDRP a simplified exploration of adaptive capacity and drought impacts was undertaken 
through literature review and community engagement, seeking to: 
•	Identify exposure and sensitivity to drought by understanding the lived experience of community members 
and evaluating historic data sources to reveal the direct impacts of drought across the region’s environmental, 
economic and social systems
•	Identify the adaptive capacity of the region through assessment of key indicators and community sentiment as to 
the region’s strengths and weaknesses regarding preparation, response and recovery to drought.
Combining these two elements, the RDRP describes the environmental, economic and social resilience of our 
region and recommends a suite of actions to further strengthen this resilience. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
31

OUR REGION 
AND OUR DROUGHTS
Source: Tarago landscape, Goulburn Mulwaree Council, 2024
32

Like much of rural Australia, the Goulburn Mulwaree and Wingecarribee Shire region has a long relationship with 
drought. The agricultural foundations of the area go together with living through climatic challenges of all types. 
The region has experienced several drought periods since European settlement, and many hundreds prior to it. 
The Bureau of Meteorology records significant drought periods affecting the region over the last century as:
•	The Federation Drought (1895 to 1902)
•	The 1914 to 1915 Drought
•	The World War II Drought (1938 to 1945)
•	The 1965 to 1968 Drought
•	The 1982 to 1983 Drought
•	The Millennium Drought (1997 to 2009)
•	The 2017 to 2019 Drought.

This is roughly one significant drought every 20 years. To assess the current drought resilience of the region, the 
environmental, social and economic impacts of the Millennium Drought and 2017 to 2019 Drought have been 
reviewed, while noting the broader definition of drought being considered as part of the RDRP. These two droughts 
represent those for which the most robust data sets exist.
Both these droughts were followed by devastating bushfires, with the 2009 fires following the Millennium Drought 
and the 2019/2020 bushfires following the 2017-2019 drought. 
Source: Streetscape, Bundanoon, Destination NSW
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
33

The Millennium Drought
The Millennium Drought occurred between 1997 and 2009, severely impacting the southeast and southwest of 
the continent. A defining feature of the Millennium Drought was the prolonged periods without significant rainfall 
episodes during the cooler seasons (Figure 5) coupled with above average summer temperatures, particularly 
at the tail end of drought between 2005 - 2007. The combination of prolonged dryness coupled with above 
average summer temperatures severely depleted major water storages, devastated cropping regions of NSW 
and Queensland and led to the introduction of extreme water restrictions across the towns and cities of eastern 
Australia. 
Figure 5: Millennium Drought Rain Deciles (Source: BOM, 2020)
34

The 2017 to 2019 Drought
The 2017 to 2019 Drought was preceded by a period of high rainfall over the winter and spring of 2016 followed by 
a sharp decline in 2017 through to 2019. The drop in rainfall was particularly acute within the Murray Darling Basin 
region, where the 36-month period between 2017 to 2019 was the driest on record. The 2017 to 2019 Drought was 
characterised by intense dry conditions in the cool seasons, followed by moderate rainfall in the October-December 
period in 2017 and 2018. 2019 was particularly dry, with the extreme cool season dryness extending into the 
warmer months of October – December. Figure 6 shows the intense dryness of the April-September period 
(right) within the 36-month drought period (left). It can be observed that the rain decile ranges indicate that the 
April-September period was the driest on record in the region. 
Figure 6: 2017-2019 Rain Deciles - (L) average annual rainfall (R) average rainfall April - September (Source: BoM 2019)
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
35

LIVED EXPERIENCE
The impact of these events for our region were extensive and diverse. A more detailed assessment of the impacts 
of drought against key indicators is discussed in the assessment of Adaptive Capacity, however, the following 
aspects highlighted by local communities and media at the time provide a snapshot of the breadth of impact 
pathways arising:
•	Environmental:
	- Increased death of wombats in the region because of increased mange spread as wombats are 
forced to congregate closer together to access feed
	- Loss of habitat and water led to migration of hundreds of thousands of bird species away from 
the region, affecting local pollination while also causing issues for areas receiving new bird 
species
	- No soil moisture means propagation of seeds is reduced and reduced ecological growth and 
diversity
	- Higher probability of invasive weed incursions due to absence of climate limitations on some 
species capacity to survive
	- Interruption of community volunteer native tree planting programs.
•	Economic:
	- Significant farm operational cost increases to cover feed and water
	- Increased cattle yard sales as farmers look to reduce stock in response to higher cost of feed and 
water
	- Loss of investment in breeding and adaption of livestock to local conditions when farms destock 
	- Local stock feed growth not possible due to lack of soil moisture and high costs of carting water
	- Coming out of drought, farmers are faced with uncertainty and limited funds as to whether to 
invest in restocking strategies or to seek alternate income opportunities
	- Landowners recovering from drought may feel the need to invest in protection of natural 
resources and soil reserves which help recovery after drought, but the economic returns are 
likely only to be felt 20 years later after the next drought.
•	Economic / Social
	- Cancellation of annual events such as the Goulburn All-Breed bull sale which act as broader 
community-shaping activities
	- During the Millennium Drought the Goulburn municipal water supply, serving over 20,000 
people reached critically low levels with less than 12 months of supply remaining
	- City of Goulburn spent more than 2 years on the top level of water restrictions in the Millennium 
Drought, forcing behavioural changes and business operational changes
	- Farms and agricultural companies reduce investment on social activities (e.g. removing 
sponsorship of local sporting clubs) leading to reduced community activities and cohesiveness. 
36

•	Social
	- Water restriction changing the culture regarding household water use also leading to lower 
sanitation and hygiene outcomes and social tensions between those who follow the restriction 
and those who do not
	- Negative community sentiment towards other regions due to water reserves being utilised 
in other regions, such as Wingecarribee Reservoir used to augment water supply to Greater 
Sydney and Shoalhaven 
	- Closure of recreation facilities such as local swimming pools and sporting fields reduces 
opportunities for social interaction 
	- Loss of established farms leading to secondary impacts on town businesses, employment and 
schools
	- Emotional distress at loss of crops and gardens due to insufficient watering
	- Emotional distress at lax water attitudes in neighbouring LGAs and regions where available 
water reserves were not at risk to the same extent
	- Farmers working 7 days a week sourcing feed and water, with associated high stress and fatigue 
and limited time for families or recreation.
While the array of negative impacts is substantial, the drought also led to the creation of many initiatives and 
actions, from both within the community and government, that strengthened the community identity and bonds of 
our region, including:
•	Establishment of Mayoral Emergency Relief Funds, 
through which business and individuals contributed 
to support their affected farmers
•	Wingecarribee Shire Council formally supported 
farmers through the deferral of rates payments
•	Resilience Ready Expo’s coordinated local community 
associations
•	The Country Women’s Association playing an active 
role in coordinating community events and providing 
support and connection to households during 
drought
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Council initiative providing 
farmers with 450 bales of hay delivered by the Rapid 
Relief Team Goulburn 
•	Establishment of The Big Dry Regional Services 
Guide providing online information for those seeking 
financial, emotional, and health support services 
across drought affected areas
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Council coordinating water 
carting services for residents not on mains water 
Financial Counsellors free services 
•	Establishment of the NSW Government’s Farm 
Tracker system, enabling farmers to access timely 
support information to aid decision making
•	Government introducing low interest loans to 
increase feed and water storage to manage dry 
conditions.
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
37

FUTURE DROUGHT PROJECTIONS AND IMPACTS
Current climate change forecasts suggest that drought conditions are expected to worsen across the broader 
south-east NSW region. While both Goulburn Mulwaree and Wingecarribee may not be as exposed as other more 
inland LGAs, both the frequency and magnitude of drought is anticipated to increase. This will be driven by:
•	Long term reduced average annual precipitation (Figure 7)
•	Long term increases in summer and spring temperatures, leading to increased evapotranspiration and reduced 
soil moisture (Figure 8).
Figure 7: Change in annual mean precipitation (adapted from the South East NSW Resilience 
Blueprint (CRJO, 2022)
Figure 8: Change in annual mean soil moisture percentiles (adapted from the South East 
NSW Resilience Blueprint (CRJO, 2022)
38

The NSW Office of Environment and Heritage South 
East and Tablelands Climate change snapshot forecasts:
•	Maximum summer and spring temperatures are 
projected to increase by 2.4oC by 2070, with the 
greatest increases in temperatures likely to be 
experienced away from the coast (Figure 9)
•	Minimum temperatures are expected to increase by 
2.0oC by 2070
•	Spring rainfall is projected to decrease, while 
autumn and summer rainfall is projected to increase. 
Increased warm weather rainfall is likely to mean that 
water storages and soil moisture will be adversely 
impacted by evaporation, compounding the impacts 
of lower cool weather rainfall
•	The region, on average, is projected to experience 
an extra three days above 35oC per year by 2070, 
while the area to west of Goulburn is projected to 
experience up to 30 additional days above 35oC by 
2070 (Figure 10). 
Projected changes
DECREASING
INCREASING
INCREASING
DECREASING 
IN SPRING
INCREASING 
IN AUTUMN
INCREASING
Figure 9: South East Climate Change Snapshot 
(Source: NSW OEH, 2014)
South East 
Tablelands
Change in annual 
average number 
of days with 
temperatures  
above 35°C
>40 
30 – 40 
20 – 30 
10 – 20 
5 – 10 
1 – 5 
0 – 1
Figure 10: Projected changes in number of days with 
max temperature above 35oC (Source: NSW OEH, 2014)
Without appropriate intervention and planning, 
the drought impacts currently incurred are likely to 
significantly worsen. Figure 11 suggests that by 2070, 
Wingecarribee LGA will face a 20% increase in the 
likelihood of drought by 2070, with the Goulburn 
Mulwaree LGA will face a 33% increase. 
Figure 11: Change in annual mean drought index (Keetch-Byram index values) (adapted from 
the South East NSW Resilience Blueprint (CRJO, 2022)
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
39

OUR DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
Based on the results of the community engagement undertaken, impacts and effects of previous drought and 
assessment of key indicators, the RDRP undertook a LGA specific evaluation of the Adaptive Capacity, Exposure and 
Sensitivity to drought.
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY 
The adaptive capacity dimensions of Goulburn Mulwaree are summarised in Table 4, and Wingecarribee Shire in 
Table 5.
Overall, the two LGAs appear to have relatively strong capital resources that could contribute to the adaptive 
capacity of the region. The two LGAs display, at a high level, a relatively healthy and educated population 
with highly diversified economies. The high proportion of land use (natural capital) for agricultural purposes 
appears to be the clear impact pathway for drought conditions to affect the two LGAs socially, economically, and 
environmentally. For both LGAs, agricultural activities represent the dominant land use.
Source: Andrii Medvediuk, iStock, 2024
40

Table 4: Adaptive capacity dimensions of Goulburn Mulwaree Council (Source: Informed Decisions, Rhelm)
DIMENSION 
INDICATOR 
Social capital: 
Income distribution: Income 
distribution is in line with 
Regional NSW, with slightly 
higher proportion of population 
in medium-higher income ranges 
than the Regional NSW average. 
From a social capital perspective, 
this indicates there is not a high 
proportion of income disparity in 
the region. 
Employment: Current 
unemployment rate of 3.2%, 
diversified employment with low 
dependency on agriculture sector 
for job creation. The economic 
mix is in line with Regional NSW 
average. 
This mix of employment indicates 
there is a not a strong reliance on 
one sector of the economy for job 
creation.
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
41

Natural capital
Land use: Goulburn Mulwaree 
land use is characterised by a 
high proportion dryland grazing 
(brown) and dryland cropping 
(yellow), with some nature 
conservation land on fringes 
(purples)
Water supply: The LGA has a 
diversified water supply however 
all are likely to become strained 
during drought periods. 
There are three major water storages for the Goulburn Mulwaree region 
are:
•	The Pejar Dam (9,000ML at capacity) on the Wollondilly River
•	The Sooley Dam (4,140ML at capacity) on the Bumana Creek
•	Rossi Weir (330ML) downstream on the Wollondilly River
The town of Goulburn is also able to source water from the Wingecarribee 
Reservoir via the Highland Source Pipeline.
Human Capital
Education level: All levels of 
education have increased over the 
last 20-years, representative of the 
changing mix of economic activity 
over time. A higher proportion 
of educated population is likely 
to strengthen human capital 
due to increased employment 
opportunities. 
42

Human Capital
Health and disease prevalence: 
around 50% of the population 
report no long-term health 
conditions, while the number 
of people reporting a mental 
health condition is in line with the 
Regional NSW average (1 in 10). 
Population age distribution: 
The population distribution of 
Goulburn Mulwaree is in line with 
the Regional NSW average, with 
a slightly higher proportion of the 
population in the 55-75 age range 
and slightly lower proportion in 
the 25-45 age range. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
43

Economic Capital
Gross Regional Product: GRP 
growth is observed to be stable 
over time, and not to be sensitive 
to water intensive industries such 
as agriculture 
Value add by industry: Health 
care and social services and 
construction are highest value 
industries. The high value of non-
agriculture output provides some 
buffering of the economy during 
drought periods. 
44

Table 5: Adaptive capacity dimensions of Wingecarribee Shire (Source Informed Decisions, Rhelm)
DIMENSION 
INDICATOR 
Social capital: 
Income distribution: 
Wingecarribee Shire has a 
relatively higher proportion of 
middle-to-high-income earners 
than the Regional NSW average, 
and a relatively low proportion of 
low-income earners. 
Employment: The current 
unemployment rate is 3.2%, with 
diversified employment and low 
dependency on agriculture sector 
for job creation. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
45

Natural capital
Land use: Wingecarribee Shire 
land use is characterised by a high 
proportion of natural conservation 
land (purple), and dryland grazing 
(brown) 
Water Supply
The Wingecarribee Reservoir 
may be likely to come under 
strain during drought conditions, 
meaning the region may be 
exposed to water security issues. 
The Wingecarribee Reservoir, located on the Wingecarribee River, about 15 
km southeast of Bowral is the main source of water for communities within 
the Wingecarribee Shire. The Wingecarribee Reservoir has a capacity of 
around 30,000 ML and is part of the Shoalhaven Scheme, which during 
drought conditions is drawn on to augment Sydney and Illawarra water 
supplies.
Under the Greater Sydney Water Sharing Plan, water supply to 
Wingecarribee Shire can be augmented from Tallowa Dam under limited 
conditions (access to water below -1 metre storage levels is not permitted). 
Human Capital
Education level: Higher education 
levels have increased over the 
last 20-years, representative of 
changing demographics. Higher 
education levels may enhance 
adaptive capacity due to increased 
employment opportunities.
46

Human Capital
Health and disease prevalence: 
around 55% of the population 
report no long-term health 
conditions, while 1 in 8 report a 
mental health condition, which is 
slightly higher than the average for 
Regional NSW (1 in 10). 
Population age distribution: 
Wingecarribee Shire has an aging 
population when compared to the 
Regional NSW average. While this 
age category is primarily non-
agricultural, drought impacts are 
likely to be experienced through 
water restrictions and urban 
amenity impacts (loss of green 
space etc)
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
47

Financial and Economic Capital
Gross Regional Product: GRP 
growth is observed to be stable 
over time and not to be sensitive 
to water intensive industries such 
as agriculture 
Value add by industry: Health 
care and social services and 
construction are highest value 
industries. High value of non-
agriculture industries is likely to 
increase adaptive capacity as 
there is low dependency on water 
sensitive industries. 
48

EXPOSURE TO DROUGHT 
Within the region, rainfall and temperature conditions during the Millennium Drought and 2017-2019 Drought 
were similar to those observed across most of southeast NSW. Figure 12 and Figure 13 show that rainfall 
was generally higher in January than July, and that periods of high rainfall were often accompanied by high 
temperatures. It is shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13 that the low rainfall in 2017 and 2019 was accompanied by the 
highest January temperatures in the 20-year period depicted in the figures. 
In terms of the various types of droughts, the NSW Department of Primary Industries (NSW DPI) began publishing 
the NSW Seasonal Update in 2017. The NSW Seasonal Update includes regional drought ratings based on the 
Combined Drought Indicator (CDI). The CDI uses remote sensing and on-ground reports to measure the drought 
indicators of rainfall, soil moisture and plant growth against long-run average to assess phases of drought. A 
CDI rating of Drought or Intense Drought indicates that a single or all three drought indicators, respectively, are 
significantly below the long run average. The CDI is not a declaration of drought, rather it is an information tool for 
primary producers to stay informed of prevailing climatic conditions.
The CDI indicators for South Eastern NSW as of December 2019 are shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15. Figure 
14 indicates that, for the 12 months to 2019, much of the region was in experiencing either Drought or Intense 
Drought conditions. Figure 15 shows vegetation density in December 2019 was well below the long run average 
(> -5%), signifying that agricultural activity had been severely impacted by insufficient rain and prolonged low soil 
moisture levels for the previous 12 months.
Figure 12: January and July Rainfall: Goulburn (Goulburn TAFE AWS) and Wingecarribee (Moss Vale AWS) (Source: BoM)
Figure 13: January and July Temperature: Goulburn (Goulburn TAFE AWS) and Wingecarribee (Moss Vale AWS) 
(Source: BoM)
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
49

Figure 14: Combined Drought Indicators for South East NSW - 12 Months to December 2019 (NSW DPIRD, 2019)
50

Figure 15: Vegetation Index for South East NSW as at December 2019 (NSW DPIRD, 2019)
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
51

ASSOCIATED HAZARD SHOCKS
While drought is primarily a slow onset natural hazard stressor, it can be associated with an array of 
inter-related rapid natural hazards, including:
•	Extreme temperatures and heatwaves – Acute extreme temperatures can lead to health risks, 
particularly of aging populations, as well as higher energy costs for associated cooling. Such events 
can rapidly exacerbate existing drought conditions by rapidly reducing remaining surface and soil 
water/moisture
•	Bushfire – The likelihood and severity of bushfires increases with the moisture content present 
within the available vegetation and decaying matter. Drought condition, particularly early on in 
their formation can significantly increase drought risk. The magnitude of the 2020 fires in the area 
were enhanced through the preceding 2017-19 drought
•	Flood – The occurrence of a flood does not necessarily represent the end of a drought and often 
the first flood following a drought can be severe as the hardened nature of the ground increasing 
imperviousness as well as the presence of high volumes of litter and material entrained by the 
floods
•	Dieback – the gradual loss of water sources for ecological communities may reach a tipping point 
for some communities, beyond which the ecological community effectively collapses because of 
core elements (often trees or fresh water for aquatic communities) dying/disappearing. Such shifts 
can be sudden and are often dramatic visual impacts to surrounding residents
•	Dust – For prolonged droughts, pending the nature of the region, the loss of moisture within soils 
can lead to increased likelihood of dust-storm occurrence. While ranging significantly in size and 
impact, larger events can significantly affect local air quality and can be associated with health 
issues for aging populations.
LOCAL DROUGHT IMPACT PATHWAYS AND 
SENSITIVITY
When a community is exposed to a drought, the magnitude of impact within the community (i.e. the 
sensitivity of the community to the drought) will reflect the characteristics of the community and the 
impact pathways present: the relational link between the effect of the drought and the economic/
environmental and social activities of the community. Key impact pathways present within our 
region include:
•	Transport and connectivity 
	- Road and transport infrastructure condition 
may deteriorate during drought, increasing 
transportation costs
	- Our community has limited access to public 
transport in some locations, reducing access 
to services, particularly for community 
members without access to private 
transport. This socio-economic disadvantage 
may deteriorate further under drought 
conditions.
•	Housing and property
	- Increase housing/mortgage/rent stress 
because of lower incomes and greater 
expenditure on responding to drought
	- Low rental incomes as renters move out of 
the drought affected area
	- Housing stock condition deteriorates as 
maintenance works diminish
	- Rural small holdings may not be well 
managed during drought leading to 
increased risk of associated natural hazard 
shocks, weeds and pest growth.
52

•	Health and Wellbeing
	- While larger health centres are available in both 
Sydney and Canberra, the limitation of the region’s 
immediate health care service providers can 
struggle to meet the provision of continuous and 
adequate health care support (particularly mental 
health) during droughts
	- Aging populations, like those within Wingecarribee 
Shire, are more sensitive to drought impacts than 
younger populations. In particular, social isolation, 
mental health and the ability to access services are 
issues of concern.
•	Employment and businesses
	- The region can face the inability to attract skilled 
workforce as a results of drought conditions
	- Unemployment rates typically increase during 
drought, particularly for economies that lack 
diversity in industries, as lower productivity and 
reduce incomes decreases workforce demand.
•	Industry
	- Both LGAs have a historic heavy reliance upon 
agriculture and related services for income and 
employment, naturally increasing the sensitivity of 
the economy to drought 
	- Drought induced lack of feed within the agriculture 
sector leads to increased importation of feed from 
other areas, and with it, increased pests and weeds.
•	Land and Water
	- The Wingecarribee LGA, due to its connectivity 
to the substantial resource of the Greater Sydney 
Water Catchment areas has a relatively high-water 
security.
	- The Goulburn Mulwaree LGA, since the completion 
of the Highland Source Pipeline, also has access to 
water supplies of Greater Sydney Water Catchment, 
although this did not prevent the need for water 
carting in the 2017-2019 drought. 
	- Both LGAs have over 30% of the total population 
not connected to the Council/Sydney Water 
operated distribution network and must rely on 
their own water sources
	- Competition for limited water supplied between 
land-owners and large industry, such as mine 
operators requiring extractive water for dust 
suppression 
	- Drought related land and water degradation can 
lead to significant native eucalypt and vegetation 
dieback, amenity impacts, and cultural implications 
and impacts to Aboriginal peoples.
DROUGHT RESILIENCE ASSESSMENT
A review of the adaptive capacity, exposure and sensitivity of our region as presented above allowed the 
identification of the resultant drought resilience strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) across 
our economic, environmental and social systems. The SWOT components are defined as:
•	Strengths are existing positive attributes of the region that already contribute to drought resilience 
•	Weaknesses are attributes of the region that could be improved to enhance drought resilience 
•	Opportunities are positive factors of the region that could be harnessed to contribute to enhance drought 
resilience
•	Threats are external conditions that negatively impact drought resilience now and into the future.
The SWOT assessment results are presented in Table 6.
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
53

Table 6: SWOT assessment
SOCIAL 
ECONOMIC
ENVIRONMENTAL
Strengths
The Regional Economic and 
Development Strategies (REDS) 
summarised in Table 2 highlight 
the strength in regional social 
institutions, such as healthcare, 
governance and law and order. 
The regional population as a 
whole is both in good health and 
higher education levels have been 
increasing over the last 20-years, 
indicating a reasonable level of 
social adaptive capacity.
The region has highly diversified 
economies with relatively low 
dependency on water sensitive 
industries such as agriculture
Stakeholders reported that there 
has been an improvement in the 
natural resource management 
(NRM) farming practices over the 
last 20-years and provided examples 
LLS programs and locally developed 
technology to provide warnings of 
the onset of drought (for example, 
soil moisture monitoring equipment 
that informs drought planning - 
when moisture drops to 80% below 
average signals it’s time to destock 
and preserve feed).
Weaknesses
Both LGAs within the region are 
characterised by aging populations 
which may be more susceptible to 
physical health impacts and risks 
associated with drought. 
Stakeholders reported that regional 
communities can become socially 
isolated in times of drought and that 
it is hard to know who is struggling 
with mental and physical health. 
Stakeholders also reported that 
there is a lack of awareness of 
where to go to seek help. 
Stakeholders reported that the 
changing demographics of the 
region can create tensions during 
drought periods as people less 
familiar with rural living ignore 
waters conservation warnings and 
property maintenance.
The recent evolving demographic 
nature of the region has led to a 
loss of local drought knowledge and 
social support networks which are 
important during times of stress. 
While the diversified economies 
of the region provide economic 
resilience in terms of total economic 
output, the agricultural industry 
remains highly sensitive to the 
impacts of drought. Stakeholders 
also reported that impacts on the 
agriculture industry are likely to 
affect related wholesale and retail 
industries, and that downturns 
in agriculture are likely to be felt 
economically in the smaller towns 
and villages more so than the larger 
regional centres. 
Stakeholders reported that while 
the sections of farming community 
maintain drought management 
plans, a large portion of the farming 
and broader commercial community 
do not maintain plans. Time, cost, 
and knowledge were seen as the 
main barriers to plan development. 
Stakeholders reported that feed 
security is an economic challenge 
for sheep and cattle farmers in the 
region, this has been exacerbated 
by changing ownership and use 
of properties previously used as 
cropping for hay.
Stakeholders reported that there 
is some resistance to adopt more 
NRM farming practices amongst 
established farmers, and that 
distributing information and sharing 
knowledge within the farming 
community is a challenge. 
Stakeholders also reported that 
management of invasive weeds and 
wildlife management is challenging 
during drought periods, particularly 
on vacant lots, and lots with 
absentee landowners. 
The increased importation of fodder 
increases the risk of biosecurity 
hazards such as priority weeds, 
feral animals, disease and insects 
incursions for example fire ants.
Regional economic strategies 
identify the increased water 
and land use demand posed by 
residential population growth and 
housing developments as a key 
challenge for future water security. 
54

SOCIAL 
ECONOMIC
ENVIRONMENTAL
Opportunities
Stakeholders reported that existing 
community-based groups (such as 
the Country Women’s Association 
and local Men’s Sheds) provide 
an informal support service for 
community members during times 
of drought and climate stress. The 
community groups could provide 
important learnings of the type 
of social issues occurring, and 
preferred methods of community 
engagement and support resources. 
There is an opportunity 
for the establishment of a 
community-based group contact 
register to champion drought 
related welfare resources. 
There is an opportunity for strong 
social institution (strength) to act as 
information and response centres 
during drought onset and drought 
periods.
The REDS summarised in Table 2 
demonstrate that both LGAs are 
actively seeking options to diversify 
the agriculture industry and invest 
in infrastructure to improve drought 
resilience. Examples include 
the equine industry growth and 
investment in regional saleyards and 
knowledge hubs. 
Improving rainfall independent 
supply and groundwater aquifer 
recharge is a state and regional 
priority and the RDRP could seek to 
identify local rainfall independent 
supply schemes to leverage the 
state level strategic priorities.
Stakeholders identified that while 
changing demographics and vacant 
landowners’ properties may 
present a social and environmental 
challenge, the vacant land 
may present opportunities for 
community-based land leasing feed 
banks schemes or co-ops where 
vacant land is used to grow crops 
for feed, or intensive farming (i.e. 
wheat or cereals). 
The state and regional strategies 
summarised in Table 2 emphasise 
that maintaining healthy waterways 
and landscapes are a state and 
regional planning priority. 
The RDRP for the region should seek 
to leverage this strategic priority 
where possible.
There is an opportunity to expand 
the use of locally developed soil 
moisture monitoring technology 
across the entire region. 
There is also an opportunity to 
leverage State based drought 
forums such as NSW DPI Seasonal 
Update, Drought Signals Dashboard 
and CDI to provide leading 
indicators to the community of the 
onset of drought. 
Increased development across 
towns and villages increases the 
capacity for water catchment on 
private land through the installation 
of stormwater capture on buildings. 
Ensuring this captured water is 
used for services such as flushing 
of toilets and watering gardens 
can ease some of the stress on the 
municipal supply.
There is an opportunity to establish 
a working relationship with 
WaterNSW to better forecast water 
demand for the region, particularly 
the demands of the increasing 
residential population. 
Threats
In a drought resilience sense, the key social economic and environmental threat to the region is the predicted 
changes in climate. The rising temperatures, decreases in cool season rail and increases in warm season rain are 
likely to be a threat to water security and landscape health.
Stakeholders identified water security as a key issue for the area and communicated a desire for the RDRP to 
address water security issues. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
55

OUR DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE ACTION PLAN
Source: Stephenallen75, iStock, 2024
56

Empowering our communities to enhance drought resilience through 
co-operative action
Our Action Plan is presented in themes, actions and timeframes (short, medium, and long). The themes emerged 
over the program of stakeholder engagement as recurrent issues of concern for the region’s community. The 
actions are primarily stakeholder identified actions, that are specific, readily implementable, and measurable. The 
actions aim to build social cohesion through resourcing the community to build knowledge and provide care, and 
to create networking opportunities so those existing knowledge holders within the community can share their 
experience. The actions are designed to offer practical solutions that will build the region’s cooperative pathway to 
a more resilient future.
The four resilience themes that guide our priority resilience actions are (Figure 17):
Resilient local 
communities
Resilient local 
economy
Resilient 
landscapes
Resilient domestic 
water supply
Stakeholders identified a number of actions under each of these themes. The adoption of resilience actions put 
forward by the community within this plan were based on an assessment of their: 
•	Alignment with community sentiment and concern
•	Alignment with the overall RDRP vision for the region
•	Similarity / duplication of other initiatives already 
underway 
•	Clarity of implementation pathway
•	Alignment with established regional community plans 
and strategies 
•	Effectiveness in addressing regional drought 
resilience.
This RDRP Plan is preceded by a Draft RDRP that was independently evaluated by the CSIRO against a set of 
evaluation criteria. A set of five resilience themes, five priority actions and twenty-one secondary actions were 
included in the Draft RDRP. These actions were socialised with key stakeholder groups for feedback in a series 
of workshops. The CSIRO evaluation and stakeholder engagement has led to the revisions of actions to be 
‘foundational’ or ‘sequential’, and revised action plan comprised of four themes, four foundational actions and 
twenty-three sequential actions. Within the twenty-seven actions (4 foundational and 23 sequential), ten actions 
have been revised from the draft plan. Lastly, CSIRO provided several suggestions for future plan changes to be 
applied over time as circumstances and knowledge change. The list of suggestions for future plan changes is 
provided at Appendix C. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
57

A high-level set of criteria were adopted to establish a sequential pathway towards the identified outcomes for each 
resilience theme. Prioritising the actions in a sequential pathway or, ‘adaption pathway’, ensures that the actions 
that will provide the foundation and build momentum for future resilience actions are prioritised and presented 
in an actionable format to encourage short-term implementation. The adaption pathway approach ensures that 
resilience measures are appropriately scaled and provide the region with a level of flexibility in incorporating 
continued learning into resilience building. 
The criteria adopted are summarised in Table 7. 
Table 7: Sequential priority criteria
PRIORITY LEVEL
CRITERIA
Foundation action
Momentum building actions that provide the foundation for future actions. The actions 
have a low risk of over investment, high ease of implementation and high likelihood 
of short-term improved resilience. The Foundation actions are likely to maintain or 
modify current systems, rather than transform.
Sequential or 
supporting action
Actions that are sequential in nature and have a moderate-to-high risk of over 
investment, medium-to-long term improvement in resilience. The sequential actions 
may maintain, modify or transform current systems.
It is acknowledged that several legitimate drought resilience issues and actions were identified by stakeholders that 
are established as priority actions in other Local and State Government plans, such as economic diversity actions 
covered by Regional Economic Development Strategies (REDS) and water sharing challenges managed by NSW 
Water Sharing Plans. These actions have not been included within this plan.
Source: Bowral, iStock, Kokkai Ng, 2024
58

Vision: We seek to develop communities that are prepared, active and structured in such a way that, 
when under the stress of drought, our economies remain prosperous, our communities remain connected, 
and our environment is protected
RESILIENCE 
THEME
RESILIENT LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES
RESILIENT LOCAL 
ECONOMIES
RESILIENT 
LANDSCAPES
RESILIENT WATER 
SUPPLY
Impact
Regional communities are 
resourceful, connected & 
thriving
Local businesses are informed, 
resourced and prepared
Agricultural landscapes 
are sustainable, 
functional, with healthy 
natural capital
Regional water supply is 
secure, sustainable and 
resilient to shocks. 
Resilience 
Outcomes 
(S1) More community 
members are resourced 
to provide community led 
intervention
(S2) Stronger community 
connectedness and greater 
awareness contributing to 
community wellbeing
(EC 1) More local businesses 
adopt strategies to reduce 
financial exposure to drought
(EN1) More primary 
producers preserve 
natural capital while also 
sustaining productivity 
and profitability. 
(EN 2) More primary 
producers adopt whole-
of-system approaches 
to NRM to restore the 
natural resource base 
and preserve long-term 
landscape health.
(S3) More water users 
are informed about water 
security issues and adopt 
sustainable water use 
practices to sustain water 
supply
Foundation 
Action
1.0 Creation of a dedicated 
(part-time) Resilience Officer 
resource, to be funded by 
DRF grant 
2.0 Formalise networks, 
accountabilities and roles for 
promoting pro-active ‘good-
year’ business planning 
3.0 Creation of a 
(temporary part-time) 
Agriculture Outreach 
Officer role
4.0 The establishment 
of water sharing and 
availability online 
dashboard to increase 
community awareness 
and visibility of water 
management during 
drought 
Secondary 
Actions
1.1 Identify opportunities 
for collaboration between 
organisations providing 
rural health care programs 
(e.g. RAHMP) and local 
community organisations 
(farming groups, sporting 
clubs etc) to promote 
wellbeing
1.2 Engage with real estate 
and property agents 
regarding access pathways 
for support and education 
regarding drought
1.3 Develop a community 
‘first-aid’ kit to assist in 
community driven out-reach 
in times of drought and 
climate stress
1.4 Establish and formalise 
network of community 
organisation leaders to 
coordinate and promote 
drought response measures 
(e.g. 1.5).
1.5 Establishment of 
network of community 
‘drop-in centres’ or ‘drought 
support hubs’ at community 
organisation locations 
1.6 Establishment of a youth 
resilience ambassador role
1.7 Identify the needs of 
young people during periods 
of climate stress and create a 
10-point Youth Action Plan.
2.1 Promotion of proactive 
‘good-year’ business resilience 
planning through creation of 
online ‘resilience’ planning 
template and online resource 
directory 
2.2 Organise business 
networking events for local 
businesses to share learnings on 
resilient business practices
2.3 Investigate opportunities 
for non-agricultural major 
events to attract tourism to 
the region, including greater 
utilisation/activation of town 
and village assets typically used 
for agricultural purposes such 
as regional show grounds or 
properties 
2.4 Investigate opportunities for 
Aboriginal community led water 
/ land tourism operations
2.5 The establishment of a small 
farm processor co-op, where 
smaller farms pool farming 
machinery and equipment
2.6 The establishment of a 
member-based regional feed 
store co-ops for livestock 
producers
2.7 Implementation of training, 
education and traineeship/
apprenticeship programs for 
off-farm income generating 
activities
3.1 The establishment 
of an online directory of 
landscape management 
grant opportunities, 
information resources 
and tools, and education 
materials practices
3.2 The promotion of 
‘wet year’ landscape 
management and 
planning activities to 
proactively promote 
landscape health under all 
climate conditions – i.e. 
promotion of practices 
to prepare for drought in 
‘wet years’ 
3.3 Engage local 
aboriginal knowledge 
holders within local land 
care groups and practice 
committee
3.4 Establish partnerships 
between local agricultural 
land holders and 
academic institutions to 
trial innovative landscape 
health management 
practices
4.1 The creation of a 
‘water-wise’ educational 
campaign targeting 
community attitudes and 
behaviours for domestic 
water use during drought 
and non-drought periods, 
including promoting 
behaviours that manage, 
store and re-use both 
potable and non-potable 
water
4.2 promotion of 
existing water security 
initiatives to encourage 
adoption of on-farm 
water management and 
retention planning and 
management practices 
during wet-years
4.3 Micro-grants for 
retrofitting older buildings 
in rural villages with water 
conservation equipment, 
or replacing aged water 
conservation equipment 
4.4 Engage local 
aboriginal knowledge 
holders within local land 
care groups and practice 
committee
4.5 Consideration of co-
operative water storage 
mechanism for farmers 
to facilitate local water-
carting services
Inputs and 
activities 
Grant funding and establishment of funding models, establishing partnerships and relationship building, formalising 
nested governance framework for implementation and ongoing monitoring and evaluation, ongoing communications and 
stakeholder engagement. 
Figure 16: RDRP Action Plan Program Logic
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
59

SHORT-TERM
MEDIUM-TERM
LONG-TERM
Actions that create momentum in 
resilience building and maintain or 
modify current systems 
Low risk of over investment, high 
ease of implementation, high 
likelihood of short-term improved 
resilience
Actions that build resilience and 
modify current systems
Moderate risk of over investment, 
sequential in nature, moderate 
implementation lead time
Actions that build resilience and 
transform current systems
Moderate-to-high risk of over 
investment, transformative in 
nature, long implementation lead 
time
1.0 Creation of a dedicated part-
time Resilience Officer resource, to 
be funded by DRF grant
1.1 Resilience Officer to Identify 
opportunities for collaboration 
between organisations providing 
rural health care programs (e.g. 
RAHMP) and Community services 
(e.g. Services NSW) and local 
community organisations (farming 
groups, sporting clubs etc) to 
promote wellbeing
1.2 Resilience Officer to engage 
with real estate and property agents 
regarding access pathways for 
support and education regarding 
drought
1.3 Develop a community ‘first-aid’ 
kit to assist in community driven 
out-reach in times of drought 
and climate stress, contents to be 
informed by Actions 1.1 and 1.2. 
First aid kit could be physical or 
downloadable ‘app’.
1.6 Establishment of a youth 
resilience ambassador role
1.7 Identify the needs of young 
people during periods of climate 
stress and create a 10-point Youth 
Action Plan
1.4 Establish and formalise network 
of community organisation leaders 
to coordinate and promote drought 
response measures (e.g. 1.5). 
This action, and Action 1.6, could 
be formalised as a ‘Resilience 
Committee’ which periodically 
meets with Council to determine 
resilience planning actions
1.5 Establishment of network 
of community ‘drop-in centres’ 
or ‘drought support hubs’ at 
community organisation locations 
such Country Women’s Association 
locations or Men’s Sheds
60

SHORT-TERM
MEDIUM-TERM
LONG-TERM
2.0 Establish accountability and local 
ownership of resilience planning for 
businesses and primary producers
2.1 Promotion of proactive ‘good-
year’ business resilience planning 
through creation of online 
‘resilience’ planning and education 
web page
2.2 Organise business networking 
events for local businesses to share 
learnings and drought management 
practices
2.3 Investigate opportunities for 
non-agricultural major events 
to attract tourism to the region, 
including greater utilisation/
activation of town and village 
assets typically used for agricultural 
purposes such as regional show 
grounds or properties
2.4 Investigate opportunities for 
Aboriginal community led water / 
land tourism operations
2.5 The establishment of a small 
farm processor co-op, where 
smaller farms pool farming 
machinery and equipment
2. 6 The establishment of a 
member-based regional feed store 
co-op for livestock producers
2.7 Implementation of training, 
education and traineeship/
apprenticeship programs for off-
farm income generating activities
3.0 Creation of a (temporary part-
time) Agriculture Outreach Officer 
role
3.1 The establishment of an online 
directory of landscape management 
grant opportunities, information 
resources and tools, and education 
materials
3.2 The promotion of ‘wet year’ 
landscape management and 
planning activities to proactively 
promote landscape health under all 
climate conditions – i.e. promotion 
of practices to prepare for drought 
in ‘wet years’
3.3 Engage local aboriginal 
knowledge holders within local land 
care groups and practice committee
3.4 Establish partnerships between 
local agricultural land holders 
and academic institutions to 
trial innovative landscape health 
management practices
4.0 The establishment of a water 
sharing and availability resource 
to increase community awareness 
and visibility of water management 
during drought
4.1 Water wise education campaign 
for domestic water use including 
options to manage, store and re-use 
water
4.2 promotion of existing water 
security initiatives to encourage 
adoption of on-farm water 
management and retention 
planning and management practices 
during wet-years
4.3 Micro-grants for retrofitting 
older buildings in rural villages with 
water conservation equipment, or 
replacing aged water conservation 
equipment
4.4 Engage local aboriginal 
knowledge holders within a local 
land care groups and practice 
committee
4.5 Cooperative water storage 
mechanism to facilitate local water 
carting or sharing services
Figure 17: Resilience pathway 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
61

RESILIENCE THEME 1: 
RESILIENT LOCAL COMMUNITIES
Regional communities are resourceful, connected 
and thriving 
(S1) More community members are resourced to provide community-led intervention 
and assistance.
(S2) Stronger community connectedness and greater awareness contributing to community 
wellbeing. 
Community mental health impacts are significant and far-reaching during times of drought and 
climate stress. There are many ways in which drought can impact communities, economy and 
landscapes, but ultimately it is the people within the community who experience the stress 
and anxiety of a drought’s many impact pathways. Edwards et al (2015) report the impacts of 
drought increase the incidence of mental health issues by up to 10% in rural communities. The 
impacts of drought on mental health are also broad, ranging from burnout and stress to more 
severe mental illness issues of anxiety and depression. At the most severe end of the spectrum, 
anecdotal evidence suggests the that the incidence of domestic violence increases dramatically 
with the onset of drought, and that the relative risk of suicide can increase by up to 15% in rural 
males aged between 30-49 as the severity of drought increases. 
There are a range of existing programs targeting rural mental health, such as the Rural Adversity 
Mental Health Program (RAMHP) which targets community knowledge and education through 
outreach. RAMHP coordinators are employed by Local Health Districts and are embedded within 
agricultural communities across NSW. However, these resources can become stretched during 
times of climate stress. Healthcare representatives and community members reported that 
enabling the community to assist one another during times of drought would assist in enhancing 
community resilience. 
Source: Marulan Kite Festival Markets with Crowds, Goulburn Mulwaree Council, 2024
62

Stakeholders reported that the uneven impacts of drought, rural nature of farming, and lack of awareness of 
support services mean that those who are suffering may struggle to seek help. The shifting demographic of the 
region is also playing a role in the social isolation of community members. The incidence of established community 
members leaving the region has reportedly led to loss of social support networks for existing community members, 
and feelings of isolation and lack of support for new community members. 
The sensitivity of local communities and economies to drought is also highly variable across the region. The 
community and economic activity of the regional economic centres are relatively diversified, with a mix of both 
agricultural and non-agricultural based activity. While the smaller towns and villages have a higher reliance on 
agricultural activity. The community within the larger regional economic centres may therefore be less aware 
of the impacts of drought on fellow community members than those in the smaller towns and villages. Drought 
also impacts age groups differently, with stakeholders reporting that rural youth are often overlooked but 
experience drought impacts in reduced capacity to access and finance schooling and recreation activities, as well as 
experiencing feelings of stress and anxiety from witnessing drought impacts on family and family farms. 
Finally, stakeholders reported high fatigue and burnout amongst the agricultural community during times of 
drought. The result is that daily tasks become arduous, individuals have limited time for recreation or family, and it 
is challenging to find avenues of support for things like financial assistance and personal wellbeing. 
A priority action of this RDRP is to seek funding for the establishment of a Resilience Officer to establish networks 
with key government and community stakeholders and to develop resources to support lasting community 
wellbeing systems. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
63

FOUNDATION ACTION 1.0: 
CREATION OF RESILIENCE 
OFFICER (PART-TIME) ROLE 
The purpose of the Resilience 
Officer is to create a resource 
with accountability for 
delivering the supporting 
and sequential community 
wellbeing actions as well 
as complementary actions 
identified under other 
resilience themes. Primary 
responsibilities would include 
developing productive 
working relationships with 
key government, community 
and business organisations 
to establish networks and 
resources to promote 
community wellbeing. 
A key outcome of the role 
should be the development of 
the ‘First-aid’ kit (Action 1.3)
The role would likely be 
temporary part time role and 
could be could be funded 
through DRF grant, or other 
government grant funding 
avenues. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN SUMMARY:
Timeframe
Short term – by June 2026
Costs
$150,000
Funding 
opportunities:
•	RDRP/DRF funding
•	Leveraging of existing resources
Strategic 
alignment
•	National Drought Agreement (objectives d. and e.)
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Community Strategic Plan 2042 (C.8)
•	Community Strategic Plan - Wingecarribee 2041 (Goal 2.1)
•	South East NSW Resilience Blueprint (Themes 1 – 3)
IMPLEMENTATION:
Implementation 
steps:
•	Seek funding
•	Establish role description and objectives
•	Advertise for role 
•	Engage with relevant government agencies (such as 
RAHMP and Service NSW) and community organisations 
on establishing working relationship
Action facilitator: •	Council
Key 
Stakeholders:
•	NSW Health (RAHMP)
•	Service NSW
•	Relationships Australia
•	Community organisations 
•	Local businesses 
Risks
•	Lack of available funding
•	Unable to retain suitable resource
•	Low government and community engagement with 
Drought Resilience Officer
MONITORING AND EVALUATION:
Resilience 
outcomes:
•	More community members are resourced to provide 
community-led intervention and assistance, resulting in 
lower rates of drought induced stress and depression
•	Stronger community connectedness and greater awareness 
contributing to community wellbeing.
Indicators/
Targets: 
•	Recruitment of suitable resource 
•	Productive engagement with Government agencies, 
community organisations and local businesses 
•	Lower incidence of reported poor mental health 
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Activities 
•	Promotion of Drought Resilience Officer role through 
Council social media, local print media, employment 
websites, local radio advertisements 
64

SUPPORTING AND SEQUENTIAL ACTION
ACTION FUNDAMENTALS
1.1
Identify opportunities for collaboration 
between organisations providing rural health 
care programs (e.g. RAHMP) and Community 
services (e.g. Services NSW) and local 
community organisations (farming groups, 
sporting clubs etc) to promote wellbeing
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain existing roles in 
providing community wellbeing support.
Modify government, community and business networks to 
support community wellbeing outcomes
Preceding action: Retention of Resilience Officer/
establishment of accountability for action
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council
1.2
Resilience Officer to engage with real estate 
and property agents regarding access 
pathways for drought support and education 
for new residents 
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify existing pathway to 
reach new residents
Preceding action: Retention of Resilience Officer/
establishment of accountability for action
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council
1.3
Develop a community ‘first-aid’ kit to assist 
in community driven out-reach in times 
of drought and climate stress and provide 
resources to alleviate stress (e.g., food and 
transport vouchers). Contents to be informed 
by Actions 1.1 and 1.2. First aid kit could be 
physical or downloadable ‘app’, with tailored 
‘kits’ for age groups.
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify drought resilience 
resources to provide regionally tailored drought assistance 
packages 
(longer term) Transform the role of community members in 
providing wellbeing support to fellow community members
Preceding action: 1.1 and 1.2 to inform resources 
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council
1.4
Establish and formalise network of 
community organisation leaders to coordinate 
and promote drought response measures 
(e.g. 1.5). This action, and Action 1.6, could be 
formalised as a ‘Resilience Committee’ which 
periodically meets with Council to determine 
resilience planning actions 
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify community 
organisation networks to established defined roles in 
responding to community shocks and stressors (i.e. not 
isolated to drought)
Preceding action: 1.0 
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council/Community 
Organisations 
1.5
Establishment of network of community 
‘drop-in centres’ or ‘drought support hubs’ 
at community organisation locations such 
Country Women’s Association locations or 
Men’s Sheds
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify community 
organisation networks to established defined roles in 
responding to community shocks and stressors (i.e. not 
isolated to drought)
Preceding action: 1.4
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council/Community 
Organisations 
1.6
Establishment of a youth resilience 
ambassador role 
Maintain/modify/transform: Create/Modify role of youth 
representation on Council committees to create avenue for 
youth representation in Regional resilience planning 
Preceding action: 1.0 / Not required
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council 
1.7
Identify the needs of young people during 
periods of climate stress and create a 10-point 
Youth Action Plan. 
Identification of actions from the UNICEF 
Australia NSW Youth Summit on Living with 
Drought that are implementable within the 
region, either in isolation or as part of the 
‘first-aid kit’ (Action 1.3).
Maintain/modify/transform: 
Preceding action: 1.4
Potential facilitator: Youth Resilience Officer/Resilience 
Officer
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
65

RESILIENCE THEME 2: 
RESILIENT LOCAL ECONOMIES 
Local businesses are informed, resourced and prepared
(EC 1) More local business and primary producers adopt proactive ‘good-year’ planning practices 
and strategies to reduce financial exposure to drought
(EC) Businesses and primary producer communities are connected and share learnings to 
improve collective economic resilience of the region 
The sensitivity of the businesses and primary producers within the region to drought and climate 
variability is highly variable. The shifting demographics of the region over the past 20 years has 
brought a wealth of non-agricultural income and industry to the area. ABS (2021) data show that 
gross regional product (GRP) has grown steadily over the last twenty-years, despite downturns 
in the value agricultural output during the Millennium Drought and 2017-2019 drought (Table 
3 and Table 4). GRP growth is largely due to growth of high value industries such as health care 
and social assistance, and construction over the past twenty-years. At a high level, this indicates 
that the relatively diversified economies and high non-agricultural income has buffered the 
regional economies from the impact of drought. However, the headline GRP growth trend is 
likely masking the impacts of drought on smaller businesses, particularly those in smaller towns, 
agricultural communities and industries downstream of agriculture such as retail and wholesale 
industries.
Source: Bendooly Estate, Berrima, Destination NSW
66

The region is characterised by urban centres surrounded by smaller towns and villages. The major urban 
centres of Moss Vale, Mittagong, Bowral and Goulburn host approximately 60% of the regions 86,600 people. 
Stakeholders reported that the business environment in the larger urban centres is relatively more stable than 
smaller towns such as Robertson and Marulan. Stakeholders reported that the business environment in smaller 
towns is challenging due to a combination of factors such as climate variability and the seasonal nature of tourism 
influxes. The nature of the business environment in the smaller towns and villages means that small shocks can 
lead to closure of businesses, as businesses struggling with profitability are forced to close. An aging population, 
particularly within Wingecarribee, while driving economic strength in industries supporting retirement lifestyles, 
does limit investment in other areas, particularly commercial and industrial trade.
A number of solutions were put forward to increase the resilience of local economies, from small scale planning 
solutions to structural solutions targeting greater diversification of economic activity. It is noted that both the 
Southern Tablelands and Wingecarribee Regional Economic Development Strategies (REDS) include priorities for 
economic diversification. 
Stakeholders reported that while the region’s agricultural industry typically prepare farm management plans 
including drought management measures, the local business community generally does not adopt drought 
management planning practices. Issues of time, cost and knowledge were identified as key barriers to adopting 
drought management planning. Stakeholders also reported that there are opportunities to improve proactive 
planning practices undertaken during ‘good-years’ to prepare for economic downturn. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
67

FOUNDATION ACTION 2.0: 
FORMALISE NETWORKS, 
ACCOUNTABILITIES AND 
ROLES FOR PROMOTING 
PRO-ACTIVE ‘GOOD-YEAR’ 
BUSINESS PLANNING 
Stakeholders reported a 
need to promote pro-active 
business planning during 
the ‘good-years’ to prepare 
for economic downturns 
resulting from shocks and 
stressors. Stakeholders 
reported that business 
resilience planning should 
extend beyond drought 
resilience planning and 
cover resilience in general, 
including such things as 
income diversification and 
managing seasonal variations 
in trade and staff availability. 
There are several potential 
commerce and primary 
producer groups within the 
region with an interest in 
improving resilient business 
practices. The first step is 
to establish and formalise 
roles in promoting business 
resilience planning. The 
establishment of networks, 
roles and functions will 
support sequential actions 
for the development of 
resources, programs, and 
schemes to support improved 
planning practices 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN SUMMARY:
Timeframe
Short term – by June 2026
Costs
$20,000
Funding 
opportunities:
•	RDRP/DRF funding
•	Leveraging existing resources
Strategic 
alignment
•	National Drought Agreement (objective f.)
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Community Strategic Plan 2042 (C.10)
•	Community Strategic Plan - Wingecarribee 2041 (Goal 4.4)
IMPLEMENTATION:
Implementation 
steps:
•	Seek funding
•	Engage with NSW Small Business Commissioner on 
potential for assistance
•	Engage with chamber of commerce and business 
representative groups
•	Secure resources 
Action 
facilitator:
•	Council/Resilience Officer (if retained)
•	Local chamber of commerce and business representative 
groups
•	Local farming groups
Key 
Stakeholders:
•	Council
•	NSW Small Business Commissioner 
•	Local business chambers 
•	Local business representatives 
•	Planning template developers 
•	NSW DPIRD – Regional Economic Development
•	Destination NSW – Destination Networks
Risks
•	Lack of available funding
•	Lack of engagement from local businesses and primary 
producers
•	Unable to establish roles and functions
MONITORING AND EVALUATION:
Resilience 
outcomes:
•	More local business adopt strategies to reduce financial 
exposure to drought
Indicators/
Targets: 
•	Key stakeholders active in the promotion of resilience 
planning
•	Number of local businesses engaged in resilience planning 
practices 
•	Lower reported incidence of drought related business 
closures 
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Activities 
•	Identification of key stakeholders
•	Identification of action enablers 
68

SUPPORTING AND SEQUENTIAL ACTION
ACTION FUNDAMENTALS
2.1
Promotion of proactive ‘good-year’ 
business resilience planning through 
creation of online ‘resilience’ planning 
template and online resource 
directory
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain current economic activity 
through improved resilience planning
Preceding action: Action 2.0 
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council, local chambers of 
commerce, local farming and primary producer groups
2.2
Organise business networking events 
for local businesses to share learnings 
on resilient business practices
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain current economic activity 
through improved resilience planning 
Modify business practices to diversify income streams and sales 
platforms
Preceding action: Action 2.0 
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council, local chambers of 
commerce, local farming and primary producer groups
2.3
Investigate opportunities for non-
agricultural major events to attract 
tourism to the region, including 
greater utilisation/activation of town 
and village assets typically used for 
agricultural purposes such as regional 
show grounds or properties 
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify use of existing regional assets 
to provide new tourism attractors to increase economic activity
Preceding action: Action 2.0 
Potential facilitator: Resilience Officer/Council, local chambers of 
commerce, local farming and primary producer groups, Destination 
NSW – Destination Network
2.4
Investigate opportunities for 
Aboriginal community led water / 
land tourism operations 
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify use of existing regional assets 
to provide new tourism attractors to increase economic activity
Preceding action: N/A
Potential facilitator: Pejar LALC, DPIRD, Council 
2.5
The establishment of a small farm 
processor co-op, where smaller 
farms pool farming machinery and 
equipment
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain primary production activity 
through supporting smaller producers to engage in sustainable 
business practices 
Transform current farming networks to support formalised 
productive working relationships
Preceding action: Action 2.0/Action 3.0
Potential facilitator: Agricultural Outreach Officer, local farming 
groups 
2.6
The establishment of a member-
based regional feed store co-ops for 
livestock producers
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain primary production activity 
through supporting smaller producers to engage in sustainable 
business practices 
Transform current farming networks to support formalised 
productive working relationships
Preceding action: Action 2.0/Action 3.0
Potential facilitator: Agricultural Outreach Officer, local farming 
groups 
2.7
Implementation of training, education 
and traineeship/apprenticeship 
programs for off-farm income 
generating activities
Maintain/modify/transform: Transform and diversify economic 
structures to create employment pathways in non-water sensitive 
industries 
Maintain agricultural employment pathways by ensuring young 
people are aware resilience building resources and educated 
landscape health practices 
Preceding action: 1.7
Potential facilitator: Local Chamber of Commerce
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
69

RESILIENCE THEME 3: 
RESILIENT LANDSCAPES
Agricultural landscapes are sustainable, functional, with healthy 
natural capital
(EN 1) More primary producers preserve natural capital while also sustaining productivity and 
profitability. 
(EN 2) More primary producers adopt whole-of-system approaches to NRM to restore the natural 
resource base and preserve long-term landscape health. 
Stakeholders reported that there are several environmental groups and government agencies 
operating within the region, with the view to promote the adoption of natural resource 
management practices and landscape health management. Government agencies and 
environmental groups operating in the region include:
•	Local Land Services (LLS)
•	Landcare
•	Southern NSW Drought Hub
•	Sustainable Goulburn Mulwaree
•	Regen Action
•	Rivers of Carbon
•	Independent Council for Ecosystem 
Restoration (ICER) Warragamba rehydration 
and restoration project.
Source: Wingecarribee Local Government Area, DCCEEW, 2024
70

Further, stakeholders were keen to point out that there are many motivated and experienced landholders and 
primary producers within the region who have had success implementing land care and sustainable farming 
practices to build landscape resilience. These members of the community hold valuable knowledge, and skill sets 
that would be of great benefit to the wider agricultural community. 
Finally, local farming groups such as Tableland Farming Systems have developed publicly available landscape health 
and livestock performance monitoring tools such as the online resource Farming Forecaster. Farming Forecaster is a 
publicly available online dashboard which publishes soil health and moisture information captured by a network of 
soil moisture probes within the region. 
While there is a wealth of knowledge and programming within the region, stakeholders report there a disjointed 
approach to land care and resource management across the region and a lack of motivation and resources to alter 
farming practices. Stakeholders also reported there are opportunities for neighbouring properties to work together 
to adopt sustainable land management practices and share knowledge and resources. 
A number of solutions were provided to increase the uptake of landscape health management practices in the 
region, ranging from education resources to regenerative agriculture ‘field days’. A priority action of this RDRP is for 
the creation of an Agricultural Outreach Officer position to facilitate the building of partnerships between land care 
groups, primary producers, and levels government for the purpose of knowledge sharing and building cooperative 
capacity. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
71

FOUNDATION ACTION 
3.0: THE CREATION OF A 
TEMPORARY PART-TIME 
AGRICULTURE OUTREACH 
OFFICER ROLE 
The purpose of the 
Agriculture Outreach Officer 
is to facilitate the connection 
of agricultural land holders 
with farming community 
networks, relevant 
government agencies, 
farming groups and land 
care organisations, and First 
Nations organisations. The 
Agriculture Outreach officer 
would also be accountable for 
the supporting and sequential 
resilient landscape actions as 
well as creating foundations 
from complementary 
measures under resilience 
theme 2 (Actions 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 
4.2, input into Actions 1.3 and 
1.4). 
The role is likely to be a 
temporary part-time role 
in the short term and could 
potentially be funded by an 
RDRP grant. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN SUMMARY:
Timeframe
Short term – by June 2026
Costs
$150,000 
Funding 
opportunities:
•	RDRP funding
•	Drought Ready and Resilient Fund
Strategic 
alignment
•	National Drought Agreement (objective c.)
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Community Strategic Plan 2042 (C.10)
•	Community Strategic Plan - Wingecarribee 2041 (Goal 4.4)
IMPLEMENTATION:
Implementation 
steps:
•	Seek funding
•	Establish role description and objectives
•	Advertise for role 
•	Engage with relevant land care organisations and 
government agencies on establishing working 
relationships
Action facilitator:
•	Council
Key Stakeholders:
•	Local landholders
•	NSW DPIRD 
•	LLS
•	CSIRO
•	Land care organisations
Risks
•	Lack of available funding
•	Unable to retain resources
•	Low engagement from local farming community
MONITORING AND EVALUATION:
Resilience 
outcomes:
•	More primary producers are connected with land care and 
management agencies
•	More primary producers preserve natural capital while 
also sustaining productivity and profitability. 
•	More primary producers adopt whole-of-system 
approaches to landscape health to preserve long-term 
landscape health.
Indicators/
Targets: 
•	Retention of qualified resource
•	Number of agricultural landholders engaged 
•	Creation of landscape health resources 
•	Adoption of ‘wet year’ planning and farming practices 
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Activities 
•	Radio advertisements, farming and land care group 
information sessions and member communications, online 
recruitment resources
72

SUPPORTING AND SEQUENTIAL ACTION
ACTION FUNDAMENTALS
3.1
The establishment of an online directory of 
landscape management grant opportunities, 
information resources and tools, and 
education materials
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain current systems by 
consolidating information sources in a single directory, and 
promoting the directory to the agriculture community 
Preceding action: 3.0 
Potential facilitator: Agricultural Outreach Officer/ Land 
care organisations/farming groups 
3.2
The promotion of ‘wet year’ landscape 
management and planning activities to 
proactively promote landscape health under 
all climate conditions – i.e. promotion of 
practices to prepare for drought in ‘wet years’ 
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify farming practices to 
promote broad adoption of pro-active landscape health 
measures 
Preceding action: 3.0 / isolated action
Potential facilitator: Agricultural Outreach Officer/ Land 
care organisations/farming groups 
3.3
Engage local aboriginal knowledge holders 
within local land care groups and practice 
committee
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify farming practices 
to incorporate learnings from local First Nations land 
managers 
Preceding action: 3.0 / isolated action
Potential facilitator: Agricultural Outreach Officer/ Land 
care organisations/farming groups 
3.4
Establish partnerships between local 
agricultural land holders and academic 
institutions to trial innovative landscape 
health management practices 
Maintain/modify/transform: Transform farming practices by 
incorporating innovative land management practices 
Preceding action: 3.0 / isolated action
Potential facilitator: Agricultural Outreach Officer/ Land 
care organisations/farming groups 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
73

RESILIENCE THEME 4: 
RESILIENT REGIONAL WATER SUPPLY
Regional water supply is sustainable, secure, and resilient to 
shocks
(S 3) More water users are informed about water security issues and adopt sustainable water use 
practices to sustain secure water supply
The shifting demographics of the region over time has led to varying levels of community 
understanding on the importance of water conservation both under non-drought and drought 
conditions. Current and expected growth in the residential population is also expected to put a 
strain on water supply during future drought events. 
Goulburn Mulwaree and Wingecarribee Shire have diversified water supply options. Both 
Councils own and operate dams and source water from the WaterNSW owned and operated 
Wingecarribee Reservoir. Goulburn Mulwaree primarily sources water from the Council operated 
Pejar and Sooley Dams, with connectivity to the Wingecarribee Reservoir through the Highland 
Source Pipeline. Wingecarribee Shire is supplied by the Council operated Bundanoon Dam and 
the WaterNSW operated Wingecarribee Dam. Under the Greater Sydney Water Sharing Plan, 
water supply to Wingecarribee Shire can be augmented from the WaterNSW operated Tallowa 
Dam in the Shoalhaven catchment under limited capacity conditions. However, both Councils 
reported that they may increase reliance on the WaterNSW operated Wingecarribee Reservoir in 
the future due to cost and demand pressures created by growth in residential population. 
Source: Artesian bore Australia, John Carnemolla, iStock, 2024
74

Stakeholders reported that over time there has been a decline in understanding of the importance of water 
conservation practices, both in urban and semi-rural domestic water users. As community members who 
experienced the severe restrictions of the Millennium Drought have left the region, and people less accustomed to 
living in a rural environment have settled in the region, there has been a shift in expectations for water availability, 
cost and security. Rural and regional residential living campaigns have often not been accompanied by water-wise 
and resource use education campaigns. 
A compounding issue is that the residential and recreational buildings in the older towns and villages of the region 
are not equipped with water conservation equipment, meaning residents, and building occupants are solely reliant 
on town water. Similarly, equipment installed during the Millennium Drought is becoming aged and in need of 
replacement. 
During the Millennium Drought, Goulburn’s town water supply levels reached critically low levels, leading to the 
implementation of the highest possible water restrictions (level 5) and warnings that the town had less than 12 
months of water supply remaining. Water security was improved by the construction of the Highland Source 
Pipeline in 2011, however stakeholders report that water carting was required during the 2017-2019 drought 
and Goulburn Mulwaree Council provided urban water taps for domestic use through the Mayoral Relief Fund. 
Illustrating that while water security has improved, there is a need enhance domestic water conservation practices.
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
75

FOUNDATION ACTION 4.0:  
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WATER 
SHARING AND AVAILABILITY 
RESOURCES TO INCREASE 
COMMUNITY AWARENESS AND 
VISIBILITY OF WATER MANAGEMENT 
DURING DROUGHT.
This action includes the development 
of online dashboard and public drinking 
water level signage (similar to green to 
red ‘Fire Danger Today’ signs).
Stakeholder consultation highlighted 
community concern with how water 
is managed and shared between 
catchments in drought conditions 
under NSW Government Water 
Sharing Plans. Some concern was 
based on a misunderstanding of water 
sharing conditions and arrangements, 
a belief that other catchments 
received favourable water allocations. 
Community sentiment of ‘getting a bad 
deal’ contributed to feelings of stress 
and anxiety during drought periods. 
The purpose of this action is to create 
a transparent resource to provide 
community members with information 
on:
•	How water is shared between 
catchments within the Greater Sydney 
Drinking Water Catchment 
•	Dam levels and water restriction 
levels on any given day
The public display of drinking water 
level signage would contribute to 
elevating community awareness of 
the importance of, and individual 
accountability for, responsible 
consumption of potable water. 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN SUMMARY:
Timeframe
Medium term – by June 2027
Costs
$50,000 
Funding 
opportunities:
•	RDRP funding
•	Drought Ready and Resilient Fund
Strategic 
alignment
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Community Strategic Plan 
2042 (D.13 and D.15)
•	Wingecarribee 2040 Local Strategic Planning 
Statement 
•	Greater Sydney Water Strategy (P.2)
IMPLEMENTATION:
Implementation 
steps:
•	Identify funding sources
•	Establish accountabilities 
•	Establish resource materials
Action facilitator:
•	Council
Key Stakeholders:
•	WaterNSW
•	Sydney Water
•	NSW DCCEW
•	NSW DPIRD
Risks
•	Lack of available funding
•	Low community engagement
MONITORING AND EVALUATION:
Resilience 
outcomes:
•	More rural residential water users are 
informed about water security issues and 
adopt sustainable water use practices to 
sustain secure town water supply
Indicators/
Targets: 
•	Sufficient funding secured
•	Publication of online resource
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Activities 
•	Radio advertisements, local mailouts, 
promotion through local community groups, 
real estate agents promoting dashboard to 
new property buyers 
76

SUPPORTING AND SEQUENTIAL ACTION
ACTION FUNDAMENTALS
4.1
The creation of a ‘water-wise’ educational 
campaign targeting community attitudes and 
behaviours for domestic water use during 
drought and non-drought periods, including 
promoting behaviours that manage, store and 
re-use both potable and non-potable water
Maintain/modify/transform: modify community attitudes 
on responsible water management practices 
Preceding action: 4.0 
Potential facilitator: Council, WaterNSW, NSW DCCEW
4.2
Promotion of existing water security initiatives 
farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate 
Scheme, NSW Government Drought Ready 
and Resilient Fund, ANU Sustainable Farms 
Enhance farm dams resource to encourage 
adoption of on-farm water management and 
retention planning and management practices 
during wet-years
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain and/or modify 
on-farm water management practices that maintaining or 
installing water management infrastructure 
Preceding action: 3.0 / not required
Potential facilitator: Agriculture Outreach Officer/Council
4.3
Micro-grants for retrofitting older buildings 
in rural villages with water conservation 
equipment, or replacing aged water 
conservation equipment
Maintain/modify/transform: Maintain or modify rural water 
conservation practices by replacing or installing required 
equipment
Preceding action: not required
Potential facilitator: Council / NSW Government
4.4
Engage local aboriginal knowledge holders 
within  local land care groups and practice 
committee
Maintain/modify/transform: Modify on farm water 
conservation practices based on First Nations learnings 
Preceding action: 3.0 / not required
Potential facilitator: Agriculture Outreach Officer, land care 
groups
4.5
Consideration of co-operative water storage 
mechanism for farmers to facilitate local 
water-carting services
Maintain/modify/transform: Transform regional water 
sharing arrangements to increase cooperative capacity / 
resilience reserves
Preceding action: 3.0 / not required
Potential facilitator: Agriculture Outreach Officer, land care 
groups, farming groups
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
77

IMPLEMENTATION REQUIREMENTS
This RDRP sets out a prioritised approach to realise our vision for the region. The proposed actions represent an 
array of initiatives to be led by community members, stakeholders, local and state government. Moreover, it is 
recognised that while actions are best delivered locally, the ability to draw upon multi-jurisdictional learnings from 
similar projects (as well as consider any associated broader requirements) ultimately leads to better outcomes. The 
successful delivery of the plan (and any of its actions) will be reliant upon:
•	Community ownership – A commonality across the proposed actions is the change in understanding and action 
by local community members as the ultimate driver to the RDRP success. While the actions identified above have 
been developed through community engagement, the continued adoption of the actions at both and individual 
and community groups level will be important. Identifying community working groups or key community 
representatives to support localised implementation will be critical
•	Local Government ownership – Both GMC and WSC are committed to enhancing the drought resilience or the 
region. Both Council’s already operate a number of working groups and dedicated resources to managing natural 
hazards and this plan will fall within and support these existing portfolios. Additional personnel support is likely to 
be required to facilitate implementation, such as the creation of a Drought Resilience Officer role 
•	State and Federal ownership – This RDRP forms one of many currently in development across NSW and the 
ongoing regional co-ordination, as well as and cross-jurisdictional learning opportunities, will be critical to 
the success of both this RDRP and the broader program. The federal government likewise has a national level 
coordination and funding role that support the delivery of state and local programs.
LASTING GOVERNANCE 
This RDRP provides a set of community driven actions within a sequential framework, designed to achieve a 
set of resilient outcomes. While it is a community-led plan, implementation of the actions will require a level of 
coordination across all levels of government, as well as a variety of NGOs. An agreed governance arrangement for 
all aspects will be required to ensure consistency and clarity in plan implementation, given the array of contributing 
parties. Key to its successful implementation, will be funding commitments to support the governance process 
and ultimate delivery from community, local, state and federal agencies. The ultimate structure of the governance 
framework will likely depend on ongoing implementation of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program, 
and coordination of implementation between Federal and State Governments. This RDRP identifies key governance 
roles at different levels of implementation (Figure 18). 
The envisioned Governance system (Figure 18) is based on nested responsibilities at different levels of Federal 
and State, Local and Community levels. The foundation of the Governance system will be the creation of a Local 
Government level Project Control Group and a community level Working Group. It is envisioned that these groups 
will meet periodically to monitor and review action implementation, as defined under the Monitoring, Evaluation, 
and Learning (MEL) Framework. It is also envisioned that the RDRP will be a live document, and that a formal 
review will be conducted after five years of publication of this RDRP (2030). 
78

Figure 18: Governance system
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
79

MONITORING, EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING (MEL)
The RDRP is envisioned to be a live document. As our communities change, and our drought exposure continues to 
change and evolve there is a need to:
•	Review the resilience indicators and update the resilience assessment 
•	Review climate projections 
•	Review the implementation of current actions
•	Update the proposed action list.
A Benefits Realisation Plan (BRP) will be developed to support the RDRP and act as the mechanism to coordinate 
reviews and ensuring ongoing performance enhancement throughout the life of the plan. A robust Monitoring, 
Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Framework will be central to the BRP. The key elements are included below. 
MONITORING
The monitoring framework is centred on a set of outcome indicators that are directly linked to the 
outcomes described in Figure 17. This plan envisions that the RDRP Working Group will track the 
outcome indicators over the next five-years and that the outcome indicators will be refreshed on 
review of this RDRP. The outcomes indicator framework is provided at Appendix B. 
EVALUATION 
The evaluation framework sets out the types and frequencies of evaluation to be performed 
under the RDRP MEL framework. It also defines the envisioned roles of stakeholders and partners 
and provides a system for tracking evaluation findings over time. The evaluation plan will include 
thematic benefit realisation evaluations, programmatic evaluations, and a summative evaluation. 
It is envisioned benefit realisation evaluations will be undertaken annually to assess the extent 
to which the measurable target outcomes for each thematic action defined within the outcome 
indicator framework (Appendix B) are being met. 
It is envisioned the programmatic evaluations will take place every six-months. Programmatic 
evaluation will review. 
•	Implementation – The timeframe, governance and budget for delivery are being met and 
understood
•	Finance – The action has available funding for completion 
•	Risks – Risks to the action are understood and appropriate mitigation measures are identified 
•	Engagement – Community and government sentiment regarding the action (and its successful 
implementation) has been sought and given. 
80

The summative evaluation should take place five years after the publication of this RDRP. The summative 
evaluation will be a comprehensive review of the periodic benefits realisation and programmatic performance 
review outputs. It is envisioned that the summative valuation will also include a revision of the resilience 
assessment of the region, a review of future climate predictions and economic shocks, and any required changes 
to resilience pathway actions. The CSIRO list of suggested future plan updates is provided at Appendix C and it is 
expected to inform future plan updates considered at the summative evaluation. 
As part of the summative review, all existing proposed actions will be assessed for continued relevance in terms of:
•	Alignment with the overall RDRP vision for the region (if changed)
•	Similarity / duplication of other initiatives already underway 
•	Alignment with community sentiment and concern
•	Clarity of implementation pathway
•	Lessons learned resilience actions undertaken by GMC, WSC or other RDRP plans.
LEARNING 
Reflection and continuous learning will be facilitated though the formalisation of a learning plan. The 
learning plan will ensure that information captured through the monitoring and evaluation stages of 
the RDRP MEL framework will inform decision making on resilience actions to be altered, pursued, or 
if necessary, ceased. 
It is envisioned that an annual MEL workshop will be held involving members of the RDRP Working 
Group to be formalised under the Governance Framework. The annual MEL Workshop will report 
the outcomes of ongoing evaluations and promote sharing of learning across the RDRP thematic 
actions. Learnings should be recorded within a workshop report and used to evaluate future changes 
to this RDRP, to be considered at the summative evaluation. 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
81

REFERENCES
Source: City center of Goulburn, NSW, Australia, Kokkai Ng, iStock, 2024
82

Australian Bureau of Statistics [ABS] (2021). 2021 Census Data, https://www.abs.gov.au/census 
Australian Bureau of Meteorology [BoM]. Recent and historical rainfall maps, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/rainfall
Australian Bureau of Meteorology [BoM]. Understanding drought, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml 
Crossman, N (2019). Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy Framework: Supporting Technical 
Guidelines, United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, Germany, August. 
Department of Regional NSW (2023). Wingecarribee Regional Economic Development Strategy – 2023 Update, 
February
Department of Regional NSW (2023). Southern Tablelands Economic Development Strategy - 2023 Update, February
Fleming-Munoz D, Whitten S, Bonnet G (2023). The economics of drought: A review of impacts and costs, CSIRO, 
Brisbane & Canberra [online resource] https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/1467-8489.12527 
Informed Decisions [online resource] https://economy.id.com.au/goulburn and 
https://economy.id.com.au/wingecarribee 
NSW Department of Planning and Environment (2022). Greater Sydney Water Strategy, August
NSW Department of Planning and Environment (2022). Greater Sydney Drought Response Plan Overview, August
NSW Department of Primary Industries, NSW Seasonal Update – December 2019 [online resource] 
https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/climate-landing/ssu/december-2019 
NSW Department of Primary Industries, Combined Drought Indicator [online resource] https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/ 
NSW Environmental Protection Agency Soil Condition [online resource] 
https://www.soe.epa.nsw.gov.au/all-themes/land/soil-condition 
NSW Office of Heritage and Environment (2014). South East and Tablelands Climate change snapshot
Wingecarribee Shire Council The Wingecarribee Local Strategic Planning Statement
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
83

APPENDIX
Source: Sheep heading for shearing shed, John Carnemolla, iStock, 2024
84

APPENDIX A: RDRP STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT LIST
•	Agribusiness and Equine Strategic Working Group, 
Wingecarribee
•	Australian Organics Plus 
•	Bowral Co-op
•	Business Southern Highlands
•	Community Voice for Hume 
•	Country Women’s Association 
•	Department of Planning and Infrastructure (DPI)
•	Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development (DPIRD)
	- Youth Community & Delivery Team
	- Aboriginal Partnerships Program
	- Regional Economic Development
•	Exeter Business 
•	Goulburn Chamber of Commerce 
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Community Sustainability Hub
•	Goulburn Mulwaree Sustainability Hub 
•	Grow Southern Highlands
•	Illawarra Local Aboriginal Land Council (LALC)
•	Jim Hindmarsh (Livestock Agency)
•	Landcare Goulburn Mulwaree – Regenerative Grazing 
and Framing Group
•	Local Land Services (LLS)
•	Marulan Region Chamber of Commerce 
•	National Parks and Wildlife Services (NPWS)
•	NSW Health - Rural Adversity Mental Health Program 
(RAMHP)
•	Pejar Local Aboriginal Land Council (LALC)
•	Regen Action 
•	Robertson Business Chamber 
•	Rural Financial Counsellor 
•	Service NSW
•	Southern Highlands Agribusiness 
•	Southern Highlands Community Garden Network
•	Southern NSW Local Area Health District (LAHD)
•	Sustainable Goulburn
•	Tablelands Farming Systems
•	TAFE NSW
•	The Interagency Group.
•	The Southern Highlands Farming Community 
Resilience and Preparedness Working Group
•	Water NSW
•	Wingello Village Store 
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
85

APPENDIX B: PERFORMANCE AND OUTCOME 
INDICATORS
OUTCOME
ACTION
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR
OUTCOME INDICATOR
Resilience local communities: Regional communities are resourceful, connected & thriving
(S1) More 
community 
members are 
resourced 
to provide 
community led 
intervention
1.0 Creation of a dedicated 
(part-time) Resilience Officer 
resource, to be funded by DRF 
grant
1. Secure funding by target date
2. Retention of one resource per LGA 
by target date
1. Community survey 
data shows lower 
incidence of poor 
mental health (e.g. 
ABS census data, 
population health 
surveys)
2. Increase in 
participation in 
community-driven 
outreach initiatives 
such as ‘check-in on 
your neighbour
1.3 Develop a community 
‘first-aid’ kit to assist in 
community driven out-reach 
in times of drought and 
climate stress
1. First aid kit list of resources 
established by target date
2. First aid kit launched by target date
1.6 Establishment of a youth 
resilience ambassador role
1.Role description established by 
target date
2. Role filled by target date
1.7 Identify the needs of 
young people during periods 
of climate stress and create a 
10-point Youth Action Plan.
1. Youth resilience workshop held by 
target date
2. 10-point Youth Action Plan 
developed by target date
(S2) Stronger 
community 
connectedness 
and greater 
awareness 
contributing 
to community 
wellbeing.
1.1 Identify opportunities 
for collaboration between 
organisations providing rural 
health care programs (e.g. 
RAHMP) and local community 
organisations (farming groups, 
sporting clubs etc) to promote 
wellbeing
1. Partnerships established by target 
date
2. Preliminary list of collaboration 
events established by target date
1. Community survey 
data shows lower 
incidence of poor 
mental health (e.g. 
ABS census data, 
population health 
surveys)
2. Increase in 
participation in 
community-driven 
outreach initiatives 
such as ‘check-in on 
your neighbour’
1.2 Engage with real estate 
and property agents regarding 
access pathways for support 
and education regarding 
drought
1. Target number of real estate agents 
engaged by target date
2. List of potential pathways 
established by target date
1.4 Establish and formalise 
network of community 
organisation leaders to 
coordinate and promote 
drought response measures 
(e.g. 1.5).
1. Target number of community 
organisation and NGO leaders 
engaged by target date
2. Network formalised by target date
1.5 Establishment of 
network of community 
‘drop-in centres’ or ‘drought 
support hubs’ at community 
organisation locations 
1. Target number of community 
organisation and NGO leaders 
engaged by target date
2. Network of ‘drop-in’ centres 
formalised by target date
86

OUTCOME
ACTION
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR
OUTCOME INDICATOR
Resilient local economies: Local businesses are informed, resourced and prepared
(EC 1) 
More local 
businesses 
adopt 
strategies 
to reduce 
financial 
exposure to 
drought
2.0 Formalise networks, 
accountabilities and roles for 
promoting pro-active ‘good-
year’ business planning 
1. Network members engaged by 
target date
2. Network and responsibilities 
formalised by target date
1. Local chambers 
of commerce and 
business groups report 
target number of 
businesses developing 
resilience plans and 
implementing practices
2. Target percentage 
reduction in drought 
related business 
closures within the 
region 
3. Value of regional 
economic output 
declines by less than 
10% during prolonged 
drought periods 
2.1 Promotion of proactive 
‘good-year’ business resilience 
planning through creation of 
online ‘resilience’ planning 
template and online resource 
directory
1. Accountability for development 
of online template and resource 
directory established by target date
2. Online template launched by target 
date
2.2 Organise business 
networking events for local 
businesses to share learnings 
on resilient business practices
1. Target number of resilient business 
networking events established by 
target date
2.3 Investigate opportunities 
for non-agricultural major 
events to attract tourism to 
the region, including greater 
utilisation/activation of town 
and village assets typically 
used for agricultural purposes 
such as regional show grounds 
or properties
1. List of potential events and venues 
established by target date
2. first event held by target date
2.4 Investigate opportunities 
for Aboriginal community 
led water / land tourism 
operations
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date
2. List of opportunities established by 
target date
3. List of operators formalised by 
target date
2.5 The establishment of a 
small farm processor co-op, 
where smaller farms pool 
farming machinery and 
equipment
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date 
2. Potential co-op members engaged 
by target date
3. Co-op governance framework 
established by target date
2.6 The establishment of 
a member-based regional 
feed store co-op for livestock 
producers
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date 
2. Potential co-op members engaged 
by target date
3. Co-op governance framework 
established by target date
2.7 Implementation of 
training, education and 
traineeship/apprenticeship 
programs for off-farm 
income generating activities, 
particularly focused toward 
regional youth
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date
2. Potential programs established by 
target date
3. Program partnerships established 
by target date
4. Program launched by target date
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
87

OUTCOME
ACTION
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR
OUTCOME INDICATOR
Resilient landscapes: Agricultural landscapes are sustainable, functional, with healthy natural capital
(EN1) More 
primary 
producers 
preserve 
natural capital 
restore 
the natural 
resource base 
and preserve 
long-term 
landscape 
health, while 
also sustaining 
productivity 
and 
profitability. 
3.0 Creation of a (temporary 
part-time) Agriculture 
Outreach Officer role
1. Secure funding by target date 
2. Retention of one resource per LGA 
by target date
1. Value of agricultural 
output is sustained 
during drought periods
2. Drought indicators 
such as NSW DPIRD 
vegetation index report 
greater vegetation 
density during dry 
periods than previous 
drought periods (i.e. 
2019-20 drought)
3. Agricultural 
employment is 
sustained during 
drought periods
3.1 The establishment 
of an online directory of 
landscape management grant 
opportunities, information 
resources and tools, and 
education materials
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date
2. Directory launched by target date
3.2 The promotion of ‘wet 
year’ landscape management 
and planning activities, and 
resources to proactively 
promote landscape health 
under all climate conditions 
– i.e. promotion of practices 
to prepare for drought in ‘wet 
years’ 
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date
2. Program launched by target date
3.3 Engage local aboriginal 
knowledge holders within a 
local land care groups and 
practice committee
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date
2. Program launched by target date
3. Target number of workshop 
attendees 
3.4 Establish partnerships 
between local agricultural 
land holders and academic 
institutions to trial 
innovative landscape health 
management practices
1. Accountability for action established 
by target date
2. Program launched by target date
88

OUTCOME
ACTION
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR
OUTCOME INDICATOR
Resilient water supply: Regional water supply is secure, sustainable and resilient to shocks
(S3) More 
water users 
are informed 
about water 
security issues 
and adopt 
sustainable 
water use 
practices to 
sustain water 
supply
4.0 The establishment of a 
water sharing and availability 
resource to increase community 
awareness and visibility of 
water management during 
drought 
1. Accountability for action 
established by target date
2. Program launched by target date
1. Reduced demand for 
water delivery (carting) 
services during 
drought periods, when 
compared to previous 
drought 
4.1 Water wise education 
campaign for domestic water 
use including options to 
manage, store and re-use water
1. Accountability for action 
established by target date
2. Campaign launched by target date
4.2 promotion of existing water 
security initiatives to encourage 
adoption of on-farm water 
management and retention 
planning and management 
practices during wet-years
1. Accountability for action 
established by target date
2. Resource launched by target date
4.3 Micro-grants for retrofitting 
older buildings in rural villages 
with water conservation 
equipment, or replacing aged 
water conservation equipment
1. Accountability for action 
established by target date
2. Funding source identified
3. Number of successful grant 
applications 
4.4 Engage local aboriginal 
knowledge holders within a 
local land care groups and 
practice committee
1. Accountability for action 
established by target date
2. Aboriginal knowledge holders 
identified by target date
3. Program launched by target date
4.5 Consideration of co-
operative water storage 
mechanism for farmers to 
facilitate local water-carting 
services
1. Accountability for action 
established by target date 
2. Potential co-op members engaged 
by target date
3. Co-op governance framework 
established by target date
4. Program launched by target date
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
89

APPENDIX C: CSIRO SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE PLAN 
UPDATES
RDRP 
COMPONENT 
SUGGESTED CHANGE FOR FUTURE PLANS 
Component 1: 
Definition, 
vision, goals and 
outcomes
Future plan updates could ensure ‘transformation’ is carefully considered as an element of the 
definition of resilience, and that the needs for transformation are explored and reflected in 
priority actions.
Future plan updates could explore transition, and transformation needs in the region to 
achieve the stated vision.
Component 2: 
Stakeholder 
engagement, 
participation, 
and partnerships
In future plan updates, it would be helpful to consider how stakeholder engagement could be 
extended to include any missing sectors and segments of the community. Also the approach 
could be deepened to support a more community-owned plan.
Future plan updates and implementation should be underpinned by stronger partnership 
arrangements with clearly defined roles and responsibilities.
Component 3: 
Active learning 
and adaptive 
governance
Future plan updates could include details about explicit structured processes to support active 
learning and ongoing adaptation of the plan and its actions. Facilitated structured learning 
processes could also be explicitly embedded in the monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) 
section with potential for the Project Control Group to have a leading role.
Future plan updates could outline formal adaptive governance arrangements that clearly 
address the following three questions: (i) How will the governance arrangements ensure 
ongoing appropriate representation of groups with different vulnerabilities to drought, 
including First Nations communities and non-farming populations? (ii) How will the 
governance be nested with other governance structures and ensure that decisions are 
made at the appropriate level (the level closest to where they will have an impact? (iii) How 
will responsibilities and ownership of the plan be balanced with rights and resources at 
appropriate levels for coordinating and implementing resilience-building activities?
Component 4: 
Evidence base, 
a stocktake of 
past and current 
relevant work 
and alignment
Future plan updates could include more discussion about the references cited, so that readers 
may better understand how these works connect to and align with the plan. This would help 
strengthen the analysis of its evidence base.
Future plan updates could include further analysis of the key linkages between the other 
plans and policies, and their implications for understanding and contributing to the region’s 
resilience, (e.g. vulnerability to drought and the economic, social and environmental impacts). 
Doing so would help the plan provide a more integrated picture of the state of the region’s 
resilience, and explicitly show how the actions proposed in the plan, and those listed in the 
other plans and policies, are linked.
Component 5: 
System 
description 
and resilience 
assessment
Future plan updates could do more to better reflect details of the system. This could be 
achieved by understanding experiences and perspectives from across diverse groups, including 
First Nations people. A profile of drought impacts for those non-agricultural sectors identified 
as significant (e.g. health care, retail and construction) could also be included. Furthermore, 
the profile could describe the employment benefits of those highest value industries for the 
region (e.g. health and social administration, and construction) to better inform the degree to 
which they can contribute to building drought resilience.
Future plan updates could go beyond characterising impacts and vulnerabilities to provide a 
more comprehensive assessment of what confers resilience to drought in different sectors, 
supply chains and segments of communities. Such an assessment would better inform 
resilience-building pathways and intervention options by explicitly considering the capacities 
(anticipatory, absorptive, adaptive and transformative) of the region’s different sectors and 
community segments to drought and related stresses and shocks.
Future plan updates could include a resilience assessment that provides quantitative and 
empirical evidence in key economic and social variables over time. This assessment could show 
demographic changes in the diversity of businesses, livelihoods and employment opportunities 
for different community segments; emergent versus declining types of industries; and labour 
mobility among different industry and sectors. Together, this evidence will better inform the 
analysis of socioeconomic resilience of the region to drought.
90

RDRP 
COMPONENT 
SUGGESTED CHANGE FOR FUTURE PLANS 
Component 6: 
Future scenarios
Future plan updates could include an exploration of alternative future scenarios that consider 
other key drivers of change (e.g. global economic disruptions) and how these may interact 
with the identified future impacts of drought. These future scenarios should consider a mix of 
livelihoods and sectors, including those that rely less on agriculture and water. A participatory-
based scenario development process and its outcomes could inform active learning and 
adaptive governance for future plan updates and implementation.
Component 7: 
Intervention 
options and 
pathways for 
building regional 
resilience
Future plan updates could introduce the concept of adaptation pathways that create options 
for future drought preparedness, response and recovery. Such pathways should also contain 
triggers and decision criteria to help navigate uncertainties when choosing which options to 
implement when.
Future plan updates could build on the adaptive capacity and SWOT analyses and assess the 
type and nature of change needed to the region’s services, livelihoods, sectors, value chains 
and subsystems for building resilience to drought and related stresses and shocks. Based on 
this assessment, the proposed intervention options may be classified according to whether 
they contribute to maintaining, modifying or transforming different aspects of the region. 
These exercises may also help with identifying additional and innovative initiatives associated 
with aspects of the region that need to be modified or transformed to build resilience.
Component 8: 
Assessment 
of pathways 
and theory 
of change for 
recommended 
actions
Future plan updates could consider developing more resilience-related criteria and means for 
assessing each action. This assessment could include considering whether each selected action 
is necessary, whether it forms a set, whether the priority and secondary actions are sufficient 
to achieve the stated outcomes and impacts, and whether they contribute to building regional 
drought resilience.
Component 9: 
Monitoring, 
evaluation, and 
learning
Future plan updates could have a well-developed theory of change that builds on the existing 
program logic. It could explain the assumed mechanisms by which the proposed actions are 
intended to bring about desired outcomes and impacts. This will involve working backwards 
from the vision and themes to identify the changes required and the causal mechanisms, as 
well as the outcomes, outputs and activities needed to achieve the desired changes. A more 
robust theory of change could also guide the development of the plan’s monitoring, evaluation 
and learning (MEL) processes.
Component 10: 
Integration 
between 
components
Future plan updates could explore the development of robust theory of change and detailed 
monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) that could enhance clarity through better 
interaction and linkages between the plan components.
GOULBURN MULWAREE COUNCIL AND WINGECARRIBEE SHIRE COUNCIL REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN - SEPTEMBER 2024
91