GOULBURN 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the 
lands and waters on which we live and work,  
and pay our respects to their Elders past, present 
and emerging. We acknowledge that the Goulburn 
region is on traditional lands, including those lands 
of the Taungurung, Wurundjeri and Yorta Yorta 
Nations, as well as other Traditional Owner groups 
in Victoria who are not formally recognised.

1
Preface
Drought inflicts major financial, social and 
environmental costs on farm businesses and 
communities. The Goulburn region is committed to 
taking steps now to ensure good strategies are in 
place to prepare for and manage through future 
drought and dry seasonal conditions. 
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought resilience initiatives to help 
Australian farms and communities prepare for 
the impacts of drought. These are implemented 
through a suite of programs under five focus areas:
1.	Harnessing innovation
2.	Better risk management
3.	Better climate information
4.	More resilient communities 
5.	Better land management. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) 
program falls under the ‘better risk management’ 
focus area and supports the development of 
regional drought resilience plans throughout 
Australia over 2021 to 2024. Regional drought 
resilience includes elements that cover all focus 
areas. The Goulburn Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan therefore, bridges all Future Drought Fund 
focus areas and identifies a broad variety of 
actions the community in the Goulburn region 
need to build drought resilience.
The aim of the Plan is to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify and address 
their needs to be better prepared for and able 
to manage future dry seasonal conditions and 
droughts. The Plan also draws out regional needs 
and priorities to inform future investments in 
drought resilience.
This Plan builds on the Goulburn region’s historic 
and recent experiences of drought and related 
strategies, programs and activities. It has been 
developed using a consistent methodology  
across Victoria: 
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts 
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify and  
collate issues and develop actions to build 
drought resilience.
Agriculture Victoria in partnership with regional 
communities facilitated the development of this 
Plan, which was jointly funded by the Victorian  
and Commonwealth Governments under the 
Future Drought Fund. 
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Image credit: Greater Shepperton City Council
2

Contents
Preface	 	
1
Goulburn Regional Drought Resilience Plan	
4
Purpose	 	
4
Plan development	
4
Plan design	
6
The Goulburn Region	
8
Drought in the Goulburn region	
12
A brief history 	
12
Looking forward	
15
Drought resilience in the Goulburn Region	
16
A drought resilient community	
16
What’s already being done to build drought resilience? 	
18
Themes, Outcomes and Focus Areas	
20
Thematic Framework 	
20
Theme 1:	 People and community wellbeing	
22
Theme 2:	Coordination, connectivity and knowledge	
24
Theme 3:	Farm and other businesses	
28
Theme 4:	Landscapes	
32
Theme 5:	Infrastructure	
36
Implementation	
39
Appreciation	
40
3

Purpose
Drought is a regular occurrence in many areas  
of Australia and best planned for on a regional 
scale based on landscape, community, economy 
and climate, rather than defined borders. It has 
varying timeframes and impacts and should be 
managed as a risk at a regional level by members 
of the community with support from government 
and industry.
This Goulburn Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
(the Plan) provides an opportunity to identify 
and outline a set of actions to build social, 
environmental and economic resilience to future 
dry seasons and drought.
Given the amount of existing work related to 
drought in the region, one of the main objectives 
of the Plan is to align, strengthen and coordinate 
existing drought related strategies and activities  
to increase drought resilience in the region.
Plan development
Agriculture Victoria facilitated the development 
of this Plan with guidance from a core reference 
group (the Reference Group). The Reference Group 
comprised of stakeholders from the community, 
regional organisations, and sectors that have a  
key role in dealing with drought and its impacts.  
In addition to input from the Reference Group,  
the Plan was co-developed through broad 
consultation and engagement with the wider 
Goulburn community, including:
•	farmer representatives
•	industry groups
•	water, health, education and financial sectors
•	Local, state and Commonwealth government 
agencies.
GOULBURN 
REGIONAL DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN
4

The Plan was also informed by various community 
organisations that support the agriculture sector 
and the broader community during drought. 
The initial stages of developing the Plan involved 
gathering information from the community on 
their experience of past droughts. This included 
highlighting what worked, what didn’t work and 
identifying what the community believes is needed 
to increase drought resilience in the future. The 
exploratory phase of the project included scanning 
existing strategies, plans and programs related  
to drought and drought resilience. This Plan builds 
on, extends and seeks to avoid duplication with 
existing planning and strategic work in the region. 
All this information was organised into topical areas 
and led to the development of a thematic framework 
under which the Plan’s actions are now arranged.
Several engagement strategies were used to 
consult with community throughout the Plan’s 
development including:
•	periodic meetings of the core Reference Group 
to guide the process and content
•	targeted interviews with key stakeholders  
to provide content and advice
•	a survey of farmers and farming families  
from the Greater Shepparton area on potential 
actions for the Plan
•	a broad-reaching survey to community members 
and key stakeholders in the Goulburn region for  
feedback on the thematic framework for the Plan
•	micro-workshops with key stakeholders and 
sectors in the Goulburn region to gather feedback 
on the thematic framework and actions.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

Plan design
The Plan is a thematic framework with a set 
of tangible actions that will guide and assist 
the Goulburn community to reduce the social, 
environmental and economic impacts of future 
droughts by building drought resilience.
Though the main focus of the Plan is on 
agriculture and allied industries, community 
feedback highlighted that drought resilience 
should be considered more broadly due to 
the interconnection of social, economic and 
environmental impacts of drought and the ripple 
effect of drought on agricultural enterprises and 
people in the broader community.
The Goulburn community identified a wide range 
of actions to improve resilience by looking back 
at previous droughts. These related to farming 
and land management, farm businesses, health 
and wellbeing, water, infrastructure, the natural 
landscape, the built environment, people, 
communities, connectivity, networks, coordination, 
knowledge and information.
Considering these, five themes with clear 
outcomes are proposed for the basis of this Plan:
THEME 1
People and community wellbeing
OUTCOME
People and communities develop resilience through proactive, efficient and  
well-established health and wellbeing support services and networks
THEME 2
Coordination, connectivity and knowledge
OUTCOME
Coordinated, connected, and informed communities throughout all phases of drought; 
pre, during and post drought
THEME 3
Farm and other businesses
OUTCOME
A drought resilient Agriculture sector supported by a skilled and stable workforce that 
is more attractive as a vocational pathway, especially for youth, and that will better 
withstand employment shocks caused by drought
THEME 4
Landscapes
OUTCOME
Landscapes and the natural resources within them are better able to withstand the 
impacts of drought
THEME 5
Infrastructure
OUTCOME
The agriculture sector and regional communities have the infrastructure and 
established management systems to better cope with periods of drought
6

GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

Taungurung, Wurundjeri and Yorta Yorta First 
Nations peoples have inhabited the Goulburn 
region for over 60,000 years with deep connection 
to Country and the natural environment through 
traditional knowledge, spiritual beliefs and cultural 
practices. The lands, rivers, wetlands, forests and 
grasslands provided shelter, food, fibre, tools and 
medicinal plants as well as the place to carry out 
spiritual and cultural activities. 
Traditional lands of the Taungurung People range 
from Kilmore in the west, Wangaratta in the north, 
Mount Beauty in the east, through to the Great 
Dividing Range in the south. Traditional Yorta 
Yorta lands cover about 20,000 square kilometres 
and lie on both sides of Dunghala (the Murray 
River), tracing from Cohuna to the regional city of 
Albury-Wodonga. They include towns of Echuca, 
Shepparton, Benalla, Corowa and Wangaratta 
and extend northwards into New South Wales to 
just south of Deniliquin. Both Taungurung and 
Wirindjeri are part of the Kulin Nation. Traditional 
lands of the Wurundjeri People are primarily in 
metropolitan Melbourne, but expand into the 
southern parts of Mitchell Shire. 
The geographical area for the Goulburn Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan includes Mitchell, Moira, 
Murrindindi, Strathbogie and Greater Shepparton. 
These are the local government areas within the 
Goulburn Regional Partnership established by 
the Victorian Government (Figure 1). It is currently 
home to approximately 170,000 people with the 
highest population bases in Greater Shepparton 
and Mitchell Shires with agriculture, forestry and 
fishing being the second highest employment 
industry after health care and social assistance. 
It is home to the largest Aboriginal1 population in 
regional Victoria.
The region falls predominantly within the 
catchment areas of the Goulburn and Broken rivers 
and is renowned for fertile soils, mild climate, 
good water resources and, growth opportunities 
for population and business.2 It extends from 
Melbourne’s northern growth corridor to the 
Murray River and is diverse in culture, landscape 
and economic enterprises. Like many rural 
regions of Victoria and Australia, it has a large 
agriculture sector underpinning the economy and 
is often described as the ‘food bowl of Australia’. 
Manufacturing, health care and social assistance 
also contribute largely to jobs and the economy.
Shepparton, the largest city in the region, is the 
primary location for health, cultural and higher 
education services. It, along with other towns 
including Yarrawonga, Euroa and Seymour,  
is culturally diverse and has a strong Aboriginal 
population.
THE 
GOULBURN 
REGION
1 Throughout this document the term ‘Aboriginal’ is used to refer to both Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
2 Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions (DJPR), 2022, Goulburn Regional Economic Development Strategy
8

POPULATION 
(2020)
POPULATION GROWTH  
(2011–20)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
170,400
15%
$8
billion
Figure 1: The Goulburn region
DJPR, 2022
GOULBURN FARMS PRODUCE
29.4%
of Victoria’s fruit
(excluding grapes)
12.6%
of Victoria’s dairy
11.5%
of Victoria’s beef
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

Agricultural and other land use across the region 
is extremely diverse (Figure 2), as is the landscape. 
Forested and hilly upland areas in the southeast 
give way to flatter areas and flood plains in 
the north that includes a large irrigation area 
within the Goulburn Murray Irrigation District. 
The agricultural enterprises across the region 
include dairy, livestock (sheep, cattle and pigs), 
horticulture (fruit, nuts, olives and grapes), cereals 
and other broadacre cropping. In addition to the 
more traditional agricultural enterprises, there is a 
significant number of equine ventures and lifestyle 
farms, particularly in the south. Aquaculture is also 
a significant contributor to the economic fabric 
of the region with 80 per cent of Australia’s trout 
being produced in the Murrindindi Shire. 
Irrigation infrastructure within the region has 
typically supported dairy and horticulture. 
These industries are integrated in local supply 
chains that include processing, manufacturing 
and distribution, all contributing to the regional 
economy and employment opportunities. 
Despite the theoretical boundary that the Plan 
encompasses, it is recognised that communities 
don’t exist and function within hard boundaries, 
nor do the organisations and businesses that 
support them. Land and resource management 
may have inter-regional impacts and effects. 
Therefore, many aspects of the Goulburn Drought 
Resilience Plan will be applicable to neighbouring 
communities and regions. It will be important 
to cooperate and share information on drought 
resilience between regions through the FDF 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning program, 
not only with immediate neighbours such as 
bordering shires, but also state and nationwide.
In the Goulburn Broken Regional Insights Paper,3 
the community identified several drivers of 
change in the region. They include climate change, 
technological innovation, transition to a service 
economy, an aging population, the increasing role 
and recognition of Traditional Owners and First 
Nations peoples, water as a tradeable commodity 
and the changing role of government. They pointed 
to the following emerging trends in agriculture in 
the region:
•	Next generation of farmers have higher 
education levels and greater environmental 
awareness
•	Big farms are getting bigger in dryland areas
•	More corporate farms
•	Reduced dairy and increased cropping  
in the north
•	Emergence of new industries, such as  
solar farms
•	Increased off-farm income
•	More lifestyle and hobby farms
•	Urban expansion in the south.
These factors have been considered in developing 
drought resilience in the region.
GOULBURN
AREA SQ KM
POPULATION
EMPLOYEE JOBS IN 
AGRICULTURE (%)
Moira
4,045
30,018
8.7
Greater Shepparton
2,422
67,070
8.3
Strathbogie
3,303
10,992
13.3
Mitchell
2,862
47,647
1.8
Murrindindi
3,880
14,661
5.0
3 Goulburn Broken Catchment Management Authority, 2020, Goulburn Broken Regional Insights Paper 
Table 1. Key geographic and demographic details of the Goulburn region
10

Figure 2. Map of land use for Victoria
Source: ABARES 2021
	 Nature conservation
	 Managed resource protection
	 Other minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Grazing modified pastures
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Dryland cropping
	 Dryland horticulture
	 Land in transition
	 Irrigated pastures
	 Irrigated cropping
	 Irrigated horticulture
	 Urban intensive uses
	 Intensive horticulture  
and animal production
	 Rural residential and  
farm infrastructure
	 Mining and waste
	 Water
TOP EMPLOYING SECTORS (2020)
WORKERS
Health care and social assistance
9,300
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
9,200
Construction
7,200
Retail trade
7,000
Manufacturing
6,900
Education and training
5,700
EMPLOYMENT
GOULBURN (%)
REGIONAL AVERAGE (%)
METRO MELBOURNE (%)
Unemployment rate (September 2021)
4.0
4.2
6.0
Average annual employment growth (2011–20)
1.3
1.0
2.1
Table 2. Employment in the largest employing industries by workers (2020)
Table 3. Employment rates in the Goulburn region
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

“Evidences of the prevailing  
drought are to be seen everywhere. 
The ground is as hard as a brick, 
and there is not a particle of green 
vegetation to be seen, except here 
and there a few small patches of 
maize or sorghum, which the more 
far-seeing of the farmers have 
planted as fodder for dairy cattle, 
and some fields of lucerne.”  
—Leader, Sat 15 Feb 1896 Page 10
“In consequence of the disastrous 
drought and the fearful condition 
of the Goulbourn Valley a meeting 
of the irrigation league was held at 
Shepparton on Tuesday to consider 
the position.”
—Kerang New Times, Friday 12 September 1902, page 3
DROUGHT IN THE 
GOULBURN REGION
A brief history 
The impacts of drought on Country have a large 
affect and implications on Aboriginal customs  
and Lore and the mental health and wellbeing of 
the community.
The region has witnessed multiple droughts of 
varying duration and extremity over this time and 
its farming families have first-hand experience 
of the impacts of drought on their businesses, 
land and wellbeing. The impacts also extend to 
non-farming community members through the 
interdependence of farms, other businesses, 
services and the social networks that constitute 
and bind the communities.
The following excerpts from newspaper articles 
capture snapshots of the droughts in the Goulburn 
region in the late 19th century and early 20th 
century evidencing post contact history of 
reoccurring drought and dry conditions across  
the region.
12

“The long-continued drought  
which wrought such devastation 
amongst the flocks and herds in  
the Goulburn Valley and in almost 
every part of the State, is now a 
thing of the past. It has gone with 
other droughts which preceded it,  
and the bountiful rains that fell 
in June have effected a complete 
transformation of the Goulburn 
Valley district.”
—Elmore Standard, Saturday 29 August 1908, page 1
“The season’s prospects in the 
Goulburn Valley are not very bright. 
The country immediately north of 
Shepparton, right up to Numurkah 
and Nathalia, seems to have 
suffered most from the absence  
of rain.”
—Benalla Standard, Friday 18 September 1914, page 2
Most recently the region has suffered impacts 
from both the Millennium Drought and dry 
seasonal conditions experienced over 2013–2015 
and 2017–2019. An integrated assessment of the 
socio-economic and environmental impacts of past 
and future droughts is available at in the 
supplementary report: Drought in the Goulburn 
Region; Information to support the Goulburn 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan. This assessment 
is based on an analytical framework that considers 
how drought affects farms and the wider 
community. It highlights that due to the large 
diversity of farming systems and demographics, 
different areas within the region experienced 
varying impacts of drought and that small towns 
are more vulnerable than larger centres like 
Shepparton.
Several important insights emerged from 
engagement with the Goulburn community about 
their experiences of the 1997–2009 Millennium 
Drought and dry seasonal conditions in 2013–2015  
and 2017–2020. A summary of social, environmental, 
and economic impacts and the interconnection 
between them is illustrated in Figure 3.
Stakeholders highlighted that economic, social, 
and environmental impacts of drought were not 
independent, and rather strongly interconnected. 
For example, drought related on-farm economic 
issues were seen to lead to poor mental health and 
wellbeing of farmers, farm employees, and their  
families. Similarly, lack of water during drought periods 
could at times render sporting venues, recreational 
areas, and greenspaces unusable. This led to 
reduced opportunities for social interactions  
which negatively impacted community wellbeing.
Stakeholders also commented on the scope for 
improved coordination and design of drought 
support activities to best meet local needs.
These and other key messages were used to 
inform and shape the thematic framework and 
actions of the Plan.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Economics impacts
•	High allocation water prices
•	Water trading allowed water 
to flow to higher value crops 
•	Water prices reached  
$1400/ML in 2007
•	Water prices averaged over 
$500/ML in 2019/2020 
•	High feed costs and  
financial stress
•	Milk production decline
•	Mixed farming enterprises 
partially offset losses by 
selling water
•	Farm and other  
businesses closed
•	Lack of quality stock and 
domestic water
•	Misalignment of support and 
funding cycles with drought
•	Inability to make timely 
financial decisions
•	Carting water and  
hand-feeding stock
•	Inequity in drought assistance
•	Changed farming businesses, 
e.g. livestock/mixed farming 
shifting to cropping only,  
fruit trees pushed out
•	Loss of permanent plantings
Social impacts
•	Reduced recreational 
activities (fishing, boating)
•	Reduced sporting activities
•	Farm workers out of work
•	Mental health and wellbeing 
issues in individuals, 
particularly farmers
•	Confusion around drought 
support (including agencies 
and grants)
•	Emotional repercussions  
of destocking 
•	Safety issues from  
roadside grazing
•	Some towns with no  
potable water
•	Lack of water for parks, 
recreational and sporting 
facilities 
•	Lack of coordination in 
drought support activities
Environmental impacts
•	Dry rivers, lakes and wetlands
•	Loss of biodiversity  
(flora and fauna)
•	Aboriginal heritage sites 
exposed to damage
•	Damage from roadside  
grazing
•	Damage to Country 
•	Riparian damage
•	Soil loss from erosion
•	Decline in soil heath and 
fertility
•	Damage to perennial  
pastures and ground cover
Figure 3.
Key social, economic and environmental impacts experienced by the 
Goulburn community during past drought and dry seasonal conditions
14

Looking forward
Though the severity and frequency of future 
droughts is uncertain, it is certain that there will be 
future droughts. Dealing with the potential impacts 
of these will come with other challenges and 
changes that will affect the agriculture sector and 
the broader community in the Goulburn region. 
The integrated assessment at Appendix 1 
highlights factors that indicate or contribute to 
droughts in the future. This includes increasing 
temperatures, decreased rainfall and increased 
fire days, and provides an overview of some of the 
likely implications. These are both positive, such as 
increases in water use efficiency, and negative, with 
impacts such as diversification away from agriculture.
Image credit: Goulburn Broken 
Catchment Management Authority
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
IN THE 
GOULBURN 
REGION
A drought resilient community
Building on the existing resilience approaches, 
a drought resilient Goulburn community should 
demonstrate some or all of the following:
•	Local leadership and initiative
•	Governance that embraces change
•	Connection through formal and  
informal networks.
They should:
•	Work together in the pursuit of  
common goals
•	Foster responsibility within
•	Be flexible and adaptable
•	Learn from change
•	Anticipate issues
•	Solve problems from multiple angles.
Image credit: Greater 
Shepperton City Council
16

GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

What’s already being done  
to build drought resilience? 
In light of the frequency of drought, the effects 
of climate change, the instability of markets, 
demographic shifts and other pressures, a 
considerable amount of work is already being  
done in the region to support social, environmental, 
and economic resilience applicable to drought.
The concept of resilience has been explored 
extensively across the region and reflected 
in several key strategies that underpin work 
programs and activities that relate to or can be 
applied to drought resilience.
Driven by the Goulburn Regional Partnership, 
the concept of resilience was comprehensively 
studied in the development of the Goulburn 
Murray Resilience Strategy (GMRS).4 Resilience 
building principles and practices were widely 
promoted within the community. The GMRS will 
continue to support the region to position itself for 
a smoother path into the future and thrive in the 
face of changes due to challenges or shocks such 
as drought and climate change.
Similarly, resilience principles were fundamental in 
the development of the Goulburn Broken Regional 
Catchment Strategy5 (GB RCS), developed by 
the Goulburn Broken Catchment Management 
Authority (CMA). The GB RCS aligns closely with 
the Landscapes theme of the Plan, referring to 
natural landscapes and their ability to better 
withstand the impacts of drought and agricultural 
practices during these times.
The Country Plan of the Taungurung Land and  
Waters Council6 plan specifically aims to strengthen 
relationships with land and water management 
agencies and community organisations that also care 
for Country. It lays out a set of clear aspirations, 
goals and actions around people, culture, and caring 
for and connecting to Country acknowledging the 
resilience and achievements today.
The Whole-of-Country plan of the Yorta Yorta Nation 
Aboriginal Corporation7 outlines a comprehensive 
set of actions towards healing Country and 
protecting natural and cultural heritage by 
resuming cultural authority and undertaking 
cultural practices to reconnect people with Country. 
The plan has a strong focus on partnerships, 
inclusiveness, improving the resilience of Country 
to cope with climate change and recognition of 
Aboriginal voice in decision making.
18

Other strategies, plans and activities with links 
to planning and implementing drought resilience 
measures include the Goulburn Regional  
Economic Development Strategy8 (REDS),  
the Goulburn Murray Regional Prosperity Plan,9  
the Hume Climate Change Adaptation Plan,10  
and the strategies, workplans and budgets  
of the Water Corporations, local governments, 
Catchment Management Authorities and 
Traditional Owner Corporations in the region.
Several organisations and networks operate 
to support various resilience-based initiatives 
in the region including the Goulburn Regional 
Partnership, the Goulburn Murray Resilience 
Task Force, the Goulburn Drought Resilience 
Leaders, the Young Farmers Network and industry 
leadership groups, to name a few. Specific  
to drought resilience, Riverine Plains is the  
north-east node of the Victorian FDF Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub.
Local governments play a critical role in land 
and water management. They provide planning 
services and community engagement and are a 
significant landholder. They recognise the long 
term financial and operational planning required 
to sustain agriculture, local economies and 
communities through severe climatic events  
and conditions, such as drought.
In addition, various local and state government 
departments including the Department of 
Environment, Water, Land and Planning (DEWLP), 
Agriculture Victoria, the Goulburn Broken 
CMA, Water Corporations, the Environment 
Protection Authority and Landcare provide many 
on the ground programs for the benefit of the 
environment, people and communities through  
a drought resilience lens.
4 2020, Goulburn Murray Resilience Strategy
5 Goulburn Broken Catchment Management Authority, 2021, Goulburn Broken Regional Catchment Management Strategy
6 Taungurung Land and Waters Council, n.d., Taungurung Buk Dadbagi; Taungurung Country Plan
7 Yorta Yorta Nation Aboriginal Corporation, 2021, Yorta Yorta Whole-of-Country Plan 2021–2030
8 DJPR, 2022
9 Kaiela Institute, 2021, Goulburn Murray Regional Prosperity Plan
10 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 2021, Hume Regional Climate Adaptation Strategy
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

Thematic Framework 
As a result of the engagement  
with community, the following 
themes – along with desired 
outcomes – emerged. The tables 
contain specific, implementable 
actions to achieve the outcomes.
Under each theme, focus areas have been 
articulated with multiple actions to deliver. 
These include activities to assist farm and other 
businesses to anticipate and manage drought 
risk and supporting programs such as networking 
and leadership training that will contribute to 
better health and wellbeing of individuals and the 
community. The Plan also identifies longer term 
actions such as investments in infrastructure and 
actions involving partnerships and systems that 
can be activated to support communities in the 
lead up to, during, and post drought into the future.
THEMES, OUTCOMES 
AND FOCUS AREAS
20

GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

PEOPLE AND 
COMMUNITY 
WELLBEING
Theme 1
Outcome:  
People and communities develop resilience through proactive, efficient 
and well-established health and wellbeing support services and networks.
Supporting the health and wellbeing of individuals 
through the provision of and access to primary 
care and other services is critical during drought. 
Similarly, participating in community activities 
and interacting with fellow community members 
bolsters and maintains the health and wellbeing of 
individuals during these times. Sporting activities 
including football, cricket and golf were badly 
missed in the last drought due to a severe lack of 
water for facilities. These establishments play a 
huge role in the community for social interaction, 
mental health and exercise.
Established formal and informal community 
networks often identify farmers and other 
community members who need wellbeing support 
during drought. There are opportunities to 
strengthen these networks as well as educate and 
train and community members to recognise and 
appropriately respond to signs of stress in friends, 
work colleagues or others, thereby contributing  
to drought resilience within the community.
22

Focus Area 1: 
Strengthen individual and community level health and wellbeing services 
to be capable of supporting the community before, during and post drought.
Focus Area 2: 
Encouraging and strengthening industry and community networks  
and activities that support people’s health and wellbeing.
Focus Areas for action
1.2.1
Invest in community infrastructure and support access to water supply to maintain irrigation 
of sporting and recreational facilities and other community assets during drought
1.2.2
Establish an event-based program for municipalities and shires in the Goulburn region  
to host social events to maintain connectedness within the farming community,  
particularly during periods of hardship
1.2.3
Advocate for and promote mental health first aid programs to increase the capacity  
of the region to deal with health and wellbeing issues in the community
Focus Areas for action
1.1.1
Support and advocate for health and wellbeing services to be provided at both individual 
and community levels before, during and post drought
1.1.2
Provide early identification and support for individuals to access services and support 
through proactive and responsive services
1.1.3
Promote and support connection and links to services and health and wellbeing support 
programs including the implementation of more coordinated programs, events and actions
1.1.4
Continue and expand Agrisafe AgriClinics program
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

Theme 2
Outcome:  
Coordinated, connected, and informed communities throughout all  
phases of the drought cycle.
Community, industry and government have a 
shared responsibility in building drought resilience 
in the Goulburn Region. All stakeholders must be 
proactive and work together to prepare for and 
be more resilient to future drought. To do this, 
coordination is required at the regional, state 
and national levels, as is connection between 
individuals, communities, industry and all levels 
of government while recognising the diverse 
landscapes and needs of the region and shires 
within the region.
To support long term preparedness and address 
the social, environmental and economic aspects 
of drought resilience, an ongoing community-
led governance group needs to oversee the 
implementation and delivery of the Goulburn 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan. This group 
will share information, coordinate, schedule and 
prioritise actions and foster partnerships across 
industry, community and all levels of government, 
pre, during and post drought. Proper engagement 
with Traditional Owners is complex as is the  
Lore and customs of Aboriginal peoples. It is 
recognised that Traditional Owner groups are  
over-stretched and may require support to 
meaningfully participate in coordinating and 
implementing the Plan.
A central information repository would provide  
a platform for collecting and sharing information 
and resources for community members in 
the Goulburn region pertaining to drought 
preparedness and resilience. It may include 
resources related to research, education, health 
and wellbeing, Indigenous knowledge, grant and 
funding opportunities and an up-to-date list of 
contact points for various topics for assistance.
COORDINATION, 
CONNECTIVITY 
AND KNOWLEDGE
24

Focus Area 3: 
Strengthening existing networks that identify, support and coordinate  
the collective needs of the community.
Focus Areas for action
2.3.1
Secure funding to support the region to establish an on-going coordination group  
to oversee the delivery of the Goulburn Regional Drought Resilience Plan
2.3.2
Support Traditional Owners to participate in coordinating, implementing and delivering  
the Goulburn Regional Drought Resilience Plan
2.3.3
Define and prepare  relevant working groups to inform the coordination group on industry 
specific drought resilience management through each stage of drought
2.3.4
Define and articulate the responsibilities of all stakeholders in drought preparedness
2.3.5
Engage municipal based drought planning and project implementation coordinators  
and support committees to plan and co-ordinate drought preparation
2.3.6
Advocate for the employment of Community Liaison officers dedicated to engaging with 
community and assist coordination between various programs that build drought resilience
2.3.7
Continue to develop drought resilience community leaders and mentors in the  
Goulburn region
2.3.8
Establish services to support grower conversations  with supply chains during times  
of drought
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

Focus Area 4: 
Increasing technical knowledge, information sharing and expertise  
in the region through human and economic resources.
Focus Areas for action
2.4.1
Support digital access to key information that enables community to better  
understand, and provide easier access to, drought and broader business resilience 
information including:
•	Social, economic and environmental impacts of drought and climate change in the region
•	Relevant policies and plans
•	Climate change impacts and forecasting
•	Climate change scenarios and possible technologies, services and land use  
that may become relevant
•	Drought preparedness case studies and success stories
•	Drought preparedness education opportunities
•	Drought resilience research, development and extension (RD&E) information
•	Indigenous knowledge and practices
•	Resources to help understand drought and climate change and their impacts  
on business and the region
2.4.2
Build the awareness and skills of community about drought preparedness
2.4.3
Strengthen forecasts and communication about water availability under predicted  
climate scenarios including drought
2.4.4
Identify and seek investment in RD&E gaps related to drought
2.4.5
Support innovation and the co-development of research which is translatable  
to practical on-farm solutions and aligns with drought resilience principles
2.4.6
Strengthen awareness of and investigate new technologies and practices to adapt  
to and mitigate climate change and increasing drought risk
2.4.7
Support the capability, adaptation and adoption of farm management practices to better 
cope with drought and climate change through extension and access to knowledge
2.4.8
Produce education and communication materials on water use (efficiency, allocations  
and its distribution) to the various users in community (urban, rural, brokers, groundwater)
26

Image credit: Greater Shepperton City Council
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

Theme 3
FARM AND OTHER 
BUSINESSES
Outcome: A drought resilient Agriculture sector supported by a skilled and 
stable workforce that is more attractive as a vocational pathway, especially 
for youth, and that will better withstand employment shocks caused by drought.
The economy of the Goulburn region is heavily 
reliant on agriculture. Allied industries such as 
processing, transport and supply, as well as other 
businesses in the community are interdependent 
and may all be impacted by drought.
Farm businesses require support through financial 
advice, farm planning, succession planning and 
farm management to be more drought resilient 
and economically viable. Financial counselling and 
business planning services to support confidence 
in decision making should extend beyond primary 
producers and farms to other non-agricultural and 
tourism businesses run by community members 
who also experience economic impacts of drought.
With increasing variations in climatic conditions 
farmers need to consider actions and farm 
management practices that help increase drought 
tolerance and recovery such as stock containment, 
feed production, purchase and storage of fodder, 
livestock breeding patterns, orchard management 
and long-term water security options to ensure 
long-term economic viability of their business. 
These actions have large upfront capital 
expenditure associated with their implementation, 
and as such, early investment can ensure 
individuals and communities are better prepared 
and more resilient to drought.
Education, training and skill development for 
farmers, farm workers as well as youth and others 
in the community will contribute to a more diverse 
and reliable workforce with the flexibility to be 
able to respond to shifts throughout the drought 
cycle as well as contribute to better health and 
wellbeing. In addition, it will encourage the 
younger generation, including those that have 
witnessed drought, that farming is a viable and 
rewarding career path.
28

Focus Areas for action
3.5.1
Promote, encourage and support a positive culture toward Goulburn community members 
utilising financial advice and planning service and improve access to these services
3.5.2
Provide financial services and advice for primary producers and small businesses that 
enable timelier and more informed business decisions prior to, during and post drought
3.5.3
Assist farm businesses with Whole of Farm Planning including drought preparedness, 
treatment of drought as a business risk, system and income diversification, and alternative 
income streams, especially in periods of non-drought
3.5.4
Explore options for additional drought resilience related activities to be delivered through 
Aboriginal Landholder Information Service (ALIS)
Focus Area 5: 
Strengthen, encourage and support farm business planning incorporating 
drought preparedness.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

Focus Areas for action
3.6.1
Promote, encourage and coordinate programs and learning activities to enhance  
storage of livestock feed for drought preparedness
3.6.2
Promote, encourage and coordinate programs and learning activities for water budgeting 
on dryland farms for drought preparedness
3.6.3
Promote, encourage and coordinate programs and learning activities for water  
management on irrigated farms and orchards for drought preparedness
3.6.4
Support farmers to increase productivity and reduce water use in irrigated agriculture 
through adoption of technologies and practices to improve water use efficiency and 
manage changes in water availability
3.6.5
Support to adopt land management practices that focus on cooling the soil to maintain  
or increase soil moisture content, and improve resilience to drought
3.6.6
Support the Traditional Owner Native Foods and Botanicals Strategy and related  
projects in the Goulburn region
Focus Area 6: 
Encourage and support on-farm drought resilience 
and preparedness activities.
30

Focus Areas for action
3.7.1
Give consideration to an employment program that enables farm businesses to retain 
employees during drought through alternative temporary or part-time employment
3.7.2
Provide access to training to maintain currency of a skilled agriculture and natural  
resource management workforce to better deal with the challenges of drought and  
other climate related risks
3.7.3
Establish or strengthen programs such as youth networks, vocational training in  
high schools and scholarships to make careers in agriculture and natural resource 
management more accessible and attractive to youth
3.7.4
Establish a program that identifies transferable skills and skills gaps, fosters  
confidence, and links individuals to credentialled education, skill development and 
alternative employment
3.7.5
Explore potential for a Regional Skills Demand Profile in the Goulburn region through  
Victorian Skills Authority to address the youth/skills/talent-drain in the Goulburn region
3.7.6
Support youth and careers in agriculture through workshops, careers days,  
meet and greets and on-farm traineeships
Focus Area 7: 
Create a more diverse, flexible and stable farm workforce that is 
more resilient to drought through education, training, up-skilling, 
and alternative employment programs.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

Theme 4
Outcome:  
Landscapes and the natural resources within them are better able  
to withstand the impacts of drought.
Management of natural resources including land, 
soil, water and biodiversity at a landscape scale 
are important elements of drought resilience, 
noting that farm management practices and 
planning contribute to the overall health and 
functionality of ecosystems.
There are competing uses of natural resources 
including agriculture, cultural, recreational and 
tourism activities, as well as the conservation 
of these resources and preservation of the 
natural environment. There are opportunities 
to incorporate Taungurung, Wurundjeri, Yorta 
Yorta and First Nations bio-cultural knowledge 
and broader understanding of Country along with 
that of more recent farming methods in land and 
resource management.
Therefore, multi-stakeholder dialogue among 
users is necessary to build understanding and 
consensus on natural resource management 
and resource use that will contribute to long 
term drought resilience to address the social, 
environmental and economic needs of the 
community. These stakeholders include farmers 
and other land managers, Traditional Owners, 
water users and traders, tourism operators and 
the community members who live in and use the 
landscape for economic or recreational activities.
Significant Aboriginal cultural heritage areas such 
as middens, burial sites and corrobboree sites  
that are exposed during drought and therefore 
more vulnerable to damage must be protected.
LANDSCAPES
32

Focus Areas for action
4.8.1
Build farmers knowledge base regarding practices that reduce the impact on natural 
landscapes during drought, e.g., temporary feed-lotting, fencing of waterways and use  
of whole farm and property management plans
4.8.2
Identify and build awareness of the native vegetation linkages that are a priority  
under a range of climate scenarios
4.8.3
Increase the understanding of tipping points for threatened species and ecological 
communities to inform management actions considering climate change and extreme 
events such as drought
4.8.4
Explore options for community and industry seedbanks and seed orchards and support the 
growing of genetically diverse revegetation species, improving the capacity of revegetation 
planting to adapt to climate change and other shocks and disturbances such as drought
4.8.5
Promote widespread recognition that current waterway management will be challenged 
under climate change (including increased drought risks) and different and sometimes 
difficult management decisions will be required
4.8.6
Encourage continued research into and communication of how climate change will shift 
rainfall-runoff relationships, inflow volumes and associated ecological change in the 
Goulburn region
4.8.7
Invest in research to understand and quantify underground water resources, inflow  
volumes and associated ecological change, including under climate change scenarios —  
link to action 10.1
4.8.8
Support activities to understand and promote water retention in the landscape,  
including linkages with other regions
4.8.9
Support Traditional Owners to protect significant cultural heritage sites vulnerable  
to drought
Focus Area 8: 
Managing public land, roadsides, riparian zones, wetlands, remnant 
bushland and other fragile ecosystems adversely affected by agricultural 
and urban activities during the drought cycle.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

Focus Areas for action
4.9.1
Promote dialogue around managing the often-competing water needs of cities,  
agriculture, regional communities, Traditional Owners and Aboriginal communities,  
rivers, wetlands and catchments under a changing climate
4.9.2
Promote dialogue and exchange regarding the management of landscapes,  
communities, rivers, wetlands and catchments under a changing climate
4.9.3
Encourage continuous public policy review to manage the often-competing water  
needs of cities, agriculture, regional communities, Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
communities, and catchments under a changing climate
Focus Area 9: 
Support and increase dialogue and knowledge sharing on natural 
resource management between landholders, natural resource experts, 
Traditional Owners and the broader Goulburn community.
34

Image credit: Visit Victoria
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

Theme 5
Outcome:  
The agriculture sector and regional communities have the infrastructure 
and established management systems to cope with periods of drought.
Climate change and future drought will impact  
the availability of water, therefore infrastructure 
and systems to manage water for various uses  
by the community is critical to drought resilience. 
Maximising, optimising and distributing water 
resources to meet the agricultural needs of the 
community during drought include maintaining 
irrigation and water distribution infrastructure, 
increasing water use efficiency and storage,  
as well as enabling access to emergency water 
points. Town water availability and issues related 
to water restrictions need to be addressed through 
water sources alternative to traditional supply  
and the associated infrastructure for its delivery. 
Water storage options also need to be considered 
in areas of the region with existing limitations. 
In addition, road, rail, air, power, digital and other 
infrastructure need to be able to cope with 
increased pressures and/or fluctuations in use over 
the drought cycle, including the transportation 
of inputs such as feed for livestock, produce and 
other goods.
INFRASTRUCTURE
36

Focus Areas for action
5.10.1
Improve access to reliable stock and domestic water in rural areas with a combination  
of improved on farm storage, bore water and water gridding
5.10.2
Review regional emergency water points (locations, operation, ownership, maintenance)  
to ensure the region can maintain sufficient access during times of drought
5.10.3
Explore increasing on and off farm water efficiency gains
5.10.4
Review the current use of raw and recycled water and explore new opportunities  
to increase its use across the region
5.10.5
Advocate for the supply of fit for purpose recycled water for urban areas to enable 
irrigation of green spaces during drought and the installation of recycled and raw water 
standpipes to substitute the use of potable water
5.10.6
Promote and enable greater use of recycled water for recreational use
Focus Areas for action
5.11.1
Explore options for community or industry-owned, low-cost silo and fodder storage 
programs to assist with long term drought planning and ability to store feed off farm at 
low cost if on farm storage is insufficient
5.11.2
Improve access to fodder, advance rail standardisation and intermodal construction to 
make fodder transport more efficient
5.11.3
Incorporate future climate change and population scenarios in all water and local 
government planning
5.11.4
Advocate for improved transport hubs, roads, rail and air enabling the production, 
purchase, storage and/or transport of produce, goods and inputs during the drought cycle
5.11.5
Build on digital technology and communication services to increase telephone access 
and internet connectivity, increasing uptake of drought resilience, preparedness and 
management technology and providing connectivity in times of drought
5.11.6
Advocate for improvements to known telecommunication blackspots
Focus Area 10: 
Maximise and optimise the availability of high quality and recycled  
and/or raw water during drought.
Focus Area 11: 
Resilient infrastructure and systems to better support communities  
during dry seasonal conditions and drought.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

38

IMPLEMENTATION
This Plan takes the first step in providing the necessary framework for the  
Goulburn region to communicate its drought resilience needs and priorities.
This Plan can be used by the Goulburn community 
– in collaboration with industry, the not-for-profit 
sector, and all levels of government – to:
•	coordinate investment
•	collaborate for shared outcomes
•	inform future drought resilience priorities
•	develop drought resilience programs
•	monitor resilience to future droughts.
Immediate next steps include securing resources 
to support the implementation of the Plan, 
establishment of a coordination group with clear 
terms of reference for governance of the Plan  
and collaboration in its delivery.
The Plan is an important step in building regional 
drought resilience. A supplementary document 
‘Regional monitoring, evaluation and learning’ is 
provided to guide how progress towards regional 
outcomes is measured and communicated.
This coordination group will need to re-engage in 
ongoing conversations with the many stakeholders 
in the community, industry, Traditional Owners 
and local and state government to identify roles 
and responsibilities in the delivery of the Plan to 
achieve its outcomes.
It is acknowledged that the Plan will need to 
be agile, not locked into a single future and 
continually adapt in response to changes occurring 
in the natural environment, the operational and 
policy environments of industry and various levels 
of government. It will also need to evolve with the 
needs of the community.
The coordination group will also assist any 
associated RDRP Grant program to fund immediate 
high priority actions as well as investigate other 
opportunities across the funding landscape.
GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

Reference Group organisations
Agriculture Victoria 
Department of Education and Training 
Department of Environment, Land, Water  
and Planning*
Future Drought Fund – Drought Resilience Leader 
Greater Shepparton City Council 
Goulburn Broken Catchment Management 
Authority 
Goulburn Murray Water 
Primary Care Connect 
Regional Development Victoria 
Riverine Plains 
Rural Financial Counselling Service – North East 
Mitchell Shire Council 
Moira Shire Council
Murrindindi Shire Council 
Strathbogie Shire Council
APPRECIATION
On behalf of the reference group, Agriculture 
Victoria thanks the many individuals, 
groups, associations, agencies, departments 
and organisations who contributed to the 
development of the Plan. Your support and 
considered input is greatly appreciated and will 
go a long way to ensuring the Goulburn region 
is better prepared and more resilient to the 
impacts of future droughts.
*As of 1 January 2023 the Department of Environment, 
Land, Water and Planning was abolished. Some agencies 
within these departments were transferred to the newly 
established Department of Energy, Environment and 
Climate Action.
40

GOULBURN DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.awe.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the 
Goulburn Region
Information to support the Goulburn Regional Drought Resilience Plan | June 2022
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Regional summary
The Goulburn region is renowned for its fertile soils and mild 
climate. The Goulburn Regional Partnership area stretches 
from Melbourne’s northern growth corridor to the Murray 
River and encompasses the local government areas (LGAs) 
of Moira, Greater Shepparton, Strathbogie, Mitchell and 
Murrindindi. The 2016 census reported a population of 
157,873 people and a Gross Regional Product of $8bn. The 
Goulburn region is dominated by the city of Shepparton, which 
is the major regional centre for northern Victoria and parts of 
southern New South Wales.
Key industries in the Goulburn region include health care and 
social assistance, agriculture, forestry and fishing, construction, 
manufacturing and retail trade.
The region features many areas of the Goulburn Murray Irrigation 
District. Surface water is sourced primarily from the Murray, 
Goulburn and Broken rivers with the key water storages being 
Lake Eildon, and Hume and Dartmouth which are upstream on 
the Murray.
The region recently experienced drought and dry seasonal 
conditions during the Millennium drought and 2017-2019.
Campaspe
Goulburn
Gouldburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
Greater 
Shepparton
Moira
Gippsland
Strathbogie
Mitchell
Murrindindi
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund. 
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was a key factor to the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may 
change in 
the future
The Goulburn 
region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness 
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls 
on surface or subsurface 
water supply
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Goulburn Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These on-
farm implications of drought flow through to the community to generate a 
range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets (e.g. sheep and 
cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of drought on agriculture 
is easier to quantify than other non-market impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions 
+
Changes in the Goulburn region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
+ 
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for 
ag farm services 
(but could increase 
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)

Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands 
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation 
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from 
green space
Drought in the Goulburn Region
Frontier Economics
3

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. The last 25 years has seen 
Goulburn experience extensive drought periods, starting with the 
Millennium drought from 1997-2009 and more recently the dry 
conditions experienced from 2017-2019.
The historical rainfall and temperature charts in Figure 3, provides 
evidence of the severity of these recent drought events. The period 
of 2002-2009 was particularly hot and dry (using Tatura as an 
example), with all of these years receiving less than median rainfall. 
The years of 2002 and 2006 received rainfall below the 10th 
percentile. At the same time the average maximum temperature 
was well above the median for most of significant periods of the 
Millennium drought.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1998-99
1999-00
2000-01
2001-02
2002-03
2003-04
2004-05
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
2021-22
HRWS
LRWS
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Rainfall (mm)
Tatura
Annual
10th %ile
Median
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Agricultural production in the Goulburn region is dominated by 
irrigated agriculture (56% of agricultural production by value), primarily 
dairy and horticulture. Dryland production is a mix of livestock grazing, 
cereal crops, hay and other broadacre crops. 
Given the region’s heavy reliance on irrigated agriculture, production 
and profitability decreased significantly during the Millennium 
drought. Irrigated agriculture faced a high ‘cost’ of water, given the 
opportunities to sell or the requirements to purchase water from 
the water market. ABARES data shows that water allocation prices in 
the Goulburn-Broken region reached a monthly average of $1,400/
ML during 2007 (compared to <$100/ML in the wetter conditions of 
2021-22). During the Millennium drought, net water allocation trade 
into the Goulburn region was observed in the most water scarce years 
of 2006-07 and 2008-09, while net trade out occurred in 2007-08. 
This means that the Goulburn region was a net buyer during the years 
where water prices were highest.
Regional milk production in Northern Victoria, which includes the 
Goulburn region, declined from over 3.0 billion litres in 2001-02 to 1.7 
billion litres in 2009-2010. This decline was significantly larger than the 
declines in Western and Eastern Victoria, where production remained 
relatively flat during this same time period (see Figure 5). ABARES farm 
survey data in the period from 1999-00 to 2007-08 shows total cash 
costs for dairy farms increased from $308,950 to $645,900. 
01
02
The lack of rainfall during the Millennium drought resulted in 
significant reductions in water allocations across the Goulburn 
region, with high reliability water shares receiving about 30% 
during 2006-07 and 2008-09 (Figure 4). The high levels of irrigation 
throughout the region is likely to limit the impacts of short periods of 
drought. Unlike dryland farms which rely heavily on rainfall, farms in 
irrigation districts have continued access to water that can be drawn 
upon during dry periods and water storages act as a buffer between 
years. However, extended periods of drought, such as during the 
Millennium drought, water allocations may not be sufficient to maintain 
production levels. Further, dry periods in the Goulburn and connected 
regions of the southern Murray-Darling Basin result in competition for 
water and high water prices for those looking to buy additional water.
The period of 2017-2019 also saw significant reductions in rainfall 
and hot temperatures, however the shorter time period meant that 
the severity of the drought was limited, leading to only a single year of 
reduced water allocations in 2019-20.
19.5
20
20.5
21
21.5
22
22.5
23
23.5
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Year
Tatura
Annual
90th %ile
Median
01
02
03
Past drought 
conditions 
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
in past drought
Recently experienced droughts in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2017-19
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Tatura
Figure 4 Water allocations in the Goulburn system
Drought in the Goulburn Region
Frontier Economics
4

The significant decline in milk production in Northern Victoria created 
implications for milk processing with reduced factory utilisation, 
changes in product mixes and retiring of different aspects of 
processing infrastructure.
Dryland productivity also declined significantly during the Millennium 
drought and 2017-2019 due to the lack of rainfall. Dryland production 
was significantly affected — for example, the harvest of cereal crops in 
2018-19 was half the recorded tonnage of 2015-16 or 2016-17.
Town water 
There were mixed water restrictions during Millennium drought with 
limited restrictions on Goulburn system towns, however water carting 
was required to some towns including Euroa/Violet Town & Broadford. 
There were more severe restrictions in the Murray system towns (such 
as Numurkah). While restrictions were generally higher in unregulated 
systems such as Sunday Creek, and the town of Kilmore.
Recreation and Tourism 
The Goulburn region has a number of lakes and rivers that are 
used for water tourism such as Lake Eildon, the Nagambie river, 
Goulburn weir and the Murray River. These water systems are used 
for recreational fitness, such as rowing, as well as recreational boating 
and fishing. The Millennium drought significantly reduced the level of 
water tourism in the area, including boating at Lake Eildon, taking with 
it the additional income that enters the region from these activities. 
Environment 
There were negative impacts on riverbank and in-stream vegetation 
in the Goulburn River during the Millennium drought. There was also 
an interaction between drought and water trade which resulted in 
environmental impacts on the Goulburn River from high summer 
flows to deliver traded water to the Murray.
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Milk production (Million Litres)
Year
Eastern Victoria
Northern Victoria
Western Victoria
03
Community outcomes 
in past droughts
Agriculture is an important segment of the regional 
economy — contributing 23% of the ‘value add’ in Moira and 16% in 
Shepparton. It is also an important employer, with the ‘Agriculture, fishery 
and forestry’ industry contributing 11.5% employment to the region. 
This means that the decreases in agricultural production caused 
by drought creates significant flow-on ommunity impacts through 
reduced income and employment, especially on-farm labour and 
agricultural services. The impacts to irrigated and non-irrigated 
agriculture flow through to impact the wider community through 
reduced overall spending in the community.
Economic modelling of the Millennium drought found that the GDP 
of the Goulburn region declined by an average of nearly $250 million 
annually in the extended drought of 2006-7 to 2009-10 — being the 
cumulation of drought impacts on dryland and irrigated production 
plus negative spending effects in the regions. The modelled 
production impacts were lessened by net water trade into the 
Goulburn region, but still were found to have significant employment 
impacts (averaging 300 jobs annually over the same period).
The dry conditions from 2017-2019 saw net trade of water out of the 
Goulburn region, which would have exacerbated the reduction in 
irrigated production. However it should be noted that water allocation 
trades generate revenues for the owner and farms can instead use 
the land for alternative production (such as less water intensive or 
dryland agriculture) — meaning that trade has different impacts on 
regional spending and production than drought itself.
Many communities in the Goulburn region have a high proportion 
of people directly affected by agriculture, with smaller communities 
heavily reliant on agriculture more impacted by drought. Production 
impacts also affect the range of milk and fruit processing facilities 
in the region. This means that the negative impacts of drought are 
concentrated in those communities. Further, businesses in smaller 
towns generally do not have many options to respond to a decline 
in the spending and economic activity. In contrast, Shepparton is a 
regional hub with a high level of diversification.
The lack of farm income being generated during the Millennium 
drought meant that farmers needed to seek off-farm income in 
the community. During this time, the Goulburn Broken Catchment 
Management Authority implemented a drought employment program, 
providing more than 70 full-time  employment positions (for up to 
6-months) to farmers in the region.
Off-farm income going into drought improves the drought resilience 
of a given farm, by supporting income during variable farm returns. 
Over 75% of farms across the region are likely to already be dependent 
on off-farm income to be economically resilient and viable.
Overall, the cumulative effect of drought both on-farm and in the 
community led to significant impacts on the Goulburn community 
during the Millennium drought and 2017-19 period of dry seasonal 
conditions. This also led to an increase in demand for services such 
as mental health and Rural Financial Counselling.
Figure 5 Victorian annual dairy production
Drought in the Goulburn Region
Frontier Economics
5

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Goulburn region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Goulburn region with future droughts 
expected to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate 
projections in Figure 6 show that by 2050 the Goulburn region on 
average will be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number of fire 
danger days. Similar to the past, the region and sub-regions will continue 
to face variable conditions within and across seasons — however in the 
future this variability will be around a lower average rainfall and higher 
average temperature than previously experienced. This means that, 
compared to current conditions, it is likely that parts of Goulburn will 
face some seasons with rainfall significantly below and temperatures 
significantly above current averages. 
The high levels of irrigation throughout the region is likely to limit the 
impacts of short periods of drought. Unlike dryland regions which rely 
heavily on rainfall, irrigated regions have continued access to water that 
can be drawn upon during dry periods. Although this is unlikely to limit 
the impact during extended periods of drought where water allocations 
may not be sufficient to maintain production levels.
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Agricultural production in dairy and mixed farming operations are 
likely to be most exposed to the increasing likelihood and severity 
of future droughts as they are dependent on certain temperature 
and rainfall patterns. The adaptiveness of these producers, with 
farmers already having many strategies to manage drought, and 
their ability to maintain sufficient reserves will be critical to their farm 
profitability. The prevailing circumstances of a future drought — such 
as commodity prices, interest rates and fuel and fertiliser costs — will 
also play a role in resultant impacts.
Permanent horticulture will increase the competition for water in the 
region. These farming businesses are expected to seek to purchase 
water (from other water users and other regions) to source additional 
water in times of drought. This will be at high water prices and will 
affect farm profitability. 
Further declines in dairy production will have flow on effects to 
dairy processing facilities, which may need to be rationalised if dairy 
production levels are not able to recover. A factory closure will have 
major implications for the town community and will also have a ripple 
effect through surrounding communities.
The region’s response to future drought will be boosted by increases in 
irrigation network efficiency and reduced network costs and the delivery 
Changes in the Goulburn region
Since the Millennium drought, the farming systems in the Goulburn 
region have become more opportunistic and flexible. For example, 
dairy farmers can decide to use annual pastures, buy and store 
fodder and buy or sell water allocations depending on the prevailing 
conditions. Irrigated farmers have also benefited from increased 
irrigation network efficiency from the Connections Project and 
water share owners in the region have recently increased their 
holdings with the ‘Irrigators Share’ of water savings being issued. 
The Goulburn Murray Water (GMW) Transformation Process is also 
reducing irrigation network tariffs.
However, the competition for water has also significantly increased 
since the Millennium drought — particularly from Basin Plan water 
recovery (including water buybacks in the Goulburn and other 
regions, and on-farm water savings projects) and horticultural 
growth in Lower Murray. 
Town water security planning and investment has increased in the 
region, and there are also population changes (including an increase 
in tree-changers due to Covid19).
Finally, there has been a continuing diversification of the region’s 
economy, with ABS Census data from 2006 to 2016 identifying the 
percentage of the community directly employed in the agricultural 
industry has decreased across the period.
01
02
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures in spring expected 
to increase by up to 3.2°C. Number of days over 
35°C increasing from 14.8 days to 19-40 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable, 
around a lower average rainfall (in spring 
expected to decrease by 12-22%).
5-14%
60%
Number of very high fire 
danger days to increase by 
11 days per year
1.8 to 
2.4 °C 
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions 
+
Changes in the 
Goulburn region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
+ 
non-agricultural impacts and 
implications
Community outcomes 
of future drought
Figure 6 Projections of future climate in Goulburn
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Goulburn Region

03
of water savings to irrigators. However, these effects are expected to 
be outweighed by the reduced water use in the region due to Basin 
Plan water recovery and competition for water with horticultural 
developments in Lower Murray. During future droughts in the Goulburn 
and the broader southern Murray-Darling Basin, water trade out of the 
Goulburn is expected in response to competing demands from water 
uses in other regions (as seen in 2017 and 2019).
Town water 
Town water security planning has improved building on lessons 
from drought. Likewise, Urban Water Strategies are now required 
to incorporate future impacts of climate change (including potential 
droughts). For example, Goulburn Valley Water has used the 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning’s 2020 
‘Guidelines for Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Availability in Victoria’ to undertake water demand system forecasts 
and identify a range of climate scenarios to assess potential impacts 
on water supply and customer demand. The water corporation has 
also augmented its network to boost water security, including the 
Tallarook to Broadford pipeline, a 360ML reservoir for Mansfield, and 
the enlargement of the Abbinga reservoir supplying Euroa. Further, 
water trade will provide additional flexibility for town water supply in 
the Goulburn region.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought. Initiatives that are not dependent on water 
availability could boost visitors to the region. COVID-19 has provided 
a boost to regional travel and relocation.
Environment 
The recent reforms to the Goulburn-Murray trade rules are expected 
to reduce future environmental damage to the Goulburn River when 
water trade responds to future drought events.
Community outcomes 
in future droughts
The increased likelihood and severity of drought in 
the future and the increased competition for water under these 
conditions will mean that the drought impacts on the community 
from agricultural consequences of drought are expected to be 
larger than have been historically observed. 
Economic modelling of potential future drought in Victoria found 
the Goulburn to be significantly affected, with GDP in the region 
falling by 9% and a fall in employment of almost 1,100 jobs. 
This flowed through the region reducing consumption/spending 
by 4.5%. The modelled 3 year drought, while prolonged, is not 
equivalent to the most severe recorded in Victoria.
Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought 
conditions become more prevalent. Not only are mental health 
services important during times of drought, but improved mental 
health increase a person’s ability to adapt. This can improve 
drought resilience by allowing people to effectively plan for future 
drought conditions.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of 
community spirit and liveability within local communities in 
the region. Water Corporations and Councils have a strong 
understanding of the importance of greenspace for their 
communities so water availability will have to be at high risk before 
community greenspace areas do not receive water. However, 
should town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will 
have a mental health toll on residents.
The diversity of the Goulburn region will continue to mean that 
some areas will be impacted by future droughts more than others. 
While it is not possible to predict which area within Goulburn will 
be more affected than others, smaller communities that are highly 
dependent on agriculture and more geographically isolated will be 
most exposed. Declining populations in smaller towns may mean 
they are more vulnerable to change.
Overall the Goulburn region’s high exposure to agricultural 
industries creates the potential for significant community impacts 
from future drought.
Drought in the Goulburn Region
Frontier Economics
7

Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness 
The Goulburn region has built on the comparative advantages 
of its soils, climate and water access to become a thriving 
agricultural region. This strength, and resulting dependence on 
agricultural economic activity presents the greatest vulnerability 
regarding drought.
The GMID Resilience Strategy (2020) found: Irrigated agriculture 
dominates the Goulburn Murray region, and in recent years, 
economic growth has been at or near zero and productivity is 
falling. If we don’t proactively respond to the challenges of climate 
change, decline in water resources and farm structural adjustment, 
the region will continue to stagnate and then decline.
This suggest that agricultural research, development and 
extension will remain important to support ongoing adaptation 
in agriculture, and will aid preparedness to future drought. 
There is also a wide range in the capacity of farmers, in terms of 
the skills to maintain more adaptive farming practices and in the 
ability to maintain buffers of financial assets or feed stocks to 
manage drought conditions when they arise.
A continued vulnerability to the region is the increasing 
competition for water due to permanent horticulture 
plantings in the Lower Murray. This increases the potential for 
water allocation trade out from the region but also creates 
opportunities for trading.  There is also a lack of information 
regarding how reliability of water access in the Goulburn, and 
southern Murray-Darling Basin more broadly, will change given 
the expected climatic change. The Northern Region Sustainable 
Water Strategy which was slated for 2019 has been pushed back 
to 2025.
Fodder management is also an important drought response and 
transport arrangements (road and rail) have room for improvement.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. 
Towns throughout the Goulburn region have varying degrees of 
diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The major regional centre, Shepparton, will provide 
somewhat of a buffer to these drought impacts as it is 
diverse economy. Shepparton itself will be buffered to 
some degree from reductions in agricultural output as it 
has alternative industries (such as health, education, retail). 
Townships near Shepparton can also benefit from some 
of this buffering in the face of less agricultural activity 
because of drought. Townships within an approximately 
50 km radius provide people with the attraction of living 
in a smaller community, lower cost of housing but having 
employment opportunities in the larger centre.
•	
Medium sized communities such as Nathalia, Numurkah, 
Tatura, Cobram and Yarrawonga are all highly dependent 
on irrigated agriculture but have some buffering capability 
due to a range of factors, including having a commutable 
distance to Shepparton, tourism (Cobram and Yarrawonga), 
desired infrastructure (such as Nathalia having an aged care 
and hospital for retired farmers), or alternative processing 
facilities (such as Numurkah’s GrainCorp oilseed processing 
plant).
•	
Small communities such as Undera, Wunghnu, Waaia, 
Katamatite and Strathmerton will be more severely 
affected by drought, as there are limited alternatives that 
can replace the people and economic activity provided by 
irrigated agriculture.  
The Tri-State Murray NRM Drought Resilience Discussion Paper 
identified: to make the appropriate decisions farmers need 
to not only have the analytical and decision-making skills but 
also adequate mental health. Stress, delayed decision making, 
not able to spot opportunities and ‘giving up’ are all significant 
issues as a drought builds and during a drought.
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These 
kinds of health services have long wait times in the region, even 
outside of drought. Waiting for a boost in service provision as a 
drought response lags the demand and means that individual’s 
seeking these services are necessarily making drought 
management decisions.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the Goulburn Region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our 
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions and Visit Victoria.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from armonline, NVRM and Dairy Australia.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.