GREAT  
SOUTH  
COAST 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge and respect Victorian Traditional 
Owners as the original custodians of Victoria’s land 
and waters, their unique ability to care for Country 
and deep spiritual connection to it.
The recognised Traditional Owners of the Great 
South Coast region include the Gunditjmara, 
Wadawurrung and Eastern Maar Peoples, and the 
Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia and 
Jupgalk Nations, as well as other Traditional Owner 
groups in Victoria which are not formally recognised
We honour Elders past and present, whose 
knowledge and wisdom have ensured the 
continuation of culture and traditional practices.
We are committed to genuinely partner, and 
meaningfully engage, with Victoria’s Traditional 
Owners and Aboriginal communities to support  
the protections of Country, the maintenance of 
spiritual and cultural practices and their broader 
aspirations in the 21st century and beyond.

Preface
Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period 
that results in significant impacts to communities, 
businesses and the environment. 
The Great South Coast (GSC) Drought Resilience 
Plan is one of 9 regional drought plans developed  
in Victoria, as part of the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning (RDRP) Program, under the 
Future Drought Fund. GSC communities are 
committed to taking steps now to prepare for and 
respond to dry seasonal conditions and droughts. 
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought related initiatives to help 
Australian communities prepare for the impacts  
of drought. These are implemented through a suite 
of programs under 4 focus areas:
1.		Better climate information
2.	Better practices
3.	Better planning
4.	Better prepared communities
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
is part of the ‘better planning’ focus area and 
supports the development of regional drought 
resilience plans throughout Australia from 2021  
to 2025.
This Drought Resilience Plan for the GSC region 
(the Plan) has been developed through extensive 
consultation with a wide range of local individuals, 
groups and organisations. The Plan includes 
a collectively agreed framework for building 
economic, environmental and social resilience  
to guide regional effort and investment.
The Plan builds on historic and recent experiences 
of drought and integrates existing drought-related 
programs and strategies. Some of the key programs 
and documents that informed the Plan are:
•	South-West node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	Barwon South West Regional Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy 2020–2025
•	Glenelg Hopkins Regional Catchment Strategy
•	Glenelg Hopkins Catchment Management 
Authority Climate Change Strategy
•	Food & Fibre Great South Coast ‘18 Point Plan 
for water policy reform in Victoria’
•	Victorian Government’s ‘Strong, Innovative, 
Sustainable: A New Strategy for Agriculture  
in Victoria’
•	Future Drought Fund’s Farm Business  
Resilience Program
•	Future Drought Fund’s Helping Regional 
Communities Prepare for Drought Initiative – 
Community Impact Program
Some aspects of the Plan have been developed 
using a consistent methodology across Victoria 
including:
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts 
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify key 
insights and suggested priority areas for action 
to build drought resilience.
As part of the planning process a Drought 
Resilience Reference Group was established for 
the region. This group included key stakeholders 
with specialist knowledge of agriculture, health, 
finance, water and environment. The GSC 
Reference Group included the organisations:
•	Corangamite Shire Council
•	Moyne Shire Council
•	Southern Grampians Shire Council
•	Glenelg Shire Council
•	Warrnambool City Council
•	Glenelg Hopkins Catchment Management Authority
•	Food & Fibre Great South Coast
•	South West Node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Innovation and Adoption Hub
•	Wannon Water
•	Southern Farming Systems
•	Southern Rural Water
•	West Vic Dairy
•	Rural Financial Counselling Service
•	Department of Energy, Environment  
and Climate Action 
•	Department of Families, Fairness and Housing 
•	Department of Health and Human Services
•	National Centre for Farmer Health
•	National Emergency Management Agency
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Photo: Oz Aerial

Contents
Preface	 	
1
Introduction	
4
Purpose and Goals	
4
Plan design and development	
5
Vision and Our Guiding Principles	
6
Guiding Principles	
7
Region and Community	
8
Geography	 	
8
The Great South Coast Region	
8
Population	 	
10
Industry/employment	
10
Climate trends	
11
Drought in the Great South Coast region	
12
Recent experience of drought	
14
Future drought scenarios	
17
Resilience	 	
18
Definitions of Resilience	
18
Community Resilience	
18
Great South Coast Thematic Framework	
20
Theme 1: 	Resilient communities	
22
Theme 2:	Sustainable management of natural resources	
24
Theme 3:	Resilient local businesses and regional economies	
26
Theme 4:	Innovation and skills	
28
Theme 5:	Key enablers	
30
Case Studies of Resilience	
32
Next Steps	 	
38
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning	
40
Appendices		
44
Appendix 1:	 Great South Coast stakeholders consulted	
44
Appendix 2:	Great South Coast References	
46
3

INTRODUCTION
Purpose and Goals
Development of the Plan has encouraged a 
collaborative and coordinated approach to building 
community and business drought resilience. The Plan 
includes a collectively agreed framework for building 
economic, environmental and social resilience.
The long-term objectives of the Plan are:
•	Build the social capital of GSC communities 
through increased connectivity, improved 
wellbeing and a greater sense of security. 
•	Empower GSC communities and businesses  
to implement economically transformative 
activities to build their resilience to drought.
•	Support GSC land managers to adopt 
approaches which will improve the natural 
resource base for long term productivity and 
landscape health.
•	Support Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
communities to continue to self-determine  
and care for Country in lead up to, and during 
times of drought.
For this Plan, drought resilience is defined as 
the ability to maintain function while effectively 
responding to the impacts of drought. It is about 
being able to adapt, thrive and take advantage of 
new opportunities rather than trying to maintain 
the status quo. This includes the ability to be 
flexible yet decisive during periods of uncertainty 
and change.
Resilience is critically important in rural and 
regional communities because it assists each 
person and group to build the mindset, social 
network and business skills to navigate difficult 
events and challenging seasons.
Droughts pose a key threat for Traditional Owners, 
impacting the health of Country, and affecting 
their rights and responsibilities in caring for 
Country. For Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
Victorians, caring for Country extends beyond 
physical landscapes and involves the natural 
waters, animals and resources and how they 
influence and impact each other. Healing Country 
in the wake of drought events is essential to 
ensuring positive health and wellbeing outcomes 
for Aboriginal Victorians.
A partnership approach will be needed with 
Traditional Owners, in line with the Government’s 
policy and legal commitments, including the 
Victorian Aboriginal Affairs Framework and the 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action’s Pupangarli Marnmarnepu – ‘Owning Our Future’ 
2020–2025 self-determination reform strategy.
Drought is a recurring feature in the Australian 
landscape, and has been for thousands of years. 
However, the impacts of climate change are 
increasing the frequency and severity of drought. 
The Australian and Victorian Governments have 
partnered to support regional areas in building 
resilience to future droughts, with a focus on 
adaptative and transformational change. The 
Resilience and Preparedness Program vision is to 
have farm businesses and rural communities that 
are prepared for, and capable of managing drought 
in pursuit of a prosperous and sustainable future.
Government, industry and community have 
contributed to the development of this place-based  
drought resilience plan for the GSC region.  
A wide range of stakeholders have participated  
in either group discussions or one-on-one 
interviews (Appendix 1). Future engagement  
will ensure Traditional Owners self-determine  
their involvement in the Plan.
4

Plan design and development
Action learning is central to the way this Plan 
has been developed, by listening to diverse 
perspectives about how drought has been 
managed in the past and determining which 
strategies will likely work best in the future. 
The Plan was developed over 9 months, drawing 
on conversations with stakeholders through 
workshops and meetings, reviewing existing 
strategic plans, and community feedback through 
the Victorian Government’s public consultation 
platform Engage Victoria.
During community conversations, local stakeholders 
identified that drought is experienced differently 
across the region and that there are many 
pathways to resilience depending on individual 
circumstances. They also commented on the 
connection between drought, fire and floods, 
and suggested that a more integrated approach 
to risk mitigation was required. Similarly, it is 
acknowledged that for many Traditional Owners, 
connection to Country is more holistic and not 
bound by the region and constructs of the Pan, 
with drought impacts likely to be broader than the 
GSC region and the actions identified in this Plan.
The community believe that increased awareness 
and preparedness is essential to building improved 
social, environmental, and economic resilience.  
They agreed that all businesses have a responsibility 
to prepare for variable seasons and drought and 
that the best way to mitigate the impacts are by 
understanding the risks and being well prepared.
In this plan, 5 themes were identified as critical  
to building resilience: 
•	Resilient communities
•	Sustainable management of natural resources
•	Resilient local businesses and regional economies
•	Innovation and skills development
•	Key enablers
Under each theme, stakeholders identified 
outcomes and actions to focus effort and guide 
investment critical to building drought resilience. 
The proposed actions capture the lived experience, 
local knowledge and solutions identified by the 
GSC community through 9 months of conversations. 
Some of the actions can be addressed directly by the 
community, while others require broader cooperation 
from governments, agencies and the private sector. 
The themes, outcomes and actions provide a 
robust framework for building regional resilience 
based on current knowledge of the most effective 
ways to prepare for drought.
Ultimately, this document is a snapshot of the 
priorities of the GSC community at a point in time, 
however, the drought resilience story does not 
begin or end with this Plan. Rather, these priorities 
will evolve as our understandings of drought, 
variable seasons, risk and resilience improve.  
An implementation plan detailing costed activities 
and their timelines will be developed once the  
Plan is approved.
The GSC Drought Resilience Plan Reference 
Group (the Reference Group), oversaw the 
consultation process, and developed the thematic 
framework based on feedback received from local 
stakeholders. This thematic framework includes 
themes, outcomes and proposed actions for 
building resilience. The Reference Group noted 
that the framework: 
•	Provides a ‘collectively agreed framework’  
to focus effort and guide investment
•	Builds on and complements existing drought 
related strategies and plans (Appendix 2)
•	Captures knowledge of recent drought 
experience in a form that can be used to improve 
preparedness and response
•	Provides an avenue for ongoing conversations 
with community
•	Provides the basis to develop an implementation 
plan with specific actions.
The Reference Group would like to acknowledge 
and thank the many organisations and individuals 
who contributed their time and expertise to shape 
this Plan.
“Each community has a responsibility to develop resilience by strategically 
planning services to support and empower its people”.
—Aunty Claudette Lovett, National Centre for Farmer Health
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

VISION AND OUR 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Photo: Heytesbury Landcare
6

To ensure a best practice approach the following 
vision and principles were used to develop this Plan.
Vision: The Great South Coast region collaborates with purpose for an 
aligned, strategic and coordinated approach to building drought resilience 
with improved community connectedness, enhanced business risk 
management and a focus on building the health of the natural environment.
“Resilience contains all the elements of connectedness, 
resourcing, future thinking, social justice and leadership”.
—Joanne Brown, Southern Grampians Glenelg Barwon South West Public Health Unit
Guiding Principles
The following principles are known to have  
positive benefits in building resilience:
Self-reliance and risk mitigation:  
drought is not an exceptional circumstance, 
but a risk to be managed along with other 
business threats.
Encourage preparedness: investment should 
focus on encouraging preparedness in good 
years and support community connectedness 
and wellbeing in times of drought.
Collaboration and co-design:  
drought preparedness programs should  
be co-designed with Local Government 
Authorities and other relevant stakeholders 
to ensure they effectively address local 
community priorities.
Improved decision making: providing the 
best possible information and tools to 
support evidence-based decision-making  
for communities, business and government.
Integration: foster collaboration between 
organisations to deliver timely, place-based, 
integrated services which simplify user 
access and reduce stress.
Leadership and community networks: 
drought programs should be designed 
and delivered in partnership with trusted, 
established networks and Traditional 
Owners/First Peoples.
Traditional Owner Self-Determination: 
Work with Traditional Owners to provide 
opportunities for them to be involved in,  
and have their self-determined goals 
reflected in, implementation of drought 
preparedness and resilience activities.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

THE GREAT 
SOUTH COAST 
REGION
Region and Community
The Great South Coast region covers about 10%  
of Victoria and consists largely of rural and coastal 
areas. The southern boundary of the region forms 
part of the south-eastern Australian coastline.  
The northern part of the region borders the Wimmera 
and includes the Grampians, which span several 
regions. The western reaches of the region 
border South Australia and primarily consist of 
agricultural land and national parks.
The region incorporates the local government 
areas of Corangamite, Glenelg, Moyne, Southern 
Grampians and Warrnambool. Located approximately 
265 kilometers southwest of Melbourne, the City 
of Warrnambool is the region’s largest population 
centre with over 35,500 people. In 2019 the ‘IPSOS 
Life in Australia’ survey ranked Warrnambool and 
the Southwest the most livable regional community 
in Australia (GSC Economic Futures, 2020).
The recognised Traditional Owners of the region 
include the Gunditj Mirring, Eastern Maar, 
Wadawurrung and the Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, 
Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupgalk Nations. 
Aboriginal Peoples have inhabited this region for 
thousands of years with a strong connection to 
Country built on cultural practices and spiritual 
beliefs. There are several heritage sites which 
hold economic, social, environmental, spiritual and 
cultural heritage value to Aboriginal communities 
including Budj Bim Cultural Landscape, Koroitj 
(Tower Hill) and Gariwerd (the Grampians).
Geography
Taking in the catchment areas of the Glenelg  
and Hopkins Rivers, the Great South Coast is  
home to many well-known landscapes including 
the southern part of the Grampians National  
Park, Budj Bim Cultural Landscape, Tower Hill,  
the Twelve Apostles, and Cape Bridgewater.  
A temperate climate with reliable rainfall as well 
as extensive groundwater systems make the area 
well suited to agricultural production. The region 
also has an impressive and extensive coastline 
which is popular with locals and tourists.
Photo: Tracey McRae
8

2.4%
POPULATION 
(2020)
POPULATION GROWTH 
(2011–2020)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
104,200
$5.8
billion
CORANGAMITE
WARRNAMBOOL
GLENELG
MOYNE
SOUTHERN 
GRAMPIANS
Source: Great South Coast Regional 
Economic Development Strategy (2022)
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

Figure 1. Broad land use in the GSC region 
The Victorian Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub (2023)
Population
In 2020 the region had a population of 
approximately 104,200. Except for the major hub 
of Warrnambool, population is spread across 
the region’s major towns including Hamilton, 
Camperdown, Portland, Terang, Port Fairy and 
Casterton. The region has experienced limited 
population growth in recent years. Subdued 
growth is expected in the Warrnambool and Moyne 
shires, while the population is predicted to decline 
in the other areas, largely driven by a net outflow 
of younger residents (Frontier Economics, 2022).
Industry/employment
The major sectors in the GSC economy include 
agriculture, forestry and fishing, health care 
and social assistance, retail trade and education 
and training. These are the dominant sectors 
contributing to the Gross Regional Product (GRP) 
of approximately $5.8 billion. The agri-food sector 
(Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing and Food Product 
Manufacturing) employs a quarter of the region’s 
workforce and generates a third of the regional 
economic output. The GSC region is the gateway 
to the Otway Basin, a 150,000 square kilometer 
onshore and offshore natural gas basin (Great 
South Coast Regional Economic Development 
Strategy, 2022).
	 Nature conservation  
and minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Modified pastures
	 Cropping
	 Horticulture
	 Intensive uses
	 Water
km
0
15
30
60
10

“Adoption of practices is the key”.
—Cam Nicholson, Southern Farming Systems, South West Node  
of the Victorian Drought Resilience Innovation and Adoption Hub
Two universities and a TAFE operate in the region. 
Deakin University’s Warrnambool Campus provides 
specialist education, research, development and 
commercialisation across a number of fields,  
while RMIT University Hamilton has undergraduate 
and postgraduate course offerings, and a focus 
on applied research. Vocational training is offered 
by Southwest TAFE, and Rural Industries Skills 
Training (RIST).
The GSC workforce is highly skilled, exceeding 
Victoria’s regional average share of the skilled 
agricultural workforce. Often referred to as a 
‘powerhouse agricultural economy’, the region 
has some of Victoria’s largest dairy, beef, lamb 
and wool producers, providing productivity and 
efficiency benefits through economies of scale. 
The health care and social assistance sectors have 
realised significant growth, which is consistent 
with regional Victorian trends. Other prominent 
industries include retail trade, manufacturing, 
education and training. Total employment growth 
has averaged just 0.2% per annum over the last 
decade, although strong employment growth 
has been registered in the health care and social 
assistance, education and training sectors, 
reflecting some population growth in the region. 
Similar to other agricultural economies across 
Victoria, the last 5 years have seen declines  
in output and productivity. Rural industries are 
encountering an adjustment period marked 
by variable seasonal conditions, a globally 
competitive environment, farm aggregation, and 
rapid technological change. The outlook for the 
industry to return to growth is positive, but it 
largely depends on how it adapts to changes and 
capitalises on opportunities (Great South Coast 
Regional Economic Development Strategy, 2022).
Climate trends
Rainfall in the GSC region occurs predominantly 
in winter and spring and is generally the result of 
rain-bearing weather systems from the southwest. 
Most areas receive between 600–750mm of rain 
per year. The highest rainfall generally occurs 
in the Simpson area, with over 950mm annually, 
while Coleraine records approximately 606mm 
per year. Since the 1950s, average rainfall has 
declined, especially in autumn.
Climate projections for the region based on climate 
change scenario modelling (Frontier Economics, 
2022) indicate continued variability and change in 
future with:
•	average temperatures to increase by 1.4–1.9°C
•	spring rainfall to decrease by 6–12%
•	an increase of up to 52% in the number of  
fire danger days
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Droughts are a cyclical feature of the Australian 
climate. They can easily be characterised in 
hindsight, however in reality they are slow moving, 
complex and dynamic. The impacts of drought can 
be highly variable across the region depending 
on rainfall, soil type and topography. Droughts 
have wide ranging consequences and can 
severely impact multiple sectors leading to lower 
agricultural yields, increased production costs and 
negative flow on effects to regional economies.
The effects of climate change, including drought, 
also significantly impact Aboriginal communities 
across Victoria. Drought harms Country and 
people, through impacts on waterways, plants, 
animals, ecosystems and seasons, making it hard 
to practice culture and heal Country. Cultural 
heritage sites are also damaged by fire, drying 
soils and erosion, caused by drought.
An integrated assessment by Frontier Economics 
(2022) of the socio-economic and environmental 
impacts of past and future droughts was prepared 
to inform the development of the Plan and is 
DROUGHT IN THE 
GREAT SOUTH 
COAST REGION
12

available as a supplementary report – Drought in 
the GSC Region. The report looks at not only the 
effect drought has on agriculture, but also the flow 
on effects to regional communities.
Agriculture is the dominant land use, economic 
driver and employer for the region and the 
impact of drought on this sector depends on the 
preparedness and ability of agribusinesses to 
respond. Some agribusinesses can prosper if 
they are able to take advantage of good decision 
making, and high commodity prices. However, 
there is generally an economic downturn 
associated with drought, including reduced cash 
flow through the local economy. Younger and less 
established farmers may be disproportionately 
impacted, and succession planning in family 
businesses is often disrupted.
The GSC community recognises the cyclical 
connection between drought, fire and floods, and 
the devastation they can cause. Often the first 
rains following a drought contribute to issues 
associated with contaminated run off and erosion.
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Figure 2. Victorian rainfall decile range during 
the Millennium drought 1997 to 2009.
Frontier Economics (2022)
Recent experience of drought
Historically, drought has affected the region to 
varying degrees with each drought being unique in 
its severity and distribution. Areas around Hamilton, 
Dunkeld, Casterton and Heywood are often the 
most seriously impacted due to their inland 
location and reliance on agriculture. Areas closer  
to Warrnambool, Port Fairy, and Portland tend to 
have more diverse economies and a milder climate.
The following section provides an insight into 
community experiences of drought in the region. 
Lessons learned from these experiences have 
greatly influenced the development of the Plan. 
Significant droughts in the region include:
•	1915, which many say was the worst drought  
on record
•	1940–44, this dry period led up to the 
devastating 1944 bushfires
•	1966–67, remains vivid in the minds of many 
farmers in the Hamilton area
•	1977–78, when the extraordinarily hot conditions 
led to many livestock perishing
•	1982–83, the Branxholme area in particular 
encountered severe drought
•	1997–2009, the Millennium drought
•	2014–2015, where rainfall totals from July to 
October were among the lowest ever recorded
•	2018–2019, when severe dry seasons affected 
many areas
The Bureau of Meteorology (2022) reported that 
the Millennium drought was essentially a cool-
season drought in southern mainland Australia, 
with low rainfall in winter and spring, and above 
average warm-season (November to March) 
rainfall received in many areas. A feature of 
the Millennium drought was the extended dry 
period the region encountered. The following 
section provides an overview of the community’s 
experiences of drought and some of the lessons 
that have influenced the development of this Plan.
Figure 2 shows the severity of the Millennium 
drought from 1997 to 2009 with parts of the region 
experiencing rainfall very much below the average. 
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Highest on record
Very much above average
Above average
Average
Below average
Very much below average
Lowest on record
14

A scan of local newspapers between 2006–2009 revealed some of the Millenium drought  
related issues that were being reported on, for example:
•	The drought was having a severe impact on 
farmers across the southwest, from broadacre 
crop growers and graziers to dairy farmers and 
horticulturalists.
•	Full Exceptional Circumstances (EC) drought 
assistance was declared for southwest Victoria, 
this meant farmers were eligible for interest  
rate subsidies, income support, assistance  
with municipal rates, and potentially receiving  
a Health Care card.
•	The Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Forestry said the declaration covered about  
a third of the state, with assistance being 
provided to more than a quarter of Victoria’s 
farmers and farm dependent businesses.
•	Many farmers had already sold older stock 
to help ease the burden of high fodder costs 
and were now concentrating on feeding their 
breeding stock.
•	Farmers were borrowing money to buy feed for 
stock, with feed costs of up to $10,000 a week.
•	Water levels in local lakes and river systems  
had significant declines.
•	Community leaders were calling for improved 
access to mental health support.
•	Invasive pests were causing widespread damage 
on public and private land.
•	The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) were 
anticipating that the drought would ‘knock off’ 
up to one percentage point of GDP growth in  
the 2007 financial year, and that in terms of 
macro-economic impacts food inflation would 
pick up (Hamilton Spectator, March 2007).
•	While it did not receive significant media 
coverage, the Department is aware that drought 
also had a significant impact on Traditional 
Owners’ ability to care for Country.
Drought has many pervasive impacts on communities. As surface 
water and subsoil moisture continue to decline during drought,  
the cash, fodder and water reserves of many farms becomes 
dangerously low or depleted. Compounding the issue of reduced 
cash flow are high supplementary feed or agistment costs, and the 
additional work of carting water for stock. In this situation agricultural 
businesses look for ways to reduce their spending on critical things 
like healthcare. The reduced spending of farmers flows on to other 
regional businesses, and impacts the regional supply chain.
Higher temperatures during these dry years 
resulted in increased evaporation rates which 
further dried out the landscape. These conditions 
peaked during the Black Saturday heatwave  
where catastrophic bushfires resulted in the  
loss of 173 lives in Victoria. Bushfires started  
in January 2009 and continued until March  
(Bureau of Meteorology, 2022).
The social, environmental and economic 
vulnerabilities that already exist in communities 
are amplified as drought conditions slowly unfold. 
Table 1 summarises the interconnected impacts of 
drought as described by the GSC community.
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

Table 1. The interconnected impacts 
of drought in the GSC region
Environment
•	There were extreme differences 
observed between north and 
south of the Glenelg Highway
•	Reduced river, dam, lake and 
surface water levels
•	Loss of ground cover and soils  
due to erosion
•	Loss of resilience in the 
environment with many  
in the community feeling  
more vulnerable
•	Negative impact on biodiversity 
with pressure on the ecosystem 
from hungry stock and wildlife
•	Potential loss of plant species
•	Stress on patches of native 
vegetation, waterways and fauna
•	Increasing weeds
•	Increased vulnerability to attacks 
from invading pests
•	Mouse, locust and vermin plagues
•	Green drought, at times the 
landscape still looked green  
but there was little growth and  
no surface water
•	Increased fire risk
•	Traditional Owners’ ability to  
care for Country using traditional 
and culturally appropriate tools  
is reduced.
•	Culturally significant places, 
species and ecosystems 
impacted
•	Cultural water flows reduced
Social
•	People self-isolating and 
disengaging from community life
•	Breakdown of community 
connections/although sometimes 
there is a strengthening of 
community connections
•	Decrease in volunteering 
•	Increased sense of powerlessness 
and isolation experienced by many
•	Trauma from past and lived 
experience
•	Increased stress and pressure  
on relationships and families
•	Many not seeking help because 
they were too proud
•	Increased anxiety and depression
•	Poor mental and physical health 
e.g., high blood pressure and 
heart disease
•	Most vulnerable families struggled 
with providing basic meals,  
paying bills, often defaulting on 
payments to local businesses
•	Increased suicide and self-harm
•	Increased strain on health services
•	Younger people felt there was  
no future in the region and left  
to find employment in the city
•	Gardens, sports fields, green 
spaces dying and parks turning  
to dust
•	Traditional Owners unable to 
practice culture and care for 
Country
•	Damage to cultural heritage sites
Economic
•	Increased input costs for farmers
•	Increased transport and logistics 
issues
•	Most of our larger centres are 
heavily dependent on servicing the 
agricultural sector. Farmers were 
not “spending” in small towns, 
hence lower spending affected  
the whole business community
•	Less cashing circulating through 
the regional supply chain
•	Spending re-directed or  
re-prioritised to high need  
ag inputs e.g. water and feed  
to keep animals alive
•	Water costs became unsustainable
•	Some dairy herds needed to be 
dried off
•	Difficulties encountered with 
succession planning
•	Loss of family farms and 
businesses 
•	Impact on workforce and decrease 
in job numbers
•	Less training undertaken, fewer 
apprenticeships and traineeships
•	Increased costs constructing 
automatic watering systems for 
sports ovals, botanic gardens  
and other public open spaces
•	Less disposable income for 
recreation
•	Coastal areas often had more 
diverse economies
16

Future drought scenarios
Future drought modelling by Frontier Economics 
(2022) includes the below scenarios:
•	Gross Domestic Product falling by 9.2%,  
a reduction of more than 800 jobs, and a  
decline of 2.7% in consumer spending 
•	Lower average rainfall and hotter, drier seasons 
with a growing number of fire danger days
•	Inland lakes, rivers and dam levels to decline 
with negative impacts on biodiversity
•	Social and economic impacts on the community
•	An increase in ‘sea changers’ moving  
to coastal areas leading to increased  
water demands
•	Parks and sporting precincts facing water 
restrictions
•	Fluctuating tourist numbers when water 
restrictions are implemented or following bushfire
•	Services such as healthcare and Rural Financial 
Counselling may see increasing wait times
•	Cropping areas in the north may move further 
south impacting landscape biodiversity
•	Cultural sites located on flood plains may be 
vulnerable to damage
•	Smaller, more agriculturally reliant communities 
located in the north-west of the region will 
potentially be more severely affected
“All land in the GSC region needs to be managed in a 
way that protects and builds biodiversity and soil health, 
including pest, plant, and animal management”.
—Sally Cunningham, National Centre for Farmer Health
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

RESILIENCE
Definitions of Resilience
Walker (2020) defines resilience as the capacity  
of a system to absorb a disturbance and 
reorganise so as to keep functioning in the same 
kind of way. Rather than just bouncing back, 
resilience is also about changing and adapting  
to new circumstances.
For this Plan resilience is described as the ability 
to effectively respond to the impacts of drought 
and maintain function. It is about being able to 
adapt, thrive and take advantage of opportunities 
when encountering change. Rather than 
maintaining a persistent or stoic response to the 
situation, resilience includes the ability to make 
tactical decisions in times of uncertainty.
Resilience assists individuals and groups to build 
the mindset, social network and business skills 
required to navigate the challenges encountered  
in difficult seasons.
Community Resilience
The Resilient Communities Framework (2022) 
describes ‘community resilience’ as “the capacity 
of individuals, communities, institutions, and 
systems exposed to hazards to survive, adapt, and 
thrive in ways that improve outcomes, and improve 
community well-being more broadly.”
The Victorian Community Resilience Framework 
for Emergency Management (2020) provides a 
coherent perspective on community resilience. 
Although drought is not a legislated emergency, 
it is closely aligned to the guiding principles of 
this document, which offers a useful foundation 
on which to build a more resilient region. The 
Framework is composed of the following 7 
characteristics that lead to greater resilience:
18

“Vulnerability and hardship look different in each context”.
—Thriving Communities Partnership Southwest Victoria Chapter
1.		Safe and well
2.	Connected, inclusive and empowered
3.	Culturally rich and vibrant
4.	Sustainable built and natural environment
5.	Dynamic and diverse local economy
6.	Reflective and aware
7.		Democratic and engaged
Building resilience includes a focus on well-
functioning communities with the explicit objective 
of strengthening the liveability, viability, and 
wellbeing of both the people and the region.
It also focuses on diversity of experience and 
needs, accounting for different parts of the 
community, including Traditional Owners.
Although there is no one-size-fits-all solution, 
alignment with this community resilience 
perspective will support organisations to:
•	Better understand and participate in building 
safer and more resilient communities 
•	Align adaptive governance, policies and 
programs to strengthen community resilience 
•	Improve collaboration within and between 
organisations 
•	Use connected networks to support  
wellbeing, liveability and sustainability
•	Utilise planning systems to mitigate risk
•	Partner with Traditional Owners to support 
culturally appropriate practices in emergency 
events.
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

GREAT SOUTH 
COAST THEMATIC 
FRAMEWORK
The Themes, Outcomes and Priority 
Actions (the Framework) detailed 
below capture the lived experience 
and local knowledge of the GSC 
community and organisations 
through 9 months of conversation 
and builds on other existing strategic 
plans and policy documents.
The framework consists of 5 themes, each with an 
outcome, and a list of actions to move the region 
towards achieving its vision. Some of the actions 
can be addressed directly by the GSC community, 
while others will require broader cooperation from 
governments, industry, and community.
Many actions identified in the Plan are incremental, 
building on existing approaches such as improving 
water use efficiency and better business planning 
across the region. However, incremental changes 
alone will not be sufficient to build resilience and 
adapt to a changing climate, and transformational 
change is required. Transformation will require a  
significant change to how things are currently done. 
For example, land use change where a higher 
water use industry, like dairy, is replaced by 
a lower water use industry, like beef cattle. 
Transformational changes can be disruptive,  
and the businesses and communities involved  
may require support to navigate the changes.
The actions identified encourage preparedness 
for drought, including the need for adaptive 
and transformational change. Actions include 
implementing sustainable water practices, adopting 
different farming methods, fostering community 
engagement, encouraging innovation and supporting 
Traditional Owners to build drought resilience  
in line with their values and self-determined goals 
and aspirations for Country and community.
Great South Coast Themes
Theme 1:	 Resilient communities  
Theme 2:	Sustainable management of  
natural resources 
Theme 3:	Resilient local businesses and  
regional economies 
Theme 4:	Innovation and skills 
Theme 5:	Key enablers
20

Photo: Tracey McRae
“Soil sampling is an often-overlooked tool when 
improving productivity, make sure you use test 
results to better allocate and select inputs”.
—Lisa Miller, Southern Farming Systems
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

RESILIENT 
COMMUNITIES
Theme 1
Outcome:  
People have ample opportunity to connect and collaborate and to develop 
their abilities through learning and leadership while supporting everyone 
in the community to be more resilient.
Theme 1 is about building more resilient communities 
by promoting collaboration, strengthening and 
enhancing health services, fostering leadership, 
and engaging the community at various levels.  
The actions identified can help build an environment 
where people connect, learn, and develop their 
abilities while effectively navigating the challenges 
posed by drought.
“One of the most important things is the capacity to coordinate events  
so communities can connect and engage”.
—Cam Nicholson, Southern Farming Systems, Southwest Node  
of the Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
22

Actions
1.1
Strengthen existing trusted local health services and co-design any new programs  
with services that best meet local needs. (See case study 1)
1.2
Advocate for the provision of outreach community support services with an  
integrated case management model, which links clients to specialist services,  
community engagement and peer supports.
1.3
Maintain and enhance formal and informal networks of key stakeholders to enhance 
preparedness and resilience building.
1.4
Integrate drought resilience engagement activities with other planned industry 
engagement, to increase collaboration between groups and reduce the number  
of events people need to attend.
1.5
Foster a culture of collaborative leadership across community, agencies, industry,  
emerging leaders and community groups.
1.6
Engage community champions to support the design and planning of community 
engagement activities and events and deliver activities which allow families to connect  
and support each other in remote areas.
1.7
Through industry leadership groups, build the skills and capacity of stock agents,  
vets, CFA, SES, Rural suppliers, agronomists, and field officers to identify issues  
and refer individuals to services and community engagement activities.
1.8
Support opportunities for Traditional Owners to build drought resilience and  
preparedness efforts, in line with their self-determined values, goals and aspirations  
for Country and community. 
Photo: Heytesbury Landcare
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

SUSTAINABLE 
MANAGEMENT 
OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES
Theme 2
Outcome:  
Land in the region is managed in a way that protects and enhances 
biodiversity and soil health. Water is managed for urban, agricultural, 
cultural and environmental purposes, based on availability, improved 
efficiencies, and increased recycling of water.
Theme 2 is about protecting biodiversity and 
soil health while managing water for multiple 
purposes. This includes improved decision-
making through training and education, using 
demonstration sites to showcase sustainable 
practices, promoting on-farm water planning, 
maintaining the emergency water supply network, 
supporting trusted networks like Landcare and 
collaborating and partnering with Traditional 
Owners, to share learnings.
24

Actions
2.1
Develop the decision-making capability of individuals and groups through training  
and education.
2.2
Encourage the setup and promotion of demonstration sites across the region highlighting 
profitable, sustainable, and resilient management strategies.
2.3
Support on farm extension advice and research into improved design and use of grazing 
management and containment feeding to reduce soil erosion, maintain soil cover and 
improve the survival of pastures.
2.4
Encourage primary producers to develop and implement farm water plans.
2.5
Collaborate with Food & Fibre Great South Coast on the delivery of their ‘18-point Plan  
for water policy reforms to drive jobs, growth and sustainability.’
2.6
Promote the availability and maintain the functioning of the Victorian emergency water 
supply network in the Great South Coast region.
2.7
Support and promote the role that Landcare Networks play in building drought resilience  
at farm and landscape level. (See case study 2)
2.8
Improve sustainable land and water management practices through collaboration  
and partnership with Traditional Owners and First Peoples, in line with Government’s  
legal and policy obligations. 
2.9
Mitigate fire risk to the community by proactively reducing fuel loads in a timely manner.
“Water needs to be managed across 
the region for urban, agricultural 
and environmental purposes based 
on reduced availability, improving 
efficiencies, and increased recycling 
and reuse of water”.
—Sherie Bain, Wannon Water
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

RESILIENT LOCAL 
BUSINESSES 
AND REGIONAL 
ECONOMIES
Theme 3
Outcome:  
All businesses within the Great South Coast region access affordable 
quality business planning and financial advice.
Theme 3 is about providing local businesses  
with access to affordable and quality business 
planning and financial advice. Businesses are 
encouraged to proactively plan for adversity, 
build capabilities through professional guidance, 
consider income diversification, create financial 
buffers during good years, and collaborate with 
neighboring communities. The actions will promote 
economic growth and enhance access to services 
in times of drought for a resilient and thriving 
regional economy.
26

Actions
3.1
Encourage small businesses to use professional advice to proactively plan for  
adversity and build capability through skill development. (See case study 3)
3.2
Promote the potential opportunities of income diversification for small business.
3.3
Support individuals and organisations to mitigate risks by being well prepared.
3.4
Promote the building of financial buffers during good years that can be used during 
difficult times like drought.
3.5
Provide opportunities for small business owners to network with advisors, to help them 
choose the right ‘team’ of advisors to generate financial success and resilience.
3.6
Collaborate with neighbouring communities for economic growth, emergency response  
and better access to services.
“The agenda is to facilitate the national availability of product while 
building a profitable business, and research to unlock the enormous 
opportunities local produce provides”.  —Wayne Schild, Grange Garlic
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

INNOVATION 
AND SKILLS
Theme 4
Outcome:  
Industry groups and research organisations are working collaboratively  
to identify and overcome drought related constraints. Information products 
relating to resilience are widely shared and can be easily accessed.
Theme 4 is about encouraging collaboration 
between industry groups and research organisations 
to identify and develop innovative ideas to build 
drought resilience through transformative 
technologies and practices. Research and innovation 
will see the development of more resilient crops, 
pastures, and farming practices. The theme also 
includes actions to improve the capability and 
capacity of the local workforce through education 
and industry pathways.
28

Actions
4.1
Identify and promote opportunities that best contribute to drought resilience arising  
from new and emerging technologies and new practices.
4.2
Encourage research and development into more resilient crops, pastures and farming 
practices. (See case study 4)
4.3
Update and promote the Future Ready Regions website developed in partnership  
Catchment Management Authority Future Ready Regions (arcgis.com)
4.4
Develop and share case studies and other stories demonstrating innovative responses  
to drought.
4.5
Undertake research into the development and use of trigger points to enhance  
proactive decision making.
4.6
Improve the capability and capacity of the local workforce by developing and  
promoting educational opportunities and industry pathways.
4.7
Identify, in partnership with Traditional Owners, opportunities to use traditional knowledge, 
and culturally appropriate tools to heal and care for Country. 
“The region’s long-term prosperity is intrinsically linked to agriculture, and its 
continuing productivity demands that water is managed and used sustainably”.
—Chris Solum, Glenelg Hopkins CMA
Photo: Rod Hayes
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

KEY ENABLERS
Theme 5
Outcome:  
Community, industry and government are clear on their responsibilities 
relating to drought preparedness. A standing Drought Resilience Advisory 
Group helps to maintain a functioning network with a focus on resilience.
Theme 5 is about establishing key enablers for 
effective drought preparedness and response. 
Clear coordination arrangements, defined 
responsibilities, a Resilience Advisory Group,  
inter-agency planning, and the integration  
of drought preparedness activities will all 
contribute to the region’s collaborative drought 
resilience efforts.
30

Actions
5.1
Build the capability of organisations and leaders to better partner in developing clear 
regional drought governance and coordination arrangements and allocate appropriate  
time and resources to coordination and partnership.
5.2
Organisations to communicate their responsibilities in drought preparedness,  
then maintain and regularly review these.
5.3
Support the setup of a Drought Resilience Advisory Group to coordinate delivery  
of the Plan.
5.4
Promote inter-agency planning for preparation and response to drought, and  
incorporate mitigation actions into relevant strategies and plans. (See case study 5, 
Harvesting Resilience Futures)
5.5
Develop working partnerships with relevant Traditional Owners on matters relating  
to drought preparedness and response in the GSC region. 
“We already have bush networks. We don’t have to reinvent the wheel, 
but we do need to make sure that existing networks communicate well 
and combine their efforts”.
—Tim Leeming, Farmer, Paradoo Prime
Photo: Heytesbury Landcare
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

The following case studies provide examples of the lived experience in 
the GSC community and are grouped according to the themes identified 
in the Plan. They highlight different aspects of building resilience 
including community engagement, health and wellbeing, sustainable 
land management, self-responsibility and effective communication.
CASE STUDIES 
OF RESILIENCE
THEME 1: RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
Improving mental health in 
farming communities
Those in rural farming communities are at a higher 
risk of suicide than average Australians. Farmers 
are known to be generous in providing help to 
others, but they are often reluctant to ask for help  
themselves. Access to mental health support in  
rural areas is limited, and where support is available, 
providers may have poor understanding of the 
realities of life and work in the farming environment.
Recognising these risk factors, the National  
Centre for Farmer Health worked in collaboration 
with Great South Coast community members  
to develop a dedicated resource for farmers and 
farming communities.
Steering Straight empowers farmers to reflect 
on and prioritise their health and wellbeing by 
identifying personalised, practical steps to take 
when navigating difficult situations. It helps to:
•	Identify personal signs of stress
•	Identify and plan helpful activities 
•	Break down goals into manageable steps
•	Know who to call for support
Written by Dr Alison Kennedy from the National Centre 
for Farmer Health. Steering Straight and the Managing 
Stress on the Farm publication were developed as part of  
the Great South Coast Suicide Prevention Place-Based Trial, 
and are now being used across Australia and internationally. 
www.farmerhealth.org.au/managing-stress-book
32

THEME 2: SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT  
OF NATURAL RESOURCES
Climate Resilient Farms
Smart farmers know healthy soils are the 
foundation of a productive, profitable and resilient 
farming enterprise. Heytesbury District Landcare 
Network’s Climate Resilient Farms program 
supported 30 farms to explore soil health best 
practice and regenerative farming methods,  
with a focus on:
•	Increasing yield and soil carbon while reducing 
fertiliser use
•	Pasture management
•	Planting and fencing wind breaks and riparian 
buffers
•	Water conservation
Chris Hibburt and Katy Millard from Port Campbell 
joined the program with an existing system 
that included shelter belts, a reticulated water 
system, laneway infrastructure, rotational grazing, 
and a large storage dam with wetlands. With a 
strong foundation already in place, they explored 
whether sowing multi-species forage crops would 
help protect soils and grow pasture in variable 
climate conditions. Their trial was a success, 
demonstrating the benefits of selecting pastures 
that can survive through the seasons. They now 
take every opportunity to resow and update their 
pastures to continue building the organic matter 
and nutrient value of their soils.
The Climate Resilient Farms program provided 
Great South Coast farmers with peer-to-peer 
learning, technical advice and practical local 
solutions, and the results are demonstrated by 
improvements in organic carbon, organic matter 
and nutrient value in their soils.
Written by Chris Hibburt.
Photo: Chris Hibburt & Katy Millard
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

THEME 3: RESILIENT LOCAL BUSINESSES 
AND REGIONAL ECONOMIES
The importance of business 
planning
Less than 1,000 farms between Geelong and  
the South Australian border produce more than 
20% of Australia’s milk. Dairy Australia’s WestVic 
Dairy team support these businesses and their 
6,000 employees to manage their businesses in  
a changing economic and environmental climate. 
The Our Farm, Our Plan program helps farmers 
develop a well-designed business plan by getting 
everyone in the business on the same page, 
clarifying where the farm business needs to go, 
and understanding how to get there. 
Through a series of structured workshops, farmers 
identify their goals and explore opportunities to 
optimise their farm production and profitability. 
The program uses measurements and metrics to 
inform decision making and track progress. This 
information also empowers farmers to understand 
opportunities for their businesses to embed best 
practice approaches, test new ideas, and manage 
risk and volatility.
By encouraging participants to connect with 
discussion groups throughout the program, 
Our Farm, Our Plan helps farmers to build 
more resilient farming businesses, and a more 
connected industry and agricultural community.
Written by the WestVic Dairy.
Photo: Basalt to Bay Landcare Network
34

THEME 4: INNOVATION AND SKILLS 
DEVELOPMENT
Creating innovative solutions  
for local problems
Southern Farming Systems (SFS) coordinates 
the South West Node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub – a part of 
Working with universities, regional development, 
catchment management organisations and private 
sector partners, the role of Node coordinator 
builds on the commitment of SFS to support 
farming businesses.  The Node works to identify 
and promote opportunities that best contribute  
to drought resilience arising from new and 
emerging technologies.
A recent collaboration with National Landcare  
has enabled two innovative tools to improve  
on-farm decision making:
•	MyFarm Dashboard centralises real-time 
information on climate, soil moisture, prices  
and pasture into a dashboard to inform  
common decisions to address soil constraints 
and optimise soil health.
•	Decision Wizard helps farmers to structure 
the decisions they make on-farm to yield better 
choices and a more resilient farm business.
These world-leading solutions for local problems, 
are enabling innovation in farming systems 
and supporting farmers to implement adaptive 
practices on-farm.
Written by Cam Nicholson.
Driving innovation and profitability 
On the site of a former pork farm in Victoria’s 
Western Districts, Grange Garlic is an innovative 
vertically integrated operation. A dedicated team 
manage everything in-house from seed production, 
sowing, harvesting, storage, food processing and 
sales, all the way through to warehousing and 
distribution. Behind their streamlined business and 
deceptively simple product is insight, innovation 
and persistence throughout an 8-year journey at 
the Croxton East property.
While ‘innovation’ can sound like an exciting 
prospect, owners Wayne and Tracey Schild know 
that it can also be risky and difficult to navigate 
while managing cashflow, production cycles and 
business operations. They emphasise the need for 
a clear business strategy and understanding what 
you are doing and why.
Recognising an opportunity, Wayne and Tracey 
transitioned from pork to garlic production. Through 
early challenges, Grange Garlic learned many 
lessons and worked hard to refine and innovate 
their business while remaining operational.
Initially planting and harvesting garlic crops by 
hand, they identified that greater scale would be 
essential to profitability, and shifted to mechanised 
models. They have built prototype harvesting 
equipment to meet their needs, navigated the  
ins-and-outs of water licensing, and explored the 
need for clear governance to enable their business.
After years of learning and evolving, Wayne and 
Tracey say that developing a network of trusted 
advisers, informed research, and enabling their 
staff has driven innovation and profitability. 
Grange Garlic is a success story of transformation, 
innovation and resilience. 
Written by Kirsten Diprose, founder of the Rural Podcasting Co.
Photo: Grange Garlic
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

The Harvesting Resilient  
Futures Project
Over the past year the Southern Grampians 
Glenelg Community Partnership (Barwon South 
West Public Health Unit) has been leading the 
Harvesting Resilient Futures Project which aims 
to build community resilience to stressors and 
shocks. The project is working to establish 
networks, build capability, align effort, and improve 
overall community mental health outcomes.
Recognising that there are activities, programs and 
frameworks already in place across the community 
that contribute to resilience, the project works to 
clarify the role that each organisation can play and 
support them to develop their own actions towards 
the shared goal.
Through the first phase of the project, by 
working with the local community to develop an 
understanding of community resilience and how 
collaboration can be enhanced, the team have 
identified the following factors as key to resilience:
•	Community connectedness
•	Access to resources
•	Future thinking
•	Leadership
•	Social justice
With these factors in mind, the project team will 
now collaborate with community members and 
stakeholders to map the ‘local resilience system’. 
This map will make the existing resources visible 
and enable a community led strategic path with 
place-based actions to be developed.  The actions 
are responsive and flexible to their needs now and 
in the future. 
Ultimately, the goal is a long-term strategic 
approach and collaborative structure to improve 
community resilience through place-based actions 
that are mobilised by locals.
Written Joanne Brown, Manager Community  
Partnerships, Southern Grampians Glenelg  
Barwon South West Public Health Unit.
THEME 5: KEY ENABLERS
Realising the Water Opportunity
Food & Fibre Great South Coast (FFGSC) is the 
representative body for Southwest Victoria’s  
$4.6 billion agriculture sector. Their purpose is  
to grow the prosperity and wellbeing of the sector 
and Great South Coast communities through food 
and fibre.
By quantifying the flow on value of primary 
production in the region – further food and fibre 
value in the supply chain is estimated at $12 billion, 
60% of Gross Regional Product (GRP), and 21.6%  
of all regional jobs. FFGSC have helped to articulate 
the importance of working together to secure the 
sector’s future.
Building the long-term value and profitability of 
the agriculture sector in the region is dependent 
on the region’s water resources. In 2021, FFGSC 
commissioned research to determine how water 
could be managed across the region to ensure 
adequate supply for the environment, traditional 
owners, recreational and productive use.
The research indicates less than 50% of current 
water license allocations are being used, and that 
lifting underutilised water by a modest 10% could 
yield an additional $40 million dollars in GRP, 
without risking water security.
The data yielded in the research has informed  
an ‘18-point plan for water policy reform for  
the Great South Coast’. The 18-point plan 
recommends key practice changes, regulatory 
reforms and other measures that will enable the 
region to realise this water opportunity together,  
to benefit all.
With over half of a projected boost of $21 million  
in household income and 400 new jobs anticipated 
to benefit non-food and fibre households  
($12.4 million), the data demonstrates food and 
fibre sectors’ ability to raise regional prosperity 
and resilience.
Written by Natalie Collard,  
Food & Fibre Great South Coast
36

Photo: Tracey McRae
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

“Our land is resilient. Mother Earth has been 
resilient for many centuries. Take care of our land, 
and it will take care of you”.
—Aunty Claudette Lovett, National Centre for Farmer Health
This Plan has been drafted with input from 
community members and organisations who 
have an important part to play in realising the 
Plan’s vision. It provides a framework for focusing 
future effort and guiding investment decisions 
to enhance drought resilience in the Great South 
Coast region.
The framework is only the first step in identifying 
the priorities of the community and recognises 
that continued collective action is necessary for 
the Plan to succeed.
This Plan is a document to be used by the 
community – in collaboration and partnership with 
First Peoples, industry, the not-for-profit sector, 
and all levels of government to: 
•	coordinate investment
•	align to other plans or strategies to support 
funding proposals
•	collaborate for shared outcomes
•	inform future drought resilience priorities
•	develop drought resilience programs
•	monitor resilience to future droughts.
Some of the actions identified can be addressed 
directly by the GSC community, while others will 
require broader cooperation from governments, 
not-for-profit organisations, and industries.  
Many of the actions identified in the Plan will 
require investment if they are to be undertaken.
Immediate next steps include securing resources 
to support delivery of actions within the Plan, 
identification of a lead organisation to coordinate 
the Plan’s delivery, and establishment of a 
governance group to support and collaborate  
on the Plan’s implementation.
The Plan Coordinator will ensure engagement with 
community, industry, business, not-for-profit, and 
government stakeholders to identify roles and 
responsibilities to deliver the Plan and achieve 
desired outcomes.
Partnerships with Traditional Owners/First Peoples 
of the Great South Coast region will ensure their 
unique rights and responsibilities, and self-
determined goals and aspirations for Country, are 
reflected during implementation of Plan actions.
It is acknowledged that the Plan will need to be 
agile and adapt in response to changes in the 
natural environment, the operational and policy 
environments of industry and various levels of 
government, evaluation and learning, and the 
needs of the community.
The GSC Reference Group acknowledge the 
experience, knowledge and generosity of 
organisations and individuals who contributed to the 
development of this Plan. Increased awareness and 
preparedness are essential to building resilience, 
and everybody has a responsibility to be well 
prepared for the coming seasons. An integrated 
approach to managing risk is critical to mitigating 
the impacts of drought and being well prepared.
This approach will support GSC communities  
to be better prepared for, and capable of, 
managing drought in pursuit of a prosperous  
and sustainable future.
NEXT STEPS
“It is about learning from your mistakes and 
also learning from your victories as well”.
—Tim Leeming, Farmer, Paradoo Prime
38

Photo: Tracey McRae
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

The collaborative effort and shared expertise  
used to prepare the Plan is an important first  
step in building drought resilience in the Great 
South Coast. Work has been done by the region  
to articulate the actions needed to achieve  
desired regional outcomes. The next step is for  
the actions and activities identified in the Plan  
to be implemented, evaluated and adapted as  
needed to achieve the longer-term outcomes  
for drought resilience. 
MONITORING, 
EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING
Figure 3. Pathway of program delivery 
through discovery, engagement, development, 
implementation and evaluation
1
Understand 
the context
Past, current 
and future 
understanding 
of drought 
in the region
2
Gather 
momentum
Bring together 
the experiences 
and perspectives 
to develop a 
regional Plan
3
Articulate the 
desired steps 
for change
Work together 
to determine 
desired outcomes 
and actions
4
Take the steps 
and actions
Implement the 
actions and activities 
to acheive change 
and build resilience
5
Determine 
next steps
Evaluate regional 
outcomes and 
identify learnings 
and gaps for 
future progress
We are here
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
40

Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) is a 
key element of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning program. Program objectives, outcomes 
and measures of success are clearly articulated at 
all levels of program delivery (national, state and 
regional) and are over a range of short, medium 
and long timeframes.
Measuring success
The outcomes identified in this Plan are community 
and region wide, and dependent on the fourth step 
of implementation identified in the pathway of 
program delivery (Figure 3). Given the long-term 
outcomes of the Plan, the MEL framework below 
outlines how progress toward success will be 
measured.
Management and reporting
The successful lead organisation chosen to 
coordinate delivery of the Plan will work with 
Agriculture Victoria to provide up-to-date data and 
information to support program implementation 
and planning. Monitoring and reporting will enable: 
key learnings to be identified, effective reporting, 
and adaptive program management.
A range of assessment tools may be used to 
indicate progress including, but not limited to, 
surveys, case studies, stakeholder interviews and 
engagement data analysis. Data and information 
will be collected at various intervals across 
implementation planning, and during and after 
activities are implemented.
Assumptions underpinning 
success of the Plan
Measuring success and reporting on progress 
toward regionally specific outcomes is dependent 
on several key assumptions.
Key assumptions affecting short-term  
outcomes (1–2 years)
•	Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning
•	Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other for regional planning
•	Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs
•	Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them
•	There are sufficient learnings to continuously 
improve program implementation
Key assumptions affecting medium term 
outcomes (2–4 years)
•	Supporting regional stakeholders through 
program implementation will result in change  
in practice in the Great South Coast region
•	There are sufficient opportunities and funding 
for the region to implement elements of the Plan
•	Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience
•	The Great South Coast Plan Coordinator  
and regional stakeholders continue to review 
and implement the Plan
MEL Framework
Key regional themes and outcomes are matched 
with relevant Future Drought Fund strategic 
priorities, regional progress measures (2-4 years) 
and indicators.
The MEL Framework is aligned to existing MEL 
plans at the Program and Fund level to ensure 
consistency and to ensure the data collection tools 
provide information across a range of learning and 
reporting requirements.
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Resilient communities
People have ample opportunity to connect and collaborate and to develop their abilities through 
learning and leadership while supporting everyone in the community to be more resilient.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities are coming together to 
prepare for and respond to drought.
Communities are learning and building 
capability, capacity, expertise, and sharing 
innovative ways to build social resilience.
Improved community awareness of and 
access to health and wellbeing services.
Groups and networks continue to 
function and work well together.
Leaders in the region are  
more confident to implement 
strategic actions.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver  
on actions across the region.
Sustainable management of natural resources
Land in the region is managed in a way that protects and enhances biodiversity and soil health.  
Water is managed for urban, agricultural, cultural and environmental purposes,  
based on availability, improved efficiencies, and increased recycling of water.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Primary producers and businesses are 
better able to prepare for drought.
Knowledge and understanding of 
resilience of natural resources across  
the region is increasing.
Plan actions and opportunities are 
incorporated into other water strategies 
and planning documents across the region.
Farmers are learning about 
and implementing new water 
management strategies and 
practices.
Stakeholders have increased 
understanding of natural 
resource management to build 
drought resilience. 
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver  
on actions across the region.
Resilient local businesses and regional economies
All businesses within the Great South Coast region access affordable  
quality business planning and financial advice.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable communities
Impacts of drought on the economies  
of region are known and prepared for. 
Primary producers are better able to 
identify business risk and make timely 
decisions. 
Businesses are identifying, managing  
and planning for the business risks 
associated with drought.
Agricultural businesses have an 
improved understanding of the 
risks to their businesses from 
drought in their region. 
Businesses are learning about 
and implementing new business 
management strategies and 
practices.
Table 2. MEL Framework for the Great South Coast.
1. Future Drought Fund
42

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Innovation and skills
Industry Groups and Research organisations are working collaboratively to identify  
and overcome drought related constraints. Information products relating to resilience  
are widely shared and can be easily accessed.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience for an 
innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector
Innovative pathways and opportunities to 
improve drought resilience in the region 
are being identified.
Research and extension programs are 
being co-designed with community  
and industry to provide outputs relating  
to the region.
Stakeholders are learning  
about and implementing  
new practices.
Key enablers
Community, Industry and Government are clear on their responsibilities relating  
to drought preparedness. A standing Drought Resilience Advisory Group helps to maintain  
a functioning network with a focus on resilience.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Communities are communicating regional 
drought resilience needs and priorities to 
inform investment.
Improved collaboration and coordination 
between governments, industry, 
communities and other networks.
Regions are monitoring their resilience  
to drought in accordance with the Plan.
Traditional Owners are engaged in  
regional drought preparedness activities, 
and those activities reflect Traditional 
Owners’ priorities.
Increased community 
understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic, 
environmental and social 
characteristics.
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
Traditional Owners are 
increasingly involved in drought 
programs and activities.
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

APPENDICES
Appendix 1 
Great South Coast  
stakeholders consulted
Development of the Great South Coast Drought 
Resilience Plan (the Plan) was based on in-depth  
conversations with the organisations and 
individuals listed below.
The Great South Coast Drought Resilience Plan 
Reference Group was established to provide 
expert input to the Plan and ensure that the 
outcomes and actions identified represent a 
coherent and balanced view of stakeholder 
feedback. We acknowledge and appreciate the 
knowledge, insight and support that we have 
received in the creation of this Plan.
The Great South Coast region includes the 
following Local Government Areas:
•	City of Warrnambool Shire
•	Corangamite Shire
•	Glenelg Shire
•	Moyne Shire
•	Southern Grampians Shire
Regional Reference Group members
Agriculture Victoria (Chair)
City of Warrnambool Shire
Corangamite Shire
Glenelg Shire
Moyne Shire
Southern Grampians Shire
Barwon South West Health Unit
Barwon South West Climate Alliance
Department of Health
Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action (formally the Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning)
Department of Family, Fairness and Housing
Farming networks
Food & Fibre Great South Coast
Glenelg Hopkins Catchment Management Authority
National Centre for Farmer Health
Rural Financial Counselling Victoria
Southern Farming Systems
Southern Rural Water
Victorian Drought Node
Wannon Water
Westpac
Agricultural industry and farm business services
Agriculture industry representatives
Agriculture consultants
Banking and Finance 
WestVic Dairy
Community and not for profit organisations
Australian Red Cross  
(State-wide and regional programs)
Lions Need for Feed (Victoria)
Rotary Club
Community Health Organisations
National Centre for Farmer Health
Southern Grampians-Glenelg Community 
Partnership (Jo Brown)
Community leaders
Bruce Valance
Bruce Noles
Oonagh and Harper Kilpatrick
Rhonda Henry
Georgina Gubbins
Ian Morris
44

Education and capability building
Deakin University
Federation University  
(Future Regions Research Centre)
South West TAFE (Rural Science programs)
Farmer groups and local business leaders, 
including
Municipal agriculture sector advisory groups
Victorian Farmers Federation
United Dairy Farmers Victoria
Southern Farming Systems
Rural Financial Counselling Service
Small Business Mentoring Service
Government Agencies and Statutory Authorities
Barwon Regional Emergency Management Team 
(REMT) Chair
Centre for Regional and Rural Futures
Climate Change Adaptation, Community  
and Partnership Programs
Country Fire Authority
Cross Border Commissioner
Department of Energy, Environment  
and Climate Action
Department of Family, Fairness and Housing
Emergency Management Victoria
Emergency Recovery Victoria  
(formerly Bushfire Recovery Victoria)
National Recovery and Resilience Agency
Fire and Forest Operations
Rural Assistance Commissioner
Small Business Victoria 
Victoria Police
Agriculture Victoria 
Major farmer, industry and community events
Food & Fibre/DELWP Great South Coast Water 
Opportunities workshop in Warrnambool  
(6 December 2022)
Food & Fibre Great South Coast Water Forum  
in Warrnambool (15 February 2023)
BestWool/BestLamb Network in Dunkeld  
(3 March 2023)
Victoria Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub’s 
Think Tank in Bendigo (23 March 2023)
Victoria Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub’s 
Showcase in Geelong (21 June 2023)
Natural Resource Management organisations
Glenelg Hopkins Catchment Management Authority
Wannon Water
Landcare networks
Parks Victoria
Southern Rural Water
Nature Trust Glenelg
Other Future Drought Fund programs
Victorian Drought Hub
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption  
and Innovation Hub – South West Node  
(Southern farming Systems)
Leadership development program  
(Australian Rural Leadership Foundation)
Farm resilience planning program  
(Agriculture Victoria)
Regional Drought Resilience Pilot Plans –  
Goulburn, Gippsland and Wimmera Southern 
Mallee (Agriculture Victoria)
Southern Farming Systems
Agriculture Dependent Resilient Communities – 
Community of Practice
Regional development organisations
Great Ocean Road Regional Tourism
The Agricollective
Small business organisations
Small Business Victoria
Traditional Owners
Wadawarrung Aboriginal Corporation
Eastern Maar Aboriginal Corporation
Barengi Gadjin Land Council
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

Appendix 2 
Great South Coast References
This Appendix outlines some of the existing 
strategies, reports and programs that have been 
reviewed for their relevance in building drought 
resilience in the region. It is intended to be used  
as a resource document.
Agriculture
Dairy Australia Strategic Plan 2020–2025 (2020). 
Dairy Australia
WestVic Dairy Strategic Plan 2020–23 (2020). 
Dairy Australia
Dairy Australia Climate Change Strategy 2020–25 
(2020). Dairy Australia
Drought Preparedness module – More beef  
from pastures. Meat and Livestock Australia,  
www.mbfp.mla.com.au (last updated 2019)
Farm decision making. The interaction of 
personality, farm business and risk to make 
more informed decisions (2020). Grains Research 
Development Corporation 
People in Agriculture, www.peopleinag.com.au 
(last updated 2022)
Community Health
From inside the farm gate: rural women’s stories of 
surviving and thriving. National Centre for Farmer 
Health, www.farmerhealth.org.au/inside-farm-gate 
(last updated 2021)
Summary of the Royal Commission into  
Victoria’s mental health system. National Centre 
for Farmer Health, www.farmerhealth.org.au  
(last updated 2022)
Economic Development
Australian Bureau of Statistics. www.abs.gov.au 
(last updated 2023)
Economic Analysis of Food & Fibre in the  
Great South Coast. A Report for Food & Fibre – 
Great South Coast Inc. (2021) Prepared by  
BDO EconSearch
Great South Coast. Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2022) Regional 
Development Victoria. Victorian Government
Shipwreck Coast Masterplan (2015) Parks Victoria, 
Victorian Government
The Economic Benefits of Native Shelter Belts 
Report. (2015) Basalt to Bay Landcare Network Inc. 
Landcare: Issue 3 2015
The Great South Coast Digital Plan (2022) 
Regional Partnerships Great South Coast, Regional 
Development Victoria. Victorian Government
Emergency Management
Barwon Regional Emergency Management Plan 
(2020). Barwon South West Regional Emergency 
Management Planning Committee (REMPC)  
Bushfire recovery consultation report (2020) 
Victorian Council of Social Services
Community Resilience Framework for Emergency 
Management (2017). Emergency Management 
Victoria
Federal and State Government  
Policy and Programs
Agriculture and Climate Change. Department  
of Energy, Environment and Climate Action,  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/climate-and-weather/
policy-programs-action (last updated 2021)
Drought, disaster and rural support. Department  
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,  
www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/ 
farm-food-drought/drought (last updated 2023)
Fisheries and Forestry, www.agriculture.gov.au/
agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/
drought-policy (last updated 2023)
46

Future Drought Fund Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program Framework Extension (2022). 
National Climate Resilience and Adaptation 
Strategy 2021 – 2025 (2021). Department  
of Agriculture, Water and Environment,  
National Drought Response, Resilience  
& Preparedness Plan (2019). Department  
Natural Environment Climate Change Adaptation 
Action Plan Victorian Government (2022). 
Department of Environment Land Water and 
Planning, Victorian Government
Loddon Mallee Regional Climate Adaptation 
Strategy (2022). Department of Environment  
Land Water and Planning, Victorian Government
Primary Production Climate Change Adaptation 
Plan 2022-2026 (2022). Department of 
Environment Land Water and Planning,  
Victorian Government
Strong, Innovative, Sustainable – A New  
Strategy for Agriculture in Victoria (2020). 
Victorian Government
Victoria’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan  
2017–2020 (2016). Department of Environment 
Land Water and Planning, Victorian Government
Victorian drought preparedness and response 
framework. Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action, www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/
farm-management/managing-for-and-during-
drought/drought-preparedness-and-response-
framework (last updated 2021)
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub, www.vicdroughthub.org.au  
(last updated 2023)
Victoria in Future 2019 (2019). Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 
Victorian Government
Victorian Government Response to the Inquiry  
into Tackling Climate Change in Victorian 
Communities (2021). Department of Environment, 
Land, Water and Planning, Victorian Government
Knowledge, Research and Innovation
Farm drought resilience research program.  
CSIRO, www.csiro.au/Drought-Resilience  
(last accessed 2023)
Future Drought Fund Projects. Southern Farming 
Systems, www.sfs.org.au (Last updated 2023)
Future Regions Research Centre (2023) Federation 
University, www.federation.edu.au/research  
(last updated 2023)
Hamilton Smart Farm. Agriculture Victoria, 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action, www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/about/
our-research/our-innovation-ecosystem/our-
smartfarms/hamilton-smartfarm  
(Last updated 2020)
Natural Resource Management
Barwon South West Regional Climate Adaptation 
Strategy 2020-2025 (2021). Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning,  
Victorian Government
Domestic and stock water. Southern Rural Water, 
www.srw.com.au/water-and-storage/ 
water-management/domestic-and-stock-water 
(last updated 2020)
Food & Fibre Great South Coast (2022)  
18 Point Plan for water policy reform in Victoria. 
Food & Fibre Great South Coast
Glenelg Hopkins Regional Catchment  
Strategy 2021–2027. Glenelg Hopkins  
Catchment Management Authority,  
www.glenelghopkins.rcs.vic.gov.au  
(last updated 2023) 
Supporting local action on climate change. 
Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action, www.climatechange.vic.gov.au/ 
supporting-local-action-on-climate-change  
(last updated 2022)
GREAT SOUTH COAST DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

Regional Resilience
Central West Regional Resilience Strategy. 
Championing resilience and prosperity  
across Central West Queensland (2020). 
Queensland Government 
Combining social capital and technology for drought 
resilience in agriculture. (2013) Author – Ranjan R. 
Journal - Natural Resource Modelling. Vol 27/1
Community resilience framework for emergency 
management (2017). Emergency management 
Victoria
Drought and the future of rural communities: 
Opportunities and challenges for climate change 
adaption in regional Victoria, Australia. (2012). 
Authors – Kiem A and Austin E. Journal – Global 
Environmental Change. Vol 23/5
Making ‘resilience’, ‘adaptation’ and 
‘transformation’ real for the design of sustainable 
development projects: piloting the Resilience, 
Adaptation Pathways and Transformation 
Assessment (RAPTA) framework in Ethiopia  
(2017) CSIRO, Australia
Managing extreme water shortage in Victoria –  
lessons from the Millennium Drought (2016). 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, Victorian Government
Nature Conservation Strategy (2021).  
Parks Victoria, Victorian Government
Resilience, adaptation pathways and transformation 
approach. A guide for designing, implementing  
and assessing interventions for sustainable 
futures (version 2) (2019). CSIRO, Australia
Resilience: what it is and is not (2020). Author – 
Walker B. Journal Ecology and Society. Vol 25/2
Social impacts of drought: A report to NSW 
Agriculture (2004). Centre for Rural Research, 
Charles Sturt University
Strengthening Australia’s Resilience to Climate 
Change (2022). CSIRO, www.csiro.au/en/research/
environmental-impacts/climate-change/ 
Climate-adaptation-research (last accessed 2022)
Transformative Adaptation Research Alliance 
2022. CSIRO, www.research.csiro.au/tara  
(last accessed 2022) 
Understanding the Drought Phenomenon:  
The Role of Definitions (1985). Authors – Wilhite D 
and Glantz M. Journal - Water International. Vol 10/3
What is maladaptation and why does it matter? 
Cervest, www.cervest.earth/news/what-is-
maladaptation-and-why-does-it-matter  
(last updated 2022)
Small business
ATO Fire Preparedness Fact Sheet. Australian 
Tax Office, www.basalttobay.org.au/wp-content/
uploads/2021/12/ATO-fire-preparedness.pdf  
(last updated 2018)
ATO Landcare Rebate Fact Sheet. Australian  
Tax Office, https://www.basalttobay.org.au/ 
wp-content/uploads/2021/12/ATO-Landcare.pdf  
(last updated 2018)
ATO Shelterbelt Fact sheet. Australian Tax Office, 
https://www.basalttobay.org.au/wp-content/
uploads/2021/12/ato-shelterbelts.pdf  
(last updated 2018)
ATO Tree Farming and Forestry Fact Sheet. Australian 
Tax Office, https://www.basalttobay.org.au/ 
wp-content/uploads/2021/12/ATO-Tree-farming-
and-forestry-operations.pdf (last updated 2018)
Small Business Natural Disaster Preparedness 
and Resilience Review (2022) Australian Small 
Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman
Traditional Owners
Aboriginal Water Program Phase 1 (2016–2020). 
Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action, www.water.vic.gov.au/ 
the-aboriginal-water-program (last updated 2023)
Meerreengeeye Ngakeepoorryeeyt Country Plan 
(2015) Eastern Maar Traditional Owners
Paleert Tjaara Dja County Plan – Wadawurrung 
Healthy Country Plan 2020-2030 (2020). 
Wadawurrung Traditional Owners 
Water, Country and Community Program  
2020–2024. Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action, www.water.vic.gov.au/ 
the-aboriginal-water-program/water-country- 
and-community-program (last updated 2023)
Water is Life – Traditional Owner access to water 
roadmap (2022). Department of Environment,  
Land, Water and Planning, Victorian Government.
48

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the 
Great South Coast Region
Information to support the Great South Coast Drought Resilience Plan
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
November 2022
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   1
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   1
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

Regional summary
The Great South Coast is situated in South Western Victoria with 
Warrnambool as its largest centre. The Great South Coast is renowned 
for its stunning natural scenery from the Grampians National Park in 
the north to the Great Ocean Road in the south. The area stretches 
from Shipwreck Coast to the South Australian Border and has a Gross 
Regional Product of $5.8 billion. The region had a population of 105,635 
in 2021.
Agricultural production is the dominant land use in the rural areas 
of the Great South Coast. Dairy farms are concentrated in the south, 
broadacre cropping (mainly wheat and canola) in the north, and there 
is extensive plantation forestry in the west. The two key regional centres 
outside of Warrnambool are the city of Portland and the town of 
Hamilton. Portland features a range of manufacturing activities and a 
port. Hamilton supports agricultural and industrial use with a range of 
food processing facilities. 
The Great South Coast includes the traditional lands of the Gunditj 
Mirring, Eastern Maar and Wadawurrung peoples and Wotjobaluk, 
Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupgalk Nations as well as other 
Traditional Owner groups in Victoria who are not formally recognised.
Key industries for employment in the Great South Coast in 2021 
included health care and social assistance, manufacturing and 
retail trade, with agriculture, fishery and forestry contributing 15.4% 
employment to the region.
Aside from rainfall relied upon for dryland farming, water is sourced 
predominately from groundwater with limited irrigation in the region. 
The region recently experienced drought and dry seasonal conditions 
during the Millennium drought, 2013 to 2015 and 2017 to 2019.
Campaspe
Goulburn
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
Gippsland
Glenelg
Southern
Grampians
Moyne
Warrnambool
Corangamite
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund.
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was undertaken for the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may  
change in  
the future
The Great 
South Coast’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness  
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls  
on surface or subsurface  
water supply
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   2
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   2
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These 
on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets 
(e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of 
drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market 
impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions  
+ 
Changes in the Great South Coast region
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for  
ag farm services  
(but could increase  
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands  
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation  
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from  
green space
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
Frontier Economics
3
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   3
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   3
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. Although agriculture and 
communities in the Great South Coast have been built around 
relative consistent rainfall, the last 25 years has seen the region 
experience extensive drought and dry periods — starting with the 
Millennium drought from 1997 to 2009 and more recently the dry 
conditions experienced from 2013 to 2015 and to a lesser extent 
2017 to 2019.
The historical rainfall and temperature charts for Hamilton in 
Figure 3, provides evidence of the severity of these recent drought 
events. During the Millennium drought and the recent dry periods 
the maximum temperature was consistently hotter than the 
median temperature in the region. The Millennium drought also 
resulted in below average rainfall, however apart from 2006 when 
rainfall was significantly below the 10th percentile, the Great South 
Coast experienced more consistent rainfall than other parts of 
Victoria. This was again the case in the recent 2017 to 2019 dry 
period which was more significant in the east of Victoria.
Agricultural impacts and 
implications of drought  
+ Non-agricultural impacts  
and implications
During drought and dry conditions, livestock farms, which are the 
predominate farms in the Great South Coast, have been impacted by:
•	
Reduced pastures and feed for livestock
•	
Reduced on farm water storages and rainfall for pasture growth
•	
Increased reliance on hay which can be more costly
•	
Higher reliance on livestock prices to manage destocking if 
required.
Regional milk production in Western Victoria, which includes the Great 
South Coast and Barwon regions, remained relatively steady at around 
2 to 2.1 billion litres during the Millennium drought.  
In contrast, Northern Victoria experienced a significant decline in milk 
production (see Figure 4). Western Victorian production levels were 
likely less impacted due to:
•	
Significant levels of dryland dairy production not linked to 
irrigation
•	
Varying dairy locations that are not reliant on a single connected 
water source
•	
Drought impacts not being as severe as in Northern Victoria
•	
Additional access to fodder, mostly via failed cereal crops
01
02
01
02
03
Recently experienced droughts  
and dry periods in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2013 to 2015
•	 2017 to 2019
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Hamilton
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Rainfall (mm)
Annual
10th %ile
Median
16.5
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Annual
90th %ile
Median
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
Frontier Economics
4
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   4
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   4
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

Town water 
Severe and enduring water restrictions were required during the 
Millennium drought in the Great South Coast. Balmoral experienced 
Stage 4 restrictions from 2006 to 2009. During the same period 
Hamilton, Tarrington, Cavendish and Dunkeld experienced Stage 3 
restrictions, with Stage 4 implemented for 11 months from 2006 to 
2007. Stage 4 was also implemented in the Glenthompson System for 
12 months during this time period.
Stage 4 water restrictions prohibit the watering of any outdoor space, 
amongst other restrictions, which had profound impacts on the 
community’s liveability.
Recreation and Tourism
Tourism in the region is both water dependent and non-water 
dependent, however the Great South Coast has an extensive coastline 
with some of Victoria’s most well-known tourist sites. These sites, such 
as the Twelve Apostles attract a range of tourists. The Great South 
Coast was able to maintain much of its tourism during past droughts 
due to its coastal tourism not being highly reliant on rainfall.  
The Southern Grampians Local Government Area (LGA) contains part 
of the Grampians National Park which also continued to be visited 
during past drought periods.
Environment 
There were negative impacts on riverbank and in-stream vegetation 
in rivers and streams during the Millennium drought.  The lack of 
moisture in the soil decreased soil quality, impacting the growth of 
native flora and reducing habitat for native fauna. 
Traditional Owners
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable 
to damage, particularly during the prolonged Millennium drought. 
Additionally, the movement of stock to areas where there were feed 
reserves resulted in stock being placed in areas of cultural significance 
which increased the risk of damage to these sites.
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Milk production (Million Litres)
Year
Eastern Victoria
Northern Victoria
Western Victoria
Community outcomes  
in past droughts
Farming communities in the Great South Coast  
have been severely impacted during periods of drought due to:
•	
Financial pressures resulting from reduced on-farm income  
and increased costs
•	
On-farm issues mostly relating to lack of water and feed for stock
•	
Pressures from invasive native and pest animals on farms
•	
Physical and mental health and wellbeing impacts on individuals  
and families
•	
Flow on financial pressures being experienced by supporting 
businesses in the community.
Agriculture is an important segment of the regional economy. It 
contributes 25% of the ‘value add’ in the Colac-Corangamite area 
(which is shared with the Barwon region) and 21% in the Glenelg-
Southern Grampians area. The Corangamite LGA is heavily dependent 
on agriculture, with 31% of the sub-region employed in the 
agricultural, forestry or fishing industries. By comparison only 2.3% 
of the Warrnambool sub-region is employed in the sector.  Other key 
industries across the Great South Coast include health care and social 
assistance and retail trade.
The high reliance on agriculture means that decreases in agricultural 
production caused by drought created significant flow-on community 
impacts through reduced income and employment, especially for 
on-farm labour and agricultural services. The impacts of reduced 
agriculture flowed through the wider community due to reduced 
overall spending in the community.
Overall, the cumulation of direct and flow through economic effects 
and the drought impacts on liveability in these communities led to 
significant impacts on the community during past drought and dry 
conditions. These also led to an increase in demand for services such 
as mental health and Rural Financial Counselling.
03
Figure 4 Victorian annual dairy production
Frontier Economics
5
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   5
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   5
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Great South Coast and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Great South Coast with future droughts 
expected to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate 
projections show that by 2050 the Great South Coast on average will 
be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number of fire danger 
days. Similar to the past, the region and sub-regions will continue to 
face variable conditions within and across seasons — however in the 
future this variability will be around a lower average rainfall and higher 
average temperature than previously experienced. This means that, 
compared to current conditions, it is likely that parts of Great South 
Coast will face some seasons with rainfall significantly below and 
temperatures significantly above current averages.
•	
An increase in town water security planning and investment, 
which will provide towns with improved access to water 
during times of drought.
•	
Population changes (including an increase in sea-changers 
due to Covid19), which will likely increase water demand as 
population grows in coastal areas.
•	
Continued diversification of the region’s economy, with a 
decreased reliance on agriculture as an employing sector (ABS 
Census data from 2006 to 2021 identified the percentage of 
the community directly employed in the agricultural industry 
has decreased from 18% to 15% across the period).
•	
The Great South Coast being more exposed to agricultural 
production than other rural areas of Victoria, with agriculture 
being the key export from the region. However, the strongest 
employment growth in the region is now in the services 
sector, with manufacturing and agriculture expected to 
continue to decline. This continued trend should support the 
region in times of drought. 
•	
A shift of agriculture from other regions into the Great 
South Coast to benefit from the relatively consistent water 
availability (and in response to the drier climate expected 
throughout Victoria).
01
01
02
03
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural  
impacts and implications
Agricultural production in dairy and dryland farming operations 
are dependent on rainfall to feed and water their livestock. These 
operations are likely to be most exposed to the increasing likelihood 
and severity of future droughts.  The adaptiveness of dairy and 
dryland producers and their ability to maintain sufficient reserves 
will be critical to their farm profitability, with farmers already having 
many strategies to manage drought. The prevailing circumstances of 
a future drought — such as commodity prices, interest rates and fuel 
and fertiliser costs — will also play a role in resultant impacts.
The strong, but declining, manufacturing sector is unlikely to contribute 
significantly to diversified income during times of future drought. 
There is a high percentage of manufacturing related to agriculture, 
including food product manufacturing. Food product manufacturing 
now makes up 64% of the manufacturing industry in the region. 
Food processing centers are located in Warrnambool, Camperdown, 
Cobden, Portland, Hamilton and Koroit. However given this processing 
is reliant on primary agricultural production it is not likely to provide 
much diversification benefit in times of drought. Any declines in dairy 
production will have flow on effects to dairy processing facilities, 
which may need to be rationalised if dairy production levels are not 
able to recover. A factory closure, as has just been announced in 
Camperdown, will have major implications for the town community 
02
Future drought 
conditions  
+ 
Changes in the  
Great South Coast region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Changes in the Great South Coast
There have been a number of changes in the Great South Coast 
that will alter the impacts of drought in the future, including:
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures in spring expected 
to increase by up to 2.4°C. Number of days over 
35°C increasing from 8.7 days to 10-23 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable. 
Average rainfall in spring expected to 
decrease by 8-22%.
6-12%
52%
Number of very high fire 
dangers days to increase by 
10 days per year.
1.4 to  
1.9 °C 
Figure 5 Climate projections for the Great South Coast region
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   6
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   6
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

and will also have a ripple effect through surrounding communities. 
Therefore, the impacts of decreases in primary production are only 
likely to be amplified as the impact of drought flows through to down-
stream markets such as food processing and manufacturing.
Future implications of drought are likely to continue to impact the 
wellbeing and mental health of the local communities. Farmers and 
local businesses are likely to continue to rely on financial counselling 
services and the broader community will continue to rely on mental 
health services. 
Access to mental health services needs to be supported moving into 
the next drought. People responding to the challenges of drought 
are in a vulnerable space and poor mental health can make it harder 
to make the required decisions. The physical and mental health of 
the community might be impacted as people in the community value 
green spaces, trees and the waterways.
Town water 
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought. Initiatives that are not dependent on water 
availability could boost visitors to the region. COVID-19 has provided 
a boost to regional travel and relocation evidenced by an increase 
in population from 2016 to 2021. However, the Great South Coast is 
better placed than many other regions in Victoria due to the majority of 
its tourism being related to the coast which is less rainfall dependant.
Recreation and Tourism section
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought. Initiatives that are not dependent on water 
availability could boost visitors to the region. COVID-19 has provided a 
boost to regional travel and relocation. However, the Great South Coast 
is better placed than many other regions in Victoria due to the majority 
of its tourism being related to the coast which is less rainfall dependent.
Environment 
Inland lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during 
times of drought which will impact the native biodiversity living in and 
relying on these water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food and 
drinking water for wild animals living in the national and state parks 
in the region. Additionally, the increased risk of wildfires will have 
significant environmental and economic impacts.
As cropping in the north of the region moves further south there 
may also be a negative impact on biodiversity, the landscape and the 
structure of ecosystems.
Traditional owners
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or are water dependent will continue to be exposed and become 
vulnerable to damage. Damage to these sites can lead to distress 
within the community.
Community outcomes  
in future droughts
The Great South Coast is likely to be more heavily 
impacted by drought in the Corangamite, Moyne and Southern 
Grampians LGAs due to their large agriculture industry — 
employment in agriculture is in excess of 20%. However, many of the 
towns closer to Warrnambool and the coast attract a range of tourists 
in a mixture of drought impacted and drought resilient activities. This 
coupled with larger diverse economies around Warrnambool and 
Portland means drought impacts are likely to vary across the region. 
Economic modelling of potential future drought in Victoria found  
the Great South Coast would be significantly affected with GDP 
falling by 9.2% and a reduction of more than 800 jobs in the region 
(see Figure 6). The modelled 3-year drought, while prolonged, is not 
equivalent to the most severe recorded in Victoria.
Access to local mental health services for community members in the 
agriculture and non-agriculture sectors will be vital as drought conditions 
become more prevalent. Not only are mental health services important 
during times of drought, but improved mental health increases a 
person’s ability to adapt. This can improve drought resilience by allowing 
people to effectively plan for future drought conditions as well as make 
informed decisions during a drought period.
03
Figure 6 Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modelling for a future drought
Flow through impacts  
from agriculture to the 
community
The increased likelihood and severity 
of drought in the future and the 
increased competition for water under 
these conditions will mean that the 
drought impacts on the community 
from agricultural consequences of 
drought are expected to be larger than 
have been historically observed.
Impacts on GDP
Economic modelling of potential future 
drought in Victoria found the Great 
South Coast to be significantly affected, 
with:
•	 GDP impact: 
– Direct agriculture impact -6.8%
– Regional impact -9.2%
•	 A fall in employment of more  
than 800 jobs.
This would flow through the region 
reducing consumption/spending by 2.7%. 
Employment and  
value add impacts
The effects on employment will not be 
distributed equally across the regions, with the 
more agriculturally dependent regions likely to 
experience larger decreases in employment. 
The economic modelling finds that the large 
impact of drought on value-added output 
of agricultural primary production has 
significant impacts on the value-added 
output of the livestock and dairy sectors.
9.2%
GDP
300
jobs
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
Frontier Economics
7
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   7
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   7
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

The physical and mental health of the community might be 
impacted as people in the community value green spaces, trees 
and the waterways. Greenspace and associated community 
sport are drivers of community spirit and liveability within local 
communities in the region. Water Corporations and Councils now 
have a strong understanding of the importance of greenspace for 
their communities. 
The diversity of the economy and landscapes across the Great 
South Coast will continue to mean that some areas will be 
impacted by future droughts more than others. While it is not 
possible to predict which area within the Great South Coast will 
be more affected than others, smaller communities that are highly 
dependent on agriculture and more geographically isolated will be 
most exposed. Declining populations in smaller towns may mean 
they are more vulnerable to change.
Overall the Great South Coast’s high exposure to agricultural 
industries creates the potential for significant community impacts 
from future drought.
Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness
The diverse Great South Coast already has many drought resilience 
measures in place or in development. 
Agricultural research, development and extension will remain 
important to support ongoing adaptation to build preparedness to 
future drought. Farmer’s capacity to adequately prepare for drought 
differs significantly within the Great South Coast region. Addressing 
gaps in on-farm business and decision-making skills, such as  the skills 
required to maintain more adaptive farming practices and the ability 
to maintain buffers of financial assets or feed stocks, will help farmers 
better prepare for future droughts.
A particular characteristic of the Great South Coast that facilitates 
regional drought resilience is the ‘internal buffer’ between cropping 
and livestock in the region. Due to the relatively consistent and higher 
rainfall (compared to regions further north such as the Wimmera),  
if there is a drought/dry-affected cereal crop there may still be 
sufficient biomass for it to be harvested and used on form, or sold 
for feed in the region. This provides a (reduced) return on the crop 
and also provides a valuable feed to livestock industries that will need 
to bring in supplementary feed in response to the dry conditions. 
Water logging is a persistent challenge in the region and can prevent 
winter crops. It may be that climatic changes and future dry conditions 
enable more feed to be grown in winter — with resultant changes to 
agricultural production systems in the region.
Tourism will continue to provide much needed income to the region 
during times of drought. Key tourist locations such as the Twelve 
Apostles, Port Fairy and the Grampians National Park are relatively 
rainfall independent. Other coastal towns should also benefit from this 
source of income.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. 
Towns throughout the Great South Coast have varying degrees 
of diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The major regional centre, Warrnambool, will provide somewhat 
of a buffer to future drought impacts as it has a diverse economy. 
Warrnambool itself will be buffered to some degree from 
reductions in agricultural output as it has alternative industries 
(such as health, education, retail). Townships near Warrnambool 
can also benefit from some of this buffering in the face of less 
agricultural activity because of drought. This is especially the case 
for townships within an approximately 50km radius of the centre, 
which offers the benefits of rural living while also allowing access 
to employment opportunities in the larger centre. 
•	
Medium to smaller sized communities such as Hamilton, 
Camperdown, Cobden and Koroit all have food processing 
facilities, however these are likely to be strongly linked to 
agricultural production. A recently announced milk processing 
factory closure in Camperdown will have major implications for 
the town due to its size and diversification and will also have a 
ripple effect through surrounding communities. Given this, food 
processing and manufacturing is less likely to provide a buffer 
during drought than in some other regions across Victoria. 
Koroit’s proximity to Warrnambool is likely to provide additional 
income opportunities for the community.
•	
Smaller, more agriculturally reliant communities that are not 
located near the coast, such as those found in the west and 
north-west of the region will be more severely affected by 
drought, as there are limited alternatives that can replace the 
people and economic activity provided by agriculture. 
However, even the large regional centers are highly exposed to the 
flow-through impacts of drought given the prevalence of agricultural 
support services, agriculture-related manufacturing as well as logistics. 
Drought impacts will flow through the entire farm supply chain.
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These 
kinds of health services have long wait times in the region, even 
outside of drought. Following the onset of a drought there is a general 
lag in the provision of additional health services. This means that 
individuals unable to access these services are having to make drought 
management decisions under significant stress.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the Great South Coast Region
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   8
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   8
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our  
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions and Visit Victoria.
CGE Modelling credits: Centre of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from the BOM, ARM online and Dairy Australia.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   9
FE_Regional_Great_South_Coast_R4.indd   9
25/11/2022   12:25 pm
25/11/2022   12:25 pm