1
October 2024
Hay and Carrathool  
Regional Drought  
Resilience Plan

2
3
Acknowledgement of Country
In the spirit of reconciliation the Hay and Carrathool Shire Councils 
acknowledge the Wiradjuri, Nari Nari, Yitha Yitha and Ngiyampaa 
Wangaaypuwan people, Traditional Custodians of the lands on which we 
live, meet and work. 
We recognise our communities are made up of many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples descended 
from additional mobs and clans who call the Hay Plains and Riverina region their home. We wish to pay our 
respects to Elders past and present, and recognise the continuation of cultural, spiritual and educational 
practices of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in our region and across Australia.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders peoples flourished sustainably on this continent for over 60,000 years, 
skilfully and sustainably managing the landscape and protecting Country for future generations. We recognise 
the enduring leadership and role Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have in contemporary land 
management and caring for country, and acknowledge the work of Elders in challenging all of us about what 
good development looks like. 
Wiradjuri 
Wiradjuri lands extend over a large part of central NSW.  Known as the land of three rivers, the territory covers 
hills in the east, river floodplains, grasslands and mallee country in the west. 
Nari Nari 
Nari Nari lands are situated across parts of the Riverina and lower Murrumbidgee regions. Nari Nari territory 
extends from the junction of the Murumbidgee and Lachlan rivers to where the Hay township now rests, south 
across the lower Bidgee area near Booroorban. Home to one of Australia’s most unique wetlands, Nari Nari 
country includes former pasture lands, wetlands, waterways and floodplains.
Yitha Yitha 
Yitha Yitha country is located in an area north east of Balranald and south of Ivanhoe, incorporating the Lachlan 
and Murrumbidgee rivers.  
Ngiyampaa Wangaaypuwan 
Ngiyampaa Wangaaypuwan country extends north from around the Lachlan River to the Darling Rivers, east to 
the country between Nyngan on Bogan River, Tigers Camp and Boggy Cowal creeks, and west to the Darling 
near Ivanhoe.
Important links (non exhaustive)
• Nari Nari Tribal Council, www.narinari.org
• Hay Aboriginal Community Corporation Working Party, www.facebook.com/haccwp
• Hay Aboriginal Medical Service, www.griffithams.org.au/hay
• Griffith Aboriginal Medical Service, www.griffithams.org.au
• Winangakirri Aboriginal Corporation, www.winangakirri.org.au
• Wangaaypuwan Local Aboriginal Land Council, www.alc.org.au/land_council/wangaaypuwan
• Hay Local Aboriginal Land Council, www.alc.org.au/land_council/hay
• Griffith Local Aboriginal Land Council, www.alc.org.au/land_council/griffith
• Riverina Murray Regional Alliance, www.rmra.com.au
• Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, Map of Indigenous Australia,  
www.aiatsis.gov.au/explore/map-indigenous-australia
Appreciations 
This Plan has been developed with and for communities across the Hay and Carrathool region. More than 
three hundred people from a diverse range of local community groups and businesses have collectively 
volunteered more than 650 hours to this process, an investment of time worth in excess of $30,000*. This level 
of community engagement reflects the leadership and strengths of this vibrant region and demonstrates the 
passion that local people have for its future. 
As the authors of this report, we want to begin by recognising this significant community investment. The 
commitment, time and resources volunteered by everyday people in the Hay and Carrathool region has shaped 
the vision that we share in this report. As we have heard, and we know you will now see, the members of this 
regional community have weathered hardship before and are ready to use what they have learned to shape 
more resilient, diverse and vibrant communities, ecosystems and economies for future generations. 
The engagement in the development of this Plan has been both broad and deep, only possible because of the 
leadership and efforts of the Hay Shire Council and Carrathool Shire Council. We want to especially thank Alison 
McLean, Cindy Smith, Nathan Willis, and Rebecca Bunyan, who have gone above and beyond to ensure this 
work serves their local communities for years to come.
The Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought Resilience Plan has been delivered by The Next Economy and the 
Australian Resilience Centre in partnership with the Hay Shire Council and Carrathool Shire Council.
* The value of this in-kind contribution has been calculated using the volunteer rate suggested by the 
Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal (as at August 2024).
Document Information
Report Authors: 	
Jacqui Bell, Paul Ryan, Kate Donnelly, Doug Ruuska and Jolee Wakefield
Final Publication: 	
31st October, 2024 by The Next Economy: www.nexteconomy.com.au  
in partnership with the Australian Resilience Centre
Front cover image: 	 Billy Buttons supplied by Hay Shire Council
Citation:	
The Next Economy. (2024). Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought Resilience Plan.  
The Next Economy, Brisbane. 31 October 2024. 
While every care has been taken to prepare this publication, Hay Shire Council, Carrathool 
Shire Council and project partners The Next Economy and the Australian Resilience 
Centre accept no responsibility for decisions or actions taken as a result of any data, 
information, statement or advice, expressed or implied, contained within. To the best of 
our knowledge the data and content is reflective of the conversations and contributions 
provided by stakeholders, and current at the time.   
Any and all actions within the Plan for further consideration and implementation are 
subject to securing external funding.
The Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought Resilience Plan has been developed as part 
of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program. The Regional Drought Resilience 
under the Future Drought Fund.

4
5
Table of Contents
Executive Summary	
6
Section 1: Introduction	
8
The Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought Resilience Plan	
8
About the Plan	
8
Who the Plan was developed with	
10
The Future Drought Fund	
13
Section 2: An integrated approach to enhancing (drought) resilience	
15
A new understanding of drought	
15
A resilience-based approach	
17
Section 3:  Resilience insights across our region	
19
Hay and Carrathool - a region on the edge	
20
Remoteness – a coin with two sides	
22
The other side of the remoteness coin	
22
Pressures acting on our regional system	
26
A changing rural economy	
27
Strengthening community resilience and the capacity to thrive	
27
Section 4: Directions for regional resilience	
29
The Plan for everyone	
29
Interpreting the Plan	
29
What does resilience across the Hay and Carrathool region look like in 2035?	
30
Section 5: Priority Actions and Strategies to enhance regional resilience	
32
Diversity of actions creates strength in systems	
32
Regional Strategies for Resilience	
32
Section 6: Implementation of the Plan	
48
Building on existing work and other plans for the region	
48
Working together to take action	
48
Learning our way forward	
50
Glossary	 	
53
References	
55
Appendix A: Understanding the Priority Actions	
58
Appendix B: Priority Actions - Potential implementation phases and associated costs	
66
Appendix C: Regional drought risk and vulnerability	
73
Appendix D: Regional strategies and plans	
80
Sheep Yards (Claire Stribbles Photography, Hay Shire Council)
4

6
7
Executive Summary
Communities across the Hay and  
Carrathool region have a long, proud history 
in agriculture - and the opportunities our 
industries and natural environment affords us.
Home to more than 5,700 people, the communities 
are situated in the Riverina region, NSW’s agriculture 
and primary production heartland generating $1.12 
billion annually and employing over 1000 people. 
The area’s unique biodiversity and landscapes, from 
the Hay Plains to the Conapaira Ranges, further 
enhance its liveability and tourism appeal.
From rising living costs to a changing climate 
to the decarbonisation of global supply chains, 
our region is navigating growing challenges and 
disruptions. Many of these will have long-term 
impacts on our region, including the compounding 
impacts of more frequent and severe extreme 
weather events like floods, heatwaves and 
prolonged droughts we are already facing. 
Additionally, new policies and industries such as 
Australia’s Agriculture and Land Sector Plan and 
the South-West Renewable Energy Zone, will play 
a role in shaping the future of our region.  Strategic 
planning and coordination is essential to navigate 
these challenges, identify opportunities, build 
resilience, and take effective action.
We have a significant opportunity to keep our 
communities and economies strong, now and 
into the future. With key stakeholders, councils in 
Hay and Carrathool have been exploring how to 
diversify our region’s economies, regenerate local 
ecosystems and strengthen our capacity to adapt 
to change. For example, with fertile soils, diverse 
ecosystems and a prime location, our region is 
well-positioned to explore existing and emerging 
opportunities in agriculture, energy, transport, 
sustainable industries and decarbonisation. 
Diversifying our economies will ensure our 
communities are more adaptable, able to withstand 
industry shocks and attract new investment. 
The Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan (‘The Plan’) is our region’s 
collective vision for the future and a strategic 
framework to guide efforts over the next decade. 
Every day, our councils, industries, businesses, and 
communities work on initiatives shaping our region’s 
future and creating a positive legacy for generations 
to come. The Plan, developed with more than 300 
stakeholders throughout 2024, reflects the lived 
experiences and wisdom of those who live and work 
in our region. The Plan is, and will remain, adaptive 
and community driven - implemented through strong 
partnerships across sectors and stakeholders.
The Plan outlines 26 Priority Actions for change 
to support climate adaptation and regional 
resilience for our complex regional system. The 
actions sit under five key Regional Strategies for 
Resilience identified as priority impact areas over 
the next decade. Designed for implementation from 
local village to regional scales, the actions were 
developed with potential stakeholder leads in mind.  
To achieve the vision and aspirations set out in the 
Plan, we require collective effort and collaboration 
across local, regional, state, and national levels. We 
thank the state and federal governments, regional 
partners and communities for their support and 
leadership to date. The Plan has already mobilised 
many stakeholders into action - demonstrating 
significant value. The commitment of Hay and 
Carrathool residents has been, and remains, key 
in advancing this work to  build more resilient, 
diverse, and vibrant communities, ecosystems and 
economies for future generations.
7
Regional Strategies for Resilience 
• Inclusive and Empowered Communities
• Future Ready Businesses
• Reimagined Care Economy
• Placemaking with Purpose
• Coordinated Action for Climate Resilient 
Economic Development
           In 2035, our communities,  
including our local governments, 
institutions, businesses,  industries and 
households, will have greater capacity 
to adapt to climate, environmental, 
social, and economic challenges and 
opportunites while remaining healthy  
and vibrant, with safe places to live,  
work, and raise future generations.
Cockatoo taking flight  (The Next Economy) 
7

8
9
Section 1: Introduction 
Figure 1. The development journey of the Hay and Carrathool Regional Plan.
The Hay and Carrathool Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan 
Communities across the Hay and Carrathool region 
have a long, proud history in agriculture – and the 
economic and lifestyle opportunities that primary 
production and the natural environment affords them.
Right now, on top of rising cost of living pressures, 
the region is facing a range of growing challenges 
to local industries, economies and community 
wellbeing. The region is already facing the 
compounding impacts of more frequent and 
severe weather events, including floods and 
prolonged droughts. It is yet to experience what 
the decarbonisation of global supply chains means 
for the regional economy and primary production 
industries. Shifting dynamics like these have long 
term implications for the future of the Hay and 
Carrathool region and must be addressed to keep 
the region, and local economy, strong.
Strategic planning and coordination is needed 
at local, regional and federal levels to holistically 
understand the nature of the challenges the region 
faces, identify opportunities to build resilience and 
take effective and sustained action.
It is in this context the Hay Shire Council and 
Carrathool Shire Council joined forces in 2024 to 
proactively: 
• understand and explore how changes occurring 
across the region may impact local communities, 
economies and ecosystems;
• identify opportunities to strengthen the capacity of 
residents, communities, institutions, businesses and 
systems to be better prepared for disruptions and 
changes in the future;  
• help councils, communities and partners 
implement strategic actions and take advantage of 
opportunities as they arise.
The culmination of these efforts has resulted in the 
development of the Hay and Carrathool Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan).
About the Plan 
  The Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan outlines key goals,  
strategies, and actions for councils, 
businesses, industries, and communities 
to build economic, social, cultural, and 
environmental resilience at regional and 
local/place-based levels.
The Plan was developed in collaboration with more 
than 300 community, industry and government 
members through an iterative and participatory 
place-based process that centred the lived 
experience and wisdom of people who live and work 
in the region.  
The stakeholder engagement approach was shaped 
by the concepts and methodologies of resilience 
planning, systems thinking, community development 
practice and participatory action research. The 
timing, duration, format, and location of engagement 
activities were guided by core engagement 
principles to ensure the process ‘met people 
where they are at’ encouraged broad and deep 
engagement and provided value to participants. 
While development was convened by Councils, 
the Plan is and will continue to be an adaptive and 
community-driven plan implemented and stewarded 
through partnerships between councils,communities, 
industry and other relevant stakeholders over the 
next decade.
Phase 3
Now what? 
Orientating ourselves 
towards action
How do we organise 
resources, activities, people 
and organisations to 
strategically take action over 
the next 10 years?
Phase 2
So what?
Exploring ideas, 
opportunities and 
pathways
How might we navigate 
potential changes and 
disruptions, as well as be 
proactive and better prepared 
for the future we want? 
Phase 1
Resilience of what, 
to what?
Shining a light on our 
people and place
Understanding what makes our 
communities work, what we 
want our regions to be in the 
future, and exploring what we 
need to think about in order to 
achieve that.
April
2024
May
June
July
August
September
Community workshops: 
Hay, Merriwagga, 
Rankins Springs, Hillston
Community 
interviews and 
conversations
Regional forums & workshops
Regional body and 
state government 
meetings
Community 
survey
Desktop 
research
Resilience assessment
Community interviews 
and conversations
Draft RDRP
CSIRO review
Community 
and regional 
stakeholder review
Council review
Finalise RDRP
Regional transition 
planning activities
Activation of foundational 
RDRP actions
How was the plan developed

10
11
More than 300 participants
More than 650 hours of work by the Community
More than $30,000 in-kind contribution in community time
Project Control Group
A Project Control Group provided iterative governance support to ensure the Plan addressed and managed the requirements and 
aspirations of the funding partner, council partners, regional stakeholders and broader community. 
The Project Control Group consisted of representatives from Hay and Carrathool shire councils, The Department of  
Primary Industries and Regional Development and The Next Economy.
In-person and online 
workshops
17 workshops
180 participants
Locations: Hay, Rankins 
Springs, Hillston and  
online
Online survey
145 participants
Community 
Conversations
40 participants
Regional stakeholder 
meetings
30 participants
• Primary producers 
• Landholders
• First Nations people and organisations 
including:
• Wangaaypuwan Local Aboriginal Land 
Council
• Nari Nari Tribal Council
• Hay Aboriginal Corporation Community 
Working Party
• Hay Aboriginal Medical Centre
• Agronomists
• Aged care service providers
• Children’s services providers
• Community health providers
• Community emergency services groups
• Self-Employed residents
• Small business owners
• Childcare workers
• Rural financial counselling services 
• Recreational and sporting clubs and 
societies
• Primary and Secondary schools
• Youth organisations 
• News outlets and media organisations
• Agricultural products and rural service 
providers
• Motelier
• Retail workers
• Councillors and Council Staff
Hay and Carrathool Shire residents including:
• Western Local Land Services
• Riverina Local Land Services
• NSW Farmers
• Australian Rural Leadership 
Foundation
• Southern NSW Drought 
Innovation Hub
• Department of Education
• Regional Development 
Australia (Riverina)
• NSW Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and  
Forestry
• EnergyCo
• National Parks and Wildlife
• Riverina and Murray Joint 
Organisation
• NSW Office of Environment 
and Heritage
• NSW Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional 
Development
• Destination Riverina Murray
• NBN Co
• TAFE NSW
Community members and volunteers from organisations such as the Lions Club, Country 
Women’s Association, Agricultural Show Societies, Creative/arts organisations, Rainbows on 
the Plains, Hay Inc Rural Education Program, Hay Services Club, Isolated Children’s Parents’ 
Association, Hay Plains Landcare Group and The Room, Goolgowi.
Who the plan was developed with 
Participants from across a range of different sectors, geographies, demographics, interests, backgrounds 
and experiences engaged in development of the Plan. All had different but equally important roles to play in 
informing the direction, strategies and actions.  Many community members participated in multiple engagement 
activities, provided feedback on the synthesis insights, and were able to go deeper and further into 
opportunities and ways forward by building on the work completed in previous engagement activities. 
The Plan focuses on the region and Local 
Government Areas as socio-ecological systems.  
That is, they are complex systems of human, 
economic, institutional, infrastructure and natural 
resource elements that interact, co-evolve and 
adapt over time to generate a range of benefits and 
outputs at multiple scales. Understanding socio-
ecological systems, how they function and how 
they may change in response to disturbances such 
as drought and other natural disasters, or other 
disruptions such as commodity price fluctuations, 
policy decisions, technological and infrastructure 
changes or demographic changes requires a holistic 
approach. In these complex adaptive systems, 
no disruption operates in isolation from the other 
connected elements of the systems.
Hay and Carrathool shire councils have drawn from 
the world’s best practice social-ecological resilience 
assessment approaches to understanding these 
complex interactions (Enfors-Kautsky et al., 2021). 
The process helps to identify where and how our 
communities can best focus resources to respond 
to external threats such as drought while maximising 
opportunities to strengthen social, economic and 
ecological resilience to other future disruptions and 
opportunities.
We are creating the conditions for communities 
across the Hay and Carrathool region to thrive 
in the face of a future with known and unknown 
challenges. We do this by ‘mapping’ our social-
ecological systems and their dynamics, identifying 
pathways for managing those dynamics towards 
community defined aspirations, and strategically 
building capacity at multiple scales – from the 
individual property or business to the  
community scale.
A word about the word  ‘community’
The word ‘community’ is a catch-all for many different things and contexts. Broadly it means a group of 
people who share common characteristics or interests. A community is most commonly thought of as 
people living within close proximity to one another, such as those living within a village, locality, town 
or suburb within a city.  A community can also be defined by other characteristics other than a place of 
residence. Most people live in and will identify with multiple communities based on individual attributes 
including place, sport, interests, beliefs, employment and heritage.  Communities are organised in 
different ways and can form (and be formed by) formal institutions such as schools, community centres 
and libraries as well as informal institutions such as garden clubs, book clubs and recreational groups. 
The assortment of communities that exist in a place or region are determined by people’s needs and 
desires for a sense of trust, belonging, safety and caring for each other. (Tamarack Institute, 2022)
For the purposes of the Plan - the word ‘community’ and ‘communities’ is used in its broadest sense to 
encompass all of the communities of place, interest, belief, culture, identity etc that are located within the 
Hay and Carrathool region. Where relevant, a community type or group will be specifically referenced.

12
13
The Future Drought Fund  
The Plan was developed as part of the Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) program, one 
Future Drought Fund (FDF). The New South Wales 
RDRP program (NSW RDRP) is jointly funded by 
the FDF and NSW Government, supporting local 
governments to provide proactive, pragmatic 
and coordinated support for communities as they 
prepare for and respond to drought. 
The NSW RDRP model involves neighbouring 
councils working together to develop regional 
drought resilience plans.  Consistent with the 
strategic priorities and objectives of the FDF, the 
objectives of the RDRP process are to:
• grow the self-reliance and performance of the 
agricultural sector,
• improve the natural capital of agricultural 
landscapes for better environmental outcomes, and
• strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, 
regional and remote communities.
The vision of the Future Drought Fund (FDF) is 
“an innovative and profitable agriculture sector, a 
sustainable natural environment, and adaptable 
rural, regional, and remote communities– all with 
increased resilience to the impacts of drought and 
The FDF seeks to enhance the public good by 
building drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural 
sector, the agricultural landscape and communities.  
The FDF is intended to deliver against three 
interconnected strategic priorities:
• economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector,
• environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscapes, and
• social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities.
Resilience of economic, environmental and social 
systems in rural and regional Australia is at the heart 
of the FDF’s vision and strategic priorities, which are 
targeted through four investment themes shown in 
Figure 3.
Hay Shire Council
Population (no.)
2882
Population change
(2006-2021)
-14.8%
Population density
(person /km2)
0.3
Median age
48
Indigenous 
population (%)
8.3%
Goolgowi
Population (no.)
334
Population change
(2006-2021)
16.4%
Rankins Springs
Population (no.)
208
Population change
(2006-2021)
-9.6%
Carrathool
Population (no.)
200
Population change
(2006-2021)
-38.5%
Hillston
Population (no.)
1149
Population change
(2006-2021)
9.0%
Carrathool Shire
Council
Population (no.)
2866
Population change
(2006-2021)
1.7%
Population density
(person /km2)
0.2
Median age
37
Indigenous 
population (%)
8.8%
Hay
Population (no.)
2300
Population change
(2006-2021)
-12.7%
Maude
Population (no.)
110
Scale: 20km
WILLANBRA
NATIONAL PARK
GAYINI – NIMME CAIRA 
(WETLANDS)
KALYARR
NATIONAL PARK
COCOPARRA
NATIONAL PARK
LACHLAN VALLEY
NATIONAL PARK
(LACHLAN)
GALARI
RIVER
MURRUMBIDGEE
RIVER
MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER
LAKE
BREWSTER
BARREN
BOX
SWAMP
Hillston
Rankins
Springs
Carrathool
Maude
Booligal
Hay
Goolgowi
Merriwagga
MID WESTERN HIGHWAY
Lachlan
Valley Way
Mossgiel Road
Maude Road
Road
Oxley
Maude
Road
Roto
d
a
o
R
The Springs Road
KIDMAN WAY
KIDMAN WAY
KIDMAN
WAY
COB
HIGHWAY
COB HIGHWAY
STURT HIGHWAY
STURT
HIGHWAY
Booligal
Population (no.)
98
Figure 2. A snapshot of the region. Inset image: the location of Hay and Carrathool shire councils within NSW.
Figure 3. Future Drought Fund Investment Themes
Better climate 
information
Enabling farmers, 
businesses, and 
communities to better 
understand the climate 
risks they face and their 
resilience to those risks
Future  
Drought  
Fund
Better planning
Helping farmers and  
regions to proactively 
plan for drought 
Better practices
Developing and 
adopting farming and 
land management 
practices and 
technologies that 
improve resilience to 
droughts
Better prepared 
communities
Building and supporting 
the community leaders, 
networks and organisations 
that underpin community 
resilience
SYDNEY
CANBERRA
Riverina
Carrathool LGA
Hay LGA

14
15
Section 2: An integrated approach to enhancing 
(drought) resilience  
A new understanding of drought  
Drought is a natural hazard, characterised by a 
sustained period of below average rainfall that 
directly leads to reduced soil moisture, plant growth 
and reduced inflows to waterways and storages.  
Rural development and agricultural practices across 
the region have modified natural ecosystems, 
reducing their resilience and capacity to support 
or shield agricultural activities from periods of low 
rainfall or drought. Dust, bare ground, dry pastures, 
diminished livestock health and failing crops are 
visible impacts of drought on the rural landscape.  
These impacts have significant consequences for 
agricultural communities whose livelihoods are often 
intrinsically linked with regular and reliable rainfall, 
and can negatively affect the social and economic 
resilience of a region.  The viability and vibrancy 
of businesses and communities, the long-term 
sustainability of production systems and ecosystems 
and the psychological health and wellbeing of 
people, families and communities can all come 
under severe stress during periods of drought. 
Long-term drying and warming trends are projected 
for the Hay and Carrathool region, particularly in 
the cool season - the main growing season (BoM & 
CSIRO, 2022). As the likelihood of more frequent 
and intense droughts increases (along with other 
extreme weather events and disruptions), so 
too does the need to reduce social, economic 
and environmental vulnerabilities to a future of 
reduced rainfall and limited access to valuable 
water resources. By planning for greater drought 
resilience across all sectors of regional and remote 
communities — not just focusing on primary 
producers — we can achieve the most substantial 
benefits and ensure rural people, businesses, 
industries, communities and towns can thrive in the 
long term. 
This involves developing sustainable and diverse 
regional economies, reducing community 
vulnerability to economic shifts, building community 
capacity to adapt and recover quickly as well as 
enhancing the natural environment. 
For further information on the history, trends and 
impact of drought in the region, refer to Appendix C - 
Regional drought risk and vulnerability. 
In addition to the RDRP, a wide range of programs, 
grants and initiatives are supported by the FDF. For 
example, there are grants to strengthen regional 
community networks and capabilities, as well 
as mentoring and networks to support learning, 
leadership capacity, and information exchanges 
(DAFF, 2024a). Eight Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hubs have been established and 
resourced to expand their scope (DAFF, 2024b), 
and there is funding to support the development of 
this and other community-owned Regional Drought 
Resilience Plans (DAFF, 2024c).
Refer to Section 6 - Strategic Alignment for further 
information about how the Plan builds on and aligns 
with the FDF’s strategic priorities. 
Hay workshop, April 2024 (The Next Economy)
Hillston workshop, June 2024 (The Next Economy)

16
17
           The initial focus of the Plan development process was on a problem: the impacts 
of drought on agriculture and primary producers. Now we know that building resilience in 
and around our agricultural sector and tackling the root causes of stress and adversity is 
the key to the health and vitality of our entire regional ecosystem.
Local government staff member
Increased
mortgage and 
business stress
Increased
community
tension
Increased risk
of bushﬁres
Death of plant
communities and
native animals
Poor water
quality
Poor soil
quality
Reduction in
biodiversity
Less and poorer
quality food
Depression and
poor mental health
Reduced
school attendance
Increased
incidences of
domestic violence
Livestock
losses
Distorted
work patterns
Higher
unemployment
E
nv
ir
on
me
nta
l e
ect
s
Broadening and
Reduced 
income
S
o
c
i
al
 e
ec
ts
E
c
o
n
o
m
i
c
e
ec
ts
Meteorological
drought
(less rainfall than usual)
Hydrological
drought
(water sources dry up)
Agricultural
drought
(fodder and crop production 
reduced or destroyed)
Duration of drought
Figure 4. As a drought becomes prolonged, the social, economic and environmental effects become increasingly severe.
Figure 5. Regional resilience requires social, economic and environmental 
systems to be individually and collectively resilient, recognising the 
inherent interconnectedness of these systems. 
A resilience-based approach  
The Plan focuses on building resilience to events 
that impact communities across the Hay and 
Carrathool region. Resilience is not a new concept 
for our communities. Our people, communities and 
ecosystems have always been resilient, finding ways 
to cope and recover from many challenges. 
Previous drought planning and recovery efforts 
however have focused largely on building economic 
resilience on farms and in the broader agricultural 
sector. While this is still a key focus, we know that 
drought is just one of the challenges our communities’ 
face today. A resilience-based approach focuses on 
strengthening our capacity to cope with any and all 
future challenges in a holistic manner.
Taking a more holistic view of resilience  
and disruptions help people understand, prepare 
for, cope with and recover from future challenges as 
well as set communities up to create and take new 
opportunities as they arise. 
In taking a resilience-based approach, the Plan 
has a strong ‘systems’ framing: it focuses on how 
the social, economic and ecological parts of our 
region are connected, interact and depend on 
each other. Understanding these connections and 
dependencies means drought and other disruptions, 
as well as responses to them, can be seen and 
designed in an holistic way. 
Building strategies around a ‘systems resilience’ 
framework helps to address underlying causes of 
challenges across our region.  It can also support 
the creation of actions and opportunities that have 
the greatest multiple benefits to help the community 
prosper in ways that are sustainable and resilient in 
the face of any type of change. 
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
E
c
o
n
o
m
y
E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
Regional
Resilience
Multi-level resilience
Resilience operates at multiple levels 
including: individuals and families, property, 
village/place, local government/region, state 
and national. The resilience at any one of 
these levels is influenced by the resilience 
of the levels above and below, highlighting 
the importance of taking a comprehensive 
‘multi-level systems’ approach to resilience 
planning. Priority Actions identified through 
the Plan’s development process have 
highlighted the importance of strengthening 
resilience at multiple levels.

18
19
  Resilience is the capacity to plan for, respond 
to and recover from disruption in positive 
ways. It can apply to a person, a business, 
an organisation, to infrastructure, to an 
ecosystem, or any other type of structure.
Resilience is built and maintained through a range of 
factors or attributes. These attributes contribute to 
the capacity of a person, business or ecosystem to 
prepare for, cope with, recover and learn from major 
change and disturbances. These include:
An important notion here is that being resilient is 
not about being tough and getting on with it. Our 
communities have coped with and recovered from 
many disruptions and set-backs in the past, and 
they will do so in the future. There are times when 
we have to Persist, but this persistence comes at 
a financial, psychological and social cost. Being 
resilient also means knowing when to be flexible 
and Adapt to changing circumstances, and, in the 
face of inevitable severe impacts to Transform and 
fundamentally change how we do things.   
The Plan recognises that to be resilient, our people, 
businesses, industries, communities, infrastructure, 
services, and ecosystems need the capacity to 
persist, adapt and when necessary, transform to 
meet the challenges our region faces and take the 
opportunities presented to us.
Figure 6. Common resilience attributes. (Source: Adapted from Biggs et al, 
2012). Refer also Appendix A - Understanding the Priority Actions 
Section 3:  Resilience insights across our region 
Section Three details factors that influence resilience across the Hay and Carrathool region. It provides a 
launching point to understand and explore how to address different challenges as well as to enhance the 
capacity of communities to thrive and innovate in the face of disruption, uncertainty and change.  
A narrative approach to understanding resilience across the Hay and 
Carrathool region
A narrative approach has been used to profile and tell the story of the Hay and Carrathool region. 
Evidence-based narratives that use inclusive language, accessible frames and stories to connect events 
and effects help make sense of complex problems. When combined with tools and processes focused on 
driving action, narratives can be a powerful way to cut through sector-specific jargon, break down difficult 
theoretical concepts and inspire people to see new ways of thinking and doing. 
This approach to profiling a region integrates a set of key concepts to provide an alternative way of 
thinking about and practising regional development.  It involves constructing a conceptual model of 
a socio-ecological system that represents a place of interest, along with its associated resources, 
stakeholders, institutions, dynamics and issues in order to provide insight into factors that build or erode 
a system’s resilience (Resilience Alliance, 2010). It should be revisited regularly as regional dynamics 
change and as the understanding of resilience and its influencing factors grow.
Strengthen 
diversity
Build and 
manage 
connection
Foster  
flexibility and 
adaptiveness
Learning and 
reflection
Inclusive and 
equitable
Build 
responsiveness 
and renewal 
capacity
Merriwagga, April 2024 (The Next Economy)

20
21
Hay and Carrathool - a region on the edge 
The Hay and Carrathool shires span a number of transition zones. These zones create the landscape, ecology, 
production systems and social diversity that define the region, and fall across a ‘have more’ to ‘have less’ 
spectrum.  Remoteness, population, rainfall, water flows and infrastructure all change as you move across the 
region from the south east to the north west. Living in these transitional zones creates particular challenges for 
maintaining and improving aspects of human health, wellbeing and prosperity.
Adapting to change 
The region’s climate has always been variable. 
Ecosystem modification and climate change have 
already begun to amplify the variability in rainfall. 
Average temperatures are increasing: over the past 
30 years, the region now experiences more hot days 
and changing winter rainfall patterns. Climate change 
over the next decade will see these trends continue 
with extreme weather events such as heatwaves, 
droughts and flooding intensifying (AdaptNSW, 
2024). For more information on our changing 
regional climate, see Appendix C - Regional drought 
risk and vulnerability. 
Drought is now widely seen as part of doing 
business for primary producers. Across the board, 
there have been adaptations and shifts in thinking 
and practices in response to the major drought in 
2017-19 and earlier during the millennium drought 
in 2000. Dryland croppers and graziers continue to 
adopt new practices and technologies to improve 
efficiency, protect the natural resource base 
and utilise limited rainfall and soil moisture. The 
consequences of drought in the upper catchments 
well outside the Hay and Carrathool region, and the 
resulting low water allocations, volatile water markets 
and water policy reform, have specific impacts on 
irrigation businesses. 
  During a workshop with local agronomists, 
one participant noted that while drought 
is just part of doing business, people do 
not have their heads around how quickly 
the climate will change and the intensity of 
future droughts. Another noted that, while 
people are more prepared, many may still 
hold some post-traumatic stress relating to 
drought as demonstrated by local responses 
to the El Niño forecasts last year.
Primary producers understand that the health of 
the region’s agricultural sector is closely linked to 
the health of the region’s waterways and natural 
ecosystems, driving a greater need to ‘do more 
with less’ to effectively manage our valuable water 
resources for production, social uses and the 
environment.
Many local residents, primary producers and town 
residents alike, have highlighted the pervasive 
economic, social, emotional and psychological 
impacts of drought on the community. Building 
individual and community psychological capacity to 
stay mentally healthy, socially connected, and make 
well-considered decisions has emerged as a key 
focus for drought resilience alongside strategies to 
stay financially viable. For First Nations communities, 
on-going priorities include improving connection to 
Country and access to culturally important areas, 
increasing opportunities for economic development 
and local employment, and ensuring culturally 
appropriate social support services are available.
Subtropical
Desert
Grassland
Temperate
Carrathool LGA
Hay LGA
BRISBANE
SYDNEY
CANBERRA
Dubbo
Bourke
Birdsville
Maree
Mildura
Echuca
Yarrawonga
Horsham
MELBOURNE
ADELAIDE
Charleville
Harbour
Port
Augusta
Subtropical
Desert
Grassland
Temperate
Carrathool LGA
Hay LGA
Hillston
Rankins
Springs
Carrathool
Booligal
Maude
Hay
Goolgowi
Outer regional 
Remote 
Very remote 
Carrathool LGA
Hay LGA
Figure 7. The Hay and Carrathool shires are in a transition zone 
between temperate climates to the south-east and desert climate to 
the north-west. Seasonal, annual and global climatic cycles means the 
region can be very wet or very dry. 
Figure 8. Hay and Carrathool shires are located predominantly in 
what is considered remote Australia.
Murrumbidgee river in Hay, April 2024 (The Next Economy)

22
23
Remoteness – a coin with two sides 
Remoteness is recognised by many people as 
both a strength and weakness for the region. On 
one side of the ‘coin’, the relative remoteness and 
isolation reinforce tight-knit local communities. 
Community spirit, family connections and supportive 
communities were identified as some of the most 
treasured aspects of the region. The richness of 
sporting and social clubs are visible expressions 
of community connection, and they are a well-
recognised feature of the region. The relative 
isolation of Hay and Carrathool communities has 
contributed to building strong social networks.
Remoteness brings other advantages. The sense 
of space and safety, slower pace of life and access 
to natural places are seen as benefits of remote 
living. The recent increase in vandalism and crime 
in Hay has undermined this sense of place for some 
residents.
The other side of the  
remoteness coin
For all the benefits and strengths residents and 
primary producers have identified, remoteness and 
a low population spread across such a large region 
create a range of challenges. They include:
Provision and maintenance of roads and physical 
infrastructure	
Considered the lifeline for town and rural households 
and farm businesses alike, road maintenance will 
continue to be a challenge across large geographic 
areas with a low population. More extreme climate 
events may provide additional costs to maintaining 
road access across the region. Similarly, limited 
mobile phone access impacts businesses and 
production, reduces social connection and impacts 
health and safety.
Hillston
Rankins
Springs
Carrathool
Maude
Booligal
Hay
Goolgowi
Merriwagga
grazing native pastures
grazing modiﬁed pastures
cropping
horticulture
MID WESTERN HIGHWAY
Lachlan
Valley Way
Mossgiel Road
Maude Road
Road
Oxley
Maude
Road
Roto
d
a
o
R
The Springs Road
KIDMAN WAY
COB
HIGHWAY
COB HIGHWAY
STURT HIGHWAY
STURT
HIGHWAY
WAY
KIDMAN
KIDMAN WAY
Figure 9. Soil quality, topography and water availability affect agriculture land-uses and property sizes across the region.
  During the 2022 floods, approximately 70% 
of the Hay Shire Council road network was 
underwater for over six weeks, with some 
areas remaining inaccessible for even longer. 
Community members identified the flooding 
caused significant damage to roads across 
the region, which impacted agricultural 
production and hindered people’s ability to 
travel for work and access essential services. 
Rainfall and access to water
The region has relatively low rainfall (BoM, 2020a), 
which has been exacerbated by a decrease in 
average winter rainfall over the past 30 years (BoM & 
CSIRO, 2022; Steffen, 2015). This means properties 
need to be larger to be economically viable, 
resulting in a lower population density and total 
regional population. While irrigation offsets the low 
rainfall, constraints on water availability, topography 
and infrastructure limit the total area of irrigation 
and drought affects catchment yields as well. These 
broad geographical and contextual factors are 
unlikely to improve over the next 15 years, with a 
high chance these factors will worsen as weather 
patterns and competition for water increases
Rankins Springs workshop, June 2024 (The Next Economy)

24
25
Access to housing 
Community members, businesses and industry 
emphasised the limited access to housing across 
the region as a critical issue. In small, remote 
communities often there is no option or means to 
travel to and from the closest available housing. 
Recent increases in house prices and rents may 
further reduce access to housing for some people 
(Schade, 2024). Expected increases in demand 
for housing – for example, with construction in the 
South West Renewable Energy Zone – will  create 
additional housing stress with flow on effects for low 
socio-economic groups and attracting and retaining 
staff for local businesses.
  During the community workshops, and  
in responses to an online survey, access  
to housing was continuously raised as 
an issue. In Hay, for example, several 
young adults noted the limited options for 
independent living and having their own 
space - highlighting how that influenced  
their interest in staying in the region to 
advance studies or enter the local workforce.
Land use planning 
Community members living in some of the region’s 
smaller villages emphasised major concerns with 
land regulations and identified the need for good 
land use and ‘place making’ planning to improve 
housing, development and attracting visitors. Basic 
services like water, energy and telecommunications 
were highlighted as issues that undermine quality of 
life and the potential for population growth.
Figure 10. Residents seek and access services and community connections differently across the Hay and Carrathool region.
Hillston
Rankins
Springs
Carrathool
Maude
Booligal
Hay
Carrathool Shire Council
Goolgowi
Merriwagga
Hay Shire Council
  When asked about the state of the local 
economy in relation to housing costs and 
availability, 68% of survey respondents rated 
this as poor or extremely poor. For example, 
in Rankins Springs issues within land use 
planning and overlays are seen to limit the 
ability of an already small community to  
grow and evolve.
Access to services
Residents are acutely aware of poor access to GP 
and specialist health services, aged care, childcare, 
financial services and public transport. Maintaining 
and improving health, aged and childcare services 
are urgent priorities for the region. 
Many workshop participants noted that the declining 
availability of services across the region reflected the 
reality that small remote and rural populations have 
less influence over government decision-making 
than larger urban centres, and the unlikelihood of 
major permanent population increases in rural areas 
even if populations increase temporarily for various 
reasons.
Hillston workshop, June 2024 (The Next Economy)

26
27
Pressures acting on our regional system
A range of changes are taking place in the region’s communities, local economies, industries and landscapes. 
Some of these changes, such as shifts in the economic profile,  labour force and demographic changes are part 
of the slower, longer term transition occurring right across regional Australia. 
Alongside these slower ‘background’ changes, a number of faster changes have created more sudden visible 
challenges including housing shortages, cost of living pressures, post-Covid migration and the resulting shift to 
working online, and the shortage of childcare places across the region. 
Individually each of these changes creates challenges and opportunities for communities. From a resilience 
perspective, it is the interactions between fast and slow changes that requires particular attention. Slow 
dynamics push parts of the regional systems to the edge of tipping points, faster changes push the system past 
those tipping points.
Tracking fast and slow changes, particularly their interaction are a focus of the adaptive monitoring, learning and 
responding framework detailed in Section 6.
A changing rural economy
The region’s local economies continue to adapt and 
diversify. Agriculture and primary production will 
always be the mainstay of the regional economy, 
but tourism, home-based businesses, renewable 
energy, environmental markets and other emerging 
industries are creating new sources of wealth and 
income for the region that are not tied to seasonal 
conditions. These opportunities may never replace 
agriculture as the engine of the regional economy, 
but do provide potential ways to; diversify and 
broaden the regional economic base, create 
different forms of employment, drive innovative 
approaches to address local issues (such as housing, 
population and access to services) and in some 
cases support the region to be less dependent on 
seasonal conditions. 
The region’s agriculture sector continues to adapt 
to climate and market changes, becoming more 
efficient to meet new standards of productivity and 
viability. In the future, many of these adaptation and 
efficiency measures, and the realities of current 
labour shortages, may lead to further changes. 
These include property aggregation, increased 
mechanisation and automation, a decline in on-farm 
employment, and a growing demand for new skills 
and expertise both on-farm and off-farm to service 
the sector. 
Maximising the economic and social opportunities 
from the range of ‘green shoot’ opportunities that 
emerge will be important. How those benefits are 
maximised while off-setting some of the longer-term 
trends and changes will fall heavily on the ability of 
the region’s communities to develop shared visions 
and pathways to work together towards those 
opportunities.
Strengthening community 
resilience and the capacity to thrive 
Basic ingredients required for rural communities to 
thrive include (Productivity Commission, 2017; Cahill, 
• a stable or growing demographically balanced 
population  
• varied employment opportunities
• social networks and human skills
• access to resources, knowledge and expertise 
• adequate and accessible housing
• support services to meet the needs of all different 
ages and sectors of the community
• adequate and evolving technology and 
infrastructure
• well managed natural resource base
• access to quality local education
• social cohesion, and cultural diversity and inclusion
• pportunities sport and recreational opportunities, 
cultural, artistic and spiritual expressions and 
nature.
All of these ingredients must be underpinned by 
functional governance, effective institutions and 
adaptive leadership to plan for the future, create 
and realise opportunities and navigate uncertain 
times and stresses. These combine to create a local 
identity and sense of place where people live and 
communities form and  thrive.  
It is easy to see how the above ingredients are 
interrelated and often interdependent. These 
‘systemic’ relationships can create positive 
feedbacks where a positive action leads to other 
increases that in turn creates more positive actions.
Resilience to what?
Net Zero 
transition
Policy and 
regulation 
changes 
Technological 
development
Market and 
consumer 
preferences
Social and 
cultural 
trends
Globalisation
Cost of living 
pressures
Climate 
change
Biodiversity 
loss
Political 
context
Context – Existing and 
ongoing stresses
External – Events, changes, 
forces and stresses
Remoteness
Decling rainfall 
/ Drought
Flooding
Physical and 
psychological 
health
Shift to 
low-emission 
economy
Narrow 
economic 
base
Low 
population 
density
Land use 
planning not 
ﬁt for purpose
Changing 
nature of 
work
Limited 
access to 
services
Deteriorating 
telecommunications 
services
Environmental
degradation
Competition 
for water 
resources
Labour 
shortages
Limited access 
to suitable 
housing
Migration of 
youth; ageing 
population 
Deteriorating 
road network
Limited 
education and 
employment 
options
Limited 
connectivity– 
transport and 
logistics
health services,  
aged and 
child-care
Figure 11. A range of events, changes and stresses placing pressure on the Hay and Carrathool region emerged through stakeholder 
workshops, community survey and resilience assessment

28
29
For example, improving local education 
opportunities for high-tech agriculture services leads 
to local employment opportunities for young people, 
which in turn leads to increased adoption of high-
tech agriculture. This creates more employment 
opportunities, which creates more demand for local 
education in high-tech ag services and so on. This 
positive feedback loop creates an ‘upward’ spiral. 
In contrast, loss of critical support services like aged 
care or childcare see families move away, further 
reducing population and demand for local services 
like in banking or health, setting in play a ‘downward’ 
spiral. These spirals can get ‘locked in’, pushing 
things in desirable or undesirable directions and 
sometimes in rapid and seemingly unnoticed ways.
Understanding interrelationships, the feedback 
spirals that spin off of them and the ‘tipping points’ 
beyond which there is a sudden positive or negative 
change are the hall-marks of a systemic approach to 
building resilience.
The Hay and Carrathool region has many of the 
elements required for communities to thrive. 
Recognising the strengths of our region and building 
upon these, while cognisant of disruptions, will allow 
us to successfully adapt and transform.
Figure 12.  Community workshop participants and survey respondents identified key strengths and assets that exist across the region.  All can 
be leveraged and built upon to enhance regional resilience.
Strong existing 
and emerging 
community 
leaders
Locally based
government
services
People with 
new skills and 
expertise
A lot of space
Transit route/
highways
Diversity of 
agricultural 
production
Good community 
networks
Pride
Proactive
citizens
Self-organising
capacity
Geographic 
isolation
Innovative 
businesses 
and people
Iconic 
outback 
town
Unique natural 
environment
Creative 
businesses 
and people
High number 
of volunteers
Sporting & 
recreational facilities
Education
structures
Strong 
partnerships
Self-reliance
C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
E
c
o
n
o
m
y
E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
Regional
Resilience
Resilience with what?
Section 4: Directions for regional resilience 
The Plan for everyone
Resilience building and climate adaptation is a 
shared responsibility that requires sustained and 
ongoing action (DAWE, 2021). Governments at all 
levels, businesses, communities and individuals 
all have important roles to play in addressing 
community needs and vulnerabilities as well as 
supporting them to achieve their aspirations. 
The locally led planning approach has given 
community members across the region a real 
opportunity to say what’s important to them, identify 
opportunities to build on what’s ‘good’ and working, 
and highlight what needs to happen to make sure 
our region and communities are better places to 
live for everyone. The approach shifts power to 
local stakeholders and catalyses adaptation that is 
effective, equitable, transparent and grounded in the 
local context of the region. 
Development of the Plan is just the start of an 
enduring process of collaboration between 
government, institutions, industry, businesses and 
the community working together to improve the 
quality of life and capacity to adapt across the 
region. This process provides an opportunity for 
everyone to see themselves in the Plan; and to feel 
supported and empowered to act. 
  We know the best solutions will come from 
within our region. The Plan is an invitation  
for all to contribute to the delivery of actions 
and initiatives that will build the future we 
want for the region.
Interpreting the Plan 
The Plan is a high-level strategic directions 
document that provides us with a framework to 
focus our attention and efforts as we move towards 
the future we want for our region. Operational 
documents and implementation plans will come out 
of the Plan as they are activated by our community 
and the appropriate partners over time. 
  The vision, strategies and actions within 
the Plan are not fixed. They will continue to 
evolve and grow as we learn our way 
forward together. 
More than 250 interventions and ideas were 
identified through discussions, workshops 
and meetings with community members, local 
businesses, primary producers and other 
stakeholders engaged in the development of the 
Plan. 
Some ideas focused on broad regional scale 
interventions, while others had a hyperlocal 
focus; that is, ideas that responded to the unique 
context of the people/place system at a village or 
township level. The diversity of the actions identified 
throughout the development process demonstrates 
the systems mindset many community members 
adopted, their deep understanding about how 
change happens in the region, and where efforts 
are best placed to build resilience and strengthen 
the capacity to adapt. Synergies and consistent 
themes exist across the challenges, opportunities, 
strengths, aspirations and ideas identified in different 
discussions and workshops - together they paint a 
rich and nuanced picture of the ‘past, now, future, 
how’ for the region.

30
31
The 2035 Vision, Priority Actions and Strategies 
attempt to shine a light on key regional insights, 
while honouring the differences that make our 
villages and townships (communities of place) and 
our different stakeholder groups (communities 
of interest/culture/practice) unique. They are 
presented in a way that enables different people 
and organisations to act in different ways to realise 
different parts of the region’s vision based on their 
individual histories, values, capacities, resources  
or beliefs.
What does resilience across the 
Hay and Carrathool region look like 
in 2035?
The Plan paints a collective vision for the future for 
everyone to orient themselves towards over the next 
10 years. The Plan’s Priority Actions create space 
for different people to take different approaches 
towards this collective vision, strengthening the 
region’s social, environmental, and economic 
systems as we go.
Sustainable 
development
Thriving
ecosystems
Healthy and 
connected 
communities
Healthy and connected communities
From the health and wellbeing of our people, 
to well-functioning and collaborative groups, 
to more free time for people to do what they 
love, we will foster community spirit and 
strengthen family and community 
connections that bind people and place.
Prosperous 
regional 
economy
From a robust, adaptive and future ready 
workforce, to on farm technology utilised to 
support more sustainable farming practices 
and more free time for farmers, to thriving 
local businesses, we will drive a diverse and 
circular regional economy that is in service to 
our local communities and environment.
From our communities being aware and 
prepared for disruptions, to young people 
and secure places to live for everyone, we 
will plan and provide reliable ‘lifelines’ that 
support our community to live sustainably 
and with dignity.
From landholders and managers working in 
strong collaboration and partnership with 
First Nations groups to communities 
celebrating and leveraging our abundance of 
sunshine, clean air, biodiversity and open 
space, we will conserve, regenerate and 
revitalise our natural ecosystems and 
landscapes.
Our 2035 Vision
In 2035, our communities, including our local 
governments, institutions, businesses, industries 
and households, will have greater capacity to adapt 
to climate, environmental, social, and economic 
challenges and opportunities while remaining 
healthy and vibrant, with safe places 
to live, work, and raise future 
generations.
Figure 13. Shared aspirations emerging from the development journey. 
30
Silo art in Hillston (The Next Economy)
30

32
33
Section 5: Priority Actions and Strategies to  
enhance regional resilience
Diversity of actions creates strength 
in systems 
The Plan identifies 26 Priority Actions for change to 
support climate adaptation and strengthen regional 
resilience. Actions vary in size, scope and focus. 
Some are already underway or have been previously 
completed with a different focus or objective. In all 
cases, Priority Actions build on and leverage existing 
community strengths, capabilities and assets. 
All Priority Actions are interconnected, working to 
address the impacts of climate risks and systemic 
issues that our current regional system is currently 
experiencing or is anticipated to face in the future. 
Some require significant time and resources, but 
have the potential to achieve deep systems change. 
Others are more easily actionable, and when 
implemented early may act as quick wins to build 
momentum and provide a positive feedback loop to 
support further efforts. 
The 26 Priority Actions are by no means the only 
actions that our community and partners can take to 
strengthen resilience across the region. Every day, 
our communities are already working on initiatives, 
programs and activities to address regional issues 
and support community wellbeing. Different 
stakeholders may also identify other important areas 
of work within our region (based on their own unique 
experience, knowledge and expertise). This will all 
help us navigate towards our goals and vision for 2035.
The Priority Actions identified in the Plan can be 
organised in different ways to understand how 
they may meet different needs, apply to different 
stakeholders and address specific focus areas. Refer 
Appendix A - Understanding the Priority Actions for 
further detail. 
Regional Strategies for Resilience
Our regional system is shaped and driven by a range 
of interrelated components — agency, relationships, 
structures, power, and processes. In areas where 
these components aren’t functioning well, they hold 
things back. Dysfunctional relationships between 
these system components reduce the ability or 
capacity for the system to change, effectively 
creating a ‘drag effect’ that hinders any isolated 
efforts to address an issue within the problem area.
  Systemic change leads to increased 
resilience and greater adaptation capacity. 
Systemic change is thus a key objective of 
the Plan. 
Systemic change is achieved when multiple actions 
work together; when synergies and impacts across 
actions are connected; and when actions are 
sequenced appropriately, coordinated across scales 
and leveraging mutually reinforcing activities.
Through this lens, the 26 Priority Actions can 
be clustered and organised within five Regional 
Strategies for Resilience and are designed for 
implementation at one or more of the following 
levels; local village/township/bio-region (Places), 
Local Government Area (LGA), and across both Hay 
and Carrathool shire councils (Region). Each strategy 
targets an impact area that requires coordinated 
focus and energy over the next 10 years in order for 
our region to reach its full potential, and to meet our 
collective vision for 2035. 
Details of the five Regional Strategies for Resilience 
are outlined below, outlining the impact of the focus 
area on the regional system; the outcomes to be 
achieved; the Priority Actions to achieve desired 
outcomes; any bright spots and strengths to work 
with; and who should be involved. 
Strategy 1 - Inclusive and Empowered Communities 
    Our Goal: Our communities look out for each other. We celebrate our unique strengths and 
contributions, support each other through hard times, and welcome diverse perspectives  
and experiences. 
Connectedness, inclusion and agency within the 
community is critical for building resilience across 
our region. Many community members share a 
sentiment that is well established in research 
literature: “social cohesion—the strength of ties and 
bonds among community members—is an asset that 
increases resilience” (Aldrich, 2017).
Strong family and community ties were identified 
as key for getting through hard times. The 
region is fairly isolated from major cities and 
vulnerable to further isolation when major roads 
and telecommunications are affected by natural 
disasters. In these cases, local volunteers, 
businesses and social networks rally to ensure 
everyone has what they need.
Hay and  
Carrathol  
Regional  
Strategies for 
Resilience
Inclusive and 
Empowered 
Communities
Coordinated 
Action for  
Climate Resilient 
Economic 
Development
Placemaking  
with Purpose
Future Ready 
Businesses
Reimagined  
Care  
Economy
Figure 14. The Five Regional Strategies for Resilience target impact areas that require effort over the next 10 years for our region to drive systemic change 
and move towards our collective vision for 2035.
           It isn’t an organised or coordinated 
response, but I know I can reach out for 
emotional or financial support (e.g. time 
to pay invoices) when it is needed. That 
doesn’t happen everywhere. We have a 
history of helping each other.
Workshop participant

34
35
The Wiradjuri, Nari Nari, Yitha Yitha and Ngiyampaa 
Wangaaypuwan people are the custodians of 
lands and waters across the Hay Plains and 
Riverina Region. Their ongoing connections to 
and stewardship of these lands and waters was 
identified as a significant asset for building regional 
resilience. First Nations custodians across the region 
hold valuable knowledge and practices, integral to 
strengthening our communities, ecosystems, and 
economies.
Many workshop participants emphasised the 
region’s cultural diversity as a strong asset for 
building resilience. For example, several community 
members in Hillston felt the town’s social fabric had 
been enriched by newer residents  introducing 
their culture to the community. Local businesses 
emphasised the benefits of people with new and 
diverse skills and expertise in the region. 
As noted in the narrative around remoteness in 
Section 3, connection between people and places 
is a defining characteristic of the Hay and Carrathool 
region. Connections between families, towns and 
villages, different cultures and First Nations peoples 
are recognised and celebrated; safeguarding and 
strengthening them a priority of many.
Potential Strategy Facilitator 
Local Government with State Government support
Partners and Collaborators
• Local and regional health service organisations
• First Nations organisations and support services
• Cultural groups and organisations
• Youth organisations
• Volunteer and community organisations
• Faith based groups
• Health organisations
• Local and state social sector organisations
• Social enterprises
• Business community and local employers
• Local emergency service organisations
• Local governments
• Universities and research institutions
• Regional development organisations
• State Government 
• Impact and private investors
• Philanthropic organisations
Key Outcomes
• The culture, stories and knowledge of First 
Nations people across the region are recognised, 
celebrated and incorporated along with other local 
knowledge
• Our community is working together with First 
Nations people to strengthen and build resilience 
for all residents
• Communities celebrate and embrace their cultural 
diversity
• Community voices are heard on issues that are 
important to them and they are supported and 
resourced to find a way forward 
• Community members have more trust in formal 
and informal decision-making processes and are 
empowered to participate 
• Local institutions, including schools and councils, 
are equipped to support greater understanding 
of different cultures and traditions within their 
communities
• Community groups and networks have access to 
the resources they need to continue supporting 
social events and cohesion 
• Community organisations and local businesses 
have strong leaders, organising capacity, networks, 
resources and communication channels
• All community members have access to public 
spaces, events, information and networks that help 
them feel connected
• Newcomers to the region have access to the 
information and social networks they need to thrive
• Local people are supported to volunteer their time 
to community groups and events, including in times 
of disaster response and recovery
Priority Actions
Details
Scale
Potential Action 
Lead
Community Impact 
Fund
The Community 
Taskforce
Community  
Passenger  
Network
Inclusive  
Communities
Community  
Welcome  
Committee
Community Hubs
Community giving and finance model to directly 
resource and fund strategic initiatives and activities to 
address regional needs and priorities; and, support the 
capacity of communities to govern, lead and manage 
place-based change aligned with their aspirations.
A strategic working group of a diverse range of 
experienced local community representatives that 
are working with community organisations, local 
councils and other agencies to steward and support 
activation and implementation of the Plan.
A network of providers, vehicles, and drivers offers 
diverse transport services to help people access 
care services, connect with training opportunities, 
and engage in social activities within the local 
community and region.
Research and program of initiatives coordinated 
by a program officer to enhance cultural inclusion, 
connection, social cohesion and wellbeing across the 
region and within town/village- based communities.
A community and economic development initiative 
to connect new residents to other members of the 
community as well as the information or resources 
they may need to thrive and feel supported.
A neighbourhood / community centre offering 
affordable and accessible programs to reduce 
loneliness, increase social connection and improve 
health and wellbeing in communities.  This includes 
supporting networking between community 
organisations to strengthen communication and 
information sharing about community events, 
processes, services and activities.
LGA
LGA/ 
Place
LGA/ 
Place
LGA/ 
Place
Place
Place
Local 
government, 
local community 
groups
A coalition of 
community 
groups and 
businesses, local 
government
Transport 
companies, 
social businesses 
and community 
organisations
Local  
government 
or community 
organisation
Community 
groups and 
volunteers
Local 
government and/
or community 
organisation or 
co-op

36
37
Strategy 2 - Future Ready Businesses 
    Our Goal: Our region’s workforce development ecosystem, local businesses and workers are 
thriving before, during and after drought and other disruptions. 
Our local businesses are an important part of our 
economy. From our large agricultural enterprises to 
our small and medium local businesses, all provide 
essential services, contribute to our identity and 
underpin our region’s resilience capacity.
           A climate-resilient business is 
less exposed to climate change impacts 
and can quickly recover and grow after 
extreme climate events.
(AdaptNSW)
Drought, floods, a changing climate, technology 
development and other socio-economic factors 
such as cost of living and housing shortages 
affect how business is done across the region. For 
example, worker shortages are a significant and 
ongoing challenge that the business community is 
grappling with. There is also an increasing need 
to manage climate risks such as declining worker 
health, reduced worker capacity (due to isolation 
in disasters or voluntary disaster response work), 
supply chain and market disruptions, increased 
maintenance costs and asset damage, more 
frequent occupational health and safety incidents 
and increased insurance costs.
If unaddressed, the impacts on local businesses in 
our region will flow into our broader community and 
customers. This will threaten water security, food 
safety, natural environments, animals, supply chain 
reliability, social cohesion, and institutional function, 
among other factors (Lawrence et al., 2022). Much 
attention has been given to drought and climate 
resilience of our agricultural sector. However 
some sectors and businesses who have otherwise 
thrived in our region previously may become more 
vulnerable to shocks and periods of stress unless 
proactive measures are taken to be future ready.
  Workers and businesses need coordinated 
and long-term support to prepare for drought 
and adapt to other changes.
Local businesses in our region need to take 
proactive steps to gain the knowledge and 
resources they need to make confident decisions, 
take advantage of opportunities, ensure operational 
continuity and step outside of the ‘business as 
usual‘ mindset. Community members and regional 
stakeholders emphasised that building future 
readiness requires actions to adapt to the already 
changing climate; reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
and limit the ecological impact of business activities. 
Strengthening pathways into employment and 
worker mobility across different sectors within the 
region is also a priority.  Managing workforce and 
workers differently and establishing collaborations 
and partnerships to train and educate local people 
with future fit skills will help ensure our region’s 
young people and existing workforce are prepared 
for future labour markets. 
           Build careers in the region –  
not just jobs!
Workshop participant
In the Hay region, for example, many local 
businesses are interested in participating in 
renewable energy development activities across the 
region including tendering for large scale renewable 
energy projects. However, many lack the capacity 
and resources to adapt. Several factors prevent 
businesses from scaling, investing in workforce 
development, or hiring. This includes insufficient 
existing workforce capacity, the cost to prepare 
businesses to be ready to tender for clean energy 
development contracts as well as uncertainty around 
work pipelines, contracts, timing, and qualifications. 
Early engagement and ongoing support are crucial 
for scaling regional workforce development. 
Accessible, up-to-date local data is needed to 
improve transparency, workforce planning, and 
equitable recruitment strategies.
Fostering collaboration between local schools, 
training centres, universities, businesses, and 
industries will build the capacity for innovation across 
the workforce development ecosystem; create 
better job pathways, help workers gain new skills, 
and support a sustainable lifestyle in the region.
Potential Strategy Facilitator 	
Local employers and the business community
Partners and Collaborators
• Local employers
• Local government
• Local high schools
• Local training providers
• TAFE NSW
• First Nations organisations and support services 
• Youth organisations 
• Community progress associations or task forces
• Renewable energy development stakeholders
• Work-integrated social enterprises
• Social sector organisations
• Regional development organisations
• State Government
• Federal Government
Key Outcomes
• Our region has a holistic and thriving local 
workforce development system that generates 
economic opportunities for businesses and 
provides supported pathways into employment for 
job seekers 
• Local businesses and major employers in the 
region are working in collaboration to close the 
workforce gap
• Businesses are thinking about workforce 
development and procurement differently 
• Employers have access to knowledge and 
information to make informed business decisions
• Businesses are addressing work arrangements 
and conditions to improve outcomes for vulnerable 
groups in our community
• Businesses are reaping the benefits of acting on 
climate related risks and other opportunities 
• Local businesses feel connected, incentivised and 
rewarded to become future ready
• People working within our business and enterprise 
sector have an entrepreneurial mindset 
• Our region is known for its innovative workforce 
development approach and attracts new workers, 
families and investment to the region

38
39
Priority Actions
Details
Scale
Potential Action 
Lead
Future Ready 
Businesses
Workforce 
Development 
Ecosystem
Building Social 
Innovation  
Capacity
Doing Business -  
Our Way
Training and 
Employment  
Pathways Hub
Capacity development initiatives to support the 
capacity of the local business and not-for-profit 
ecosystem to be innovative and prepared for 
disruptions and change.
A network of partnerships and initiatives working 
together to promote a thriving workforce 
development ecosystem that generates economic 
opportunities for businesses, helps existing workers 
build transferable skills and provides supported 
pathways into employment for job seekers and 
young people in our communities.
An incubator to support local community members, 
young people and businesses develop mindsets 
and capacities to design and activate innovative 
responses and alternative solutions to the provision 
of goods and services across the region.
A B2B shared workforce group that supports local 
businesses and major employers to take a collective 
approach to closing the workforce gap through 
‘sharing employees’.
Program, partnerships and service offering to 
leverage and create opportunities for education, 
training and employment.
LGA
LGA
LGA/ 
Region
Place
LGA
Local employers 
and businesses, 
local and state 
government
Local and state 
government, 
local businesses 
and training 
providers 
Local business 
network or 
community 
progress 
association/
taskforce
Local employers 
and businesses
Coalition of local 
and regional 
training and 
education 
providers, local 
businesses, 
industry groups, 
local and state 
government
Strategy 3 - Reimagined Care Economy
    Our Goal: Our region has a sustainable care economy that improves people’s lives, strengthens 
community capacity to adapt to stresses and drives the region’s economic growth. 
A wealth of people and organisations provide 
healthcare, education and social services to 
community members in formal and informal settings 
across the Hay and Carrathool region. All of this 
work constitutes the region’s care economy and 
is an integral yet often overlooked component of 
development and community resilience.  
Our community identified a strong and accessible 
regional care economy as necessary for the 
physical, psychological and social wellbeing of 
all people including children, young people, First 
Nations people, the elderly, people with different 
abilities and other marginalised groups. A connected 
intergenerational care system meets the needs of 
(eS4W, 2024):
• children so they are cared for and educated
• everybody’s physical and mental health that 
requires attention
• those that require good quality financial assistance 
or social support
• individuals who require assistance with the activities 
of daily living because of illness, age or disability.
In addition to health and wellbeing outcomes, 
community conversations highlighted a range of  
co-benefits from a sustainable care economy.  
These include: 
• improved child development as a long-term 
investment in the economy (15-20 year rate of 
return)
• young people capable and equipped to 
constructively contribute to their local and wider 
communities and economies
• greater workforce participation for parents and 
carers (particularly mothers)
• increased local social participation, volunteerism 
and community resilience
• more resilient businesses and local economy 
stimulus
• attractive regional livability (Lehmann & How, 2019).
Our region understands the impact drought and 
other weather related events have on the mental 
health and wellbeing of individuals and communities 
not just within agriculture, but more broadly across 
the community and other industries. Childcare, 
aged care, social assistance and health services 
that provide both preventative measures (so people 
are equipped for climatic, financial and personal 
stresses) as well as responsive measures (to connect 
people with peers and professionals when needed) 
- provide a lifeline essential for individual wellbeing 
and broader community resilience.
           The care economy matters for 
gender equality, socio-economic equality, 
poverty reduction, inclusive growth and 
sustainable development.
(DPMC, 2023)
Despite incremental efforts to improve services 
across the region, pockets of our care system are 
under stress making our community vulnerable to 
shocks and stresses. Exploring new practices and 
models of care is required to reshape and bolster 
our entire care economy, particularly in the childcare, 
aged care mental health and health outreach systems.

40
41
Many community members see the opportunity for 
new innovative regional level care models to be 
established alongside community-led approaches 
such as cooperative childcare facilities and 
community health service models. The region’s 
businesses also have a responsibility to invest in 
local care provisions and initiatives to attract and 
retain people in work across the region. Cross sector 
collaboration and partnerships are vital to achieving 
this, with stakeholders who see ’care’ not as welfare 
but as a priority for economic and community 
resilience into the future.
Note: This Regional Strategy for Resilience identifies 
Priority Actions that primarily address the provision 
of care for particular groups. Improving health, 
wellbeing and care services more broadly are also 
considered across other Strategies, particularly 
Strategy 1. 
Potential Strategy Facilitator 	
Local and regional health service organisations and 
providers with State Government support
Partners and Collaborators
• Early childhood education and childcare providers 
• Aged care service operators
• First Nations organisations, support services and 
community health organisations
• Cultural groups and organisations
• Businesses and local employers
• Volunteer and community groups
• Local high schools
• Local and state social sector organisations
• Social enterprises
• Industry partners and representative groups
• Regional development organisations
• Local governments
• State Government
• Federal Government 
• Impact and private investors
Key Outcomes
• Our region’s care system provides an integrated 
and comprehensive range of services to prevent 
and address priority care needs
• The region’s care system has a strong network of 
collaborators and partnerships driving development 
and sustainability
• The work of the care system is visible, accessible 
and valued across the region
• Community-led service models are well-resourced 
and supported  
• First Nations owned enterprises receive support 
and resourcing to extend their level of care and 
services 
• Businesses are providing workplace packages that 
include care provisions
• Community members are able to access the 
services and support they need to live life with 
dignity
• The business sector is investing in new models of 
care 
• Children have a positive start to life that sets them 
up well for school 
• Families are connected with one another and the 
broader community
• Individuals have greater health and wellbeing, and 
capacity to respond and recover from stresses and 
shocks
• People can ‘age in place’ and stay connected to 
community and social support systems 
• New families and people are attracted to live and 
work in the region
Priority Actions
Details
Scale
Potential Action 
Lead
The Care Economy 
- Strategy & 
Coordination
Growing Together 
- New Regional 
Childcare System
Innovative Models  
of Care 
A regional taskforce and strategy to foster new 
collaborations to collectively develop and establish 
connected and alternative models of care across the 
region, drawing on evidence-based approaches.
New ‘childcare’ initiatives to support more families 
return to work and increase early childhood 
outcomes through the delivery of innovative models 
for decentralised childcare services.
Trialling new ways to provide intergenerational care 
across our region, through innovative partnerships 
and approaches (formal services and community-led 
initiatives)
LGA
LGA/ 
Place
Coalition of 
community 
organisations, 
local business, 
health services, 
care providers 
and social 
businesses
Health services, 
care providers 
and social 
businesses
Road signage on the highway between Hay and Carrathool Shire councils, June 2024  (The Next Economy)

42
43
Strategy 4 - Placemaking with Purpose
    Our Goal: Our communities have liveable, resilient, and lively public spaces that contribute  
to people’s health, happiness and wellbeing. 
Our connection to place is at the very heart of 
our resilience. When working well, our places and 
local environment are what sustains and provides 
for us economically, physically and emotionally. 
We value and take pride in our regional lifestyle, 
the wide-open spaces our region affords, and the 
connection to a unique landscape of waterways, 
vegetation and abundant wildlife. However, it is this 
relationship with the landscape, our remote context 
and the geographical spread of our townships and 
villages that also means our places and people are 
vulnerable to drought, heat, flood and economic 
disruptions.
  Placemaking is an overarching and broad 
approach to recreating and activating local 
public and cultural spaces into inviting and 
vibrant areas to re-establish and foster 
connections between people, Country and 
their built environment.
Our local places can be leveraged to build resilience 
and address socio-economic issues. The open 
spaces in our villages and townships are where 
people form strong social bonds, build trust, share 
knowledge, and strengthen social cohesion and 
networks — essential resources that are relied on 
during droughts or times of community stress.
Whether it be developing shared energy sources, 
new neighbourhoods, localised food systems, 
cultural meeting places, or creating new events 
and activations in our shared public spaces - the 
value of our community developing placemaking 
ideas and implementing them is two-fold. That is, 
revitalising public and shared spaces will enable our 
businesses and communities to flourish, improve 
our physical and mental health, and strengthen our 
region’s social capital. At the same time, the process 
of implementing initiatives builds our capacity to 
organise and adapt.
Developing more green spaces can provide shade 
and cool places to shelter; water sensitive landscape 
design can capture, store and manage water use 
in public spaces; and regenerating landscapes can 
enhance and protect our wildlife and biodiversity. 
These types of activities support climate adaptation 
and are just as essential to the health and wellbeing 
of our people as they are to the health and resilience 
of our local ecosystems. 
           Placemaking is as much about 
the activities we host in our region and 
creative ways we use our public and 
shared spaces, as it is about investing in 
new infrastructure and projects.
Community workshop participant
Effective placemaking often requires capacity 
building support, technical expertise and core 
project funding.  These resources come from within 
our local communities, but also need to be provided 
by local and state governments as well as other 
strategic partners.  
Potential Strategy Facilitators 
Local community groups with support from local 
governments, philanthropic organisations and/or 
corporate partners 
Partners and Collaborators
• First Nations organisations and support services
• Cultural groups and organisations
• Youth organisations
• Volunteer and community organisations
• Faith-based groups
• Local and regional arts councils/organisations
• Business community 
• Industry partners 
• Regional development organisations
• Destination Riverina Murray
• Local governments 
• State Government
• Impact and private investors
• Philanthropic organisations
• Regional support NGOs 
• Tourism groups and enterprises
Ideas to enhance local places and community life
Community members across the Hay and Carrathool region identified a range of opportunities to 
enhance our local places and strengthen community life. These ideas respond to the unique context, 
challenges and opportunities of each township or village. Inspiration can be drawn from them for 
activities and initiatives in other parts of the region.  
• New birding opportunities and bushwalking tracks
• Establish meeting places and walks that provide information about local Indigenous culture
• Develop outdoor play spaces for children, young people and visitors
• Retain visible and healthy water bodies near public spaces
• Provide farm-tours and unique experiences (such as star gazing)
• Revegetate common property and local parks with native species
• Establish murals on rural building assets
• Free pool access
• Establish moderated community information boards
• Create a tiny home initiative
• Explore community energy options
Placemaking ideas generated through the Plan development process will be available as a separate 
online resource.

44
1
Key Outcomes
• Community members are empowered and feel a 
sense of agency to shape the future of their place
• Residents and local businesses are actively 
participating in community activities
• Community members feel a greater sense of 
connection and social cohesion
• Community organisations and local businesses 
have strong leaders, organising capacity, networks, 
resources and communication channels
• Our region has assets, places and events that 
attract people to the region, develop markets and 
stimulate collaboration outside of the region
• Our natural environment and biodiversity is 
regenerating 
• Our townships and villages have shared spaces 
that are inclusive, safe, welcoming and reflect our 
values and aspirations for the future
• Local people enjoy their local places, and are 
providing opportunities for visitors to also enjoy 
what the region has to offer
• Our region has an innovative, flexible and 
adaptable local housing system promoting livability 
and wellbeing in our communities
• People have access to alternative sources of 
reliable energy, water and other critical services 
and infrastructure
Priority Actions
Details
Scale
Potential Action 
Lead
Housing Our  
Future
Shaping Our  
Places
Reimagining Our 
Visitor Economy
Enabling  
Community 
Placemaking
A business case and investment prospectus to 
drive an innovative, flexible and adaptable local 
housing system for liveable, healthy and resilient 
communities.
Community-led placemaking initiatives to create 
opportunities for local people to connect and enjoy 
local places while providing opportunities for visitors 
to enjoy what the region has to offer.
An Action Plan to enhance and invest in the natural, 
lifestyle and historical assets of the region to expand 
the local tourism economy.
A participatory grant-making program for 
communities to develop and activate strategic 
placemaking initiatives that reimagine and revitalise 
our shared spaces in towns and villages for improved 
social, environmental and economic outcomes.
Place/ 
LGA
Place/ 
LGA
LGA/ 
Place
LGA/ 
Region
Local 
government
Community 
organisations, 
recreational 
groups, local 
businesses
Coalition of local 
government, 
local businesses 
and local and 
regional tourism 
operators
Local 
government and 
funding partner
Road signage (Hay Shire Council)

2
3

4
45
Strategy 5 - Coordinated Action for Climate Resilient Economic Development
    Our Goal - Our region is an innovative economic hub looking at the whole picture: building 
resilience to the impacts of climate change while driving a rapid transition to net zero emissions 
for a sustainable regional economic system that works for the benefit of people, the planet and 
our local places. 
Economic development and climate resilience are 
intrinsically linked. If climate risk and water variability 
aren’t considered, planned for and managed at 
farm, local and region scales then drought and 
other extreme weather events, such as flooding and 
heatwaves, will increasingly:
• damage critical infrastructure 
• disrupt business operations
• affect the delivery of essential services 
• increase the cost of living
• devastate ecological systems. 
Shifts to decarbonise global and national supply 
chains, sequester carbon to account for late-to-abate 
industries and achieve national biodiversity targets 
will also have a significant impact on the regional 
economy, natural environment and community 
livelihoods.  
           Climate resilient development  
is a process of implementing greenhouse 
gas mitigation and adaptation options  
to support sustainable development  
for all. 
(IPCC, 2012)
Climate resilient development can spur economic 
growth, viability and resilience across a region. 
Proactive efforts to build regional resilience within 
a broader agenda of decarbonisation and climate 
adaptation can minimise the costs and impacts of 
both climate and transition risk. 
Incorporating clean energy generation, appropriate 
land-use planning, sustainable and accessible 
transport, appropriate housing, and accessible 
services were identified by many community 
members and regional stakeholders as crucial for 
supporting health and wellbeing, as well as the 
community’s capacity to respond and recover from 
adversity. Similarly, access to water, energy and 
telecommunications were viewed as critical lifelines 
that keep communities going, making them less 
vulnerable to climate impacts and other disruptions. 
The establishment of new industries that utilise 
waste and by-products to create products for new 
markets and sectors was highlighted as one solution 
to address unsustainable land practices, biodiversity 
loss, and waste management. New collaborations, 
partnerships and business models are considered by 
many as important enablers to pilot, test and scale 
new technologies, access new markets and de-risk 
investment in new industries in the region.
  All Priority Actions should be informed by 
climate risk and contribute to resilience 
in different ways. This Regional Strategy 
for Resilience brings together actions 
that directly sit at the nexus of economic 
development, climate adaptation and  
climate mitigation.
Murrumbidgee river in Hay, June 2024 (The Next Economy)

46
47
The Hay and Carrathool region has an abundance 
of space, networks and natural assets with 
opportunities for climate resilient economic 
development varying by location. The region’s 
innovative and diverse agricultural sector is open to 
exploring new options for economic diversification 
and is interested in reimagining the region’s 
economic system and supply chains. This includes 
examining how the local agricultural system can 
produce environmental and social co-benefits. There 
is significant capacity and willingness to explore 
and confront the complex synergies and trade-offs 
between different development pathways, as well 
as the options, contested values, and interests that 
underpin climate mitigation and adaptation choices.
The region has the right conditions in place to 
realise this Strategy and move towards a more 
sustainable regional economy that is working for the 
benefit of people, the planet and place. 
Potential Strategy Facilitator 
Local governments with State and Federal 
Government support 
Partners and Collaborators
• Primary producers
• Local businesses and industry
• Community groups and residents
• Community leadership organisations
• Youth organisations
• Local land services
• Local Aboriginal land councils
• First Nations organisations 
• Primary production industry groups
• Rural services businesses and agronomists
• Emerging industries
• Universities and research institutions
• Water catchment authorities
• Renewable energy development stakeholders
• Regional development organisations
• Impact and private investors
• Southern Innovation Drought Hub
Key Outcomes
• A strong economy that promotes the sustained 
provision of essential services, critical infrastructure, 
education and training 
• A region wide ‘sustainability’ focus attracts new 
industries and investment into the region
• Landholders are participating in and benefiting 
from environmental markets
• Local businesses are identifying opportunities 
to build climate resilience while capitalising on 
expanding, evolving and emerging markets
• The region is powered by renewables and working 
to transition to net-zero emissions
• Landholders, councils, communities and 
businesses have access to information, resources 
and appropriate evidence to make informed 
decisions
• First Nations groups are participating in, leading 
and benefiting from development in the region
• Communities and families can continue to live and 
work in the region
• Nature-based solutions are being adopted to 
protect, restore and regenerate natural ecosystems 
• New industries and economic activity minimise land 
degradation and land clearing activities
• Water is more effectively and efficiently captured, 
retained, used and re-used on farms, within 
industries and by the broader community
Priority Actions
Details
Scale
Potential Action 
Lead
Our Community 
Changemakers
Climate Resilient 
Councils
Primary Production 
Innovation Network
Regional Economic 
Transition Roadmap
Every Drop  
Counts 
Climate Resilient 
Lifelines
Regional 
Environmental - 
Economic Account
An annual program to invest in local leadership 
capacity (young people and adults) to support, lead 
and manage positive change.
A program to increase institutional capacity to plan for 
and respond to the challenges/opportunities of climate 
change including ongoing delivery of services.
A network for regional producers and industry 
innovation to support on-farm and regional adaptation/ 
transition efforts in agriculture and primary production.
A roadmap to build the capacity for a coordinated 
and collaborative approach to economic 
development for a net zero, climate resilient future.
Research, partnerships, place-based pilots and 
foresight papers to drive the adoption of more 
innovative and sustainable approaches to efficiently 
capture, manage and safeguard valuable water 
resources on farms and across local industries.
Participatory climate adaptation planning to reduce 
the direct impact of disasters on the region’s 
critical infrastructure and road networks, maintain 
the services they provide and ensure connectivity, 
productivity and safe mobility into the future.
Initiative and cross-sector partnership to collect, track 
and integrate environmental and economic data for 
effective analysis, decision-making, investment, as 
well as facilitate access to emerging environment 
markets.
LGA/ 
Region
LGA
LGA/ 
Place
LGA
Place
LGA
LGA/ 
Region
Local government 
and community 
groups
Local 
government
Primary producers, 
landholders and 
local land services
Local 
government, 
local industries 
and community
Local primary 
producers,  
landholders,  
research institutions, 
First nations 
organisations, local 
land services
Local and state 
government 
authorities and 
infrastructure 
developers 
Local primary 
producers, 
natural resource 
management and 
environmental 
organisations
Promoting Net  
Zero Regional 
Transport
A region wide ‘Net Zero’ vehicle charging network to 
enable greater connectivity, reliability and range for 
transport and travel within and across the region that 
services local industries, freight, communities and visitors. 
LGA/ 
Region/ 
Place
Local government, 
community 
groups and local 
businesses

48
49
Section 6: Implementation of the Plan 
Building on existing work and other 
plans for the region
The overarching goals of the Hay and Carrathool 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan is for a climate-
resilient region that supports healthy and connected 
communities, a prosperous regional economy, 
sustainable development and thriving ecosystems. 
A holistic understanding of regional resilience 
underpins the Plan, as we consider the relationships 
between our environmental, economic and social 
systems (see Sections 2, 3 and 4). The Priority 
Actions and Strategies contribute to connectedness 
and innovation between farms, communities, 
ecosystems.  They support the development of 
diverse employment opportunities and new models 
for social services across our region, and recognise 
local leadership, planning and action as vital drivers 
of resilience (see Section 5). 
The Plan’s 2035 Vision and aspirations align with 
the strategic objectives of the FDF and a range 
of other local development plans, including the 
Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041, Hay Shire 
Council’s Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032, and 
Carrathool Shire Council’s Community Strategic Plan 
2032. The key objectives of these plans are outlined 
in Appendix D - Regional strategies and plans.
All of the Priority Actions and Strategies contribute 
to the FDF’s strategic areas.  For example, the 
objectives of the Priority Actions Primary Production 
Innovation Network and Every Drop Counts, 
are to connect our primary producers with the 
information, resources and networks they need to 
improve adaptation and resilience in our agricultural 
sector. Priority Actions in Strategy 1,3 and 4, such 
as; Our Community Changemakers, Workforce 
Development Ecosystem, Growing Together - New 
regional childcare system and Community Impact 
Fund aim to specifically address outcomes that 
strengthen the social networks and support systems 
needed to weather future drought impacts and other 
disruptions. 
The Priority Actions and Strategies also contribute 
to local and regional development priorities. For 
example, Priority Actions Shaping Our Places, 
Inclusive Communities and Community Transport, 
contribute to a more vibrant and connected 
regional community - while Reimagining Our Visitor 
Economy, the Regional Environmental-Economic 
Account, and Future Ready Businesses encourage 
greater investment in our local environments and 
economic diversity.
  The Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan is a complementary, 
community-led asset to guide and galvanise 
our communities and partners to take action 
towards a climate-resilient future.
Working together to take action 
Responsibility for local climate adaptation and 
resilience building lies with local, regional, state 
and national actors. All stakeholders must work in 
partnership with our region and support us to deliver 
our Priority Actions and Strategies, realise positive 
outcomes, and move steadily towards our vision of a 
resilient future. 
 Working together, our vision is attainable  
and outcomes are sustainable.
Several conditions, capacities and skills need to be 
brought together in a structured way to implement 
and adapt the Plan as well as enable the collective 
and coordinated approach required to create 
positive change over time.  These include:
Influential champions
Dynamic leaders who have participated in 
development of the Plan as well as other people 
from across the community and/or those who have 
valuable knowledge of the region such as its cultural, 
geographical or political dynamics. These people 
may provide custodianship of the Plan (see Adaptive 
Governance, below), lend support to moving 
specific Priority Actions and Strategies forward, and 
ultimately champion the work.
Backbone support 
A backbone support infrastructure is needed to 
mobilise implementation of the Plan and foster 
the cross-sector and  stakeholder communication, 
alignment, and collaboration required to realise the 
2035 Vision and transformation at a regional scale. 
Backbone infrastructure can be structured in many 
different ways, often involving the participation of 
a supporting organisation with certain convening 
functions and resources. Hay and Carrathool shire 
councils have provided the backbone support 
infrastructure for the development phase of the Plan.
Resources
Implementation of the Plan requires financial 
and non-financial resources. The availability 
and willingness to contribute resources towards 
achieving the shared vision is crucial.
Continuous communication and engagement 
processes 
Regular communication and informal and formal 
mechanisms for transparent dialogue about 
progress, key milestones and challenges are 
required to ensure diverse and broad engagement 
with the Plan. Processes need to reflect who is and 
who is not engaged in implementation of actions, 
and what is and what is not working for different 
groups. Communication and engagement is critical 
for building trust between stakeholders, foundational 
for regional transformation and ongoing resilience.  
Centering equity for First Nations people and 
diverse groups 
Centre and sustain the perspectives and leadership 
of First Nations people and other diverse groups to 
enhance the region’s system understanding, address 
and shift power in decision making, build the 
mindsets and capacity of communities and ultimately 
achieve better outcomes for all through our actions.  
A common agenda
A shared vision and aspirations developed and 
agreed to by a range of stakeholders and community 
members provides a collective goal that everyone 
can work towards. It also provides a framework 
for people to question actions or initiatives that 
may impede the capacity of the region to achieve 
this goal. The Plan provides the common agenda 
through the key components; the Priority Actions, 
Strategies, and 2035 Vision. The key components, 
forming the common agenda, will likely need 
adjusting over time as the region’s context and 
capacity changes.  
Shared measurement 
Processes and measures to collaboratively track 
progress toward the shared vision supports 
ongoing collective learning, adjustment, action and 
accountability. See the section below ‘Learning our 
way forward’ for further information. 
Adaptive governance 
Recognising and allowing for change in complex and 
dynamic systems supports effective management by 
emphasising flexibility, resilience, collaboration and 
learning. Utilising a set of key evaluation questions, 
in conjunction with monitoring activity outputs, 
ensures ongoing learning and supports adaptive 
governance.

50
51
Learning our way forward
To achieve our collective commitment and 
aspirations for 2035, we must continuously monitor 
our progress and integrate emerging knowledge 
into the Plan’s key components: the Priority Actions, 
Strategies, and 2035 Vision. A set of key learning 
and evaluation questions can be used to explore 
the impact, appropriateness, effectiveness and 
efficiency of the Plan’s key components and guide 
implementation, prioritisation and resourcing. These 
questions may include: 
• How is the capacity to adapt to future climate, 
environmental, social, and economic challenges 
and opportunities changing within the region? 
(Impact)
• To what extent do the implemented actions support 
the strategic goal? (Appropriateness) 
• To what extent does the strategic direction align 
with current community voices and aspirations? 
(Appropriateness)
• To what extent is the program achieving worthwhile 
results and/or meeting its intended outcomes? 
(Effectiveness)
• To what extent is the action/program/initiative 
achieving its purpose, worthwhile results and/or 
intended outcomes? (Effectiveness)
• Do the outcomes of the action/program/initiative 
represent efficient use of resources (such as time, 
money)? (Efficiency)
Implementation of the Plan is centred on ‘triple loop’ 
learning to support long-term transformation through 
a process of monitoring, learning and responding. 
A triple loop approach provides a clear and logical 
structure to test assumptions, track progress, 
capture lessons and adjust strategies in response 
to changing context in which it operates. Specific 
monitoring, evaluation and learning plans can be 
developed later by relevant action stakeholders. 
However, starting with a learning framework ensures 
the right questions are asked at the right level for 
the right reasons, rather than just creating sets of 
indicators and measures that may not drive real 
learning and change (Chapin III et al., 2009). This 
approach to implementation and management of 
the Plan is centred around a continual and shared 
process of ‘learning-by-doing’, where actions are 
implemented in a way that helps all stakeholders test 
and refine the Plan’s Priority Actions and Strategies 
to support long-term transformation and navigation 
towards the 2035 Vision.
 Working together, our vision is attainable  
and outcomes are sustainable.
The triple loop learning approach
The three ‘loops’ or levels of a triple loop 
approach refer to the depth of inquiry relating 
to the assumptions behind the Regional 
Strategies for Resilience, the outcomes of 
Priority Actions, the processes guiding the 
Plan and how it is responding to changing 
circumstances over time.
Loop 1. Learning from Actions (1-3 years) - as 
specific actions are undertaken, and results and 
outcomes from those actions are observed, 
that knowledge and experience can be used to 
adjust future actions.  
Loop 2. Learning for Reframing (3-5) - as 
actions are taken over time, the context changes 
and progress is made towards the regional 
vision, it is important to ask deeper questions 
about the Strategic directions and priorities. 
Loop 2 creates space for reviewing and 
reevaluating these core elements of the plan.
Loop 3. Learning for Transformation (5-10 years) 
- in the longer term, as the broader social, 
economic and ecological context for the Plan 
changes, and progress towards the communities 
aspirations are achieved through various actions, 
deeper questions about the future direction, the 
aspirations and needs of the community can 
be asked. This deeper learning loop creates an 
opportunity to reflect on the process of planning, 
the inclusiveness of the process and how 
differing values and perspectives are brought 
together to build shared aspirations that benefit 
everyone in the community.  
Adaptive Governance and Community Stewardship of the RDRP
Learning for  
Transformation
Learning for Reframing
Learning from Actions
Learning from Outcomes
Evaluation 
and Learning 
Questions
Indicators
Evaluation 
and Learning 
Questions
Indicators
Evaluation 
and Learning 
Questions
Indicators
2035 Vision
Healthy and 
connected 
communities
Climate Resilient 
Economic 
Development
Actions
Outcomes
Activities
Prosperous 
Regional  
economy
Future Ready 
Businesses
Actions
Outcomes
Activities
Sustainable 
Development
Reimagined  
Care Economy
Actions
Outcomes
Activities
Thriving 
Ecosystems
Inclusive and 
empowered 
communities
Actions
Outcomes
Activities
Placemaking  
with purpose
Actions
Outcomes
Activities
Aspirations
Strategic Goal
Aspirations
Strategic Goal
Aspirations
Strategic Goal
Aspirations
Strategic Goal
Strategic Goal
FDF Impact
FDF Long Term Outcomes
FDF Intermediate Term Outcomes
Long term
5-10 years
Short term
3-5years
Action 
Plans  
1-3 years
Figure 15.  A triple loop learning approach for the Plan will support long-term transformation through a process of monitoring, learning and responding.
Hay workshop participants, June 2024 (The Next Economy)

52
53
Level / 
Timeframe
Examples of key evaluation and learning  
questions
Example of indicators 
Learning from  
Actions 
(1-3 years)
Learning for 
Reframing  
(3-5 years)
Learning for 
Transformation  
(5-10 years)
Action, Outputs and Accountability focus
To what extent is the action/program/initiative 
achieving its purpose, worthwhile results and/or 
meeting its intended outcomes? 
Do the outcomes of the action/program/initiative 
represent efficient use of resources (time, money)? 
Adaptive focus
To what extent do the implemented actions support 
the strategic goal?
How is the capacity to adapt to future climate, 
environmental, social, and economic challenges and 
opportunities changing within the region? 
What have we learned about the region’s systems 
and resilience capacity by undertaking this action?
Transformative focus
How is the capacity to adapt to future climate, 
environmental, social, and economic challenges and 
opportunities changing within the region? 
How have priorities changed over time? 
What community perspectives are and are not 
involved in identifying issues and setting priorities?
To what extent does the strategic direction align with 
current community voices and aspirations? 
• Progress towards outcomes
• Output metrics
• Accountability metrics 
• Sustainable Development 
Goal (SDG) indicators
• Early insights for More 
Resilient Communities 
(Southern NSW Innovation 
Hub)
• Regional resilience 
capacity metrics
• Regional vulnerability 
metrics
• Changes in priorities and 
rationale
• Socio-Economic Indexes 
for Areas (SEIFA) indexes
• Population change
• Community leadership 
and governance capacity 
metrics
• Change in Gross Regional 
Product (GRP) by sector 
contribution  
The framework below outlines how the triple loop learning approach can be adopted to guide efforts to monitor, 
learn, respond and adjust the Plan and planning process over time.
Framework for Monitoring, Learning and Responding
Glossary
The following table outlines key terms used in this Regional Drought Resilience Plan.
Term	
Definition
Adaptation 	
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to 
actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability 
and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
Adaptive capacity	
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental 
and socioeconomic changes.
Climate adaptation	
The process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects.
Climate change	
Long-term shifts in average climate conditions, like temperatures and weather 
patterns. These shifts can be driven by natural causes (e.g. volcanic or solar 
activity), but have been dominated since the 1800s by significant increases in 
the concentration of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the atmosphere as a 
result of human industrial activity.
Climate risk 	
Potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems. Climate 
risks may be associated with potential changes in the climate system itself, as 
well as human responses to changes in the climate system.
Drought	
A sustained period of below average rainfall leading to reduced soil moisture, 
reduced plant growth and reduced inflows to waterways and storages.
Economic resilience	
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and 
stressors without changing the economic status or outcomes.
Environmental resilience	
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks 
and stressors while maintaining natural processes and ecosystem services.
Governance	
The structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a 
society share power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or 
informal.
Local knowledge	
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of lived 
experience within a landscape, bearing witness to the operation of systems. 
It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people interact with 
surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
Resilience	
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to 
maintain the existing functions, structure and feedback. Also see economic 
resilience, environmental resilience and social resilience.

54
55
Term	
Definition
Resilience thinking	
An approach that focuses on strengthening our capacity to plan for, respond to 
and recover well from future challenges. Holistic resilience thinking considers 
how social, economic and ecological systems are connected, interact and 
depend on each other.
Social resilience	
The ability of human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and 
stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions.
Systems thinking	
An approach to analysis that considers both the individual parts and 
interconnected whole of a system, accounting for the complex and dynamic 
relationships between the different parts. 
Transformation	
A change that results in a fundamentally new structure, function, feedback 
loops and identity. Can apply to personal worldviews or mental models, and 
paradigms. There can be two types.
Active transformation: the deliberate initiation of a phased introduction of 
one or more new state variables (a new way of making a living) at lower 
scales, while maintaining the resilience of the system at higher scales as 
transformational change proceeds.
Forced transformation: an imposed transformation of a social-ecological system 
that is deliberately introduced by external actors. 
Transition	
A transformation from one recognisable form or state to another, which takes 
place over a period of time by incremental steps.
Tipping point	
The point at which change in a level or amount of a controlling variable causes 
a system to shift to a qualitatively different regime.
Vulnerability	
Exposed to a possibility of being harmed.
References
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES). (2024). Snapshot of Australian 
Agriculture 2024, ABARES Insights, Issue 1 - March 2024. Retrieved from https://daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/
en_AU/search/asset/1035603/0
Aldrich, D.P. (2017). The Importance of Social Capital in Building Community Resilience. In: Yan, W., Galloway, W. (eds) 
Rethinking Resilience, Adaptation and Transformation in a Time of Change. Springer, Cham. Retrieved from  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50171-0_23 
Aslin, H. & Russell, J. (2008). Social impacts of drought: Review of literature. Report prepared for the Drought Review 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/abares/documents/socimpctdroughtlitrev2008-1.0.0.pdf 
2024. Retrieved from https://www.legislation.gov.au/F2024L00150/asmade/2024-02-08/text/original/pdf
for the Care and Support Economy 2023: Economic impact of care and support. Retrieved from https://www.pmc.
gov.au/sites/default/files/resource/download/draft-national-care-and-support-economy-strategy-2023.pdf
Biggs, R., Schlüter, M., Biggs, D., Bohensky, E. L., BurnSilver, S., Cundill, G., Dakos, V., Daw, T. M., Evans, L. S., Kotschy, 
K., Leitch, A. M., Meek, C., Quinlan, A., Raudsepp-Hearne, C., Robards, M. D., Schoon, M., Schultz, L., & West, P. C. 
(2012). Toward principles for enhancing the resilience of ecosystem services. Annual Review of Environment and 
Resources, 37, 421-448. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-051211-123836
Bond, N.R., Lake, P.S. & Arthington, A.H. (2008). The impacts of drought on freshwater ecosystems: an Australian 
perspective. Hydrobiologia, 600, 3–16. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-008-9326-z
Bourne, K. (2019). Understanding Regional Liveability: Discussion Paper. Retrieved from 
https://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/common/Uploaded%20files/Files/RAI_SIP2019-1-2-1_
UnderstandingRegionalLiveabilityDiscussionPaper.pdf
Bureau of Meteorology (BoM)., CSIRO., & FarmLink. (2019). A climate guide for agriculture Riverina, New South 
Wales. Retrieved from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/guides/03-Riverina-NSW-Climate-Guide.pdf
Cahill, A. (2022). What Regions Need on the Path to Net Zero Emissions. The Next Economy. Retrieved from  
https://nexteconomy.com.au/wp-content/uploads/What-Regions-Need-Report-Full-May22.pdf
Chapin III, F. S., Kofinas, G. P., & Folke, C. (Eds.). (2009). Principles of ecosystem stewardship: resilience-based natural 
resource management in a changing world. Springer Science & Business Media.
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). (2020a). Average annual rainfall: 30-year climatology 
(1981-2010) [Map]. Retrieved from  
http://www.bom.gov.au/jsp/ncc/climate_averages/rainfall/index.jsp?period=an&area=ns#maps
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). (2020b). Rainfall deciles for the Millennium drought (1997 
to 2009) [Map]. Retrieved from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). (2024a). Climate classification maps. Retrieved from 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/climate-classification/?maptype=kpn
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). (2024b). Climate Glossary.  
Retrieved from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/glossary/drought.shtml.

56
57
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). (2024c). Climate statistics for Australian locations: 
Summary statistics HAY (Miller Street). Retrieved from  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/cw_075031.shtml
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). (2024d). Drought: Rainfall deficiencies and water 
availability. Retrieved from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/
Commonwealth of Australia., Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) and CSIRO. (2022). State of the Climate 2022. Retrieved 
from http://www.bom.gov.au/state-of-the-climate/2022/documents/2022-state-of-the-climate-web.pdf
Resilience and Adaptation Strategy 2021 to 2025: Positioning Australia to better anticipate, manage and adapt to 
our changing climate. Retrieved from https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/national-climate-
resilience-and-adaptation-strategy.pdf
Drought Initiative. Retrieved from https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-
drought-fund/helping-regional-communities-prepare-for-drought-initiative
Retrieved from https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund/
research-adoption-program/adoption-innovation-hubs
from https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund/regional-
drought-resilience-planning
Economic Security 4 Women (eS4W). (2024). The Australian Care Economy. Retrieved from https://www.
security4women.org.au/overarching-focus-womens-lifelong-economic-sustainability/the-australian-care-economy/
Enfors-Kautsky, E., L. Järnberg, A. Quinlan, and P. Ryan. (2021). Wayfinder: a new generation of resilience practice. 
Ecology and Society, 26(2): 39. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-12176-260239
Fleming-Muñoz, D.A., Whitten, S. & Bonnett, G.D. (2023). The economics of drought: A review of impacts and costs. 
Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 67(4), 501–523. Retrieved from  
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8489.12527
Hay Shire Council. (2023). Hay and Maude Flood Study. Retrieved from  
https://www.hay.nsw.gov.au/Portals/0/HAY%20AND%20MAUDEV1.pdf
Hanigan, I., Butler, C., Kokic, P. & Hutchinson, M. (2012). Suicide and drought in New South Wales, Australia, 1970-
2007. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(35), 13950–13955. 
Retrieved from https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1112965109#sec-3
Hanigan, I.C., Schirmer, J. & Niyonsenga, T. (2018) Drought and Distress in Southeastern Australia. EcoHealth 15, 
642–655.Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-018-1339-0
Hughes, N., Lu, M., Soh, W.Y. & Lawson, K. (2022). Modelling the effects of climate change on the profitability of 
Australian farms. Climatic Change, 172: 12. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-022-03356-5
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2012).  Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to 
Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-
K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, 
NY, USA. Retrieved from https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/SREX_Full_Report-1.pdf
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate change [Field C, Barros V, Mach K and Mastrandrea M (eds)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY USA
Lawrence, L., Parfitt, R., & Ummenhofer, C.C. (2022) The role of atmospheric fronts in austral winter precipitation 
changes across Australia. Atmospheric Science Letters, 23(10), e1117. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1002/asl.1117
Lake, P. S. (2006). Drought, the “creeping disaster” Effects on aquatic ecosystems. Land and Water Australia. Canberra.
Lehmann, A., & How, G. (2019). Health hotspots in regional Australia: Building the health sector to drive growth.  
The Regional Australia Institute. Retrieved from https://www.regionalaustralia.org.au/Common/Uploaded%20
files/Files/2024/Backdated%20ISIP%20Reports/A%20healthy%20check-up%20The%20healthcare%20and%20
social%20assistance%20industry%20in%20regions.pdf
NSW Government, AdaptNSW. (2024). Effects on state government. Retrieved from  
https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/how-adapt/state-government/effects-state-government
NSW Government, Department of Primary Industries (DPI). (2018). Riverina Murray Region Agricultural Profile.  
Factsheet No.1, November 2018. Retrieved from https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/843363/
Draft-ial-mapping-riverina-murray-agricultural-profile.pdf
NSW Government, Department of Primary Industries (DPI). (2023). The NSW Combined Drought Indicator (CDI).  
Retrieved from https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/dpi/climate/seasonal-conditions-and-drought/key-research/features-of-
the-nsw-state-seasonal-update/features-of-the-combined-drought-indicator
NSW Government, Department of Primary Industries (DPI). (2024). Riverina Local Land Services. Retrieved from 
https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/climate_applications/state-seasonal-update/monthly-regional-breakdown/riverina-lls-
region
Padrón-Monedero, A., Linares, C., Díaz, J., & Noguer-Zambrano, I. (2024).  Impact of drought on mental and 
behavioural disorders, contributions of research in a climate change context. A narrative review. Int J Biometeorol, 
68, 1035–1042. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-024-02657-x
Productivity Commission. (2017). Transitioning Regional Economies, Study Report. Retrieved from  
https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/transitioning-regions/report/transitioning-regions-report.pdf
Resilience Alliance. (2010). Assessing resilience in social-ecological systems: Workbook for practitioners. Version 
2.0. Retrieved from https://www.resalliance.org/files/ResilienceAssessmentV2_2.pdf
Schade, K. (2024). Crisis point - The local face of the national housing crisis. Australian Rural & Regional News, 14 
February 2024. Retrieved from https://arr.news/2024/02/14/crisis-point-the-local-face-of-the-national-housing-crisis/
Steffen, W. (2015). Thirsty Country: Climate Change and Drought in Australia. Climate Council of Australia. Retrieved 
from https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/37d4a0d2a372656332d75d0163d9e8b8.pdf
State of NSW, Office of Environment and Heritage (OEH), (2014). Integrated Regional Vulnerability Assessment: 
Riverina Murray. Retrieved from https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-06/
IRVA%20Riverina%20Murray%20Vol%201.pdf 
Tamarack Institute. (2022). Building the case for deepening community: What is community?. Retrieved from  
https://www.tamarackcommunity.ca/hubfs/Building-the-Case_What-Is-Community.pdf?hsLang=en-us
Whittenbury, K. L. (2013). Climate change, women’s health, wellbeing and experiences of gender based violence in 
Australia. In M. Alston, & K. Whittenbury (Eds.), Research, Action and Policy: Addressing the Gendered Impacts of 
Climate Change (pp. 207 - 221). Springer. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-5518-5_15

58
59
Appendix A: Understanding the Priority Actions 
Community members, local businesses, primary 
producers and regional stakeholders across the 
region have identified 26 Priority Actions for the next 
decade to ensure our communities and economies 
are as resilient as they can be in the face of drought 
and other disruptions.
All Priority Actions will benefit adaptation and 
resilience in our region, even where they do not 
specifically focus on managing drought or other 
climate risks and impacts. All Priority Actions are 
interconnected, working to address systemic issues 
that our region is currently experiencing or anticipate 
to face in the future.  
The Priority Actions build on existing community 
strengths, capabilities and assets. However, the 
responsibility to deliver actions does not rest solely 
on the shoulders of the local community, businesses 
or councils.  
  Responsibility for local climate adaptation 
and resilience building also lies with regional, 
state and national actors. These stakeholders 
must work in partnership with our region and 
support us to deliver our Priority Actions, 
realise positive outcomes, and move steadily 
towards our vision of a resilient future.
The following section organises the Priority  
Actions in different ways to illustrate how each  
‘does the work’ of building capacity to adapt to 
drought and a changing climate and highlights entry 
points for different stakeholders to lead and take 
collective action. 
	 Strategy 1: Inclusive & Empowered Communities
  1	
Community Impact Fund
  2	
The Community Taskforce
  3	
Community Hubs
  4	
Community Passenger Network
  5	
Inclusive Communities
  6	
Community Welcome Committee
	 Strategy 2 - Future Ready Businesses
  7	
Future Ready Businesses
  8	
Workforce Development Ecosystem
  9	
Training and Employment Pathways Hub
  10	
Building Social Innovation Capacity
  11	
Doing Business - Our Way
	 Strategy 3 - Reimagined Care Economy
  12	
The Care Economy - Strategy & Coordination
  13	
Growing Together - New Regional Childcare 
System
  14	
Innovative Models of Care 
	 Strategy 4 - Placemaking with Purpose
  15	
Housing Our Future
  16	
Shaping Our Places
  17	
Reimagining Our Visitor Economy
  18	
Enabling Community Placemaking
	 Strategy 5 - Coordinated Action for Climate 
Resilient Economic Development
  19	
Our Community Changemakers
  20	
Climate Resilient Councils
  21	
Primary Production Innovation Network
  22	
Regional Economic Transition Roadmap
  23	
Every Drop Counts 
  24	
Climate Resilient Lifelines
  25	
Regional Environmental - Economic Account
  26	
Promoting Net Zero Regional Transport
The 26 Priority Actions 
Contribution to System Outcomes
Drought has traditionally been viewed as an 
economic issue, primarily impacting farms and 
the agricultural sector. Drought support initiatives 
have typically focused on financial preparation and 
recovery, with limited focus on the wider impacts 
of drought on social and environmental resilience 
across rural communities and landscapes. 
While the economic focus on the agricultural 
sector is still important, increasing awareness of 
the broader impacts of drought on individual and 
community health and wellbeing, as well as the 
impacts on natural landscape and biodiversity health, 
has fostered a more holistic view.  
Mapping community-identified Priority Actions 
onto an integrated systems view illustrates the 
community’s deep awareness and understanding 
of the relationship and overlap between the social, 
economic and environmental domains. 
The diagram below indicates the core contribution 
of each Priority Action to system outcomes. For 
example, Priority Actions sitting across domains, 
such as those in the centre of the Venn diagram, 
provide social, economic and environmental 
benefits.  
Figure A1. This diagram indicates the contribution of each Priority Action to system outcomes - highlighting the relationships and interdependencies of the 
social, economic and natural systems that make up rural communities.

60
61
Contribution to Resilience 
Attributes
Resilient rural and regional people, businesses, 
communities and ecosystems are able to plan for, 
cope with, and recover from disruptions in positive 
ways. Resilience is built and maintained through 
a range of factors or attributes. The attributes 
contribute to the capacity of any system to prepare 
for, cope with, recover and learn from major change 
and disturbances.
The Priority Actions identified during the planning 
process contribute to these attributes to varying 
degrees. Priority Actions that contribute across a 
greater number of resilience attributes or provide a 
high contribution to particular attributes represent 
a good resilience investment. This is a subjective 
(low-high contribution) rating that accounts for the 
general size and scope of the action. It’s important to 
acknowledge that there may be many other factors 
and reasons to proceed or not proceed with an 
action that have nothing to do with these specific 
resilience attributes. 
Strengthen diversity
Diversity provides a source of options and innovations when responding to 
change or dealing with uncertainty, and helps to spread risks during times of 
stress.
Build and manage connection
Connection allows the flow and spread of resources (such as information, 
innovations), species and people across geographical landscapes and 
communities. It helps to create new social networks and norms and can help 
facilitate recovery after a disturbance. Connection also needs to be managed to 
avoid the spread of negative or harmful flows such as negative ideas and practices 
(social perspective) or weeds and pathogens (environmental perspective).
Foster flexibility and adaptiveness
Having an adaptive mindset and building in flexibility into infrastructure, practices, 
organisations and institutions means it is possible to pivot, redirect or manage 
change and disruptions when needed.
Build responsiveness, recovery and renewal capacity
Having capacity to respond, recover and renew to the degree needed, when and 
where needed, during and after times of stress is fundamental to resilience.
Learning and reflection
Learning from past experiences, developing the ability to detect changes, and 
reflecting on how systems can be reorganised and renewed in ways that can 
improve how well they function and cope with future events is critical.
Inclusive and equitable
Inclusive participation through active engagement of all relevant stakeholders 
helps build the trust, shared understanding and relationships needed for collective 
action. Participation from a diversity of backgrounds and perspectives can 
uncover perspectives that may not be acquired through more traditional scientific 
processes, improving legitimacy of knowledge and empowering stakeholders in 
decision making that supports more equitable outcomes. More equal societies are 
less prone to instability and conflict. 
Figure A2. Resilience attributes used to assess the contribution of Priority Actions towards resilience building and maintenance in the Hay and Carrathool region. 
(Adapted from Biggs et al., 2012)
A farm located along the Kidman Way between Merriwagga and Hillston, April 2024 (The Next Economy)

62
63
Figure A3. Priority Actions mapped to illustrate their contribution towards resilience building and maintenance in the Hay and Carrathool region. 
Figure A4. Typology of climate adaptation and resilience building actions used to categorise the Priority Actions.
Community Impact Fund
The Community Taskforce
Community Hubs
Community Passenger Network
Inclusive Communities
Community Welcome Committee
Future Ready Businesses
Workforce Development Ecosystem
Training and Employment Pathways Hub
Building Social Innovation Capacity
Doing Business - Our Way
The Care Economy - Strategy & Coordination
Growing Together - New Regional 
Childcare System
Innovative Models of Care
Housing Our Future
Shaping Our Places
Reimagining Our Visitor Economy
Enabling Community Placemaking
Our Community Changemakers
Climate Resilient Councils
Primary Production Innovation Network
Regional Economic Transition Roadmap
Every Drop Counts 
Climate Resilient Lifelines
Regional Environmental - Economic Account
Promoting Net Zero Regional Transport
Strengthen 
diversity
Build and 
manage 
connection
Foster 
flexibility and 
adaptiveness
Build 
responsiveness 
and renewal 
capacity
Learning and 
reflection
Inclusive and 
equitable
Low contribution
Medium contribution
High contribution
Types of Priority Actions
There are many different types of activities, 
interventions and approaches that can be taken to 
strengthen community, economic and environmental 
resilience. Categorising the diversity of actions 
can make it easier to see what types of activities 
are proposed in the Plan and understand where 
attention might be required or best focused. This 
view supports informed decision making on where 
and how different stakeholders can practically take 
action.
Figure A4 summarises the different types of actions, 
ranging from those that build adaptive capacity 
(the capacity to respond effectively to change and 
disruptions), to the delivery of adaptation actions 
(practical activities that directly aim to reduce 
vulnerability to climate risks or exploit positive 
opportunities). 
Research and  
innovation
Changing or  
developing  
regulations,  
strategies, plans, 
programmes  
or services
Capacity  
development,  
training and  
knowledge  
transfer to empower 
good practices
Coordination, 
cooperation,  
networks and 
partnership
Awareness Raising, 
Communication  
and information
Financing and  
incentive actions
Nature-based solutions and 
Ecosystem based approaches 
Physical infrastructure and 
Technology
Building Adaptive Capacity
Adaptation Actions

64
65
Scale of Implementation
Scale can be understood in several ways, such as 
the magnitude of an action (complexity, number 
of people and resources involved, reach and 
timeframe) or the geographic landscape. In this 
case, ‘scale’ is referred to as the level of the regional 
system that a Priority Action would be most effective 
operating at to achieve resilience outcomes. This 
could be local places (village/township/bio-region), 
Local Government Area (LGA), and region levels 
(across both LGAs).    
Some Priority Actions ‘do work’ at a specific scale, 
while others could be implemented at various 
scales depending on the delivery model, scale 
of resources, capacity of partners, and other 
stakeholders involved.  
Figure A6 places Priority Actions across these 
different scales, based on workshop discussions with 
stakeholders around the purpose of interventions 
and how they would be implemented.
It is important to note that Priority Actions placed at 
the LGA level do not indicate responsibility of local 
government.  Instead, it highlights that it is logical for 
the Priority Action to be implemented and operated 
at this scale based on how it will interact with and 
affect elements such as existing social networks, 
resource flows, economic and business activities 
and ecological landscapes.
Figure A6. Priority Actions at the scale they would be most effective operating at to achieve resilience outcomes.
Figure A5. The primary typology of each Priority Action (dark green dot). Most types of actions are interrelated and an Action can also have components 
of several types at once (light green dots of varying sizes).
Research and 
innovation
Changing or 
developing 
regulations, 
strategies, 
plans, 
programmes  
or services
Capacity 
development, 
training and 
knowledge 
transfer to 
empower good 
practices
Coordination, 
cooperation, 
networks and 
partnership
Awareness 
raising, 
Communication 
and  
information
Financing  
and  
incentive 
actions
Nature-based 
solutions and 
Ecosystem 
based 
approaches
Physical 
infrastructure 
and  
Technology
Building Adaptive Capacity
Community Impact Fund
The Community Taskforce
Community Hubs
Community Passenger Networks
Inclusive Communities
Community Welcome Committee
Future Ready Businesses
Workforce Development 
Ecosystem
Training and Employment 
Pathways Hub
Building Social Innovation 
Capacity
Doing Business - Our Way
The Care Economy - 
Strategy & Coordination
Growing Together - 
New Regional Childcare System
Innovative Models of Care
Housing Our Future
Shaping Our Places
Reimagining our Visitor Economy
Enabling Community Placemaking
Our Community Changemakers
Climate Resilient Councils
Primary Production 
Innovation Network
Regional Economic Transition 
Roadmap
Every Drop Counts
Climate Resilient Lifeliness
Regional Environmental - 
Economic Account
Promoting Net Zero Regional 
Transport
Adaption Action

66
67
Appendix B: Priority Actions - Potential  
implementation phases and associated costs 
The table below details the potential phases of 
implementation for each Priority Action, including 
indicative timeframes and associated cost scales 
for one or more phases. This information aims to 
illustrate the potential next steps for each Priority 
Action and the level of resourcing support that may 
be needed.
Please note:
• The information in the tables below is indicative 
only.  It is provided as a requirement of the 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning program 
to demonstrate the potential next steps, activities 
and scale of investment required to mobilise 
and implement each Priority Action. The actual 
implementation activities and level of funding 
required will be unique to the context in which 
the action is being realised - the action leads, 
stakeholders involved, supporting partners, 
location, approach, extent and scope of initiative 
and timing. 
• Cost implication / Phase represents the indicative 
amount of time, money and energy required to 
complete a Priority Action or a specific phase.  
• See Section 5 for further information about the 
Priority Actions and Strategies.
Strategy 1 - Inclusive and Empowered Communities (continued from previous page)
Strategy 1 - Inclusive and Empowered Communities
Priority Action
Priority Action
Potential phases/activities
Potential phases/activities
Cost Implication / Phase
Cost Implication / Phase
Inclusive 
Communities
Community Welcome 
Committee
Community Impact 
Fund
The Community 
Taskforce
Community Hubs
Community 
Passenger Network
Establishment: Convene a working group or 
local network to develop a concept proposal 
and program of activities and initiatives. Secure 
funding for a program officer (6-12 months)
Implementation: Deliver and pilot program 
model and activities with community (ongoing)
Establishment: Establish a working group of 
diverse representatives. Develop a charter and 
program of activities. Seek funding - as required.  
(2-6 months) 
Implementation: Deliver events and activities in 
alignment with program plan. Review outcomes. 
(ongoing)
Establishment: Explore feasibility of community 
finance models. Form partnerships and 
governance. Develop strategy and mandate. 
Establish an entity. Seek investment and 
establish funding/finance models. (6-12 months)
Implementation: Carry out activities in alignment 
with strategy. (ongoing)
Establishment: Deliver a forum with community 
organisations to co-design the taskforce, 
strategy and governance structures.  Conduct 
an EOI for taskforce membership. (4-6 months)
Implementation: Host convenings to share 
community updates and activities. Support action 
across Regional Resilience Strategy areas. (ongoing)
Establishment: Convene a codesign process for the 
community hub concept. Develop a business case. 
Identify partners. Develop governance structure. 
Seek funding to establish a pilot site, secure a 
coordinator and support core activities (6-12 months) 
Implementation: Establish a pilot ‘hub’ and pilot 
a program of activities.  Review outcomes and 
develop proposal for ongoing operations (1-3 years)
Establishment: Explore alternative models for 
transport services. Develop local and regional 
partnerships. Develop a concept proposal and 
business case. Secure funding and delivery 
partners. (6-12 months) 
Implementation: Establish programs and deliver 
services across region. Review outcomes and adapt 
services. (1-3 years)
Medium - High
Establishment and 
Implementation (Year 1)
Low - Medium
Establishment
High
Establishment
Low - Medium
Establishment and 
Implementation (Year 1)
Medium - High
Establishment and 
Implementation (Year 1)
Medium - High
Establishment and 
Implementation (Year 1)
Distance sign (Hay Shire Council)

68
69
Strategy 2 - Future Ready Businesses
Strategy 3: Reimagined Care Economy
Priority Action
Priority Action
Potential phases/activities
Potential phases/activities
Cost Implication / Phase
Cost Implication / Phase
Building Social 
Innovation Capacity
Doing Business -  
Our Way
Future Ready 
Businesses
The Care Economy 
- Strategy & 
Coordination
Workforce 
Development 
Ecosystem
Growing together 
- New Regional 
ChildCare System
Innovative Models  
of Care
Training and 
Employment 
Pathways Hub
Establishment: Prepare program design. Seek 
and formalise partnerships and providers.  
Establish business/funding model. (3-6 months)
Implementation: Deliver capacity building program. 
(1- 2 years)
Establishment: Form pilot employee group. Connect 
with industry partners and training organisations. 
Develop concept model and business case. Test the 
working model with employers and employees in the 
region. (3-12 months) 
Implementation:  Extend the group membership 
and employee offering.  Explore further shared work 
package options for the collective. (ongoing)
Establishment: Develop and deliver several pilot 
business focused capacity building activities. Form 
a working group and partner network. Prioritise 
capacity development areas and program of 
activities with business community. (6-12 months)
Implementation: Seek funding support and/
or establish a business model to implement the 
program of activities (ongoing)
Establishment:  Run a community awareness raising 
campaign. Establish a regional taskforce. Develop a 
regional strategy. (4 months) 
Implementation: Foster partnerships and implement 
coordination activities with partners and industry. 
(ongoing)
Establishment: Host forum on workforce 
development in the region with relevant stakeholders.  
Activate early opportunities and initiatives.  
Form a taskforce and develop a strategy and plan. 
Formalise partnerships and develop proposals for 
investment into key initiatives. (6-12 months) 
Implementation: Establish a pilot ‘hub’ and pilot 
a program of activities.  Review outcomes and 
develop proposal for ongoing operations (1-3 years)
Scoping: Explore feasibility of service model.  
Develop a business case. Seek investment and 
partnerships. (6-12 months) 
Implementation: Establish and test services/models. 
Mature service and business model (ongoing)
Establishment: Co-design and prepare a feasibility 
plan and business case for local training and 
industry partnerships hub. Secure funding, 
investment and partnerships (6-12 months) 
Implementation: Mobilise initiatives such as local 
education and training programs, scholarships, 
awards and on-the-job placements (ongoing)
Low - Medium
Development
Medium
Establishment and 
Implementation
Medium
Establishment
Low -Medium
Establishment and 
Implementation
Medium - High
Establishment and 
Implementation
Medium - High
Establishment and 
Implementation (Year 1-3)
Medium - High
Establishment

70
71
Strategy 4: Placemaking with Purpose
Strategy 5: Coordinated Action for Climate Resilient Economic Development
Priority Action
Priority Action
Potential phases/activities
Potential phases/activities
Cost Implication / Phase
Cost Implication / Phase
Enabling Community 
Placemaking
Regional Economic 
Transition Roadmap
Climate Resilient 
Lifelines
Every Drop Counts
Housing Our Future
Our Community 
Changemakers
Shaping Our Places
Climate Resilient 
Councils
Reimagining Our 
Visitor Economy
Primary Production 
Innovation Network
Establishment: Form partnerships and funding. 
Collaboratively design grant program and 
governance model for grant making program  
(6 months) 
Implementation: Support communities in place to 
co-design their priority placemaking initiatives and 
develop a concept proposal for funding. Award 
grants through participatory model (6-9 months)
Establishment: Convene participatory process to 
develop roadmap and taskforce. (6 months) 
Implementation: Deliver roadmap strategies and 
pilot activities. Adaptive management by taskforce. 
(ongoing)
Establishment: Carry out climate risk assessment.  
(3 months) 
Implementation: Carry out development 
and upgrades to road network (and essential 
infrastructure). (ongoing)
Establishment: Form partnerships and 
collaborations to respond to existing opportunities 
and develop project proposals. Seek investment. 
(3-9 months) 
Implementation: Activate projects and initiatives. 
Communicate insights and resources with regional 
stakeholders and industry. (ongoing)
Establishment: Work with regional and industry 
partners to develop a scope of works and formalise 
partnerships to support the process (3-6 months)
Development: Carry out strategic planning 
assessment. Develop business models for new 
housing approaches and formalise an investment 
prospectus (6 months)
Establishment: Pilot various initiatives and codesign 
enduring program. (12 months) 
Implementation: Deliver annual program of 
leadership development activities and convening of 
alumni network. (ongoing)
Establishment: Review pre-existing ideas 
with community members. Co-design priority 
placemaking initiatives. Develop a concept  
proposal to seek funding. 
Implementation: Community members and relevant 
partners deliver the placemaking initiative/s  
(12 months +)
Establishment: Staff training and capacity building. 
Service assessment and strategy development. (6-
12 months) 
Implementation: Climate risk informed delivery of 
services. Yearly strategic reviews. (ongoing)
Establishment: Develop a regional taskforce, 
tourism association or working group.  Work 
collaboratively with community to inform updates to 
Local Governments Destination Management Plan. 
Develop an action plan for regional stakeholders 
(3-6 months) 
Implementation: Drive activities to bring in 
resources for campaigns, activities and initiatives  
(3 months +)
Establishment: Create network and industry 
partnerships. Seek seed funding for network 
development and pilot activities. Establish priority 
focus areas and pilot activities. (12 months) 
Implementation: Pilot initiatives and network 
activities. (ongoing)
Low - Medium
Development
Medium
Development
Low
Establishment
Low
Establishment
Low - Medium
Establishment and 
Development
Low - Medium
Establishment
Low-Medium
Establishment and 
Implementation
Medium
Establishment
Low
Establishment and 
Planning
Medium
Establishment
Med- High
Establishment and 
Implementation

72
73
Strategy 5: Coordinated Action for Climate Resilient Economic Development  (cont. from previous page)
Priority Action
Potential phases/activities
Cost Implication / Phase
Regional 
Environmental - 
Economic Account
Promoting Net Zero 
Regional Transport
Establishment: Develop strategy partnerships 
and agreements. Carry out baseline assessment.  
Collaboratively design and develop account and 
business case. (1-2 years) 
Implementation: Deliver activities and initiatives 
to progress account objectives and measure 
outcomes (ongoing)
Establishment: Develop prospectus, feasibility 
and business case. Form partnerships and 
collaborations. Seek funding. (6-12 months) 
Implementation: Establish test sites. Promote 
service network. Monitor use and performance. 
Extend network. Mature business model and 
partnerships. (ongoing)
Medium
Establishment
Medium - High
Establishment and 
Implementation (Year 1-3)
Appendix C: Regional drought risk and vulnerability 
Understanding drought
Drought is most simply understood as an acute water 
shortage (BoM 2024b). It is generally measured in 
Australia by assessing rainfall deficiencies over three 
or more months (meteorological drought), though 
low soil moisture (agricultural drought) and low 
streamflow (hydrological drought) are also important 
to understand the extent and impacts of drought 
(IPCC, 2012; BoM, 2024d). 
Rainfall in Australia is highly variable and strongly 
influenced by three key drivers: the El Niño Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) to the east, the Indian Ocean 
Dipole to the west, and the Southern Annular Mode 
(SAM). While Australia has historically experienced 
high rainfall variability, rising global temperatures 
have contributed to a long-term shift towards drier 
conditions, particularly across the south-west and 
south-east of the country (BoM & CSIRO, 2022). 
Figure C1. New South Wales CDI map, 2024 (Source: DPI, 2024).
Classifying drought in New South Wales
The New South Wales Government uses the Combine Drought Indicator (CDI) to classify drought in the state. 
The CDI combines the definitions of meteorological, hydrological and agronomic drought using measures 
of indicators for rainfall (RI), soil water (SWI), and plant growth (PGI) to provide a comprehensive drought 
assessment over a preceding 12-month period (DPI, 2023). 
As at 30 June 2024, the CDI showed that the Hay and Carrathool shire councils were not in drought,  
though 34% of the broader Riverina region was classified as Drought Affected (DPI, 2024).
Hay Youth Taskforce workshop, August 2024 (The Next Economy)

74
75
Drought in the Hay and Carrathool shire councils
The Hay and Carrathool shire councils are located in the western Riverina region of New South Wales.  
This region is one of the most agriculturally diverse and productive regions of Australia, producing merino wool, 
beef cattle and poultry, and a range of irrigated and non-irrigated crops including cotton, wheat, maize, and rice 
(DPI, 2018). The region is also home to a diverse range of wetland ecosystems across the Murray-Murrumbidgee 
river system.
The Hay and Carrathool region receives relatively low rainfall, with average annual rainfall of 366.5mm between 
1877-2015 (BoM, 2024c). Rainfall in the Riverina was relatively stable between 1989-2018, decreasing slightly 
(4%) compared to the preceding 30-year period (1959-1988) (BoM et al., 2019). It is important to note, however, 
that these averages can mask the significant periods of both extreme drought and flooding experienced in the 
region during this period. These events include the Millennium Drought (1997-2009: see Figure 3) and record 
flooding in November 2022 (Hay Shire Council, 2023).
Figure C2. Average annual rainfall in New South Wales (30-year climatology, 1981-2010) (Source: BoM, 2020a).
Figure C3. Rainfall deciles for the Millennium drought (1997 to 2009) (Source: BoM, 2020b)

76
77
Projections for drought in the future
More frequent years of below-average rainfall, 
especially in the cool season between April and 
October, have been observed in the south-east of 
Australia over the past two decades (Figure 5, BoM 
& CSIRO, 2022). This is particularly important for 
agricultural regions like the Riverina, as the cool 
season is the main growing season for many crops 
and also when peak streamflow tends to occur 
for most catchments in southern Australia (BoM & 
CSIRO, 2022). 
Long-term drying and warming trends are projected 
for the region, particularly in the cool season, which 
is expected to reduce rainfall and overall water 
availability (OEH, 2014). This is expected to increase 
the occurrence and duration of droughts, leading to 
greater heat and moisture stress on crops, pasture 
and animals, in addition to more intense heatwave, 
flooding and fire events (DPI, 2018).
Impacts of Drought
The climate characteristics of the Hay and Carrathool 
region, combined with the region’s high economic 
reliance on the agricultural sector, contributes to high 
vulnerability to drought (Fleming-Muñoz et al., 2023). 
The impacts of drought can be devastating and 
far-reaching. Droughts can have an acute impact on 
ecosystems, agricultural industries and communities 
in a relatively short period, such as the drought that 
affected the Murray Darling-Basin between 2017-
2019, or chronic impacts over many years, as with 
the Millennium drought, which lasted from 1997 to 
2009. The impacts of drought on communities in the 
Hay and Carrathool Shires are discussed below.
Social impacts of drought
Drought can take a significant toll on the mental, 
physical and financial wellbeing and resilience 
of individuals, families, and communities. Studies 
have documented links between drought and poor 
mental health experienced by farmers and people 
living in agriculture-reliant communities, related to 
both the financial stress on farms and psychological 
toll of local environmental degradation (Hanigan 
et al., 2012; Fleming-Muñoz et al., 2023). Drought-
related distress and isolation also exacerbates 
existing vulnerabilities: for example, drought impacts 
may be felt more acutely among young farmers, 
people with lower financial security, and those living 
in geographically remote areas (Hanigan et al., 
2018;Fleming-Muñoz et al., 2023).
People in drought-affected regions are also 
susceptible to poorer physical health caused by 
water shortages, poor air and water quality, and 
more extreme heatwave conditions (Fleming-
Muñoz et al., 2023). Studies have found that health 
impacts include cardiovascular problems, respiratory 
conditions, and increased risks of infectious diseases 
(Padrón-Monedero et al., 2024).
Drought can lead to unemployment in the 
agricultural sector and migration away from rural 
and regional communities. This can have a knock-on 
effect in nearby towns and businesses, particularly 
in areas where there is little economic diversity. 
These effects include the loss of services, skills and 
local knowledge, and unemployment outside of the 
agricultural sector (Aslin &Russell, 2008).
Financial stress and poor physical and mental 
health can greatly impact family relationships, safety, 
and resilience. Additional paid and unpaid work 
obligations on all family members (for example, 
off-farm work to supplement on-farm incomes or 
to replace paid labour on-farm) can exacerbate 
experiences of stress, depression, and isolation 
(Aslin & Russell, 2008). These experiences have 
historically impacted men and women differently. 
Research in New South Wales has found that 
men are at higher risk of suicide during periods 
of drought (Hanigan et al., 2012), and women 
experience greater incidents of domestic violence 
by their male partners (Whittenbury, 2013). 
Environmental impacts of drought
The environmental costs of drought can be 
enormous, exacerbating existing stresses on rivers, 
wetlands and terrestrial ecosystems. For example, 
many river systems experienced record low flows 
during the Millennium Drought over a long period 
of time. The intensity and duration of the drought 
had a severe impact on broad areas of wetland and 
dryland ecosystems in the Murray-Darling Basin: river 
red gums died across extensive areas, while water 
toxicity contributed to a significant decline in fish, 
aquatic plant, and water bird populations (Bond et 
al., 2008). 
Agricultural practices such as intensive land use, loss 
of riparian (riverbank) vegetation, introduced pest 
species, and alterations to river flows have reduced 
the natural capacity of aquatic ecosystems to cope 
with drought. This impact on ecosystem resilience, 
in addition to the intensity and duration of droughts, 
determines whether and how long ecosystems 
affected by drought will need to recover. There can 
be long delays in a return to health and balance, and 
in some cases, the drought may have resulted in 
local species extinctions (Lake, 2006, cited in Bond 
et al., 2008).
Figure C5. April to October rainfall anomaly in south-east Australia, there are fewer wet years now than during the 20th century (Source: BoM & CSIRO, 2022)
Source: Bureau of Meteorology
Rainfall anomaly (mm) south-east Australia (April-October)
Figure C4. Periods of significant drought in Hay & Carrathool region

78
79
Economic impacts of drought
Droughts have had a significant economic impact 
on Australian farming communities and national 
GDP, spanning through and well-beyond particular 
drought events. For example, from 2007 to 2008 
(a single year towards the end of the Millenium 
Drought), regional GDP in the southern Murray-
Darling Basin fell 5.7 percent below the forecast 
and cost a temporary loss of 6000 jobs (IPCC, 
2014, cited in Steffen, 2015). Australian cropping 
farms received record cash incomes in 2022-23, 
largely derived from high commodity prices and 
high levels of production (ABARES, 2024). Despite 
this recent bumper season, research has estimated 
that the long-term climate trends towards higher 
temperatures and lower winter rainfall has reduced 
annual average broadacre farm profits by 23% 
(Hughes et al. 2022).
Community perceptions of drought 
impacts across the Hay and 
Carrathool region
Residents living within the Hay and Carrathool region 
have experienced significant environmental events, 
including droughts and floods, that have caused 
damage in their local communities, ecosystems and 
industries over the past 30 years. 
During the development of the Plan, we surveyed 
147 local residents and spoke to 316 people 
through workshops and interviews. We asked how 
exposed people feel to natural disasters and how 
prepared they feel to cope with these events. 
Survey participants understand that they live in a 
region with a high risk of drought (84.3% agree or 
strongly agree), heatwaves (80.9% agree or strongly 
agree), and floods (64.1% agree or strongly agree). 
Over half of survey participants agreed (56.1%) or 
strongly agreed (10.1%) that they were well prepared 
for drought, though their confidence was lower 
in relation to the preparedness of the broader 
community. 
Conversations with locals provided a more nuanced 
understanding of this question. In a workshop with 
agronomists, one participant reflected: “People don’t 
have their head around how quickly the climate will 
change the intensity of drought. Farmers are the 
most prepared they have ever been for thinking 
about these things, but this next phase of climate 
and environment is not what they are expecting.“ 
Another participant said: “Even though people are 
more prepared, there seems to be a bit of PTSD. We 
saw this with El Nino forecasts last year…there was 
a lot of unease in farmers, thinking if they were up 
to that again. They might have all the tools but are 
they emotionally ready and confident – do they feel 
ready?” 
Workshop participants discussed how quickly 
changing climate conditions and meteorological 
forecasts can impact the emotional and 
psychological states of primary producers and 
quickly affect markets and commodity prices. 
Local forums, like farm groups or a Community 
Drought Task Forces, were identified as important 
compliments to published information. Participants 
reflected that this is because a social space to 
discuss changing forecasts, locally observed 
conditions, and their potential implications for the 
season could better support producers to make 
informed decisions about farm management under 
changing climate conditions.
Overall, community discussions suggest 
that residents feel that they are prepared for 
environmental disasters such as drought if they do 
happen, though there is more work to do in the face 
of our changing climate.
Regional drought resources and 
support
The New South Wales (NSW) Government and 
resources to understanding and preparing for the 
future impacts of droughts. These include:
1. NSW Government DroughtHub. The DroughtHub 
is an online centre that includes a wide range of 
guides, resources and assistance programs for 
primary producers and rural communities who 
are preparing for, managing the impacts of, or 
recovering from, droughts in New South Wales.
2. Disaster Assist. This federal government program 
allows people to apply for disaster recovery 
payments when their Local Government Area has 
been declared a natural disaster.
3. Future Drought Fund. This federal government 
fund helps farmers and rural communities prepare 
for drought. It includes subsidised training and 
coaching, innovation for drought resilience, 
information about the projected impacts of climate 
change on different commodities, and low-cost 
drought loans.
Existing capacities and preparedness for drought in the context of 
regional resilience
Participants in this project consistently identified community spirit and support as a key source of 
resilience in the Hay and Carrathool region. As one participant said: “Resilience is the ability to shift and 
evolve and be adaptable in face of whatever change comes your way. It’s embedded in the community 
and the people themselves.”
The strength of local communities was raised as an asset and strength in times of acute crises, as with 
the 2022 floods, as well as longer term challenges. Another participant reflected: “It isn’t an organised 
or coordinated response, but I know I can reach out for emotional or financial support (e.g. time to pay 
invoices) when it is needed. That doesn’t happen everywhere. We have a history of helping each other.”
Survey respondents identified a range of other local strengths, assets and resources for responding 
to disasters, including good local communication channels, local volunteers in services like the State 
Emergency Services (SES) and Rural Fire Services (RFS), and access to government support through 
the shire councils and primary producer support programs.

80
81
Appendix D. Regional strategies and plans
This is a summary of the Regional Resilience Strategies of the Hay and Carrathool Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan and the high level goals of the existing regional plans and strategies that were used to inform and  
shape them. 
Resource
Resource
State Development plans
Drought tools and information
Relevant themes
Relevant themes
Published
Published
Link to 
resource 
Link to 
resource 
Hay and Carrathool 
RDRP
NSW Net Zero Plan
NSW 2021: New South 
Wales State Plan  
(2011-2021)
NSW Government’s 
DroughtHub
AdaptNSW
Thirsty Country: 
Climate Change and 
Drought in Australia
The Hay and Carrathool RDRP has 26 Priority 
Actions organised into five Regional Resilience 
Strategies. These are:
1. Inclusive and Empowered Communities.
2. Future Ready Businesses.
3. Reimagined Care Economy.
4. Placemaking with Purpose.
5. Coordinated Action for Climate Resilient 
Economic Development.
The New South Wales Government’s Net 
Zero Plan is the foundation for NSW’s action 
on climate change and goal to reach net 
zero emissions by 2050. It is guided by an 
overarching commitment to “maintaining a strong 
economy, improving the quality of life for the 
power of NSW and protecting the environment”. 
The Net Zero Plan Stage 1: 2020-2030 identifies 
four priorities for the state:
1. Drive uptake of proven emissions reduction 
technologies
2. Empower consumers and businesses to make 
sustainable choices
3. Invest in the next wave of emissions reduction 
innovation
4 Ensure the NSW Government leads by example.
The NSW State Plan was a 10-year plan that 
informed the development of regional development 
plans (see Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041).  
The State Plan introduced five key strategies: 
1. Rebuild the economy: Restore economic 
growth and establish NSW as the first place in 
Australia to do business.
2. Return Quality Services: Provide the best 
transport, health, education, policing, justice 
and family services with a focus on the customer.
3. Renovate Infrastructure: Build the 
infrastructure that makes a difference to both 
our economy and people’s lives.
4. Strengthen our local environment and 
communities: Improve people’s lives by 
protecting natural environments and building a 
strong sense of community. 
5. Restore Accountability to Government: 
Talk honestly with the community, return 
planning powers to the community and respect 
the wishes of the community when making 
decisions that will impact on their everyday lives
The DroughtHub brings together resources 
for primary producers navigating drought across 
NSW.
AdaptNSW maintains a summary of relevant 
information and resources about drought in  
NSW.
This report by the Climate Council explores the 
likely impacts of climate change on drought in 
Australia.
October 
2024
March 
2020
September 
2011 (not yet 
superseded)
Ongoing
Ongoing
2015
–
Available 
online
Available 
online
Website
Website
Available 
online

82
83
Resource
Resource
Regional Development plans
Regional Development plans
Relevant themes
Relevant themes
Published
Published
Link to 
resource 
Link to 
resource 
Riverina Murray 
Regional Plan 2041
NSW Regional 
Economic 
Development 
Strategies
NSW Regional 
Economic 
Development 
Strategies
Murrumbidgee 
Regional Water 
Strategy
This Regional Plan provides a framework to 
align actions across all levels of government 
to enhance the environment, communities, 
place and economy across the Riverina region, 
including Hay and Carrathool Shires. It is guided 
by six goals: 
1. Proactively encourage greater economic 
growth, diversity and industry innovation.
2. Nurture the development of a sustainable 
environment for future generations, including 
the development of an innovative response to 
the water challenge.
3. Support education and skill development 
initiatives that enable all people to have the 
capacity and confidence to contribute to the 
region’s growth.
4. Facilitate a collaborative approach across all 
tiers of government, business and community 
to solving the challenges of the region.
5. Encourage a proactive approach to health 
and living.
6. Act with honesty, integrity, transparency and 
in accord with relevant legal and financial 
obligations, sound corporate governance 
procedures and to fulfil Departmental funding 
requirements. 
The Hay Shire is within the Western Murray FER. 
The updated strategies to support economic 
development in the region are to: 
1. Drive growth in high-value agriculture 
and value adding in agricultural product 
manufacturing
2. Recognise the role of the visitor economy 
in developing a more resilient and diverse 
economy
3. Grow the mining and construction industries 
to capitalise on the region’s renewable 
energy generation, storage and transmission 
opportunities
4. Leverage cross border and training 
industries.
The NSW Government has supported local 
councils and communities across regional NSW 
to develop Regional Economic Development 
Strategies for 38 Functional Economic Regions (FER). 
The Carrathool Shire is within the Western Riverina 
FER. The updated strategies to support economic 
development in the region are to:
1. Develop and grow the agricultural and 
manufacturing ‘Engines of Growth’
2. Invest in skills and the supply of key utilities 
critical to ‘Engines of Growth’
3. Grow the Western Riverina population and 
labour pool
The NSW Government is supporting the 
development of regional water strategies, 
including for the Murrumbidgee River system, 
which is integral to the Hay and Carrathool Shires. 
First 
published 
in 2017, 
updated 
in January 
2023
June 2018, 
updated 
in January 
2023
June 2018, 
updated in 
January  
2023
Expected 
late 2024
Available 
online
Available 
online
Available 
online
Available 
online

84
85
Resource
Resource
Local Development plans
Local Development plans
Relevant themes
Relevant themes
Published
Published
Link to 
resource 
Link to 
resource 
Carrathool Shire 
Council ‘Towards 
2032: Our vision,  
our plan’
Carrathool Shire 
Council ‘Towards 
2032: Our vision,  
our plan’
Hay Shire Council’s 
Community Strategic 
Plan 2022-2032
The Carrathool Shire Council’s “Towards 2032: 
Our Vision, Our Plan” sets out the community’s 
long-term plan for the Shire. The Plan’s five goals 
and community outcomes are:
1. Thriving and liveable communities
a. Our communities are vibrant and liveable and 
help maintain and improve our quality of life
b. Our open spaces are inviting and accessible 
to all, showcase the natural beauty of the 
landscape, and provide us with places for 
meeting, resting and playing
c. There is enough land and housing available 
for our community to grow and for us to have 
choice in where we live
2. Accessible and connected 
a. We have a reliable and well-maintained local 
road network that connects us with our own 
community and other places
b. Our public spaces and parks are accessible to 
all community members
c. People and places within our communities are 
connected through well-planned networks of 
footpaths and walking tracks
3. Resilient and welcoming 
a. We have a strong connection to place, and 
our sense of community is one of our greatest 
strengths
b. We provide opportunities for our youth and 
talent
c. We enjoy a variety of community events and 
programs. Tourists enjoy a range of attractions 
that showcase our shire.
4. Reliable and relevant services 
a. We enjoy well-maintained public infrastructure, 
parks, and open spaces
b. The services Council provides are reliable and 
suited to our needs
c. Our future service needs are considered
5. Civic leadership and governance 
a. Our views are heard and responded to
b. We are informed and engaged
c. Our local leadership is strong and effective.
The Hay Shire Council’s Community Strategic 
Plan 2022-2032 sets out the community’s vision 
for their region, in alignment with the NSW State 
Plan and Riverina Murray Regional Plan. The key 
objectives of the plan are:
A. Environmental sustainability
a. Celebrate and promote our unique local 
environment
b. Protect our water security
c. Manage our waste sustainably
d. Our community is inclusive and sustainable
B. Liveable and vibrant community
a. Maintain and beautify the town centres
b. Our community has available housing options
c. Our community has access to a range of 
employment opportunities
d. All cultures are strong, well supported, 
flourishing
e. Our community has access to a range of 
community services
2022
2022
2022
Available 
online
Available 
online
Available 
online

86
87
Resource
Local Development plans
Relevant themes
Published
Link to 
resource 
Hay Shire Council’s 
Community Strategic 
Plan 2022-2032
Hay Shire Council 
Circular Economy 
Strategy
Hay Shire Council 
Drought Management 
Plan 2018
C. Economic prosperity and sustainability 
a. Our community welcomes new and innovative 
industry to support our future
b. Our community values its history and tourism
c. We have the capacity to hold numerous events 
and activities
d. Our community is innovative and adaptive
D. Governance and organisational performance
a. Our community is supported by a strong and 
resilient Council that is responsive to its needs
b. Our community is connected and informed
The Hay Shire Council’s Circular Economy 
Strategy aims to “provide guidelines and practical 
examples of where the Hay Shire Council as 
an organisation can make a difference, and 
ultimately lead by example” in relation to circular 
economy approaches in the region. The vision in 
the Strategy is to:
1. Reduce waste and pollution
2. Circulate products and materials at their 
highest value
3. Regenerate nature
The Hay Shire Council published the Drought 
Management Plan 2018 to provide guidance to 
staff when managing drought events and inform 
the community of the issues associated with 
drought management and the community’s role 
during drought. The Plan includes:
1. Drought prevention strategy
2. Preparedness actions
3. Drought response strategy
4. Recovery strategy
5. Water supply scheme
6. Climate considerations
7. The applicable regulatory framework
2022
October 
2022
January 
2018
Available 
online
Available 
online
Available 
online

88
           We know the best solutions will 
come from within our region. The Plan is 
an invitation for all to contribute to the 
delivery of actions and initiatives that will 
turn the Hay and Carrathool region into 
the future we want.
Horses in Hay (Hay Shire Council)