Inland Great Southern
Drought Resilience Plan
Great Southern 
Development Commission

Contact Details:
Great Southern Development Commission
Pyrmont House
110 Serpentine Road
ALBANY WA 6330
Telephone: (08) 9842 4888
Email: gsdc@gsdc.wa.gov.au
Website:	 www.gsdc.wa.gov.au

10 Dore Street
KATANNING WA 6317
Telephone:(08) 9821 3211
Email: katanning@gsdc.wa.gov.au
be reproduced by any process without written permission from the Great Southern Development Commission. 
Requests and enquiries concerning reproduction and rights should be addressed to the Chief Executive Officer, 
Great Southern Development Commission, PO Box 280, Albany WA 6331.
This report is available in alternative formats on request. We encourage readers to access the report online 
through our website and to use recycled paper if they print a copy.

TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
Acknowledgement of Country	
4
Acknowledgements 	
5
5
Foreword	
6
Executive Summary	
7
01 Introduction	
8
02 Vision, Goals and Outcomes	
12
2.1 Developing Our Vision	
13
2.2 Goals and Outcomes	
14
2.3 Definitions	
15
03 Stakeholder Engagement and 
Partnerships	
16
04 The Evidence Base	
20
4.1 Drought Vulnerability Assessment 	
21
4.2 Technical Expertise	
24
4.3 Plan Alignment	
25
05 The Inland Great Southern Region - 
System Description	
26
06 An Assessment of the Inland Great 
Southern’s Resilience	
30
6.1 Mapping Drought Vulnerability 	
31
6.2 Drought Vulnerability Index 	
37
6.3 Impacts of Drought on the inland 
Great Southern 	
40
07 Building on Existing Resilience	
44
Theme 1: Resilient Water 	
46
Theme 2: Resilient Communities	
47
Theme 3: Resilient Agriculture	
47
Theme 4: Resilient Landscapes	
48
Theme 5: Resilient Regional Economy 	
48
08 Opportunities Moving Forward	
50
Theme 1: Resilient Water	
51
Theme 2: Resilient Communities	
52
Theme 3: Resilient Agriculture	
52
Theme 4: Resilient Landscapes	
53
Theme 5: Resilient Regional Economy	
53
09 The Plan	
54
9.1 Resilient Water	
55
9.2 Resilient Communities	
57
9.3  Resilient Agriculture	
59
9.4   Resilient Landscapes	
61
9.5    Resilient Regional Economy	
63
10 Plan Implementation and Enduring 
Governance	
64
11 Investment Framework	
65
12 Monitoring and Evaluation	
66
12.1 Context	
66
12.2 Inland Great Southern Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan Monitoring 
and Evaluation Framework	
67
12.3 Reporting and Responsibility	
67
13 Appendix 1: Inland Great Southern 
Policy, Strategy and Plan Alignment	
70

Acknowledgement 
of Country
We acknowledge the Noongar people, the traditional 
custodians in the Great Southern, and their continuing 
connection to the region’s land, waters and community. 
We pay our respects to all members of Noongar 
communities, and to elders past, present and emerging.
Indigenous filmmaker Karla Hart (centre) and elders Averil Dean and Annette Eades lead 
Noongar dancers during the CinefestOZ Albany event Kinjarling Koort.
4          Great Southern Development Commission

Welcome to the Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan (DRP). This plan is jointly funded through the 
of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD). The Inland Great Southern DRP is a locally led project 
that champions drought resilience and preparedness for dry seasons in the region. It has been developed in 
collaboration with the Shires of Jerramungup, Kent, Gnowangerup, Katanning, Kojonup, Cranbrook, Woodanilling 
and Broomehill-Tambellup. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the nearly 330 people representing 150 different organisations and businesses in the region 
who contributed to the development of this plan through participation in interviews, meetings and workshops. 
The in-kind contribution of the Climate Science and Geographic Information Systems teams at DPIRD, and the 
work of the consultants who undertook literature reviews and data syntheses on our behalf were integral in the 
development of this document. We thank the Steering Committee and Technical Working Group that contributed to 
the review and refinement of elements of this plan. We also acknowledge the partner agencies, organisations and 
stakeholders who have supported and contributed to this plan including: 
•	
The Wheatbelt, Mid-West and Great Southern Development Commissions
•	
South-West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	
Shires of Kojonup, Jerramungup, Gnowangerup, Katanning, Kent,  Cranbrook, Woodanilling 
and Broomehill-Tambellup 
•	
Southcoast Natural Resource Management 
•	
State Agencies
•	
Grower Groups
•	
Local community groups and business networks
•	
Indigenous groups
•	
Research organisations
•	
Consultants/technical experts
This document has been prepared using best available information and expert analyses to provide an evidence base 
for the Inland Great Southern DRP.  All information is provided to the best of our ability, and within the limits of our 
knowledge and resources. It is anticipated that elements of this inaugural Drought Resilience Plan will require review 
and updating, as new information and research become available. 
The interventions identified in this Plan are conceptual and not endorsed by the State. The implementation of these 
resilience building interventions and the proposed actions is subject to further development, feasibility studies and 
endorsement with consortia stakeholders and lead delivery agencies.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, and the State 
of Western Australia accept no liability whatsoever by reason of negligence or otherwise, arising from the use or 
release of this information or any part of it. 
Version: 1.0 
An electronic copy of this plan may be obtained at gsdc@gsdc.wa.gov.au or www.gsdc.wa.gov.au
Photos: Great Southern Development Commission, Marion Leonhardt, Shire of Gnowangerup.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              5

Foreword
The Great Southern region of Western Australia is well 
known for its unique environment, strong communities, 
and farmland. Agriculture is a significant segment of 
our economy, with both livestock and a diverse variety 
of cropping featuring across the region. 
The impacts of extended dry seasons and drought 
stretch far beyond the agricultural sector, bringing 
uncertainty and strain to our local communities and the 
broader economy. However, there are opportunities 
for diversification of our regional economy to reduce 
the dependence upon agriculture, and increase value- 
adding options and new industries across the Great 
Southern region. 
For this reason that the Great Southern is heavily 
invested in better understanding climate variability 
and dry seasons in our local region, and how we can 
support our regional economy. This will allow us to 
strengthen our preparedness for future dry season 
events to better withstand the risks of drought and an 
increasingly changing climate.
The Great Southern is fortunate to participate in the 
pilot of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
process which draws on understanding local impacts 
and opportunities, while also creating pathways to 
share and learn from other regions.
This three-stage process brings together a Drought 
Vulnerability Assessment, Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan and Investment Framework specific for our region. 
The combination of both technical and scientific 
evaluation, along with extensive local insights, provide 
a comprehensive picture of the impacts of climate 
variability and practical future actions to encourage 
investment in long term risk mitigation and 
resilience activities.
This community-led plan will ultimately place the 
Great Southern in a position to adapt, recognise 
opportunities, and implement mitigation activities with 
the benefit of both local knowledge and learnings from 
further afield. 
I would like to acknowledge and thank everyone who 
took part in the Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
process. This input, paired with a strong evidence 
base, will be invaluable when considering new options 
for better managing dry seasons and reduced growing 
season rainfall in the inland Great Southern.  
We are fortunate to live and work in such a beautiful 
part of the world, with a strong sense of community. 
Our Drought Resilience Plan is yet another tool that will 
help to support our communities to thrive. 
Natasha Monks
Chief Executive Officer
Stirlings - Tourism Western Australia
6          Great Southern Development Commission

Executive Summary
1	 Mastrantonis, S. (2022). Defining Drought in Western Australia. Centre for Crop and Disease management, School of Molecular 
and Life Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA.
The inland Great Southern is one of three regions 
developing Regional Drought Resilience Plans (RDRPs) 
in Western Australia. The Great Southern Development 
Commission (GSDC) partnered with the Department of 
Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) 
to support the delivery of the plan across the Shires of 
Jerramungup, Kent, Gnowangerup, Katanning, Kojonup, 
Cranbrook, Woodanilling and Broomehill-Tambellup. 
Collaborative stakeholder consultation facilitated 
the contribution of over 330 people, from 150 
organisations. The Drought Vulnerability Assessment 
(DVA) informs the Inland Great Southern DRP and 
should be read in conjunction with the plan. 
The intensity and duration of hot spells is projected to 
increase across WA, with wet years likely to become 
less frequent, and dry years likely to become more 
common. Analyses of rainfall and temperature data 
highlight a potentially concerning trend, with the 
composite hazard of hot drought beginning to occur 
in recent years.1  Appropriate steps must be taken 
to anticipate and mitigate the potentially devastating 
effects of hot droughts and a changing climate. 
The region has demonstrated good capacity to 
adapt to drying seasons and is in a strong position 
of resilience due to consistent rainfall and increased 
technology. However, there is a continual need to 
adapt, innovate and potentially transform to enable this 
success to be maintained or built upon. 
The Inland Great Southern DRP identified five 
key drought resilience themes, with a number of 
interventions and specific actions identified.  
These key themes include:
Resilient Water
Resilient Communities 
Resilient Agriculture 
Resilient Landscapes 
Resilient Regional Economy 
Inland Great Southern stakeholders identified 
gaps in past dry season responses that could be 
addressed through future resilience building activities. 
Opportunities to enhance resilience include: 
•	
well-informed farm business planning
•	
earlier identification of dry season impacts 
•	
interventions to support community groups and 
local government
•	
continued investment for research and 
development into farming practices to maximise 
preparedness for reduced rainfall in the growing 
season
The Inland Great Southern DRP has strong alignment 
with the Great Southern Development Commission’s 
strategic priorities of a Strong and Diverse Economy, 
Regional Livability and Strong Communities. The 
Plan also aligns with the Strategic Community Plans 
of the Shires of Broomehill-Tambellup, Cranbrook, 
Gnowangerup, Jerramungup, Katanning, Kent, Kojonup 
and Woodanilling. 
This Plan is intended to be a living document, guiding 
state, federal and local government, community, and 
industry action on drought resilience.  Implementation 
of the plan is subject to further discussion with project 
partners and local government stakeholders. This 
will also include identification of high impact and high 
feasibility interventions that can be further developed 
into investable projects.  
               7

01 Introduction
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Vision
To build a resilient region that can withstand the impacts of 
dry seasons and climate variability by creating a sustainable 
environment, self-reliant communities, and a diverse 
regional economy.
Lake Ewlyamartup 
8          Great Southern Development Commission

Australia is a country with a history of drought. In the Great Southern region, there has been a recurring theme of 
drier seasons over the last decade, adversely affecting the agricultural sector and agriculturally dependent rural 
and regional communities. These impacts will become more frequent and severe with climate change.  Proactive 
regional drought resilience planning is imperative to developing locally applicable solutions and responses. 
initiatives, including development of RDRPs across States and Territories. These RDRPs focus on innovative ways 
to build regional drought resilience across the agricultural sector and supporting industries, through a triple bottom 
line, collaborative and evidence-based approach.  
In the inaugural year of the program in WA, RDRPs have been completed for three regional consortia areas, 
identified due to their reliance on agriculture, and their experiences of recent exposure to prolonged dry conditions 
(figure 1).  The consortia include:
•	
Southern Wheatbelt - Wheatbelt Development Commission and five LGAs (Dumbleyung, Kulin, Kondinin, Lake 
Grace and Wagin)
•	
Inland Great Southern - Great Southern Development Commission and eight LGAs (Jerramungup, Kent, 
Gnowangerup, Katanning, Kojonup, Cranbrook, Woodanilling and Broomehill-Tambellup)
•	
Northern Agricultural - Mid-West Development Commission, Northern Agricultural Catchments Council and 
three LGAs (Greater-Geraldton, Northampton and Chapman Valley)
Figure 1: Pilot Consortia Areas of WA for 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning
Gascoyne
LAKE GRACE
WAGIN
JERRAMUNGUP
KONDININ
KATANNING
Regional Development Commission boundary
Participating Shire
Partner Development Commission
GOLDFIELDS-
ESPERANCE
WHEATBELT
GREAT
SOUTHERN
SOUTH WEST
PEEL
MID WEST
KALGOORLIE
MEEKATHARRA
GERALDTON
ALBANY
PERTH
BUNBURY
ESPERANCE
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
REGIONAL DROUGHT
RESILIENCE PLANNING
NORTHAMPTON
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              9

Figure 2: Regional Drought Resilience Program Framework   
To inform the planning process for the Inland Great Southern DRP, input was sought from a range of stakeholders. 
The following figure presents an overview of the Regional Drought Resilience Program, with a description of each of 
the four stages undertaken as part of our approach. 
Regional Drought Resilience Program
The project allocated funds to DPIRD and the Wheatbelt, Great Southern,  and Mid West Development Commissions 
to support the development of Regional Drought Resilience Plans for three sub-regions across Western Australia
 A DROUGHT RESILIENT REGION
STAGE 1 - GOVERNANCE
The RDRP has strong alignment to the Strategic Plans of the three Regional Development Commissions, and the 
participating Local Governments. The Plans will be developed in partnership with DPIRD, Local Governments, 
Regional Development Commissions, community and industry. The program will be overseen 
by a Steering Committee, Project Advisory Groups (PAG) and technical experts.
Steering Committee
Project Team
Project Advisory Group
Technical Advisory Group
STAGE 2 - DROUGHT VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT
The development of the drought vulnerability assessment is a vital informing piece of work for the Plans. 
This will ensure a science-based approach, incorporation economic, social and environmental resilience factors.
Demographic 
analysis and 
literature review
Climate risk and 
spatial analysis
Economic 
impacts analysis
Environmental 
impacts analysis
Social impacts 
analysis
Indicators of 
drought
STAGE 3 - DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN DEVELOPMENT
Engagement of the community by the Project Teams to identify projects. This will be completed with the support 
of contracted Project Officers and Regional NRM Organisations. The Plan will be reviewed by the Project Advisory 
Group.
First Nations projects
Agriculture and 
related supply chain 
projects
Local government 
service deliver 
projects
Transformational 
projects
Business and 
community sector 
projects
STAGE 4 - INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT
A framework of investment ready Drought Resilience Actions will be developed, allowing targeting of
 public and private investment
Includes potentially 
shovel-ready business 
cases
RDRP funding per region 
to implement plan* 
PLANNING WITH COMMUNITY AND PAG
VALIDATION WITH PAG
CO-DESIGNED COLLABORATIVE AND 
REGIONALLY SPECIFIC
*subject to negotiation with 
the Federal government 
10          Great Southern Development Commission

Jake Wilton Photo
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              11

02 Vision, Goals 
and Outcomes
12          Great Southern Development Commission

2.1 Developing Our Vision
The purpose of the Inland Great Southern DRP is to identify actions to prepare for increased climate variability, 
reduced growing season rainfall, and an increased number of drought events. This plan will inform future 
investments and assist in securing future funding for communities, the agricultural sector and regional businesses 
to help increase drought resilience in our region.  
Our drought resilience vision for the inland Great Southern is based on a grass roots assessment of what can 
realistically be achieved at a community, government and industry level to ensure the region is prepared for more 
frequent and severe droughts in the future. By creating a shared vision and agreed goals and outcomes, we have 
set a common direction and aspirational view of our region’s future from a drought resilience perspective. 
Our vision has been guided and informed by widespread stakeholder input which points to a self-reliant agricultural 
community, capable of withstanding the challenges of dry seasons through shared responsibility and an integrated 
approach to drought management and preparedness.  As such, our resilience vision for the region is ‘to build 
a resilient region that can withstand the impacts of dry seasons and climate variability, by creating a sustainable 
environment, self-reliant communities, and a diverse regional economy.’
Notably, the vision, priorities and outcomes of the Future Drought Fund have provided the background and context 
for the development of the inland Great Southern drought resilience vision.
Our Noongar youth artistically 
represented Country with trees and 
landscapes, highlighted the importance 
of trees to address global challenges.  
(Report on Aboriginal Community Consultations, 2022)
“
“
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              13

2.2 Goals and Outcomes
Through discussions with regional stakeholders, five key themes emerged, each with its own long-term desired 
outcome. These provide the roadmap needed to achieve our overall drought resilience vision and are outlined in the 
following figure. 
Figure 3: Inland Great Southern’s drought resilient themes and desired outcomes
The specific priorities and actions associated with each of these themes and outcomes are provided in greater 
detail in The Plan section of this document. The interventions detailed will guide investment to build drought 
resilience, with actions implemented in partnership between communities, regional organisations, local government 
and industry. 
RESILIENT 
WATER
Outcome: A water 
system that can 
sustain industry, 
agriculture and the 
community for two 
consecutive low 
rainfall years
What a 
drought 
resilient 
region
looks like
RESILIENT COMMUNITIES 
Outcome: Communities that are 
resourceful, adaptable and 
supported to mentally and physically 
bounce back from drought
RESILIENT 
LANDSCAPES
Outcome: Healthy landscapes 
with natural resources able 
to sustain industry and 
environmental services
RESILIENT 
REGIONAL ECONOMY 
Outcome: A diverse, forward 
looking, adaptable business     
sector, not wholly 
     dependant on seasonal     
conditions
RESILIENT 
AGRICULTURE
Outcome: An 
agriculture 
sector that is 
highly engaged in 
innovating farming 
systems to be 
resilient to drought
THEME
THEME
THEME
THEME
THEME
14          Great Southern Development Commission

From a government and funding perspective, the following figure illustrates how our five drought resilience themes 
resonate with the objectives of the Drought Resilience Funding Plan. 
Stakeholder themes and future drought fund alignment

Figure 4: Inland Great Southern drought resilient themes
2.3 Definitions
The need for a regionally appropriate definition of “drought” was raised several times during stakeholder 
engagement for this Plan.  Community groups defined drought as ‘consecutive dry seasons where there is 
inadequate growing season rainfall over two or more seasons.’ Indicators that they are in a drought were the lack of 
opening rains to commence their seeding operations, reduced growing season rainfall, less rainfall events that result 
in reduced run-off, and reduced spring rainfall. The Drought Vulnerability Assessment highlights the need for a more 
appropriate set of drought criteria for Western Australia. 
The Technical Working Group further expanded the need for drought definitions to include social, environmental 
and economic impacts. The Technical Working Group (TWG) defined drought for the RDRP project as follows:2
“The term drought refers to a prolonged period of abnormally dry 
conditions that impact negatively on water availability and agricultural 
production in a region and, consequently, impacts negatively on the 
economy and environment of the region and the health and well-being 
of its residents”.
An assessment of meteorological definitions of drought indicated that a definition based on growing season rainfall 
(between April to October) is considered more appropriate for the inland Great Southern than a definition based on 
total annual rainfall. 
Growing season rainfall better represents agricultural drought in the region, where dryland cropping in autumn and 
winter is the primary land use.3 Livestock also require water for runoff into dams, generally events greater than 
25mm.  In some years there is sufficient rainfall for cropping but not enough on-farm water for livestock. A more 
in-depth analysis of terms and definitions can be found in the Inland Great Southern Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment and supporting analysis undertaken by Curtin University. 
2	 Mastrantonis, s. (2022). Defining Drought in Western Australia. Centre for Crop and Disease management, School of Molecular 
and Life Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA.
3	 Mastrantonis, Stanley. (2022). Defining Drought in Western Australia. Centre for Crop and Disease Management, School of 
Molecular and Life Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA.
THEME 1
RESILIENT 
WATER
RESILIENT 
COMMUNITY
RESILIENT 
AGRICULTURE
RESILIENT 
LANDSCAPES
RESILIENT 
REGIONAL 
ECONOMY
THEME 2
THEME 3
THEME 4
THEME 5
FDF OBJECTIVE
Grow the self-
reliance and 
performance of the 
agriculture sector
FDF OBJECTIVE
Strengthen the 
wellbeing and social 
capital of rural, 
regional and remote 
communities 
FDF OBJECTIVE
Grow the self-
reliance and 
performance 
(productivity and 
profitability) or the 
agriculture sector
FDF OBJECTIVE
Improve the natural 
capital of agricultural 
landscapes for 
better  environmental 
outcomes
FDF OBJECTIVE
Grow the self-
reliance and 
performance 
(productivity and 
profitability) or the 
agriculture sector
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              15

03 Stakeholder 
Engagement and 
Partnerships
Pingrup silos - Shire of Kent
16          Great Southern Development Commission

Through the regional stakeholder engagement process, project partners worked collaboratively to:
•	
demonstrate the State’s commitment to supporting farm businesses and communities to become more 
prepared for, and resilient to, the impacts of drought 
•	
identify the appropriate target audiences in each region, share program benefits and promote the importance 
of becoming drought-resilient and drought-prepared
•	
engage local stakeholders in each region, undertaking communication activities that promote the importance 
of regional-scale planning, building commitment to the process and strengthening partnerships between 
relevant stakeholders
•	
maximise participation and engagement in regional planning processes
Strong partnerships were key in the successful delivery of the program. The following figure outlines the 
governance framework that supported the achievement of our engagement goals. 
Figure 5: Governance framework for the WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
STEERING COMMITTEE
(DPIRD, 3 x RDCs, SW WA 
Hub, LGA Rep for each RDC)
PROGRAM: Future Drought Fund
TECHNICAL WORKING 
GROUP
(DPIRD, DWER, CSIRO, Water 
Corporation, GIS expert, other 
experts as required, RDC 
representatives)
Legend:
Reporting	
       Flow of funds	            Ongoing working relationship
EXECUTING ENTITY: Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development
MID WEST 
DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION
Local Project Advisory 
Group and Implementation 
Consortium
(local DPIRD and DWER 
officials, LGAs, tertiary 
institutions, other State 
agencies, industry, 
consultants and 
contractors)
GREAT SOUTHERN 
DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION
Local Project Advisory 
Group and Implementation 
Consortium
(local DPIRD and DWER 
officials, LGAs, tertiary 
institutions, other State 
agencies, industry, 
consultants and 
contractors)
WHEATBELT 
DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION
Local Project Advisory 
Group and Implementation 
Consortium
(local DPIRD and DWER 
officials, LGAs, tertiary 
institutions, other State 
agencies, industry, 
consultants and 
contractors)
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              17

To ensure our plan was well informed by local views, values, interests, knowledge and experience, we engaged a 
diverse range of stakeholders in a fair and non-discriminatory way by creating a collaborative environment where 
everyone was encouraged to have a voice and contribute their views, without judgement.  
Engagement activities occurred between October 2021 and Dec 2022, involving more than 330 individuals 
representing 150 organisations. 
In addition to the Steering Committee, Project Advisory Group and Technical Working Group, stakeholders engaged 
included:
•	
Agricultural and non-agricultural businesses
•	
Representatives of the Indigenous community
•	
Noongar Land Enterprise Group
•	
Growers groups
•	
Community organisations, leaders, and local champions
•	
Research organisations
•	
South Coast Natural Resource Management
•	
Local Government Areas (LGA)
•	
Tertiary organisations
•	
CSIRO
•	
Agricultural industry representatives
•	
State government agencies and government trading enterprises
•	
Financial experts, organisations and institutions
•	
Farm and agricultural advisers, consultants, agronomists, and stock and station agents
Engagement sessions focused on reviewing emerging technical analyses and identifying drought resilience project 
ideas for inclusion in the Inland Great Southern DRP.  A range of methods were used including in-person interviews, 
meetings, surveys (online and in person), phone interviews, online engagement and workshops.  
In addition to this consultation work, a global review of drought innovation4 was commissioned to identify global 
resilience projects and assess their potential application to regional WA.  Areas of research were developed and 
workshopped with regional areas to identify key priorities. These are outlined in more detail in “The Plan” section of 
this document. 
Strong stakeholder engagement generated buy-in from the community and stimulated interest in the project, 
building and strengthening relationships across and within the region.
As part of our engagement, interventions were identified within each of our five emerging themes.  Outlined in 
Table 1, interventions are grouped under each theme, and classified according to their identified pathway – maintain, 
modify, or transform. These pathways identify the type of change needed in the region to achieve our desired 
outcomes. This allows for decision making around which set of intervention options to start with, given available 
resources. 
4	 Middleton, S. (2022). AgDots. Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program Global Literature Review – Key Drivers Report. 
Prepared for Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development.
18          Great Southern Development Commission

MAINTAIN 
MODIFY
TRANSFORM
Resilient Water
Increase capacity of on-farm 
water supplies to meet increasing 
demands and a drying climate. 
Bolster scheme capacity in 
agricultural areas and regional 
towns at risk of a drying climate and 
increased demand (buffer tanks).
Review risks of drought on regional 
intensive livestock, horticulture and 
viticulture industries, and support 
implementation of drought proof 
measures.  
Prioritisation framework to guide 
investment in water infrastructure 
for agriculture and regional 
communities, based on increased 
demand and a drying climate.
Install climate-independent water 
infrastructure using innovative 
technology in areas with no 
access to scheme water.
Extend scheme pipes further into 
regions of the Great Southern at 
risk of climate change.
Water for industry growth: 
Identification of future business 
opportunities in regional areas 
with access to suitable water 
resources (i.e. Beaufort Paleo-
channel).
Resilient Communities
“Green spaces” and community 
infrastructure to support community 
connection during drought events.
 Mental health first aid training for 
farm consultants and community 
leaders to support farmers and 
regional businesses pre, post and 
during drought events. 
Development of local leadership 
capacity to share drought resilient 
strategies.
Drought Plan for WA (interagency 
approach using framework of 
Emergency Management). 
Provision of drought officers 
to support LGAs, regional 
communities, businesses and 
the agriculture sector during and 
post drought events. 
Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment – refined to monitor, 
track and predict impact of 
drought (benchmarking social, 
environment and economic 
criteria). 
Resilient Farms
Farm Business Resilience and Small 
Business climate resilience planning 
workshops in the region.
Collaborate to identify, prioritise, 
and implement research and 
development needs to increase 
drought resilience.
Identify and integrate economic 
indicators into the DVA framework.
WA Drought Platform (including 
climate information, drought 
indicators, support services, 
drought resilience information).
Increase uptake of innovative 
research to address drought 
resilience.
Implement farm drought risk 
planning and implement into 
business planning to ensure 
preparedness.
Strengthen and expand WA 
Climate Policy programs to 
develop carbon farming and 
sequestration markets.
Identify transformative 
agricultural enterprises that 
could operate in areas at high 
risk of drought.
Continued research and trials 
of drought resilient crops and 
pastures.  
Resilient Landscapes
Quantify the impacts of 
regenerative agriculture practices 
during and post drought.
Diversification options explored 
and analysed to increase value for 
marginal agricultural land at risk of 
drought.
Farm dams built with ecosystem 
services to improve water quality 
and reduce evaporation. 
Natural resource condition 
report card and natural capital 
accounting for the regions.
Increase capacity of Aboriginal 
businesses to be more resilient 
to dry seasons.
Landscape rehydration project 
– to increase water holding 
capacity across the agricultural 
land.
Documented ecosystem services 
for inland Great Southern. 
Resilient Regional 
Economy
Undertake regional infrastructure 
audit of regional towns and identify 
actions to address limitations to 
growth.
Review risks and viability of supply 
chain sector based on increasing 
drought events.
Support industry diversification 
to buffer regional communities 
from the impact of droughts.
Address constraining enabling 
infrastructure to support industry 
growth and regional resilience to 
climate change.
Table 1: Inland Great Southern themes, interventions and pathways
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              19

04 The 
Evidence Base
20          Great Southern Development Commission

4.1 Drought Vulnerability Assessment 
4.1.1	
Overview
This Inland Great Southern DRP provides a high-level summary of the findings from our Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment (DVA). The DVA provides the evidence base to support the identification of actions to mitigate drought 
impacts in the inland Great Southern. It provides a summary of the likely economic, environmental and social 
impacts of future drought, based on the latest available climate change scenarios.
The DVA is comprised of a literature review, socio-economic analysis, spatial prioritisation, risk assessment. It 
includes analysis from technical experts, research professionals and industry leaders. Extensive stakeholder and 
community engagement allowed for the harnessing of perspectives and insights from people’s lived experience and 
provided the opportunity to better understand how the regions have been affected by drought in the past, and what 
has already been done to mitigate the impacts of future droughts.  This in-depth evidence base supports:
•	
An improved understanding of the impacts of drought in the region
•	
Synthesis of program and policy initiatives related to drought at a local, regional, state and federal level
•	
Investigation of alternative definitions of drought, based on growing season rainfall, better suited to the 
broadacre cropping areas in the inland Great Southern
•	
In depth analyses of the economic, environmental, social and water impacts of drought, including the impacts 
of drought on Aboriginal communities
•	
Development of a multi-criteria mapping methodology that synthesises many datasets into a single decision-
support tool highlighting priority areas for investment in resilience-building activities
•	
An exploration of how readily measurable biophysical and socio-economic factors, often publicly available 
data, might serve as indicators of drought and be used to understand and / or predict the impacts of drought
•	
A drought vulnerability index using the data collected to create the drought risk priority areas map 
Regional drought vulnerability assessments require consideration of both the potential impacts of drought and the 
adaptive capacities of the people and systems in each region. Drought impact includes the degree of exposure to 
drought in the regions and each region’s inherent sensitivity to drought conditions. Adaptive capacity describes the 
internal features and characteristics of the regions that influence their ability to respond effectively to and withstand 
past and future droughts. 
Exposure is the extent to which a given system, community or region will be subjected to a particular hazard. For 
the RDRP, exposure is measured in terms of the extent to which a focus region will be exposed to drought and 
drought-related climate change processes such as increasing atmospheric temperatures and changes in rainfall 
patterns and soil moisture.
Sensitivity is the extent to which a given system, community or region will be affected by a particular hazard. For 
the RDRP, sensitivity is fundamentally about the ways in which regions are impacted by drought. It is measured in 
terms of the effect of drought on crop and animal production, and the influence of regional characteristics such as 
soil types and farming systems on the effect that a drought has in the region.
Adaptive Capacity is the extent to which a system is able to exploit opportunities and resist or adjust to change. 
For the RDRP, adaptive capacity is measured in terms of historical response to droughts in the regions or estimated 
according to a set of vulnerability proxies such as income, education, community participation rates and drought 
resilient natural features (ground cover, topography).
Resilience refers to the region’s ability to absorb disturbance and to effectively maintain, reorganise or make 
changes to sustain lives and livelihoods5. The RDRP drought vulnerability assessment conceptual framework draws 
on past studies in Australia and around the world to ensure that sufficient attention is paid to all important aspects 
of drought vulnerability and resilience in the affected regions. Planning for resilience is about building:
•	
absorptive capacity for maintaining the system
•	
adaptive capacity for modifying the systems when needed
•	
transformative capacity for systemic change when maintaining and modifying existing systems 
•	
developing new configuration of networks and institutions to implement these capacities
5	 Maru, Yiheyis & Tom Measham. 2021. CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission: Transition planning for building resilient communities 
in drought affected regions. National Science Agency.
               21

The following figure outlines the framework for the development of the DVA, with the broad range of information 
sources that contributed to it.
Figure 6: Conceptual framework for the DVA
4.1.2	
DVA Methodology Components
Stakeholder Engagement
Consultation with stakeholders is critical in understanding how those living and working in the regions have 
experienced and responded to drought in the past, what they have undertaken to mitigate drought risk, how they 
perceive future drought risk and understanding priority actions they consider important in building resilience to 
drought in the future.  
A Technical Working Group (TWG) was established and provided opportunity for input and review of the key 
elements of the DVA model, including identification of important datasets to inform the assessment process. 
Membership of the TWG included DPIRD climate scientists, CSIRO, University of Western Australia’s Centre for 
Social Impact, Curtin University’s Centre for Crop Disease Management, Murdoch University’s Harry Butler Institute, 
Planfarm and Noongar Land Enterprises
A Steering Committee provided high level support and direction to the project team and was chaired by the CEO 
of the Wheatbelt Development Commission, with representation from the participating Regional Development 
Commissions and local governments, and the Director of the South-West of WA Drought Resilience and Adoption 
Hub.  
South Coast Natural Resource Management (South Coast NRM) was contracted to assist with consultation with 
Grower Groups, farm advisors, farming champions and South Coast NRM Reference Groups. They also worked in 
cooperation with Gillamii Centre and Keogh Bay to consult with First Nation representatives across the region. They 
used a range of methods including participatory workshops, interviews and regional surveys. 
NDVI at the end of 
the growing season 
(20yr average, 
lowest  10%)
Average household 
income
Farm profit
Percentage 
employment in 
agriculture
Average farm size
DROUGHT
 IMPACT
Change in growing 
season rainfall 
(historical)
ADAPTIVE 
CAPACITY
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Change in maturing 
season temperature 
(historical)
Change in growing 
season rainfall 
(projected)
Change in maturing 
season temperature 
(projected)
Rainfall intensity 
events > 10mm
Change in drought 
frequency
Rainfall intensity 
events > 25mm
Distance from the 
coast
NATURAL CAPITAL
•	 Soil capability
•	 Plant available soil 
moisture
•	 Native vegetation extent
•	 Trend in NDVI
•	 Surface salinity
•	 Important water 
resources
•	 Groundwater resources
•	 Groundwater quality
•	 Proclaimed water 
protection areas
Water quality
High quality 
agriculture land
Livestock production 
(numbers; sheep, 
cattle)
Crop population (t/
ha; wheat, canola, 
barley)
Average potential 
wheat yield
Change in root zone 
soil moisture
Change in timing of 
the autumn break
Change in potential 
yield
FINANCIAL CAPITAL
SOCIAL CAPITAL
DROUGHT VULNERABILITY 
AND RESISTANCE
Ability to absorb, respond to and 
recover from drought
HUMAN CAPITAL
•	 Population > 65yrs
•	 Percentage 
unemployment
PHYSICAL CAPITAL
•	 Road infrastructure
•	 Strategic community 
water supplies
•	 Scheme water coverage
Presence of bores 
and dams
Farm diversity
remoteness index
Population trends
Areas declared 
water deficient
22          Great Southern Development Commission

This consultation focused on identifying ways in which the local community understands and defines drought, 
how they have been impacted by drought in the past, and how they responded in the most recent droughts.  
Consultation then focused on identifying key actions and priorities to include in the final drought resilience plan.
In the Great Southern region, engagement occurred with 24 farming businesses, six Grower groups, community 
members, two agronomists, eight LGAs, South Coast NRM and over 25 Aboriginal community members and 
industry representatives. 
As the project includes the Wheatbelt and Midwest regions, collaboratively the program consulted with more 
than 330 people representing at least 150 separate organisations and businesses. with 19 state agencies, six 
peak bodies (agricultural), 34 agribusiness, three universities and CSIRO and over 300 stakeholder engagement 
meetings.
Locally, the project was overseen by the Great Southern Development Commission (GSDC). The GSDC’s role is to 
coordinate and support endeavours that build the economy and promote growth in the Great Southern region of 
Western Australia. Project updates were regularly provided to GSDC’s Board of Management, with the opportunity 
to provide input and feedback into the DVA and final Inland Great Southern DRP. 
Desktop review
Desktop review is a critical component of any vulnerability assessment process. It involves identifying, summarising 
and interpreting what is already known about the impacts of the hazard on drought.  The desktop review followed 
the development of the RDRP conceptual framework, and investigated aspects of exposure, sensitivity, impact and 
adaptive capacity and the ways in which each of these relate to and inform vulnerability and resilience to drought in 
the regions. 
The desktop review included an overview of existing data, research, tools and resources that informed our 
stakeholders’ understanding of drought impacts and drought preparedness across the focus regions. It included 
a socio-economic and land-use profile of each region, describing the population, major land uses and economic 
activities, the threatening processes they face and what that means in terms of drought resilience. 
The review identified those actively working to support drought resilience in the region with regards to drought, 
including their respective roles and relationships between them, and summarised existing and past drought 
resilience policies and plans across a range of levels, from local to international, and the suite of drought resilience 
programs currently operating in Western Australia and Australia as a whole.
Spatial Prioritisation
The spatial component of the drought vulnerability assessments used mapping software to map drought resilience 
priority areas. All spatial data was prepared and presented at the scale of local administrative boundaries, to best 
support local level decision-making and investment.
Inputs into the multi-criteria analysis (MCA) were determined following the development of the RDRP conceptual 
framework, and include exposure, sensitivity, impact and adaptive capacity and the ways in which each of these 
relate to and inform vulnerability and resilience to drought in the regions. Spatial data layers include:
•	
climate data (historical and projected change in rainfall, temperature, soil moisture and drought frequency and 
severity)
•	
environmental data (soil type, topography, ground and surface water resources, native vegetation extent, 
ground cover, Normalised Difference Vegetation Index)
•	
production data (crop yields, animal production, type of farming system)
•	
financial data (household income, farm profitability, use of farm management deposit schemes)
•	
social data (population trends, access to services, community participation rates)
•	
infrastructure data (roads, water supplies).
Composite maps showing how different features of drought risk and resilience are overlaid using a standard multi-
criterion GIS analysis (MCA). Priority areas for investment are highlighted at the overlap between spatial datasets 
where drought is likely to occur, where there are features are likely to provide resilience to the impacts of drought 
(e.g. high ground cover, availability of water resources, drought resilient farming systems) and/or where vulnerable 
communities are likely to be impacted (e.g. remote communities with limited access to services). 
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              23

Risk Assessment
A drought risk assessment collates all the data collected and analysed from the stakeholder engagement, desktop 
review and spatial prioritisation components, and provides local decision-makers with a summary of vulnerability 
to drought in their region. Synthesis of the data into a risk assessment followed the development of the RDRP 
conceptual framework and investigated aspects of exposure, sensitivity, impact and adaptive capacity and the ways 
in which each of these relate to and inform vulnerability and resilience to drought in the regions. 
The aim of a risk assessment summary is to assist local decision makers and managers in the rapid evaluation of 
drought vulnerability for the region and enable tracking of change over time. Data in each drought impact category 
(i.e., social, financial, production, environmental) can be scored along a sliding scale and assessed over medium and 
long-term timeframes in terms of drought risk and resilience6,7  
4.2	 Technical Expertise
To strengthen this evidence base, the following technical reports were commissioned to gain regionally specific 
insights into drought resilience. These insights informed the DVA and were drawn from:
•	
Socio-economic and literature review (Anna Dixon Consulting);
•	
Drought Indices (CSIRO): Repeated the recent CSIRO NSW drought indicators exercise by deploying a 
Random Forest Analysis to Nous data, relevant to the three focus regions.
•	
Defining Drought in WA (Curtin University): Assessment of the suitability of the current BoM definition of 
drought in decile 1 over two or more consecutive years and investigation of other drought definitions or indices 
appropriate for the regions.
•	
Drought Risk Assessment (DPIRD): Analysis of historical and future drought risk scenarios for each region.
•	
Drought Priority Areas Map for Southwest of Western Australia (DPIRD): A GIS-based multi-criteria analysis 
integrating relevant economic, environmental and social data at a scale to identify high priority drought risk areas. 
•	
Economic Impacts of Drought (LA One Economics and Consulting): Review of historical and potential future 
economic and environmental impacts of drought on farming businesses, communities, agribusiness and supply 
chain sectors in the region.
•	
Social Impacts of Drought (UWA): Identification of primary social impacts of drought in the region and 
assessment of the effectiveness of actions taken in the past.
•	
Investigating the Environmental Impacts of Drought in Regional WA (LA One Economics and Consulting): 
Review of the impacts of drought on natural resources that support and surround farming, rural and regional 
communities.  Identification of responses and initiatives to mitigate the environmental impacts of drought.
•	
Transformative Review (AgDots): Global review of transformative research areas to build resilience.  
•	
Regional Water Issues and Policy Analysis Wheatbelt and Great Southern (Aurora): An investigation into 
issues and policies relating to provision of non-potable water during drought for agriculture (e.g. stock drinking 
and crop spraying), community (e.g. firefighting, watering ovals and landscaped areas) and local government 
authorities (LGAs, road works and water for community uses).
•	
Water Supply and Demand Assessment (Murdoch University): A report summarising a high-level water 
balance for the Wheatbelt and Great Southern Consortia Shires. This report includes understanding the 
current state of water supply and demand, identifying gaps and modelling the risk to water supplies under 
drought and climate change scenarios (the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5).
•	
Valuing Noongar People and Practices in Drought Resilience (Noongar Landcare Enterprises): A review of 
the impacts of drought and First Nations land management practices, with a focus on Noongar Country; and 
the impacts of drought on the Noongar region. Capturing Noongar knowledge and practices for integration 
into Drought Resilient Strategies.
•	
Great Southern (Inland) Regional Drought Resilience Plan: Report on Aboriginal Community Consultations 
(South Coast NRM in cooperation with Keogh Bay and the Gillamii Centre): A report that collates information 
from stakeholders in the Noongar Community of the Great Southern and captures risks and impacts of 
drought and strategies to increase drought resilience. 
•	
	Regional Drought Resilience Community Consultation Report for the Inland Great Southern (South Coast 
NRM): A summary of drought risks, impacts and strategies to increase drought resilience from stakeholders in 
the Great Southern. 
6	 Bourne, Amanda R.; Petra de Abreu; Camilla Donatti; Sarshen Scorgie; Stephen Holness. 2015. A Climate Change Vulnerability 
Assessment for the Namakwa District, South Africa: The 2015 revision. Conservation South Africa, Cape Town. Available here.
7	 Hughes, Neil; Kevin Burns; Wei Ying Soh; Kenton Lawson. 2020. Measuring drought risk: the exposure and sensitivity of 
Australian farms to drought. ABARES Research Report 20.17
24

Further adding to the range and quality of data, this plan has been developed using a partnership and co-design 
process that has leveraged diverse region-specific knowledge and skills from the following sources:
•	
	South-West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	
relevant local government plans
•	
economic development plans
•	
strategic community plans
•	
•	
regional blueprints 
•	
WA Government’s Climate Policy 
•	
State Infrastructure plans
The evidence base for this plan was also informed by previous and current strategies such as the Australian 
Government Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan and a review of relevant science-based 
initiatives, such as the DPIRD WaterSmart Farms project and the work of the South-West WA Drought Resilience 
Adoption and Innovation Hub.  
4.3 Plan Alignment
The Inland Great Southern DRP was developed to be consistent with the National Framework for Drought Policy 
Plan (fitting under pillar 3). The Drought Resilience Plan has a focus on long term resilience and preparedness. The 
Inland Great Southern DRP also has strong alignment with National, State, Regional and Local plans, strategies and 
policies, including: 
Nationally: 
•	
•	
South-West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
At a State level: 
•	
State Infrastructure Strategy: Foundations for a Stronger Tomorrow)
•	
Diversity WA (a Framework to Support the WA Government’s Economic Development Priorities)
•	
Department of Water (Strategic priority - Water for Growth 2016 plan)
•	
DPIRD Strategic Intent 2018-2021
•	
DPIRD Primary Industries Plan 2020–2024
•	
Water Corporation - Water Forever (Water Recycling and Water Efficiency)
•	
Towards Climate Resilience 50 Year Plan 2009
•	
Western Australian Climate Policy November 2020
•	
Western Australian Agricultural Research Collaboration
•	
DPIRD State Soil Health Strategy
•	
WA Natural Resource Management Framework
Regionally: 
•	
The Great Southern Development Commission Strategic Plan 2022-25
•	
Regional Investment Blueprint – 2015
•	
Regional Planning and Infrastructure Framework 
•	
South Coast NRM Strategic Plan
•	
Southern Link Voluntary Regional Organisation of Councils (VROC) Strategic Plan 
•	
South-West Native Title Settlement Agreement
Locally: 
•	
LGA Community Strategic Community plans 
•	
Local Government Emergency Rural Water Plans
Appendix 1 of this document presents a detailed description of how the Inland Great Southern DRP aligns with the 
above strategies, plans and policies. 
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              25

05 The Inland Great 
Southern Region - 
System Description
 Tourism WA
26          Great Southern Development Commission

The inland Great Southern Consortia covers an area of 27,871 km2 in the Great Southern region of Western Australia 
and includes the local government Shires of Broomehill-Tambellup, Cranbrook, Gnowangerup, Jerramungup, 
Katanning, Kent, Kojonup and Woodanilling, as shown in the following figure. 
Figure 7: Map showing the geographic scope of the regional drought resilience plan in inland Great Southern.
The Consortia is within the Wagyl Kaip / Southern Noongar (Ganeang, Goreng and Menang) Agreement for Native 
Title and the northern section is Ballardong Noongar, both in the South West Native Title Settlement. It is home 
to 11,324 people. Between 2017 and 2019, there was population decline within all local government areas in the 
Consortia. The median age is highest in the Shire of Cranbrook at 46 and all Shires are above the WA median of 36. 
The percentage of older people (over 65 years) is projected to increase from 18.8% to 22.3% between 2015 and 
2025 in the region.
The Index of Relative Socio-economic Advantage and Disadvantage Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (IRSAD 
SEIFA) score found the Shires of Broomehill-Tambellup and Katanning have more disadvantage than greater 
regional WA, while the Shires of Jerramungup and Kent have more advantage than both greater regional WA and 
greater WA. Within the Consortia region, Katanning and Tambellup are considered locations of priority health need 
in the Great Southern, based on analysis of social determinants, health indicators, service gaps and stakeholder 
feedback.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              27

The Index of Disadvantage Dropping off the Edge (DOTE) gives a score by SA2 area, with the Consortia covering 
three SA2 areas.  Katanning had an overall score of 1 (highest level of disadvantage); Kojonup SA2 had an overall 
score of 2 and Gnowangerup had an overall score of 3. Common areas of vulnerability across all three SA2 areas 
were: no post-school qualification, family violence, psychiatric admissions and no access to recreation parks. Some 
key characteristics of the inland Great Southern region are highlighted below:
•	
Largest population is in the Shire of Katanning, which is the key centre for the inland Great Southern
•	
All areas have a median age above the WA median, with the largest variance in Cranbrook
•	
All areas had negative in-migration between 2017-2020
•	
the Shires of Broomehill-Tambellup and Katanning have more disadvantage than greater regional WA 
•	
the Shires of Jerramungup and Kent have more advantage than both greater regional WA and greater WA
•	
the Shires of Broomehill-Tambellup, Cranbrook, Jerramungup, Kent and Kojonup agriculture accounts for 50% 
or more of economic output.
Climate
The Consortia includes projections for average temperatures to continue to increase in all seasons, more hot days 
and warm spells, a continuing reduction in growing season rainfall (April – October) increased extreme rainfall 
events and a harsher fire-weather climate.
Economy
The Consortia has an annual economic output of $2.1 billion and accounts for 9.5% of employment in the broader 
Great Southern region. Agriculture accounts for 40.1% of economic output and 40.9% of total jobs in the selected 
areas. The Shire of Kojonup had the largest output from Agriculture at $178.5 million, and the Shire of Kent had 
the largest percentage of total economic output from agriculture at 75.6%, followed by the Shire of Broomehill-
Tambellup at 65.2%. 
28          Great Southern Development Commission

Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              29

06 An Assessment 
of the Inland 
Great Southern’s 
Resilience
Katanning saleyards
30          Great Southern Development Commission

The Inland Great Southern DVA identified key areas of the region’s vulnerability to drought. The characteristics of 
each vulnerability driver are:
•	
Exposed areas – show low incidence of rainfall events over 10mm and 25mm, percentage change in autumn 
break from 1975-1999 and 2000-2020, and decline in average yield potential over the same time frame, 
number of hot days, and decline in growing season rainfall. 
•	
of livestock in some Shires, areas declared water deficient (Jerramungup and Kent), low water assets such as 
bores and dams and high levels of employment dependence on agriculture.
•	
Areas with low adaptive capacity – could be related to an ageing population.  
6.1 Mapping Drought Vulnerability 
6.1.1	
The Mapping Process 
Using GIS-based multi-criteria analysis (MCA), DPIRD’s GIS team spatially integrated relevant economic, 
environmental and social data to produce a set of maps identifying high priority drought risk areas.  These maps 
take into consideration farm water supply, agricultural production, soil health and erosion potential along with a 
range of socio-economic and landscape features that contribute to drought resilience or exacerbate drought risk 
in the Great Southern region. These features include water-related ecological infrastructure, high value agricultural 
land and areas of higher socio-economic vulnerability. 
The approach consolidates complex information into user-friendly spatial products designed to enable fine-scale, 
local-level decision making on drought resilience. The maps form part of the evidence base for the RDR Plans. 
Drought resilience priority areas maps are made up of a set of composite maps for i) exposure, ii) sensitivity, iii) 
impact (combining exposure and sensitivity) and iv) adaptive capacity.  Forty-four variables and ten composite maps 
were weighted according to their likely influence on drought resilience, based on literature review, expert opinion 
and feedback from regional stakeholders, and combined to create the final drought priority map. The analysis 
was performed using the Multi-Criteria Analysis Shell for Spatial Decision Support (MCAS-S) tool developed by 
ABARES8. Drought resilience priority areas lie at the intersection of all categories, where exposure, sensitivity and 
adaptive capacity overlap. 
The overlapping areas highlight where droughts are likely to occur most frequently and have the largest impact 
on water resources and agricultural production. They also identify locations where regional communities may be 
more vulnerable to the impacts of drought due to socio-economic factors including relative remoteness, access to 
infrastructure and income. 
The maps were ground-truthed with the community and the technical working group and feedback was 
incorporated into the final products.
The composite drought vulnerability map has the potential to be a powerful decision-support tool for the South 
West of WA. There is a high level of confidence in the analysis as many of the included datasets are robust, regularly 
collected and available at high spatial and temporal resolution including the participating Shires in the inland Great 
Southern. 
8	 MCAS-S Development Partnership. 2018. Multi-Criteria Analysis Shell for Spatial Decision Support MCAS-S version 3.2 user 
guide. In ABARES BY-ND 4.0.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              31

Figure 8: Final drought vulnerability map showing that the areas in WA most vulnerable to drought are in the north and east of the region
The links between the component datasets and impacts of drought are well understood. Low rainfall exacerbates 
drought risk, as does a shorter or warmer growing season; drought is associated with reduced production and farm 
income; problems with water quality or infrastructure can leave regional communities more vulnerable to the effects 
of drought. Spatial products such as the drought risk and resilience priority areas maps can provide significant 
support to decision-makers by collating complex climate, ecological, and socio-economic information into a single 
powerful image. These maps, developed together with regional stakeholders, are widely replicable.
32          Great Southern Development Commission

6.1.2	
Drought Exposure Map
Figure 9:  Inland Great Southern Exposure Map
In the inland Great Southern, exposure to drought ranges from moderate in the far west of the region to high in the 
north/east region. 
This result was influenced by the low incidence of rainfall events over 10mm and 25mm, the percentage change in 
the autumn break from 1975-1999 to 2000-2020 and decline in average yield potential from 1975-1999 to 2000-
2020, number of hot days and decline in growing season rainfall. 
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              33

6.1.3	 Drought Sensitivity Map
Figure 10:  Inland Great Southern Drought Sensitivity Map
In the Great Southern, sensitivity to drought ranges from moderate in the far west of the region and high to very 
high across the Shires of Jerramungup and Kent. 
numbers of livestock in some Shires, areas declared water deficient (Jerramungup and Kent) and low counts of 
water assets (bores and dams), and the high percentage of workers reliant on agriculture, may have contributed to 
the result.
34          Great Southern Development Commission

6.1.4	 Drought Impact Map
Figure 11:  Inland Great Southern Drought Impact Map 
The drought impact map is a composite of the Drought Exposure and Drought Sensitivity maps. The Western Shires 
including Kojonup, Katanning, Tambellup, Woodanilling Cranbrook and Broomehill-Tambellup have moderate risk of 
being impacted adversely by drought.  The eastern half of the Great Southern region has high to very high likelihood 
of being impacted adversely by drought. Areas of most concern are the northern areas in the Shire of Kent.
Actions that are targeted at improving the reliable harvesting and storage of water, support drought resilient farming 
systems, and diversification of economic activity across the region will support the ability of the region to lessen 
adverse impacts of drought.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              35

6.1.5	 Drought Adaptive Capacity Map
Figure 12: Inland Great Southern Adaptive Capacity Map
The adaptive capacity map is made up of three composite maps for human capital, natural capital and physical 
capital. This map is based primarily on the natural and physical capital of the region and limited in its depiction of 
human and social capital.  Though community consultation, and the outcomes of the social impact study, a strong 
link was identified between natural and physical capital and economic prosperity, which impacts on individual 
wellbeing and ultimately social and community resilience. 
In the Great Southern, the areas that had the highest impact of drought, showed the highest capacity to adapt.  The 
lower levels of capacity around Kojonup and Katanning would require further investigating. 
The very low unemployment rate across the region relates to better adaptive capacity, though this does not reflect 
the issues with attracting labour due to lack of housing options for workers. More exploration is needed of these 
factors to ascertain true adaptive capacity to drought. 
36          Great Southern Development Commission

6.1.6	 Drought Vulnerability Map
Figure 13: Great Southern Drought Vulnerability Map
The drought vulnerability map is a composite map of Adaptive Capacity and Drought Impact. There is variability in 
drought vulnerability across the inland Great Southern. 
Further work is needed to consolidate the different approaches and agree on a final vulnerability assessment 
framework for drought resilience planning. While the current drought vulnerability assessment for the inland Great 
Southern is best represented by the regional drought priority areas maps, the spatial analysis is limited in its ability 
to include social and economic data. 
The DVA summarises several different possible approaches to assessing drought vulnerability focusing primarily 
on measurable biophysical and economic indicators (indicators of drought) or primarily on socio-economic 
factors. These contributions were considered and incorporated into the overarching conceptual framework for the 
vulnerability assessment. 
6.2 Drought Vulnerability Index 
A Drought Vulnerability Index calculated for the inland Great Southern region, enables local decision makers and 
managers in the rapid evaluation of drought risk in the region. The index has been specifically designed to track 
change over time for the study, although it could be adapted for any region across Western Australia. The index can 
be seen as a repeatable exercise providing a snapshot of vulnerability to drought that can be tracked over time. 
The analysis utilizes the overarching DVA conceptual framework and an understanding overall vulnerability as the 
outcome of interacting exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity parameters. A number of indicators were then 
selected within each category to serve as proxies for exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. 
Each sub-indicator was scored using a 1-5 sliding scale where 1 represents the most desirable condition (low 
vulnerability) and 5 represents the least desirable state (high vulnerability) in terms of drought risk. The data used 
for determining scores for each indicator were drawn from the same (largely) publicly available datasets used to 
create the drought risk priority areas map. Scores represent the average for the region.

Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              37

Table 2: The exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity of the inland Great Southern
Averaging the scores from each individual indicator returns an overall vulnerability index of 3.3, indicating moderate 
vulnerability to drought. A radar chart is useful for seeing which components of vulnerability need to be addressed 
most urgently as risk is not evenly spread across the selected indicators and therefore poorly represented by 
the average score. Given that each indicator has been scored on a 1-5 sliding scale where 1 represents the most 
desirable state and 5 the least desirable, it is most desirable for the indicators to cluster towards the centre of the 
radar chart. 
Areas of strength in terms of drought resilience in the inland Great Southern region lie in soil and production 
capability, access to critical infrastructure and limited exposure to production risk. These are areas to maintain and 
build on for a successful response to future drought in the region. These are shown on the radar chart as points 
closer to the centre of the chart.
AREA OF 
RESILIENCE
RISK RESULT BY 
INDICATOR
RESULT BY LOCALITY 
KEY ISSUES AND RESPONSE
Exposure
2 - projected temperature 
and rainfall change, 
moderate increases in 
temperature and moderate 
drying
4 - change in timing of the 
autumn break experienced 
to date
4.5 - increasing drought 
frequency.
Moderate in the far west 
(Kojonup, Cranbrook 
and western parts of 
Woodanilling, Katanning 
and Tambellup), the far east 
(parts of Jerramungup) 
and far south (parts of 
Gnowangerup).
High (Kent and parts 
of Woodanilling, 
Katanning, Gnowangerup, 
Jerramungup).
Very high in minimal parts 
of Kent. 
Despite high resilience in agricultural 
production capability, the region is 
highly exposed to the impacts of 
climate change and faces several 
general resilience challenges including 
economic diversification and access 
to infrastructure, services and reliable, 
good quality water.  Higher risk was 
a result of decline in growing season 
rainfall. The focus of resilience action 
should be improving understanding of 
and responses to these challenges.
Sensitivity
2.5 - production risk
3.5 - lowest 10% of NDVI 
values recorded between 
2002-2021
5 - % of the population that 
is employed in agriculture.
Ranges from moderate in 
the far west of the region 
and high to very high across 
Shires of Jerramungup and 
Kent.  
percentage of Drought Risk by farm 
profit, higher numbers of livestock in 
some Shires, areas declared water 
deficient (Jerramungup and Kent) and 
low counts of water assets (bores 
and dams), and the high percentage 
of workers reliant on agriculture, may 
have contributed to the result.
Adaptive Capacity
2 - levels of existing 
unemployment in the region
1.5 - access to water 
services and transport 
infrastructure
5 - groundwater quality
3 - soil capability.
Lower levels of adaptive 
capacity potentially linked 
to ageing population 
(Kojonup and Katanning). 
Very high in north (Kent), 
central (Gnowangerup) 
and western areas 
(Jerramungup).
Through community engagement and 
the outcomes of the social impact 
study, a strong link was identified 
between natural and physical capital 
and economic prosperity, which 
impacts on individual wellbeing and 
ultimately social and community 
resilience.  Very low unemployment 
rate relates to better adaptive capacity, 
though this does not reflect the issues 
with attracting labour due to lack of 
housing options for workers. More 
exploration is needed to ascertain true 
adaptive capacity to drought.
38          Great Southern Development Commission

Weaker areas in terms of drought resilience are shown on the radar chart as those points further from the centre 
of the chart. These are the expected impacts of climate change on temperature and rainfall patterns, increasing 
drought frequency, NDVI trends and the level of direct dependence of local economies and livelihoods on 
agriculture. These are the aspects of vulnerability to drought in the region that need to be prioritised to improve 
resilience. If these can be improved, or better understood, planned for and dealt with, the region will be in a better 
position to respond effectively to drought. Improving levels of economic diversity are a desired outcome for the 
region to build drought resilience. 
Improving understanding of the impact of changing weather patterns on agricultural production is required. 
Measures to improve access to water and road infrastructure, as well as other services, increase and diversify 
employment opportunities and adapt agricultural practices in the region to accommodate shorter or later growing 
seasons will improve resilience to drought. Current climate projections suggest that the situation is likely to worsen 
over time and steps should be taken now to ensure proactive adaptation to expected impacts.

Figure 14: Radar chart of vulnerability index scores
Table 3: Inland Great Southern drought resilience strengths and weaknesses
0
1
2
3
4
5
Climate change
Autumn break
Drought frequency
Production
NDVI
Employment in Ag
Unemployment
Access to
infrastructure
Groundwater quality
Soil capability
INLAND GREAT SOUTHERN DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE STRENGTHS
INLAND GREAT SOUTHERN DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE WEAKNESSES
•	
Access to critical infrastructure 
•	
Percentage unemployment
•	
Limited exposure to production risk 
•	
Projected change in growing season rainfall and 
maturing season temperature
•	
Change in drought frequency to date
•	
Percentage employment in agriculture
•	
Groundwater quality
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              39

6.3 Impacts of Drought on the inland Great Southern 
Drought impacts can be significant and wide ranging. It can impact a region’s economic, social and environmental 
functioning. Several studies rank drought first amongst natural hazards in terms of the seriousness of impacts, 
including loss of life and livelihoods, economic losses and adverse social, economic and ecological effects9. 
Reduction in household income, financial hardship and a drop in financial position are three major economic impacts 
experienced by those in drought across Australia. Broader economic impacts on regional communities include 
job losses, worker relocation and a reduction in income for small local businesses, particularly in small towns with 
economies highly dependent on-farm expenditure.
Environmental impacts of drought include irreversible damage to soil and vegetation, leading to dust storms and 
a loss of top soil, soil nutrients, organic matter and soil carbon. Social impacts of drought can be devastating and 
include permanent loss of services in regional areas, loss of employment opportunities, negative physical and 
mental health impacts and financial hardship. 
Drought amplifies existing personal and professional burdens of regional communities such as poor health, 
isolation and limited access to services and infrastructure. Drought resilience is strongly influenced by regional 
characteristics including wealth, infrastructure, policies and plans, the level of community cohesion and the extent 
to which regional economies depend directly on agriculture and/or water10,11,12.
6.3.1	 Regional Level Impacts
It is evident from the literature that climate change is having significant and ongoing impacts on the agricultural 
regions of Western Australia. Australian average temperatures have increased by about 1o Celsius since 1950 and 
the south west and south east of Australia are seeing a trend towards lower average winter rainfall. This includes 
a forecast increase in hotter weather patterns across Western Australia and a reduction in wet years, with drought 
becoming a more common occurrence13.
Many areas of the State are experiencing the early impacts of drought and ongoing drying conditions including 
the Northern Agricultural Region, inland areas of the Great Southern, parts of the Wheatbelt and Southern 
Rangelands14.
Decreased water availability is one of the biggest identified concerns across all regions.  Forage production may be 
reduced by up to 10% over the agricultural areas, and by 10–20% over the rest of the state. Broadacre crops are the 
most vulnerable to rainfall variations with an expected decline in yields in the drier eastern and northern areas of the 
Great Southern. 
9	 Bruntrup M. & Tsegai D. 2017. Drought Adaptation and Resilience in Developing Countries. German Development Institute in 
partnership with United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. Retrieved 22 January 2022. Available here. 
10	Adams P., Horridge M., Madden J., Wittwer G. 2002. Drought, regions and the Australian economy between 2001-02 and 
2004-05. Centre of Policy Studies, Monash University
11	 Wanders N. 2016. Human impacts on droughts: how these hazards stopped being purely natural phenomena. Princeton 
University. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Available here.
10 January 2022. Available here.
13	CSIRO. (2018). Australia’s Changing Climate. Retrieved 15 January 2022. Available here.
14	Sudmeyer, R, Edward, A, Fazakerley, V, Simpkin, L & Foster. (2016). Climate change: impacts and adaptation for agriculture in Western 
40          Great Southern Development Commission

Additional potential impacts of climate to consider at a regional level include: 
•	
economic pressures
•	
increased input costs and energy prices
•	
competing land-use pressures
•	
policy-related economic pressures, such as measures to mitigate greenhouse gas emission.
The results of stakeholder engagement were centred around the broad ranging impacts of drought at an economic, 
environmental and social level. It is important to recognise that impacts span a spectrum and may be cumulative. 
For example, a drought may not be seen as severe, but impacts might be greater due to a lack of recovery between 
stress events. The dry seasons of 2018 and 2019 were compounded by events happening over two consecutive 
years. The late break in 2020 amplified concerns of another dry season however, extensive spring rainfall events 
provided relief and enabled farmers to finish their crops and replenish on-farm water storage.  
Economic Impacts
Agriculture is the primary land use in the region. Inland Great Southern stakeholders reported experiencing 
financial stress because of reduced production during drought. Farming families sell livestock, change livestock 
structure, liquidate assets or increase their debt to survive. Non-farming families in the region suffer from reduced 
employment opportunities and cash flows. 
A decline in rainfall over the winter months in the south-west regions of Western Australia, including in parts of 
the Great Southern, over the past 20 years has contributed to a reduced inflow into many surface dams. In some 
towns not connected to the Lower Great Southern Towns Water Supply Scheme, supplies are becoming critically 
low. Below-average rainfall has also impacted on-farm storage sources, local government dams and Department of 
Water and Environmental Regulation strategic community water supplies, which are held for emergency use when 
low rainfall causes on-farm supplies to fail. To address water deficiencies in the Great Southern, resilient water 
infrastructure is essential.
Several localities in the region including Jerramungup, Gairdner and Kent experience water deficiencies, with 
deficiency declarations triggering State Government assistance to cart water for emergency use.  Non-potable 
strategic water supplies and on-farm supplies are often unable to cope with more than two dry seasons. 
Regional businesses in LGAs with more diverse economies, not dependent upon agriculture, showed a reduced 
effect of drought events15.  In the Great Southern region, some businesses, including dam building businesses, water 
drilling companies, and hay production businesses, significantly benefited from drought events. However, there is 
a significant risk to our value-adding industries such as abattoirs, where a significant loss of livestock to the region 
impacts viability of our key regional industries.  
15	 Anderton, L. (2022). Economic Review on the Impacts of Drought. Prepared for the Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development.
The additional labour demands, with 
the need to carry out activities such as 
confinement feeding and water carting 
for some businesses, was identified. 
Recovery times from drought are not 
immediate, especially for stock related 
enterprises. It can take considerable 
time to restock to pre-drought levels. 
(South Coast NRM stakeholder engagement 2022)
“
“
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              41

Environmental
Drought can have serious, long-term consequences for soil health, vegetation cover and biodiversity. Reduced 
vegetation cover and drier soils increase the risk of erosion and invasion by weeds, pests and diseases. Plant 
mortality becomes more pronounced in drought years, impacting on biodiversity and ecosystem services, and 
reduces the ability to sequester carbon. This also impacts on the functioning of the landscape for economic and 
social purposes. Aboriginal community members expressed concern about the impact of drought on vegetation, 
water and fire regimes in the region.
Social
During the consultation process, Great Southern stakeholders stated that drought and drying seasons negatively 
affect mental health, and led to business closures. This causes people to move away from the region, reducing 
population sizes and access to essential skills and services. Mental health pressures are observed particularly 
in successive dry or damaging event seasons, with people withdrawing from social interaction, impacting on 
volunteering and philanthropy.  
Notably, Aboriginal communities are likely to be disproportionately affected by drought, based on pre-existing 
health and social disadvantage. Dry seasons and climate change impacts were highlighted as two of several linked 
factors that have damaged the foundation of Noongar identity and well-being. The effects of dry seasons are felt 
most strongly in First Nations communities as people feel Country hurting. This is also felt by the youth who feel a 
disconnection from country, leading to struggles retaining identity and culture16. There are however opportunities to 
increase the resilience of our First Nation communities through on-country restoration programs, to help Noongar 
people connect with landscape and share cultural knowledge.  
Further work is required to unpack and further understand the links between social and economic impacts and 
environmental and economic predictors in the context of drought. However, inland Great Southern consultation 
identified that drought and a drying climate presents an existential threat to ongoing cultural connection to the land. 
16	Noongar Land Enterprise Group (2022). Valuing Noongar People and Practices in Drought Resilience.
Land clearing really affects the 
environment and its ability to retain 
water. Water runs off the land very fast 
and poisons creeks with fertilizer or 
chemicals and silt, and it brings up the 
salt. All the land clearing creates heat. 
These days, I see a lot of trees dying 
because it is too dry.
(Noongar stakeholder engagement participant, 2022).
“
“
Country is pretty important to us. 
I see the overload of community when 
it becomes part of someone - it takes 
their wellbeing. I see young fellas who 
don’t get out into the bush enough. 
It takes away their identity and they 
start to lose it.
(Noongar stakeholder engagement participant, 2022).
“
“
42          Great Southern Development Commission

Future Scenarios
The intensity and duration of hot spells is projected to increase across WA, with wet years likely to become 
less frequent, and dry years (and drought) likely to become more frequent. Analyses of rainfall and temperature 
data highlight a potentially concerning trend, with the composite hazard of hot drought beginning to occur in 
recent years17. Appropriate steps must be taken to anticipate and mitigate the potentially devastating effects of 
hot droughts. Analysis of climate data over recent decades has demonstrated six key messages relevant to the 
sustainable and profitable management of our agricultural land 18:
•	
mean temperatures are rising
•	
annual rainfall is declining
•	
autumn and winter rainfall is declining
•	
spring and summer rainfall is increasing
•	
predictions indicate that these trends will continue
•	
in the short term, year-to-year climate variability may be more important than the longer-term trends 
Additional future impacts of climate to consider at a regional level include: 
•	
economic pressures
•	
increased input costs and energy prices
•	
competing land-use pressures
•	
policy-related economic pressures, such as measures to mitigate greenhouse gas emission
Crop and livestock farms in the region are likely to be adversely affected by a changing climate, with projected 
increases in extreme events. Through increases in extreme events, water supplies may not be able to meet industry 
and community demand. The potential future environmental impacts of drought are soil degradation, in particular 
soil erosion, increasing risk of fire, and ongoing biodiversity loss. 
The Inland Great Southern Drought Vulnerability Assessment describes future drought scenarios and details 
the vulnerability of the region to future climate impacts, along with potentially transformative actions.  Research 
commissioned by DPIRD19 highlights transformative solutions to build drought resilience of the community, regional 
businesses, and agriculture. The project pipeline underpins the Regional Drought Resilience Plans and pending 
investment framework. The overarching objective when implemented, will ensure the transformative projects will 
build the resilience of the communities and regional businesses. 
Research areas were identified by mega trends and short-range trends, their impact on the regions and what type 
of change they would drive. Seven categories were then identified: water, digital, farm business, farming systems, 
natural capital, community resilience and regional economy resilience (table below).  
The level of innovation is high within the Great Southern region and this information was captured where possible to 
provide the opportunity to leverage existing projects to support increasing resilience.  
Table 4: Mega trends and short-range trends and potential impacts on regions
17	 Mastrantonis, S. (2022). Defining Drought in Western Australia. Centre for Crop and Disease management, School of Molecular 
and Life Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA.
18	Anderton, L. (2022). Economic Review on the Impacts of Drought. Regional Drought Resilience Planning 2022. LA. One 
Economics and Consulting.
19	Middleton, S. (2022). AgDots. Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program Global Literature Review – Key Drivers Report. 
Prepared for Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development. 
MEGA TREND
IMPACT/RELEVANCE
Supply and demand 
shocks
High input costs – substitution inputs, tight supply commodities, confidence 
agriculture industry, land value increases
Food trends
Vegetable oil and plant protein demand, aquaculture product demand, onshoring 
meat production
Climate crisis
Need for adaptive responses, ecosystem services, natural capital market, carbon 
market opportunities
Resource scarcity
Oil, gas, water, labour underpinning inputs for the region’s economy
Digital transformation
Connectivity is the new highway, and data is currency
Neo-ecology
Sustainability becoming major economic driver
Globalisation and 
pandemics
Less safe world, which is very connected, ongoing impact from major events and 
tensions
Wellbeing
Wellbeing of communities impacted by drought
               43

07 Building on 
Existing Resilience
44          Great Southern Development Commission

The agricultural regions of South-West of Western Australia are a success story in terms of climate adaptation 
to date. While regions like the inland Great Southern are exposed to the impacts of climate change, farmers have 
demonstrated a very high level of innovation to climate variability and reduced growing season rainfall. This includes 
strong advancements in farming technology such as spray innovations to reduce water consumption and tramline 
farming. It must be recognised that there is substantial collective experience in dealing with adverse conditions and 
innovation and increased technological advancements. Much can be learned from what is already happening within 
our communities and farming businesses.
The sector has a good track record with increasing levels of grain production occurring despite reduced growing 
season rainfall.  The dryer seasons in the Great Southern have seen a shift towards more cropping, particularly 
canola, which is very profitable and reduces the risk of water logging in areas such as Cranbrook.  
All farmers indicated that they have plans and seeding dates were important. Decisions are made based on past 
experiences, observations, and the plan they were following. They try not to look “over the fence” and have more 
trust in their own decision-making skills.
The region has a number of highly valued grower groups who are actively involved in activities that support the 
production, profitability and sustainability of their members through farmer-led collaboration, participatory research 
and peer to peer learning. The South-West Western Australia Drought Resilience and Innovation Hub is actively 
working with grower groups to develop and enhance the uptake of farmer-centred drought innovation and adoption 
practices in the region.20
South Coast NRM is an organisation involved in initiatives and programs that support the regeneration and 
sustainability of local landscapes.  The Gondwana Link program, supported by a number of local, national and global 
organisations, is highly active in reconnecting natural habitats across the South West.
Regional stakeholders identified a number of initiatives worth noting that have been successful in supporting 
communities through the challenges of drought. These are summarised below, according to each of our five 
regional resilience themes.  Through South Coast NRM discussions21 with the community, it was clear that a 
“holistic” approach is needed to make our region more resilient in the face of future droughts.  
Drought or dry seasons have encouraged better farming practices and planning, bringing farmers’ attention to 
improvements required. Some farmers have worked harder to increase drought resilience, although there is room 
for some enterprises to improve their cost structuring and farm planning. 
Farmer interviews conducted by South Coast NRM 22 indicated a strong level of existing resilience amongst 
agricultural businesses in the inland Great Southern region.  The responses revealed that farmers: 
•	
recognise adverse seasonal conditions and fully understand the impacts of dry seasons on their business
•	
see business planning as a way to limit the stress, with the need to be adaptable and flexible
•	
noted the need to read the season and make early decisions 
•	
were aware of changing climate trends
20	Grower Group Alliance 2022. South West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub. Available here. 
21	 South Coast Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). Regional Drought Resilience. Community Consultation Report for the 
Inland Great Southern. Prepared for the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
22	South Coast Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). Regional Drought Resilience. Community Consultation Report for the 
Inland Great Southern. Prepared for the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Building recognition of the impacts 
of drought and what’s needed for 
resilience should be an ongoing 
conversation - set the groundwork in 
the good times to prepare for the 
bad times.
South Coast NRM Community Consultation Report 2022 for 
the Inland Great Southern).
“
“
               45

Theme 1: Resilient Water 
Snapshot of what’s working:
•	
Water harvesting projects
•	
Community Water Supply Program providing grants for community water supply improvements provided by 
Department of Water Environment and Regulation (DWER)
•	
Water Smart Farms – a program demonstration innovative options to increase water harvesting, storage and 
desalination options
•	
Farm Water Rebate scheme and Farm Management Deposit scheme to support farm businesses through 
drought, and in preparing for drought 
•	
Technology to improve water harvesting and storage
•	
Interconnected dam strategies to maximise water storage efficiencies i.e. Gnowangerup
•	
More farmers exploring and equipping ground water supplies
•	
Government provision of emergency water supplies
•	
Waterwise towns program. In the Great Southern region, the program is being adopted in Gnowangerup, 
Katanning, Kojonup, Tambellup and Pingrup
•	
Stormwater recycling schemes for irrigating public open space and/or providing emergency agriculture 
supplies
•	
Policies that encourage water re-use policies including decentralised water supplies such as plumbed-in 
rainwater tanks, greywater recycling and water efficient appliances for new residential developments.23
23	Clifton, P. and Price, M. (2022) Regional Water Issues and Policy Analysis – Non-potable water: Southern Wheatbelt and Inland 
Great Southern, Western Australia.
Gnowangerup Airport Dam funded 
through DWER’s Community Water 
Supply Program, in partnership with 
the Shire of Gnowangerup. 
Completed in 2021.
“
“
46          Great Southern Development Commission

Theme 2: Resilient Communities
Snapshot of what’s working:
•	
Community events and projects supporting ongoing connection and opportunities to volunteer
•	
Participation in on-country land restoration projects
•	
Sharing cultural knowledge
•	
Maintaining green spaces and accessible community spaces to support social connection, particularly through 
sport and cultural events, and networking opportunities
•	
Counselling services to support those farmers dealing with dry seasons, and extending this support to 
regional businesses
•	
Sharing lessons learned from previous droughts and the community experiences of how they have adapted 
when going through a drought period

Theme 3: Resilient Agriculture
Snapshot of what’s working:
•	
Drought mitigation and planning through shared experiences and farmer networking
•	
Encouraging farmers to adopt practices to become more profitable and sustainable, with a focus on carbon 
sequestration
•	
Adoption of research innovation (no-till, new varieties, low input cropping) has been instrumental in ensuring 
productivity increases despite declining growing season rainfall
•	
Increasing sophistication of farm business management, including use of professional farm consultants and 
advisors
•	
Drought planning
•	
Exploration of pasture and perennial systems to make use of summer rainfall
•	
Niche, high value-adding opportunities
•	
Off-farm income
•	
Soil health monitoring site and projects aiming to remediate soil acidity and wind erosion
•	
General sound management such as weed control, appropriate varieties and stock husbandry
•	
Non-wetting management, such as clay spreading, mouldboard ploughing or application of wetting agents
•	
Seeking methods for improving soil biology to improve efficiency of inputs such as fertiliser
•	
Application of lime to improve soil pH and deep ripping for improvement in subsoil pH
•	
Precision agriculture tools such as GPS monitoring of operations allow for better targeted application of inputs
•	
Alternative crops and pastures, chickpeas, long coleoptile wheat varieties
•	
Lick feeders and increased storage facilities for grain and fodder
•	
Labour-saving technology for stock
•	
Re-greening farms to benefit biodiversity in a changing climate
Participation in restoration projects gets 
Noongar people out on Country. Spending 
time on Country helps Noongar people 
connect with the landscape and share 
cultural knowledge.  These projects, 
in addition to their restorative benefits 
and mental health effects, are also 
mechanisms for the maintenance and 
transmission of Noongar culture.
(Indigenous stakeholder participant 2022).
“
“
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              47

Theme 4: Resilient Landscapes
Snapshot of what’s working:
•	
Analysis of climate change impacts and adaptation approaches 
•	
Soil health monitoring site and projects aiming to remediate soil acidity and wind erosion
•	
Supporting farmers with knowledge and tools across the Southern WA agricultural regions to regenerate 
saline and marginal production lands (Gillamii)
•	
Improving farming practices to build soil health
•	
Active efforts to rehabilitate and regenerate landscapes restoring connection to land, while supporting the 
economic participation of Aboriginal people through business opportunities, including seed collection, seedling 
raising and revegetation efforts
•	
Noongar people bringing value from cultural knowledge and practices
•	
Switching to sustainable farming solutions
Theme 5: Resilient Regional Economy 
Snapshot of what’s working:
•	
Business diversification 
•	
Value-adding to existing agricultural enterprises 
•	
Improved online presence and e-commerce
•	
Good business planning
•	
Learning from experience
•	
Accessing professional advice
•	
Strong interest and commitment in the region for Noongar engagement and participation to support resilience 
activities 24
•	
Katanning has a high level of business diversity (less reliance on agriculture)
24	Wrigley, M. and Bartlett, K. (2022). Great Southern Inland Regional Drought Resilient Plan – Report on Aboriginal Community 
Consultations. Prepared in collaboration by Keogh Bay; South Coast NRM and Gillamii Centre for the Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development.
But there are good things going on - 
there is “a lot of seed collection and 
replanting and revegetation, especially 
at the Stirlings. You are starting to see 
where there are more trees planted. 
You start to see more rainfall, so it is 
not all doom and gloom”.
(Noongar stakeholder, 2022)).
“
“
48          Great Southern Development Commission

Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              49

Shire of Gnowangerup - Street Art 
08 Opportunities 
Moving Forward
50          Great Southern Development Commission

Whilst the region already has several initiatives and interventions that are working well in terms of dry season 
preparedness and mitigation, efforts should be made to reduce socio-economic vulnerabilities and increase 
institutional capacities. Through the stakeholder engagement process, a number of opportunities for drought 
resilience were identified. 
Inland Great Southern communities are very dependent on the agriculture sector for its their economic well-
being.  This means climate variability and dry seasons could impact on the economic and social wellbeing of these 
communities. The region also faces several resilience challenges, including economic diversification and access to 
infrastructure and services. The number one issue of concern for inland Great Southern communities is having 
confidence in existing available water systems to ride out at least two successive drought years.
South Coast NRM stakeholder25 engagement revealed key whole of landscape, whole of business, and whole of 
community resilience challenges. These include:
•	
the need for extension of drought preparedness information
•	
communications consistency in the delivery of planning and mitigation actions
•	
support for existing networks that work at the ground level (eg. grower groups and community landcare 
groups)
•	
a more holistic approach to drought response (impacts don’t stop at the farm boundary)
•	
the need for mental health and wellbeing need to be supported individually and at a community level
•	
the need to build and restore natural resources
The following is a summary of the key areas of opportunity for improving drought resilience. These are structured 
around each of our five resilience themes. More details on this can be found in the Inland Great Southern DVA.
Theme 1: Resilient Water
Targeted research, development and extension to build on water efficient farming systems and practices, and 
investment in water infrastructure, would further support ongoing agricultural resilience. Improved planning and 
coordination of future water needs was identified as a key opportunity for industry, agriculture and community use, 
supporting ongoing growth and development of the region. 
Investigation of alternative water sources is an opportunity that should be pursued, along with reducing distances 
between off-farm water sources and increasing the capacity of community water sources. Also important is 
the bolstering of scheme capacity to support regional communities’ non-potable and potable water supplies. 
Considerable work has been undertaken in the Great Southern to address rising saline groundwater beneath 
farming land and rural towns. This water could supplement farm and emergency community water supplies and 
alleviate the pressure on schemes that supply potable water.
25	South Coast Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). Regional Drought Resilience. Community Consultation Report for the 
Inland Great Southern. Prepared for the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              51

Theme 2: Resilient Communities
Mental health pressures are amplified in rural communities in successive dry or damaging event seasons.  This 
manifests through people withdrawing from social interaction, impacting on volunteering and philanthropy which 
often form the fabric of many communities.  The challenges to maintain green spaces in towns and the decline 
in natural resource condition (soil erosion, water erosion, vegetation decline) adds to the mental health burden 
associated with drought and directly impacts social cohesion.  The delivery of high-quality, large-scale events held 
in the region provides significant regional economic benefits to the region. 
Through regional stakeholder engagement, it became clear that opportunities for strengthening Indigenous 
knowledge through creating and maintaining access to land and sea Country is very important for social and 
community resilience. Fostering strong partnerships that enable the building of respect and appreciation for 
Indigenous knowledge and the harnessing of intergenerational knowledge, peer-to-peer learning opportunities and 
leveraging networks are highly valued and important opportunities to be pursued26.
Theme 3: Resilient Agriculture
There are opportunities to tap into the recently announced WA Farming Systems Project, a partnership between 
DPIRD and the Grains Research and Development Corporation, that has focus areas in the low and medium rainfall 
zones, including consortia locations.  
Early detection and monitoring of seasonal conditions, and dissemination of relevant information to farming 
communities about the potential for drought conditions would allow for timely decisions. There is an opportunity 
to establish a network of ‘typical’ farms in WA to monitor farm performance and volatility of climate impacts which 
would be a cost-effective and more informative strategy to understand the impacts of seasonal conditions. 
Transitioning to regenerative agriculture practices has also been identified as fundamentally important to meet 
climate change targets, food security needs, protect farmland and build healthier food systems in addition to carbon 
farming opportunities.
26	Noongar Land Enterprise Group (2022). Valuing Noongar People and Practices in Drought Resilience.
“
“
The Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience 
Plan presents for consideration a range of 
interventions and actions to support the 
preparedness and economic, environmental, and 
social resilience to future droughts in the region.
52          Great Southern Development Commission

Theme 4: Resilient Landscapes
Stakeholder consultation in the region revealed a number of opportunities for Aboriginal businesses to participate 
and benefit from initiatives to support drought resilience. In particular, participation in landscape conservation and 
restoration activities such as seed collection to support revegetation and carbon farming projects offer potential 
economic opportunities for Aboriginal people. 
Environmental stewardship programs, informed participation in carbon farming, and extension and adoption 
programs were identified as opportunities to improve environmental resilience. Developing and sharing Noongar 
“science” to support the improved condition and potential restoration of significant gathering places such as the 
water pools, was an expressed desire of Noongar Elders. 
Noongar people hold valuable and in-depth knowledge about the nature of the Great Southern. As a result, 
opportunities should be sought to engage the Noongar community in leading and being involved in any restoration-
related projects. It was suggested that an innovative project to support Noongar cultural maintenance and 
relationships in the inland Great Southern might be to establish a “Noongar-friendly landowner network” willing to 
allow Noongar people to do some, or all, of the following on their land27:
•	
Access remnant bushland
•	
Gather bush foods and medicines
•	
Run revegetation projects on parts of their land
•	
Take kangaroos and emus and other game
•	
Control feral animals
•	
Visit important sites and locations that may have previously been inaccessible
•	
Camp 
•	
Conduct traditional burning in remnant native vegetation 
A Noongar led framework of action to support improved engagement in land management was suggested as a 
way forward.
Theme 5: Resilient Regional Economy
There is strong potential to capture opportunities for decarbonisation of the economy, with growing interest and 
investment in renewable energy and biofuels projects, and large-scale carbon farming plantings. Niche value-adding 
on-farm, off-farm diversification, and multi-industry servicing also present opportunities to build drought resilience 
and adaptive capacity. Improved understanding and advocacy for regional enabling infrastructure to support 
economic growth is considered essential for building dry season and climate resilience. 
Additionally, there is the opportunity to develop ‘culture based’ economies in areas such as biodiversity 
conservation, land and water management and carbon sequestration. A project identified during stakeholder 
engagement, included the option to integrate carbon farming to low-value agricultural land – across a number of 
properties. This is an example of a project that would have significant benefits to the environment, in addition to a 
potential economic benefit to landholders in the region. 
Drought Policy and Support Mechanisms
A range of policy ideas were raised during consultation, including: 
•	
defining drought for WA to ensure consistent and fair allocation of drought resilience/ drought support funding
•	
policies and programs to incentivise upgrading of water infrastructure on farms and in communities
•	
tax incentives for landholders/ businesses to invest in water supplies
•	
extension of farm management deposits to rural businesses that rely on agriculture
A demonstrated ability for the agricultural industry, regional businesses and communities to adapt to changing 
conditions make the region an excellent candidate for future drought resilience action.
27	Wrigley, M. and Bartlett, K. (2022). Great Southern Inland Regional Drought Resilient Plan – Report on Aboriginal Community 
Consultations. Prepared in collaboration by Keogh Bay; South  Coast NRM and Gillamii Centre.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              53

09 The Plan
Stirlings - Tourism WA
54          Great Southern Development Commission

The actions and priorities presented in this plan are grouped under each of our five drought resilience themes, 
identified through stakeholder engagement, as follows: 
Resilient Water
Resilient Communities 
Resilient Agriculture 
Resilient Landscapes 
Resilient Regional Economy 
Building resilience can involve maintaining, modifying, or transforming parts, sectors or whole systems. Therefore, 
each proposed set of actions is identified as either maintain, modify, or transform to indicate which pathway is 
required. These pathways identify the type of change needed in the region to achieve our desired outcomes. This 
allows for decision making around which set of intervention options to start with, given available resources.  
Interventions identified as part of the formal Transformative Review undertaken by AgDots   have also been 
included. The implementation of these resilience building actions is subject to further discussion with Consortia 
stakeholders.  
9.1 Resilient Water
Theme Outcome
The region has a water system the community has confidence in to sustain industry, agriculture, and the community 
through consecutive decile 1 rainfall years.
FDF Strategic Priority
Environmental, Economic and Social Resilience
FDF Objective
Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity and profitability) of the agricultural sector; Strengthen the 
wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional, and remote communities; Improve the natural capital of agricultural 
landscapes for better environmental outcomes.
Current Situation
The inland Great Southern’s potable water source is provided by externally sourced piped scheme water via Great 
Southern Town Water Supply scheme. During dry periods, scheme water resources are strained.  Non-potable 
strategic water supplies and on-farm supplies are often unable to cope with more than two dry seasons. Dry 
seasons and reduced growing season rainfall result in increased draw on scheme water and strategic community 
water supplies, triggering water deficiency declarations.  Water supply development occurs sporadically and is 
undertaken by multiple organisations. Improved planning and coordination of future water needs was identified as a 
key opportunity for industry and community use, supporting ongoing growth and development of the inland 
Great Southern.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              55

THEME 1: RESILIENT WATER
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Future looking and 
coordinated total water 
management planning. 
•	
Review and update LGA emergency water supply plans
•	
Review water requirement for regional road works and firefighting capabilities, 
and identify risks in supply during times of drought
•	
Update regional water strategy for the Great Southern, taking into consideration 
supply and demand requirements of non-potable water, and capacity from 
scheme, groundwater and surface water resources
•	
Review Water Deficiency Declarations Policy, including a review of cost of 
scheme water for regional communities in drought
•	
Review capacity of the Scheme system to cope during drought events and 
risks associated in delivery of water for agriculture, businesses, farmland and 
regional communities
•	
Develop a platform to make this information available to decision makers and 
planners on current demand and availability of water across the region (include 
Standpipe access, strategic community water supplies)
•	
Farm water budgeting - assist farmers to integrate climate information, 
increased demand for water into on-farm water supply plans to ensure farms 
are not at risk for two dry seasons
Better water data 
to support planning 
and better regional 
development outcomes
•	
Understand regional water development constraints to support business 
investment decisions and consideration of options to address constraints
•	
Review capacity of regional bores that provide drought relief
•	
Review risks of water demands for key industries in the Great Southern
•	
Improve the security of strategic community water supplies through swipe card 
access
•	
Undertake detailed hydrogeological surveys in areas at risk of drought to 
identify potential groundwater resources for non-potable water use (including 
new technologies/desalination)
Improving the uptake of 
on-farm and household 
water supply 
•	
Investigate and promote cost effective water quality treatment options to 
improve water quality on-farm
•	
Demonstrations of water monitoring technology on-farm
•	
Support access to hydrogeological expertise to investigate groundwater 
opportunities to support regional communities access water for agriculture and 
industry development
Regional small water 
infrastructure projects
•	
Review options to extend scheme and increase/buffer capacity to fill gaps in 
high-risk areas
•	
Implement a program of water-related project upgrades to address urgent gaps 
in the water supply system (based on DWER/LGA/Water Corporation planning)
Optimising use of water in 
communities
•	
Develop proactive regional water improvement incentive scheme (farm water 
planning/farm water rebate scheme/rainwater tank subsidies)
Transformative Actions 
Identified through AgDots 
Review
Transform
•	
Water Supply and Risk Assessments (Regional Water Security and 
Investment Plans)
•	
Conduct water source investigations for all new water sources
•	
Support and expand desalination pilots in communities and on-farm
•	
Support development of on-farm planning tools to accelerate water resource 
planning at local scale (e.g., DamCat project acceleration)
•	
Incentivise on-farm water infrastructure investment
56          Great Southern Development Commission

9.2 Resilient Communities
Theme Outcome
Communities that are resourceful, adaptable and supported to mentally and physically bounce back from drought. 
FDF Strategic Priority
Social and Economic Resilience
FDF Objective
Strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and remote communities.
Current Situation
The small communities in the inland Great Southern are particularly exposed to dry season impacts, given the high 
dependence on agriculture and the high levels of volunteerism that support social connection. The uncertainty and 
financial stress associated with future droughts has the potential to negatively affect mental health in regional areas. 
Drought also contributes to failed businesses, causing people to move away from regional communities. Smaller 
communities lack access to community services and support networks in the region.  Noongar community members 
see drought in the context of wider changes to the natural environment including land clearing, damage to rivers 
and creeks, changing climate and ecological responses. Drought was noted as one of the several linked factors that 
have damaged the foundation of Noongar identify and well-being. 28
28	Wrigley, M. and Bartlett, K. (2022). Great Southern Inland Regional Drought Resilient Plan – Report on Aboriginal Community 
Consultations. Prepared in collaboration by Keogh Bay; South Coast NRM and Gillamii Centre.
THEME 2: RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Community Health and 
Wellbeing 
•	
Development of drought responsive wellbeing programs to support key areas 
including mental health, women, businesses, community groups and farmers
•	
Complete local community wellness plans based on local needs and drought 
resilience risks
•	
Establish regular regional visiting mental/financial counselling/physical health 
specialist program that is visible and delivery is considerate of local needs and 
sensitivities, matched to drought status
Events and green spaces 
to support community 
connection
•	
Provision and maintenance of green spaces for regional towns during drought 
events
•	
Innovative flexible community events funding program with a defined trigger for 
access during drought events
•	
Support LGA’s, communities and Grower Groups with Drought Officers, 
providing support and knowledge/access to funding assistance
Access to educational 
opportunities closer to 
home
•	
Education - review option of providing year 7 for smaller regional communities 
impacted by drought
•	
Improved online learning options for regional people - qualifications on-line 
(subsidised options)
•	
Enhance visibility of the regional University Centres/TAFE opportunities
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              57

THEME 2: RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Development of local 
leadership capacity and 
enhancing social capital
•	
Statewide drought plan to include appropriate indicators and response 
mechanisms to support regional communities in drought (including a reviewed 
communication and reporting mechanism from regional communities to State and 
Commonwealth Government)
•	
Enhance local leadership capacity through encouraging participation in 
leadership programs
•	
Identify mentors in and out of the community (drought champions)
•	
Support for inter-regional tours of growers and community leaders to share 
drought experiences and practices
•	
Support an active network of arts/culture/community organisations during times 
of drought
•	
Cultural connections and learning - increase collaboration between Noongar 
organisations, farmers and natural resource management / landcare groups in 
planning and implementing land restoration projects to increase climate resilience
Increasing community 
capacity to understand, 
plan and manage for 
drought
•	
Cultural Heritage Management Plans to include threats from climate change, 
droughts and dry seasons
•	
Conduct vulnerability assessments of Aboriginal sites and potential risk of 
drought/climate change impacts
•	
Drought Platform - one stop shop for support mechanism - enhance visibility 
of support mechanisms of relevance to the region - (regionally relevant tools, 
referral agencies, technical information); case studies of local champions that are 
implementing climate change adaption and dry season/drought preparation on-
farm; locations of relevant research, demonstration sites and trials
•	
Drought responses further validated based on appropriate drought indicators and 
identified vulnerabilities contextualised to Western Australian agricultural systems
Support evidence-based 
policy and program 
response to address 
drought resilience in 
vulnerable cohorts
•	
Conduct research into the true impact of drought and concepts of ‘resilience’ 
on rural, remote and regional women - what is the most appropriate response 
from a policy perspective
•	
Match financial Counsellor and drought support workers to demand - develop 
triggers, linked with drought check in programs
Natural resource condition 
report card and natural 
capital accounting for the 
regions
•	
Develop a program to monitor and record impact of drought on natural 
resources (report card instigated during times of drought)
•	
Include appropriate measures into DVAs (water quality and availability, soil 
health (biology, carbon), pests and weed incursion, vegetation condition, salinity, 
and erosion)
•	
Enlist support of regional landcare groups and Aboriginal rangers to support 
resource condition monitoring and restoration during and post drought events
•	
Better articulate the economic and social value of natural resources and 
ecosystem services - natural capital accounting for the regions; and impact on 
capital during times of drought
Building regional capacity 
to manage natural 
resources
•	
Support the regional NRM organisations to target and leverage grant 
opportunities to assist landcare groups and grower groups become more 
drought resilient
•	
Support expansion of Aboriginal ranger program to embed traditional 
knowledge into natural resource management
Best bet land and 
infrastructure design 
uses to support improved 
natural resource 
functioning 
•	
Identify diversified options for land not suitable for cropping or livestock such 
as native bush food collection
•	
Explore how on-farm and town water structures can support environmental 
functioning (e.g. better dam design to replicate wetland functioning/filtering; 
evaporation control; drainage planning)
Quantifying the impacts of 
regenerative agriculture 
practices during and post 
drought
•	
Investigate and champion opportunities for uptake of regenerative agriculture 
practices that support drought resilience in the region (increasing groundcover; 
integration of animals; improving soil health)
58          Great Southern Development Commission

9.3  Resilient Agriculture
Theme Outcome
An agriculture sector that is highly engaged in innovating farming systems to be resilient to drought.
FDF Strategic Priority
Economic Resilience 
FDF Objective
Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity and profitability) of the agricultural sector; Improve the natural 
capital of agricultural landscapes for better environmental outcomes.
Current Situation
Despite high resilience in terms of agricultural production capability, the region is still exposed to the impacts of 
climate change (increasing temperatures, decreasing rainfall, changes in the timing of rainfall and increasingly 
frequent drought) and faces several general resilience challenges including economic diversification and access to 
infrastructure, services and reliable, good quality water. 
However, the agriculture sector across the region has made major changes to farm management practices to limit 
the impacts of reduced growing season rainfall and dry seasons on businesses.  These include managing their debt, 
accessing farm management and business support, de-stocking early and / or permanently, improving soil acidity 
and water retention capability, increasing on-farm water storage and optimising pesticide and fertiliser use.  The 
sector has a good track record in terms of capacity to adapt and respond to risks, with increasing levels of grain 
production occurring despite reduced growing season rainfall.  
There are still areas for further investigation to enable continued productive capacity and profitability in the face of 
a drying climate. The region has a large number of highly valued grower groups who are actively involved in activities 
that support the production, profitability and sustainability of their members through farmer-led collaboration, 
participatory research and peer to peer learning.
THEME 3: RESILIENT AGRICULTURE
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
WA Drought Indicators 
Platform and longitudinal 
monitoring program
•	
Adapt the National Climate Drought Indicators platform for WA - develop WA 
specific climate/drought indicators and platform to support early forecasting, 
detection and reporting, of drought
•	
Develop an appropriate drought criterion for Western Australia (seasonal 
rainfall, researching use of rainfall percentiles, or other more appropriate criteria 
as triggers for drought support programs)
•	
Further investigate the application of drought indices relevant for the Great 
Southern
•	
Further research on ‘hot droughts’ - current and predicted impacts on 
agricultural production
•	
Further define the RDRP DVA methodology, updating as new information comes 
on board; advocate for improved data quality collected by ABS/ABARES and 
appropriate criteria.
•	
Develop a State-wide Drought Plan, documenting roles and responsibilities of all 
agencies with appropriate response and support mechanisms
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              59

THEME 3: RESILIENT AGRICULTURE
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Building drought, climate 
and carbon literacy to 
support risk management 
and planning
•	
Improve regional access to extension program to increase knowledge on 
climate and weather patterns and forecasting, including use of existing tools 
such as DR-SAT, CliMate, DPIRD Statistical Seasonal Forecasting
•	
Support initiatives to build regional climate monitoring capacity 
•	
Extension programs to support land managers to use available industry 
approved tools to calculate carbon footprint and to support decision making 
to mitigate the impact of climate change, drought and dry seasons on land and 
economic assets
•	
Identify local champions that are implementing climate change adaption and dry 
season/drought preparation on-farm to document and share their experiences
•	
Improve the adoption of on-farm water management improvements through 
integration of water planning modules into existing farm business planning 
decision making tools
•	
Cost benefit analysis of innovative wate resolutions and maintenance of existing 
infrastructure
•	
Support delivery of Farm Business Resilience and Small Business climate 
resilience planning workshops in the region; including focus on financial 
strategies to mitigate drought impacts
•	
Support Aboriginal landholders to build drought resilience in their enterprises
Connection and 
collaboration for 
identifying, prioritising and 
implementing research and 
development needs for the 
region
•	
Articulate and communicate key drought R&D priorities for the region through 
targeted grower group
•	
R&D forum and future farming system workshop, including strong engagement 
with the SWWA Drought Hub and key industry stakeholders (MLA, GRDC)
•	
Identify and implement opportunities for ‘in my backyard’ innovation 
demonstrations relevant to the region, including digital farm demonstrations to 
increase uptake of drought innovation and research
•	
Advocate for extended field testing of long coleoptile wheat varieties (200mm +) 
in WA’s low-medium rainfall grain belt and GM drought tolerant wheat and frost
•	
Enhance the visibility of State-led farming systems research and development, 
including long term farming systems trial at Merredin and Katanning pastures 
and low carbon livestock, research and crop and pasture modelling across soil 
types and rainfall zones
•	
Trial AASF in WA in target areas for this program
Better understanding risk
•	
Assess the risk and impact of drought on the agricultural supply chain
•	
Investigate improved agricultural weather insurance products and access to 
products
Collaboration and 
extension support for 
drought resilience
•	
Support local Grower Groups and local community groups who provide a 
valuable role to implement drought adaption initiatives
•	
Support farmers to develop drought plans for their farms
Transformative Actions 
Identified through AgDots 
Review
Transform
•	
Build capability for usage of on-farm data for insurance index products
•	
Support grower education/training for financial risk management tools
•	
Advocate Farm Management Deposit maximum cap to be relative to the size of 
the business
•	
Evaluate impact of drought support programs on-farm businesses
•	
Support research and development and industry development for alternative 
drought tolerant crops
•	
Support research and industry development for livestock feeding options 
(carbon positive feed supply e.g., asparagopis)
•	
Support research and increased adoption of low input cropping options (VRT, 
alternative fuels, electric vehicles, regen farming)
•	
Support research and development for building soil health (greater depth soil 
amelioration, hostile soil management, biochar)
•	
Support research and development in catchment management initiatives and 
build soil and water systems health (e.g., landscape ecology and rehydration)
60          Great Southern Development Commission

9.4   Resilient Landscapes
Theme Outcome
Healthy landscapes with natural resources able to sustain industry and environmental services.
FDF Strategic Priority
Environmental Resilience 
FDF Objective
Improve the natural capital of agricultural landscapes for better environmental outcomes; Strengthen the wellbeing 
and social capital of rural, regional and remote communities.
Current Situation
Consultation with Aboriginal Elders identified that, when country is not healthy, the people are not healthy. A number 
of initiatives are already being undertaken by local natural resource management and Indigenous groups to mitigate 
the effects of drought on the natural landscape. 
During stakeholder consultation, Aboriginal community members expressed concern over the degradation of the 
natural environment, through land clearing, and salinisation, worsened by global warming, higher temperatures and 
dry seasons. Cultural values are steeped in connection to land, and this degradation is of concern in the Noongar 
community. 
Natural resource management support was noted as one of the first things to be cut in a dry season, with no extra 
time or money for activities like revegetation. At the sub-regional level, management of landscapes to reduce impact 
of erosion events (e.g. increased levels of vegetation, permanent plantings) and improve biodiversity are areas that 
need further investigation and support. 
THEME 4: RESILIENT LANDSCAPES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Natural resource condition 
report card and natural 
capital accounting for the 
regions
•	
Develop a program to monitor and record impact of drought on natural 
resources, longitudinally monitor and incorporate into DVAs; includes water 
quality and availability, soil health (biology, carbon), pests and weed incursion, 
vegetation condition, salinity, erosion
•	
Re-establish regional wetland monitoring program to establish environmental 
values, cultural values and condition of wetlands and the impact of drying 
seasons (include groundwater dependent ecosystems)
•	
Enlist support of regional Landcare groups and Noongar Boodja Rangers to 
support resource condition monitoring
•	
Identify and monitor indicator species for changes in the climate (such as the 
Australasian bittern or noisy scrub bird)
•	
Collect more information on threatened species biology and ecology, 
particularly climate tolerances
•	
Better articulate the economic and social value of natural resources and 
ecosystem services - natural capital accounting for the regions; and impact on 
capital during times of drought
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              61

THEME 4: RESILIENT LANDSCAPES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Building regional capacity 
to manage natural 
resources
•	
Support sub-regional groups to ensure targeting and leveraging of NRM grant 
opportunities
•	
Promote actions to improve soil health (e.g. increased soil cover, organic matter) 
and ensure that actions are implemented to retain a vegetative cover/structure 
to protect topsoil
•	
Support expansion of Noongar Boodja Ranger program; encourage expansion 
of traditional knowledge into natural resource management
•	
Promote the principles of land rehydration and support the process through 
education and funding for on-ground actions/trials/demonstrations
•	
Provide opportunities for on-country projects, recognising that on-country 
activities enable intergenerational transfer of knowledge and build connection 
to country and offer viable business opportunities
Inland Great Southern 
Revegatation
•	
Develop a strategy for optimised carbon plantings to ensure triple bottom 
line benefits; includes mapping of suitable locations that do not compromise 
agricultural productivity, provide biodiversity benefits (create habitat corridors) 
and economic opportunities for landholders
•	
Build carbon farming literacy through delivery of workshops and accessible 
information/support on carbon farming opportunity to support uptake of 
appropriate opportunities
•	
Build resilience by large scale re-vegetation, build connectivity and improve 
mosaic landscapes (using priority areas as identified in the South Coast Macro-
Corridor Project and the NRM Planning for Climate Change MCAS modelling, 
Gondwana Link)
•	
Monitor increased fire risk with vegetation management and fire research
Best bet land and 
infrastructure design 
uses to support improved 
natural resource 
functioning
•	
Identify productive uses of land not suitable for cropping or livestock and 
identify appropriate management options
•	
Explore how on-farm and in-town water structures can support environmental 
functioning - e.g. better dam design to replicate wetland functioning/filtering; 
evaporation control
•	
Investigate opportunities for uptake of regenerative agriculture practices that 
support drought resilience in the region - increasing groundcover; integration of 
animals; improving soil health
Quantifying the impacts of 
regenerative agriculture 
practices during and post 
drought
•	
Investigate opportunities for uptake of regenerative agriculture practices that 
support drought resilience in the region - increasing groundcover; integration of 
livestock and improving soil health
Ecosystem services
•	
Marketing of good land stewardship (e.g. case studies)
•	
Environmental services
•	
Catchment plans to support holistic landscape scale actions
•	
Continue updating and implementing the Regional NRM Plan (Southern 
Prospects) – a regional context and framework for catchment management.
Transformative Actions 
Identified through AgDots 
Review
Transform
•	
Support natural capital framework development in WA Agriculture 
•	
Evaluate and expand biodiversity stewardship program and trials in WA
•	
Pilot participation in national biodiversity trading platform
•	
Improve carbon and climate literacy and understanding of the carbon market
•	
Support projects to test market to develop smaller more integrated projects 
(pollination, soil conditions, biodiversity) and create a model to provide co-
benefits and support local communities and businesses
62          Great Southern Development Commission

9.5    Resilient Regional Economy
Theme Outcome
A diverse, forward looking, adaptable business sector, not wholly dependent on seasonal conditions.
FDF Strategic Priority
Economic Resilience 
FDF Objective
Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity and profitability) of the agricultural sector; Strengthen the 
wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and remote communities.
Current Situation
Despite a declining or stagnant population growth, the Great Southern region’s gross regional product is growing as 
the agricultural and mining sector grows, and small and medium enterprises establish to service those underpinning 
sectors. Supporting the diversification of the economy through encouraging business development in the region 
was considered important in enhancing economic and community resilience. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that farm numbers and on-farm based populations are declining, but regional ‘town’ 
populations are not - a gap that warrants further investigation.  There is strong potential to capture opportunities for 
decarbonisation of the economy, with growing interest and investment in renewable energy and biofuels projects, 
and large-scale carbon farming plantings. Niche value-adding on-farm, off-farm diversification, and multi-industry 
servicing also present opportunities to build drought resilience and adaptive capacity.
THEME 5:  RESILIENT REGIONAL ECONOMY
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Addressing constraining 
enabling infrastructure to 
support industry growth 
and regional resilience to 
climate change
•	
Undertake regional infrastructure/market constraint audit - including power, 
water, transport, telecommunications, land, housing and labour - to consolidate 
understanding and focus investment to building economic and social resilience; 
Great Southern water supply plan (refer to water resilience actions)
•	
Great Southern energy supply strategy developed, or made visible, to support 
ongoing resilience of regional communities, including enhancing rollout of 
alternative, grid independent energy sources (e.g. Stand Alone Power Systems) 
and consideration of requirements to electrify the agricultural industry
•	
Work with relevant organisations to develop and implement a worker 
accommodation strategy
Supporting economic 
diversification and 
business development in 
the region to capitalise on 
growing agriculture and 
mining sectors and the 
region’s unique features
•	
Regional collaboration to support tourism product development related to 
regional CRC Innovation and Incubation Centre strategy - explore leveraging 
the existing CRC networks to support business incubation in regional 
communities, including partnerships with networks outside the region
•	
Identify and share case studies of agribusiness diversification, build on the 
network of businesses who are value-adding to commodities and developing 
niche, high value products;
•	
Quantify and qualify the impact of small and medium enterprises in the region 
and true dependency on agriculture
•	
Understand extent and plans for mining activity in the region; explore 
opportunity for mining projects to support local content and local workforce 
development and encourage business expansion or establishment
•	
In-drought support programs developed and encourage genuine local 
expenditure/local content outcomes
•	
Expand Stand Alone Power System program to support energy efficiency on 
farms and improved reliability
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              63

THEME 5:  RESILIENT REGIONAL ECONOMY
Transformative Actions 
Identified through AgDots 
Review
Transform
•	
Improve connectivity through co-investment in digital infrastructure (includes 
backhaul + wireless networks to farms)
•	
Build tech skill and support in agriculture (connectivity literacy, data 
management capability, farm tech capability of industry)
•	
Regional tech support built within regions (CRC flying squads) and develop long 
term plan to build tech capacity in regions
•	
Support tourism planning processes (destination management plans) and invest 
in regional and local tourism projects
•	
Support higher level of integration and planning for major mining resource 
projects and develop community structures to capture benefit from investment
•	
Develop more intensive farming opportunities (e.g., horticulture through water 
security assessments and identification of land/water/workforce /infrastructure 
packages for investors)
•	
Create a revolving loan fund to encourage regional entrepreneurship and 
innovation and support innovation/resilience training for regional businesses
10 Plan Implementation and 
Enduring Governance
The Plan’s proposed themes and interventions have been developed with the community and technical experts, with 
delivery and impact targeted at the local and regional level, with some interventions having significance beyond the 
Consortia region.  We acknowledge there are many relevant programs already underway or being planned that will 
support the delivery of this Plan. 
The implementation of the Plan, including identification of priority program areas and the Plan’s enduring 
governance and ongoing resourcing, will be subject to further discussion in coming months with Consortia local 
governments and potential program delivery partners.  While locally-led delivery of the Plan is preferred to ensure 
maximum community buy-in and impact, resourcing to implement the Plan requires resolution. 
Successful plan implementation should consider projects for investment as drought preparedness measures against 
those that could be delivered during an actual drought event. Drought mitigation actions are best implemented well 
in advance of any drought event to mitigate drought induced impacts on local farming communities.
64          Great Southern Development Commission

11 Investment Framework
An Investment Framework supporting the RDRP Plans is being developed to identify priority program areas and 
potential resourcing opportunities. This will be subject to further discussion in coming months with Consortia local 
governments and potential program delivery partners, including the South-West WA Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hub.  
This work will include the principles of the feasibility and practicality of proposed actions and the quantitative and 
qualitative public-good benefits to the region as described in Component 8 of the Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
Independent Review Guide. It is vital that the momentum created by developing this initial plan is carried through the 
implementation of this Plan and the supporting Investment Framework. 
Figure 16: Investment Framework for RDRP Program
WEIGHTING
RANKING
RESULT
IMPACT
Social
Benefits
33%
6
4.33
Environmental
Benefits
33%
3
Economic
Return on Investment
33%
4
100%
FEASIBILITY
Capability
Capacity, skills and expertise
20%
8
4.8
Approvals
Planning and Approvals
20%
4
Risks
Project risk
20%
6
Strategic Fit
Aligns with Existing Programs
20%
4
Timeframe
Project delivery timeframe
20%
2
100%
West Australian Regional Drought Planning Investment Framework | FEB 2023
What is drought resilience 
and preparedness?
Investment 
Framework Criteria
The WA Government is committed to 
ensuring our regions are equipped 
to manage the impacts of drought by 
being more prepared and resilient. 
The WA Government, through the 
Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development (DPIRD), 
is working with the Australian 
Government’s Future Drought Fund 
to support partnerships of regional 
organisations, local government, 
communities and industry to develop 
Regional Drought Resilience Plans (DRPs).
This pamphlet outlines the core 
elements of an Investment 
Framework which will enable 
the Western Australian State 
Government to assess, rank and 
prioritise its investment in this critical 
area of drought resilience and 
preparedness.   
BACKGROUND
IMPACT
FEASIBILITY
Very High        High     Medium   Low
Risk
Strategic Fit
Capability
(Capacity,
Skills &
Expertise)
Planning &
Approvals
Timeframe
SCORE
Social
Environmental
Economic
SCORE
FEASIBILITY
COST
IMPACT
Given the needs of 
communities preparing, 
responding and 
recovering from drought and 
maintaining a resilience to do so, 
there needs to be a mechanism 
to prioritise the allocation 
of Government funding.
This tool provides a framework 
to assist with this goal.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              65

12 Monitoring and Evaluation
12.1	 Context
Monitoring and evaluation is a critical component of effective planning. It provides the framework to assess 
progress of implementation, adapt strategies and ensure that the plan ultimately achieves its intended outcomes. 
The Inland Great Southern Regional Drought Resilience Plan Monitoring and Evaluation Framework sits within the 
broader context of the Future Drought Fund (FDF) Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MELP) and the WA 
RDRP Monitoring Evaluation and Reporting Plan (MERP). 
The Great Southern Development Commission has the role of initiating actions in line with the Plan, reviewing 
progress against the Plan objectives and making changes to the Plan as needed to maintain its relevance and 
usefulness. 
During the program period, reporting against the MELP and MERP is coordinated by the Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) in WA, including monthly dashboard reporting, and annual reporting 
including acquittal report at program completion. The MERP also includes a client survey at the completion of the 
program to collect qualitative data on engagement, capacity and understanding of drought resilience.  
A FDF Steering Committee formed within DPIRD will provide high-level monitoring and evaluation of the program at 
a State level. FDF indicators of success include: 
Short term:
•	
Regional representatives have considered and planned incremental, transitional and transformational 
opportunities to strengthen resilience.
•	
Identified actions, pathways and opportunities (including innovative and transformative) to improve regional 
drought resilience, mitigate risks and adapt to change.
•	
Communities use relevant data and information to better understand their resilience to plan for drought.
•	
Plans have buy-in from key stakeholders in the region.
•	
The number of, and participation in, local networks and programs to enhance drought resilience increases. 
•	
Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often to build drought 
resilience.
•	
Regional leaders are in a stronger position to implement strategic actions, adapt to change and take 
advantage of opportunities to build economic resilience as they arise.
•	
Partnerships, networks and engagement are built between stakeholders managing natural resources.
•	
Increased community understanding of the region’s current and future drought resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic, environmental and social characteristics.
•	
Natural resource management capability is improved across region. 
Long term: 
•	
Agricultural landscapes are functional and sustainable, with healthy natural capital (environmental resilience).
•	
Agricultural businesses are self-reliant, productive, and profitable (economic resilience).
•	
Agricultural communities are resourceful, adaptable, and thriving (social resilience).
•	
Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to wellbeing and security.
•	
	Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to drought.
•	
More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving productivity and profitability.
66          Great Southern Development Commission

12.2	 Inland Great Southern Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
The Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (Table 5) outlines how the regional level impact of the Inland Great 
Southern Regional Drought Resilience Plan will be measured.
The Vision for the IGS RDRP Plan is ‘to build a resilient region that can withstand the impacts of dry seasons and 
climate variability, by creating a sustainable environment, self-reliant communities, and a diverse regional economy.’
The Outcomes driving the IGS RDRP across the five themes are:
1.	 	Resilient Water: The region has a water system the community has confidence in to sustain industry, 
agriculture, and the community through consecutive decile 1 rainfall years.
2.	 	Resilient Economy: A diverse, forward-looking, adaptable business sector, not wholly dependent on seasonal 
conditions.
3.	 	Resilient Landscapes: Healthy landscapes with natural resources able to sustain industry and environmental 
services.
4.	 	Resilient Agriculture: An agriculture sector that is highly engaged in innovating farming systems to be resilient 
to drought.
5.	 	Resilient Communities: Communities that are resourceful, adaptable and supported to mentally and 
physically bounce back from drought.
The Monitoring and Evaluation Framework align with these five theme areas of the IGS RDR, together with the 
foundational requirement for communities to have access to relevant and up to date information to support planning 
and implementation. A range of assessment tools will be used to assess progress, including but not limited to 
surveys, environmental scans, data analysis, direct industry engagements and project counts.  
In addition to the qualitative measures in Table 5, the Drought Vulnerability Assessment (DVA) is a key component 
of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program. In addition to identifying key areas of vulnerability to inform 
interventions and actions, the information captured could be used as a baseline for comparison with future 
assessments to measure the success of the program at building drought resilience.  
12.3 Reporting and Responsibility
Though the implementation of the plan will be undertaken by a range of agencies and organisations, the GSDC, with 
DPIRD, is responsible for monitoring and evaluation through this framework.  
Reporting will include progress towards achieving the desired outcomes of the IGS RDRP through the identified 
interventions and activities. In addition to monitoring, reporting will be used to capture emerging opportunities, 
record learnings and considerations for future interventions. Short-term evaluation will be captured through DPIRD 
MERP reporting during the program phase. 
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              67

FDF Indicators 
RDRP Theme
RDRP Summary interventions*
Foundational
Decision makers and 
planners have access to 
relevant and up to date 
information to underpin 
planning and activities
Platform for decision makers and planners to access 
information.
WA Drought Indicators Platform and longitudinal 
monitoring.
Communities implement 
transformative activities 
that improve their 
resilience to drought.
Resilient Water 
The region has a water 
system the community has 
confidence in to sustain 
industry, agriculture, and 
the community through 
consecutive decile 1 
rainfall years.
Optimise use of water and explore alternative water 
sources for industry and community. 
Future looking and coordinated total water management 
planning to support regional development outcomes.
Agricultural businesses 
are self-reliant, productive, 
and profitable.
Resilient Economy
A diverse, forward-looking, 
adaptable business sector, 
not wholly dependent on 
seasonal conditions.
Addressing constraining enabling infrastructure to 
support industry growth and regional resilience to 
climate change.
Supporting economic diversification and business 
development in the region.
Maximising economic development opportunities for 
communities associated with major projects.
Agricultural landscapes 
are functional and 
sustainable, with healthy 
natural capital.
Resilient Landscapes
Healthy landscapes with 
natural resources able 
to sustain industry and 
environmental services.
Incorporate environmental services and values in 
agricultural and community landscape planning.
Research and adoption of practises that support natural 
resource functioning. 
Building regional capacity to manage natural resources.
More primary producers 
preserve natural capital 
while also improving 
productivity and 
profitability.
Resilient Agriculture
An agriculture sector 
that is highly engaged 
in innovating farming 
systems to be resilient to 
drought.
Connection and collaboration for identifying, prioritising 
and implementing research, development and extension 
needs for the region.
Building capacity of regional farmers and supporting 
services to plan and adapt to a changing climate.
Agricultural communities 
are resourceful, adaptable, 
and thriving.
Stronger connectedness 
and greater social capital 
within communities, 
ontributing to wellbeing 
and security.
Resilient Communities 
Communities that are 
resourceful, adaptable and 
supported to mentally and 
physically bounce back 
from drought.
Build community capacity to understand, plan and 
respond to drought.
Support initiatives that connect community and engage 
vulnerable cohorts.
* Refer to section 9 for the full list of interventions and actions
Table 5. IGS RDRP Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
68          Great Southern Development Commission

Indicator
Timeframe
Availability of information to support rapid evaluation of drought risk in the region.
1-4 years
Regional plans reference the IGS RDRP and associated technical reports.
1-4 years 
4+ years
Number of projects or initiatives that have been implemented that are aligned to the 
actions outlined in the Plan or directly support by the Plan.
1-4 years  
4+ years
Activities underway to progress identified priority interventions.
1-4 years  
4+ years
Increased uptake of alternative/ innovative water infrastructure for farms, industry and 
community.
4+ years
Investment framework for water infrastructure, underpinned by integrated water 
planning, is delivered for consortia LGAs.
4+ years
Activities underway to progress identified priority interventions.
1-4 years  
4+ years
Investment framework for enabling infrastructure, underpinned by an infrastructure 
audit, is delivered for consortia LGAs.
4+ years
Activities underway to progress identified priority interventions.
1-4 years  
4+ years
Uptake of environmental value assessments such as natural capital accounting and 
ecosystem services.
4+ years
Activities underway to progress identified priority interventions.
1-4 years  
4+ years
Increased R&D focus on drought resilience for Farms and agricultural industry.
4+ years
Activities underway to progress identified priority interventions.
1-4 years  
4+ years
Number of community infrastructure projects and events remains steady pre, during 
and post drought periods.
4+ years
Project Contact
To provide feedback or to obtain further information, contact the Great Southern Development Commission at 
gsdc@gsdc.wa.gov.au or (08) 9842 4888
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              69

13 Appendix 1: Inland Great Southern 
Policy, Strategy and Plan Alignment
POLICY/STRATEGY 
ALIGNMENT
Future Drought Fund
The program will support the long-term outcomes of the Drought Resilience 
Funding Plan 2020 to 2024, specifically:
•	
Creating stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security
•	
Empowering communities to implement transformative activities that improve 
their resilience to drought
•	
Supporting more primary producers to adopt whole-of-system approaches to 
Natural Resource Management to improve the natural resource base, for long 
term productivity and landscape health
This plan is key to delivering on the FDF’s three strategic priorities which include:
•	
Economic resilience for an innovative and profitable agricultural sector
•	
Environmental resilience for sustainable and improved functioning of 
agricultural landscapes
•	
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable communities
WA Government: Diversity 
WA - A framework 
to support the WA 
Government’s Our Priorities 
July 2019
Diversify WA is a blueprint for collaboration between government, industry and the 
community, to supports the WA Government’s focus on creating secure, quality 
jobs, growing and diversifying the economy and attracting investment.  Primary 
Industries is one of six priority sectors in which Western Australia has a competitive 
advantage significant growth and diversification opportunity. 
Department of Water, 
Strategic priority - Water for 
Growth 2016 plan
Moving to water sources for a drier climate - this project delivers new information 
to support the development of climate-resilient water resource support.
Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional 
Development, Strategic 
Intent 2018-2021
Sustainability - this project ensures future generations of agribusinesses will have 
continued access to support social and economic growth.
Research, Development and Innovation - this project will enable the creation of new 
knowledge and build capacity within WA on alternative resources that incorporate 
innovative and emerging technology.
Regional Opportunities - this project will help drive the economic growth, local 
capability and social amenity of regional communities. 
Regional growth opportunities will benefit from investment in priority resources to 
provide drought securities.
DPIRD - Primary Industries 
Plan 2020–2024
Supports DPIRD vision of a more sophisticated, diverse and globally competitive 
sector.  Growth and expansion into targeted markets remain at the heart of the 
Plan which complements the State’s economic blueprint, Diversify WA.
Water Corporation, Water 
Forever, Towards Climate 
Resilience 50 year plan, 
2009
Develop new water sources - Water Corporation have acknowledged that reducing 
water use and increasing water recycling will not be enough to counteract 
projected reductions in rainfall. As such, it is necessary that new water sources be 
developed to ensure that there is sufficient supply to meet water demand over the 
next 50 years. Increasing desalination to support population growth to optimise 
water use are part of WC strategic vision.
70          Great Southern Development Commission

POLICY/STRATEGY 
ALIGNMENT
Western Australian Climate 
Policy - November 2020
The WA Climate Policy outlines the State Government’s commitment to climate 
change adaptation and achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. 
Several climate resilience initiatives are identified as part of this policy, including 
the Climate Resilience Action Plan 2022-25, Climate Science Initiative, Climate Risk 
Framework and Pilot Sectoral Adaptation Plans.
The Climate Science Initiative is aimed at understanding how future global 
emissions will affect WA’s climate. As part of this initiative, climate projections will 
be provided along with communications material that support agribusinesses and 
government with interpreting the projections
Regional Investment 
Blueprint - 2015
Developed by each of the nine Regional Development Commissions, the Blueprints 
are plans for investment, outlining transformative strategies, priority actions 
and investment opportunities.  This plan identifies four regional imperatives that 
are fundamental to the region’s economic and social development, growth and 
prosperity to 2040:
1.	 Economic growth and diversification
2.	 Essential infrastructure and services
3.	 Knowledge and innovation
4.	 Community and environment
It also specifies 7 transformation projects:
1.	 Growing value (premium food production and value adding)
2.	 Energy security
3.	 Water for growth
4.	 Avenues to opportunity (transport and industry hubs)
5.	 Connected Great Southern (thriving in the digital age)
6.	 Destination of natural choice (iconic and creative tourism)
7.	 Strong communities
Great Southern 
Development Commission 
Strategic Plan 2020-2022
By working in partnership with local governments, businesses and communities, 
the GSDC aims to coordinate and support endeavours that build an integrated 
regional economy, foster regional growth, and transform our communities into 
vibrant places to work, play and learn.  The GSDC’s strategic goals include:
•	
Strong and diverse economy
•	
Regional liveability
•	
Strong communities
•	
Organisational excellence 
South Coast Natural 
Resource Management –
Southern Prospects 2019-
2024
A strategy to guide investment in natural resource management on the South 
Coast of WA. Provides a common focus for the communities of the SCNRM region 
to work collectively towards the vision of looking after where we live – communities 
caring their environment. 
Regional Planning and 
Infrastructure Framework
Identifies each region’s vision and provide an important foundation for future 
decision making, outlining key planning initiatives for each region.
LGA Community Strategic 
Community plans
Includes economic and community sustainability, quality long term water supply, 
water security, and water holding infrastructure and harvesting.
Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan 2022              71

Inland Great Southern Drought Resilience Plan
Great Southern Development Commission 
Pyrmont House 
110 Serpentine Road 
ALBANY WA 6330
Telephone: (08) 9842 4888 
Email: gsdc@gsdc.wa.gov.au
Great Southern Development Commission 
10 Dore Street 
KATANNING WA 6317
Telephone: (08) 9821 3211
Email: katanning@gsdc.wa.gov.au
Website: www.gsdc.wa.gov.au