LODDON 
CAMPASPE
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge and respect Victorian Traditional 
Owners as the original custodians of Victoria’s land 
and waters, their unique ability to care for Country 
and deep spiritual connection to it.
The recognised Traditional Owners of the Loddon 
Campaspe region include the Dja Dja Wurrung, 
Taungurung, Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung, Baraba 
Baraba and Yorta Yorta Peoples.
We honour Elders past and present, whose 
knowledge and wisdom have ensured the 
continuation of culture and traditional practices.
We are committed to genuinely partner, and 
meaningfully engage, with Victoria’s Traditional 
Owners and Aboriginal communities to support 
the protections of Country, the maintenance of 
spiritual and cultural practices and their broader 
aspirations in the 21st century and beyond.

Preface
Drought causes significant financial, social and 
environmental impact on people, communities 
and the region. The Loddon Campaspe region is 
committed to taking steps now to ensure well 
considered strategies are in place to prepare for 
and manage through future dry periods.
The Loddon Campaspe Drought Resilience Plan 
(the Plan) is one of 9 regional drought plans 
developed in Victoria, as part of the Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) Program, 
under the Future Drought Fund. Loddon Campaspe 
communities are committed to taking steps now to 
prepare for and respond to dry seasonal conditions 
and droughts.
The aim of the Plan is to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify and address 
their needs, so that they can be better prepared for 
and able to manage future dry seasonal conditions 
and droughts. The Plan may also inform future 
investments in building regional drought resilience.
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund (FDF) invests 
in a wide range of drought resilience initiatives to 
help Australian farms and communities prepare 
for the impacts of drought. These are implemented 
through a suite of programs under 4 focus areas:
1.		Better climate information
2.	Better planning
3.	Better practices
4.	Better prepared communities
The RDRP Program is included under ‘better 
planning’ focus area. However, regional  
drought resilience includes elements that cover  
all focal areas. The Loddon Campaspe Plan 
therefore bridges all FDF categories, informing 
future investment in actions that build regional 
drought resilience.
This Plan is founded on historic and recent 
experiences of drought within the region,  
as well as relevant existing regional strategies, 
programs and activities that aim to manage, 
mitigate or adapt to a drier climate. All 9 plans 
were developed using a consistent methodology 
across Victoria:
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify and  
collate issues and develop actions to build 
drought resilience.
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Photo: Coliban Water

Contents
Preface	 	
1
Collaboration	
4
Summary	
5
Introduction	
6
Regional Vision	
8
Regional principles, drivers of change and goals	
8
A snapshot of the Loddon Campaspe	
10
Environment	
12
Climate trends	
13
Communities and Culture	
13
Industry and employment trends	
14
Drought impacts in the region	
16
Resilience in the region	
18
Concepts considered in the Plan	
20
Themes, outcomes and actions for a drought resilient community	
22
Theme 1:	 Collaboration, knowledge gathering and sharing	
24
Theme 2:	People and community wellbeing	
26
Theme 3:	Empowered communities	
28
Theme 4:	Rural economy	
30
Theme 5:	Infrastructure	
32
Theme 6:	Farm management	
34
Theme 7:	Environment and natural resources management	
36
Case Studies	
38
Next steps for the Loddon Campaspe	
42
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning	
44
Appendices		
48
Appendix 1:	 Drought resilience insights from the Loddon Campaspe	
48
Appendix 2:	Existing actions and strategies in the Loddon Campaspe	
50
References	
56
3

Collaboration
The Plan is the culmination of a co-design process 
led by the Loddon Campaspe Regional Reference 
Group, with wider community engagement sought 
through stakeholder interviews and the open 
online platform, Engage Victoria. Members of the 
Reference Group and other stakeholders were 
drawn from a broad range of organisations and 
sectors within the region that have responsibilities 
for, or interests in, agriculture, water, liveability, 
regional and local communities, and regional 
development. Consultation with a broad range 
of regional stakeholders was critical to the 
development and aggregation of themes and actions 
that will achieve the overall vision for the region. 
Organisational members of the Reference Group:
Adapt Loddon-Mallee
Agriculture Victoria
Bendigo Youth Council
Birchip Cropping Group
Campaspe Shire Council
Central Goldfields Shire Council
Coliban Water
Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action
Department of Families, Fairness & Housing
Department of Health
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Aboriginal Corporation)
Emergency Recovery Victoria
Goulburn Murray Water
Greater Bendigo Council
Loddon Campaspe Regional Partnership
Loddon Shire Council
Macedon Ranges Shire Council
Mount Alexander Shire Council
North Central CMA
Rural Financial Counselling Service
The Reference Group met several times between 
July 2022 and December 2023. The members 
guided the RDRP development approach, 
identified key regional strategies and plans 
containing existing public participation summaries 
and actions related to drought resilience building, 
provided input on past regional drought impacts, 
identified stakeholder groups to be engaged,  
and contributed to the contents of the Plan. 
Individual meetings with key stakeholders were 
also held in person or using online tools, and input 
from these meetings was used to populate the 
initial thematic framework. This framework was 
then used in a series of online workshops, inviting 
representatives of stakeholder groups identified 
by the Reference Group to provide feedback.  
The improved regional thematic framework was 
then opened for broad public engagement using 
the Engage Victoria online platform.
The process was paused from October 2022 to 
April 2023 due to major flooding in the region, 
which shifted the focus of Reference Group 
members and stakeholder groups to flood relief 
and recovery.
Development of the Plan was facilitated by 
Agriculture Victoria and jointly funded by the 
Victorian and Commonwealth Government under 
the FDF.
4

Summary
The long-term objectives of the Plan are to build 
regional, community and individual resilience to 
drought through recognising and mitigating risks, 
strengthening preparedness, and recognising 
opportunities for change that will improve the 
economic, environmental and social opportunities 
in the Loddon Campaspe region.
A list of actions was developed and agreed by the 
Loddon Campaspe Reference Group. The actions 
were grouped in themes and contribute to specific 
outcomes that together build regional drought 
resilience.
The key themes and corresponding outcomes  
that emerged through the Plan's development are: 
• Collaboration, knowledge gathering and 
sharing: Regional networks are maintained 
to ensure open channels of communication, 
knowledge sharing and promotion of 
engagement from a diverse representation  
of sectors, communities and industries.
• People and community wellbeing: Drought 
resilience at the individual and community 
level is strengthened by supporting physical 
and mental wealth, peer-support and informal 
support groups, grassroots initiatives, and 
initiatives and actions by regional organisations 
and agencies.
• Empowered communities: Communities are 
empowered to act and are supported where 
requested. Communities have local and regional 
leadership and are connected to regional and 
state networks to ensure a shared responsibility 
for improved drought resilience.
• Rural economy: The rural economy remains 
vibrant during droughts and  drought impacts  
are minimised through resilience building  
before droughts.
• Infrastructure: Infrastructure at an individual, 
community and regional level is sufficient to 
support increased drought resilience.
• Farm management: Primary producers are 
supported to maintain production systems  
during drought that are environmentally and 
financially sustainable and resilient.
• Environment and natural resources 
management: Best management principles  
and practices are recognised and adopted  
by land managers to minimise drought impacts 
and ensure the natural environment can  
rebound effectively.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

Drought is a recurring feature  
in the Australian landscape,  
and has been for thousands of 
years. However, the impacts  
of climate change are increasing 
the frequency and severity  
of drought.
The Commonwealth and Victorian governments 
have partnered to support regional areas to ensure 
they are better prepared to manage and build 
resilience to future droughts, with an increasing 
focus on adaption and change. The Commonwealth 
Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness 
Program’s vision is to have farm businesses and 
rural communities that are prepared for, and 
capable of managing, drought in pursuit of a 
prosperous and sustainable future. 
This Loddon Campaspe Drought Resilience Plan 
seeks to facilitate a cohesive and coordinated 
approach to building community drought 
resilience. The Plan aims to build:
•	economic resilience for an innovative  
and profitable agricultural sector
•	environmental resilience for sustainable  
and improved functioning of landscapes
•	social resilience for resourceful and  
adaptable communities
INTRODUCTION
6

Given the existing work related to drought and 
water management in the region, one of the main 
objectives of the Plan is to align, strengthen and 
coordinate existing drought-related strategies, 
plans, actions and aspirations to increase overall 
drought resilience in the region.
The Plan was developed through engagement 
with regional organisational stakeholders and 
local community groups. The Plan aligns with 
Commonwealth and Victorian government 
principles and approaches to drought 
preparedness and response. The Plan supports 
communities of the Loddon Campaspe region  
to be better prepared and more responsive  
to future drought events. The Plan leverages  
regional strengths and address vulnerabilities  
in the region’s ability to prosper during dry  
seasons and droughts.
Agriculture Victoria coordinated the development 
of the Plan, utilising a Reference Group comprised 
of representatives from community (including 
Traditional Owners), industry and government. 
Consultation with other community groups with an 
interest in drought resilience was also undertaken. 
Reference Group members and their affiliated 
organisations guided drought resilience thinking 
to ensure that the Plan will accommodate changes 
through adaptive planning and community 
engagement processes. Workshop-style meetings 
were also held by the Reference Group to guide 
development of Plan content and actions. The Group 
also provided access to local reports, regional 
priorities, organisational strategies and ensured 
coordination of place-based strategies. Additional 
regional stakeholders were engaged to inform 
development of the Plan, and public consultation 
was completed through an online platform. 
This Plan considers the broad need for the  
regional community, environment and economy  
to be resilient to drought.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

Regional Vision
The vision for this Plan is to support the Loddon Campaspe region to 
maintain productive and healthy communities during times of drought, 
through preparedness and anticipation of regional changes.
Regional principles, drivers of change and goals
The Plan’s goal of building drought resilience is 
based on a set of guiding principles. These principles 
guide actions for the Loddon Campaspe region  
and are:
Self-reliance and risk mitigation: drought is 
not an exceptional circumstance, but a risk to 
be managed along with other business threats. 
Primary producers and other small businesses 
mitigate the impacts of drought by understanding 
and reducing risk and impacts.
Encourage preparedness: investment should 
focus on encouraging preparedness in good  
years and support community connectedness  
and wellbeing in times of drought.
Collaboration and co-design: drought 
preparedness and resilience programs should be 
co-designed with Local Government Authorities 
(LGAs), Traditional Owners and other relevant 
stakeholders to ensure they effectively address 
local community priorities. Co-design means that 
the programs are developed with local stakeholders 
– not by an external party for local stakeholders.
Improved decision-making: business skills 
and improved access to timely drought-related 
information is essential to support evidence-based 
decision-making for businesses and communities.
Integration: foster collaboration between 
organisations to deliver timely, place-based, 
integrated services which simplify processes for, 
and access by, users and reduce stress.
Leadership and community networks:  
the Loddon Campaspe region has a strong record 
of collaboration and community leadership. 
Drought programs should be designed and 
delivered in partnership with those established 
networks.
Traditional Owner Self-Determination:  
Traditional Owners will be provided opportunities 
to be involved in, and have their self-determined 
goals reflected in, drought preparedness and 
resilience activities.
The Loddon Campaspe is a region in constant flux 
and development. Drivers of change identified for 
the region include:
•	More lifestyle and hobby farms in the southern 
and central area of the region
•	An influx of new populations from other urban 
areas of Victoria with less experience of drought
•	Competition in water markets and trading with 
changing intensity of water demand and use 
across the region
•	Climate change and different greenhouse gas 
profiles impacting plant growth
•	Emerging carbon markets and opportunities for 
land managers to participate in them, including 
in carbon sequestration through revegetation 
and land management practices
•	Employment demographics, with:
	 —	expected growth in food product 
manufacturing (key export for the region)
	 —	an expected decline in employment  
in agriculture
	 —	strong employment growth in health  
care, accommodation, food services  
and construction.
8

LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

A SNAPSHOT  
OF THE LODDON 
CAMPASPE
In this plan, the Loddon Campaspe region is 
defined by the Loddon Campaspe Regional 
Partnership boundary and includes the 6 LGAs 
of Loddon, Campaspe, Central Goldfields, Mount 
Alexander, Macedon Ranges, and Greater Bendigo.
The Loddon Campaspe region covers 19,100 square 
kilometres (8%) of Victoria and is characterised 
by several distinct areas. The southern part of 
the region extends to the Macedon Ranges and 
incorporates towns such as Macedon, Kyneton  
and Gisborne. The northern part forms part  
of the New South Wales-Victorian border along  
the Murray River, with Echuca being the main 
regional centre in the far north-east of the region. 
The western reaches of the region border the 
Mallee and Wimmera and are primarily rural.  
The regional hub of Bendigo is in the centre of the 
region, with several moderately sized towns such 
as Castlemaine, Gisborne and Maryborough spread 
throughout the surrounding LGAs (Aither, 2019).
The Loddon Campaspe region has a diverse 
population and a strong economy based on 
agriculture, retail, health and manufacturing.  
Many migrant and refugee communities have 
settled nearby, with 1 in 10 people born overseas 
(EY, 2019).
LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
AREA
SHIRE SERVICE  
CENTRES
AREA 
(KM2)
POPULATION 
(2020)
ECONOMIC OUTPUT 
($ MILLION)
Bendigo
Bendigo, Heathcote, 
Huntly, Marong
3,000
119,000
18,646
Macedon Ranges
Kyneton, Gisborne, 
Romsey, Woodend
1,748
50,000
5,139
Campaspe
Echuca, Kyabram, 
Rochester, Rushworth, 
Tongala
4,519
36,500
5,479
Mt Alexander
Castlemaine,  
Maldon, Newstead
1,530
20,000
2,614
Central Goldfields
Maryborough, Talbot
1,533
13,000
1,261
Loddon
Wedderburn, Serpentine
6,696
7,500
984
10

13.4%
POPULATION 
(2020)
POPULATION GROWTH 
(2011–20)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
249,200
$11.7
billion
Source: Loddon Campaspe Regional 
Economic Development Strategy (2022)
LODDON
CENTRAL 
GOLDFIELDS
BENDIGO
MACEDON 
RANGES
MOUNT 
ALEXANDER
CAMPASPE
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Agricultural systems in the Loddon Campaspe 
have been developed in the context of a highly 
variable climate and many farmers have lived 
experience of coping through drought. Broadacre 
cropping, irrigated crops, extensive grazing and 
forestry are important land uses in the Loddon 
Campaspe region. Dryland cropping in the  
region is highly dependent on the timing and 
quantity of rainfall, while irrigated cropping  
is highly dependent on external water supply.
Environment
The Loddon Campaspe region is home to an 
extensive network of public land that protects 
important environmental, social and economic 
values. The terrestrial environmental assets 
are diverse, including River Red Gum forests, 
Box-Ironbark, Black Box forest communities, 
grasslands, grassy woodlands and various lakes, 
rivers and wetlands. The region contains five 
national parks (Gunbower National Park and State 
Forest, Castlemaine Diggings National Heritage 
Park, Heathcote-Graytown National Park, Greater 
Bendigo National Park, Terrick Terrick National 
Park) and six state forests and parks (Kooyoora 
State Park, Paddys Ranges State Park, Mount 
Alexander Regional Park, Macedon Regional Park, 
Rushworth-Heathcote State Forest, Leaghur State 
Park) (Aither, 2019).
The Loddon Campaspe region is also part of the 
Murray-Darling Basin. Hydrological features 
include multiple waterways, lakes, floodplains 
and wetlands as well as important drinking water 
catchments and reservoirs.
To the north-west, the Loddon system flows 
towards the Murray River. Part of the Gunbower 
Forest Ramsar site is also located there, as well  
as Lake Boort and the Mid Loddon Wetlands.  
To the west, the Avoca River straddles the border 
of the Loddon Campaspe region. To the south, 
there are large storages at Tullaroop Reservoir  
and Cairn Curran Reservoir, and also in the south 
east within the Macedon Ranges. In the south  
east, the Campaspe and Coliban rivers flow into 
Lake Eppalock. To the east, Waranga Basin is 
situated outside Rushworth. In the north east,  
the Campaspe system joins the Murray River near 
Echuca (VEWH, 2022).
Echuca
Boort
Castlemaine
Bendigo
Non-agricultural land
Agricultural areas
Beef
Dairy
Sheep meat
Rail network
Road network
Regional boundary
12

Climate trends
Climate projections based on climate change 
scenarios indicate that the regional climate  
will change with:
•	Average maximum temperature  
increase of 3.0°C
•	Twice as many days above 38°C
•	Annual rainfall decreasing by as  
much as 20 mm
•	Extreme rainfall and flooding expected  
to be more intense
•	Longer fire seasons and 62% more  
“very high” fire rating days
•	Bendigo’s climate trending towards  
the current climate at Shepparton.
These projected climate scenarios will have 
implications for agriculture in the region.
Communities and Culture
The region has been home to the Dja Dja Wurrung, 
Yorta Yorta, Taungurung and Wurundjeri Peoples 
who have lived, worked and cared for their people 
and resources for many thousands of years.
Over 250,000 people call the Loddon Campaspe 
home. Almost half the population live in the City 
of Greater Bendigo, which is one of the fastest 
growing LGAs in regional Victoria. Macedon 
Ranges and Mount Alexander shires are attracting 
significant numbers of tree-changers. Population 
growth and associated development is putting 
increasing pressure on the region’s natural 
resources, which is a key challenge for those 
areas. In the north and west of the region, an 
ageing population and continuing trend toward 
larger/corporate farms is contributing to further 
population decline and associated socio-economic 
impacts, including a reduced volunteer base  
(DJPR, 2022).
Loddon Campaspe’s population grew by 13.4% 
between 2011 and 2020. Much of this growth  
has been driven by Bendigo, the third largest city 
in regional Victoria, and the Macedon Ranges, 
a peri-urban region with close proximity to 
Melbourne. While the region’s total population 
is projected to continue increasing, this growth 
will not be evenly distributed across the region, 
with higher growth rates expected in Bendigo 
and in the southern shires (reflecting proximity 
to metropolitan Melbourne’s employment and 
education centres) (DJPR, 2022).
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Nature conservation
	 Managed resource protection
	 Other minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Grazing modified pastures
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Dryland cropping
	 Dryland horticulture
	 Land in transition
	 Irrigated pastures
	 Irrigated cropping
	 Irrigated horticulture
	 Urban intensive uses
	 Intensive horticulture  
and animal production
	 Rural residential and  
farm infrastructure
	 Mining and waste
	 Water
Industry and employment trends
Employment growth in Loddon Campaspe over  
the last decade has been slower than regional 
Victoria and metropolitan Melbourne. Industry 
output has grown most rapidly in population-driven 
sectors such as health care and social assistance, 
construction, and education and training.
The traditional industries of manufacturing and 
agriculture, forestry and fishing have declined in 
output since 2001. Manufacturing has rebounded 
over the past 5 years but agriculture, forestry and 
fishing has continued to decline to almost half the 
output of 2001. Financial and insurance services 
are the second largest contributor to regional 
output. This reflects the position of Bendigo as 
the headquarters of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, 
one of Australia’s largest banks. Output growth 
has been uneven across the region, with growth 
largely occurring in Greater Bendigo, the Macedon 
Ranges and Mount Alexander. The Campaspe, 
Loddon and Central Goldfields areas have 
experienced declines in output since 2001  
(DJPR, 2022).
Catchment Scale Land Use 
of the Loddon Campaspe
(ABARES 2021)
14

LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

Many definitions of drought exist, 
generally depending on what  
indicators are used to describe it. 
•	Meteorological drought relates to a lack of 
rainfall, or at least below expected rainfall. 
•	Hydrological drought relates to a lack of runoff, 
measured by river and creek flow volumes, a 
lack of groundwater availability, and a lack of 
water storage in catchments. 
•	Agricultural drought can be defined by  
reduced productivity on-farm resulting from  
a lack of water.
•	Institutional drought occurs when decisions on 
water allocation have induced a water shortage.
•	Economic drought can be defined as an 
economic downturn resulting from a lack of 
water availability. 
•	Green droughts exist where limited rainfall 
shows the appearance of green paddocks,  
but insufficient water is available for agricultural 
crop production.
Definitions of drought are important because they  
help define the issues to be addressed. No single 
definition will be used for this Plan, as every 
individual, business, organisation and community 
will have their own unique drought experience.  
For example, the impact of drought is felt 
differently in broadacre cropping than in livestock 
farming, while the health care sector requires a 
different approach to the educational sector to 
cope with drought.
Droughts also pose a key threat for Traditional 
Owners, impacting the health of Country, and  
affecting their rights and responsibilities in caring 
for Country. For Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
Victorians, caring for Country extends beyond 
physical landscapes and involves the natural 
waters, animals and resources and how they 
influence and impact each other. Healing Country 
in the wake of drought events is essential to 
ensuring positive health and wellbeing outcomes 
for Aboriginal Victorians.
While this Plan aims to build resilience across 
communities, businesses and sectors, each 
experiences the impact of drought differently  
and a range of different resilience-building  
actions is required.
It is important to note that duration and intensity 
of drought have an impact on how resilient 
a community can be. While on-farm drought 
management can be effective for a seasonal 
drought, it may be less effective for a 5 year 
drought. A meteorological drought with “only” low 
rainfall may have less impact than a hydrological 
drought combined with heatwaves, dust storms 
and fires.
In developing this Plan, organisations and 
individuals came together to discuss drought 
and chart a course for a smarter, more resilient 
future. The Plan was not developed to deal with an 
emergency, or an acute drought. It was developed 
to assist the Loddon Campaspe community to 
proactively prepare for drought across a range of 
future scenarios. The Plan proposes actions that 
individuals, communities, industry and government 
can take to achieve this. 
Given the region’s extensive use of irrigated 
agriculture in the north, production and 
profitability decreased significantly during the 
Millennium Drought. Irrigated agriculture faced  
a high “cost” of water, given the opportunities to 
sell or the requirements to purchase water from 
the water market.
Dryland productivity also declined significantly 
during the Millennium Drought, and from 2017  
to 2019, due to lack of rainfall. Dryland production 
was significantly affected; for example, the harvest 
of cereal crops in 2018–19 was half the (individually) 
recorded tonnage of 2015–16 and 2016–17.
DROUGHT IMPACTS 
IN THE REGION
16

Water restrictions during the Millennium Drought 
commenced early in the Loddon Campaspe region, 
with some towns entering Stage 3 in 2003 and 
many in Stage 4 by 2004.1
After a slight reprieve, many towns were again  
on Stage 4 water restrictions from 2006, lasting 
until 2009 or 2010. Stage 4 prohibits the watering 
of any outdoor space, amongst other restrictions, 
which had profound impacts on communities’ 
liveability.
The Millennium Drought significantly reduced the 
level of water tourism in the area, taking with it 
the additional income that enters the region from 
these activities.
Culturally significant sites, particularly those 
located on flood plains and/or are water dependent, 
were exposed and became vulnerable to damage. 
Additionally, the movement of stock to areas with 
feed reserves meant stock were occasionally 
placed in areas of cultural significance. 
The decreases in agricultural production caused 
by drought created significant flow-on community 
impacts. This included reduced income and 
employment, especially in on-farm labour and 
agricultural services. The impacts to irrigated and 
non-irrigated agriculture flowed through to impact 
the wider community through reduced overall 
spending in the community.
Overall, the cumulative effect of drought both 
on-farm and in the community led to significant 
impacts on the Loddon Campaspe community 
during the Millennium Drought and the dry 
seasonal conditions experienced between 2017–19. 
This also led to an increase in demand for 
services such as mental health and rural financial 
counselling (Frontier Economics, 2022).
1	Water restrictions can be implemented in 4 stages from 1 – Mild to 4 – Severe. Stage 4 water restrictions prohibit 
the watering of public, residential and commercial gardens, lawns and playing surfaces at all times.
	 Stage 3 restrictions prohibit types of urban water use outside of set days and times (e.g. watering of residential 
gardens is only permitted on alternate days, from 6 to 8 am, using a hand-held hose fitted with a trigger nozzle). 
Source: www.water.vic.gov.au/for-households/water-restrictions-and-rules/stage-3-water-restrictions
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

Drought resilience in the Loddon Campaspe is 
described for this Plan as communities that are 
able to adapt, modify and transform their practices, 
knowledge and attitudes to overcome climatic 
adversity or the ”new normal” of a drier climate.
Resilience is used in this Plan to shape intended 
outcomes and actions, with an understanding that 
resilience to climatic challenges and uncertainties 
is an opportunity to strengthen communities, rather 
than simply maintain systems, processes and culture.
There is no one-size-fits-all route to becoming a 
resilient community. However, certain community 
characteristics are known to contribute to 
resilience. These characteristics have been 
used to build the suite of outcomes and actions 
documented in the Plan.
Similarly, it is acknowledged that for many 
Traditional Owners, connection to Country is more 
holistic and not bound by the region and constructs 
of the Plan. Drought impacts are also likely to be 
broader than what can be addressed by the actions 
identified in the Plan.
RESILIENCE  
IN THE REGION
18

Resilient regions have:
•	a common vision and goal
•	cooperative and interconnected leadership  
and governance
•	strong connections and relationships  
through formal and informal networks
•	genuine collaboration
Resilient communities have:
•	local leadership and initiative
•	governance that embraces change
•	willingness to work together in the pursuit  
of common goals
•	drive for self-responsibility
•	a willingness to be adaptable and learn  
lessons from change
•	the skills needed to anticipate issues and 
effectively manage risk
•	foresight to consider different perspectives  
and options to solve complex problems
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

CONCEPTS CONSIDERED 
IN THE PLAN
Cultural and Environmental Flow
Cultural flow is a concept in water management 
that recognises the importance of water to First 
Nations peoples for cultural, economic, customary, 
and spiritual purposes. It refers to the quantity, 
quality, timing, and variability of water flows that 
are required to maintain and enhance First Nations 
cultural values.
First Nations people in the Murray–Darling Basin 
have a strong spiritual connection to water, and  
a moral obligation to care for it, as they have done 
for many thousands of years.
Cultural flows benefit practical activities like 
fishing, hunting, ceremonies and harvesting 
medicinal plants and herbs. They also preserve and 
protect important assets including burial mounds, 
scarred trees, and campsites which help maintain 
connections to Country. Identity, wellbeing, 
capacity building and inter-generational teaching 
are also key components of cultural flows.
The Victorian Government is committed to working 
with First Nations peoples to recognise and 
protect cultural flows. This includes developing 
and implementing water management plans that 
incorporate cultural flow considerations.
While cultural flows can also be used to improve 
the health of the rivers, that is not their only 
purpose – cultural flows are therefore different 
from environmental flows. 
Environmental flows are used to improve the 
health of our rivers, wetlands and floodplains. 
Water is allocated to federal and state 
environmental water holders across the Basin. 
In Victoria this is managed by the Victorian 
Environmental Water Holder, who make decisions 
about when, where and how much water is 
released for the environment.
Mental Wealth and Mental Health
Mental health is a state of wellbeing in which an 
individual realises their own abilities, can cope with 
the normal stresses of life, can work productively 
and fruitfully, and is able to contribute to their 
community.
Mental wealth is a term used to describe the 
emotional, psychological, and social well-being 
of an individual or community. It goes beyond 
the absence of mental illness to encompass 
the positive aspects of mental health, such as 
resilience, coping skills, and a sense of purpose.
Another way to think about the difference 
between mental health and mental wealth is that 
mental health is about managing symptoms and 
conditions, while mental wealth is about thriving 
and flourishing.
While mental health and mental wealth are related, 
they are not the same thing. It is possible to have 
good mental health but not great mental wealth. 
For example, someone with a chronic mental 
illness may be able to manage their symptoms and 
live a fulfilling life, but they may still experience 
some challenges that impact their mental wealth.
Mental wealth is important because it can help 
people to live happier and more fulfilling lives.  
It can also help in terms of individuals being more 
resilient in the face of adversity. Good mental 
wealth supports a better ability to cope with 
stress, manage our emotions, and build positive 
relationships.
20

Green-Blue Infrastructure
‘Green’ infrastructure refers to living vegetation 
such as gardens, nature strips, trees, parks and 
green open spaces. ‘Blue’ infrastructure are the 
assets associated with managing stormwater, such 
as gutters, pits, pipes and drains, ponds, wetlands 
and waterways. Green-blue infrastructure (GBI) is 
a term designed to help explain that these green 
and blue infrastructure assets are as critical to 
a town’s liveability and resilience as are roads, 
buildings and carparks. GBI principles aim to 
protect and enhance a town’s natural assets, 
combined with better retention, treatment and 
use of rainwater where it falls. By improving the 
way urban stormwater is conveyed, stored and 
used, a town can make the most of the water that 
falls within its boundaries. The combination of GBI 
provides the space to retain stormwater close to 
where it falls and use it to irrigate the living assets 
valued for liveability while improving downstream 
water quality. This in turn supports strengthening 
drought resilience.
The principles of GBI can be applied at 4 scales: 
lot, streetscape, precinct and township. At the lot  
scale, these techniques include gardens, green roofs, 
green walls, water tanks and raingardens. At the 
streetscape scale, techniques include nature strips, 
footpaths, roadside raingardens, street trees and 
swales, shallow channels that convey and treat 
stormwater. Techniques at the precinct scale 
include parks, green links, open drains, wetlands, 
detention basins and sport grounds. The township 
scale techniques include urban forests, expansive 
open spaces, waterways and lakes.
Social, environmental and economic benefits 
include improving township amenities and 
liveability, reducing urban heat for cooler streets, 
and contributing to improved community physical 
and mental health. GBI also enhances urban and 
aquatic biodiversity, increases tree canopy and 
decreases air pollution, and increases stormwater 
and rainwater infiltration and improves soil water 
retention. The economic benefits include an 
improved township entrance to make it attractive 
for visitors, better and more significant use of open 
spaces, and increased use of alternative water, 
freeing up domestic water.
Climate Anxiety
For most young people, the awareness and 
concern about the impact of climate change is a 
healthy response to a serious problem and doesn’t 
impact their mental health. This awareness can 
motivate young people to be actively involved 
in positive change. Examples of young people’s 
contribution to positive change include attending 
public marches, raising awareness through 
conversations, and reducing their ‘carbon footprint’ 
through changes in lifestyle.
‘Climate anxiety’ and ‘eco-anxiety’ are terms being 
used to describe feelings of helplessness, stress, 
worry and frustration about the effects of climate 
change. There is growing research in this area to 
understand how concerns about climate change 
can significantly interfere with some people’s 
daily lives. Young people may experience ‘climate 
anxiety’ because they are aware that it is their 
generation and future generations that will be 
most affected by climate change. They can feel  
a sense of urgency to create immediate change 
and make a difference to future generations.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

THEMES, OUTCOMES 
AND ACTIONS FOR  
A DROUGHT RESILIENT 
COMMUNITY
The Plan’s themes and outcomes 
were designed and agreed by the 
Loddon Campaspe Reference Group. 
Themes reflect the broad areas of 
interest of regional stakeholders 
related to building drought 
resilience. The outcome for each 
theme reflects the overall goal for  
a set of actions that have a common 
purpose, beneficiary or instigator.
The actions listed under each theme should not 
be seen in isolation. Each action is designed to 
help drive the region towards its overall vision of 
maintaining productive and healthy communities 
during times of drought.
Some actions are the responsibility of an individual 
agency or organisation; however, most actions 
will require a collaborative approach by several 
organisations, businesses and communities.
For some actions, a partnership approach will be 
needed with Traditional Owners. This is consistent 
with the Victorian Government’s policy and 
legal commitments, which include the Victorian 
Aboriginal Affairs Framework and the Department 
of Energy, Environment and Climate Action’s 
Pupangarli Marnmarnepu ‘Owning Our Future’ 
2020–2025 self-determination reform strategy.
The outcomes and actions in the Plan draw on 
the local experiences of people who live in the 
community. They also draw on existing plans and 
strategies, which drive the actions and priorities 
of the organisational members of the Loddon 
Campaspe Reference Group.
The seven themes of the Loddon Campaspe Plan are:
•	Collaboration, knowledge gathering and sharing
•	People and community wellbeing
•	Empowered communities
•	Rural economy
•	Infrastructure
•	Farm management
•	Environment and natural resources management
22

LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

COLLABORATION, 
KNOWLEDGE GATHERING 
AND SHARING
Theme 1
Outcome:  
Regional networks are maintained to ensure open channels of 
communication, knowledge sharing and promotion of engagement 
from a diverse representation of sectors, communities and industries. 
Before, during and after drought, collaboration 
between sectors and organisations is critical 
to ensuring an integrated approach to drought 
resilience building and response. This includes 
information gathering and sharing between 
agencies and organisations and within the 
broader community. The use of existing policies 
and strategies, and raising awareness of these, 
as well as the roles played by different agencies 
and organisations were identified as important to 
reducing uncertainties during droughts.
24

Actions
1.1
Take actions aligned with polices developed by Traditional Owners that build  
and strengthen drought resilience in local communities.
1.2
Increase support for existing networks to identify and support the needs  
of local communities by generating transformational change.
1.3
Increase support for networks that gather and share technical knowledge  
and translate this information in tangible ways.
1.4
Proactively communicate region-specific elements from policies and strategies  
on drought resilience and response and associated materials, such as the roles  
and responsibilities of water management authorities during drought.
1.5
Support bush fire prevention and raise awareness within local communities  
to prepare properties before heat and drought periods.
1.6
Support research into the development and use of trigger points to enhance  
proactive decision making associated with drought response.
1.7
Communicate and support region-specific actions in Sustainable Water Strategies.
1.8
Provide climate outlook information, specific to the Loddon Campaspe region,  
to support better informed land management planning and decision making,  
such as plant selection for revegetation programs.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

PEOPLE AND 
COMMUNITY 
WELLBEING
Theme 2
Outcome:  
Drought resilience at the individual and community level is strengthened 
by supporting physical and mental wealth, peer-support and informal 
support groups, grassroots initiatives, and initiatives and actions by 
regional organisations and agencies.
Connectivity and preventing isolation was listed 
as important to maintaining community wellbeing. 
Key to this is the role of regional events and 
face-to-face interaction. Initiatives focusing on 
mental health support, and mental wealth upkeep, 
contribute to drought resilience.
26

Actions
2.1
Support mental wealth initiatives before, during and after droughts  
(and other extreme weather events).
2.2
Ensure infrastructure that supports local sport and cultural events is sufficient  
to allow continuation of these activities during drought.
2.3
Collect and publish stories and experiences from previous drought experiences  
to inform new residents and next generations.
2.4
Support opportunities to stay connected at community events, to prevent isolation  
and maintain motivation.
2.5
Promote Mental Health First Aid training for interested communities.
2.6
Support existing community initiatives and organisations that provide spaces and  
activities which generate lasting public benefits by creating healthy, vibrant  
and resilient communities, such as Landcare groups, schools, men’s and women’s  
sheds, and community houses.
2.7
Provide networking and training opportunities for existing community groups to  
connect with each other and identify key contacts from groups; for example, provide 
cultural awareness and inclusivity training opportunities for community groups,  
to encourage inclusiveness and cross group interactions and the sharing of resources.
2.8
Partner with Traditional Owners to support culturally appropriate practices in  
emergency events. 
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

EMPOWERED 
COMMUNITIES
Theme 3
Outcome:  
Communities are empowered to act and are supported where requested. 
Communities have local and regional leadership and are connected 
to regional and state networks to ensure a shared responsibility for 
improved drought resilience.
Empowered communities are created by providing 
the opportunities and support to co-design 
initiatives and programs. Information should be  
made available in a structured, accessible way, 
preferably by having single information points 
that cover the wide range of services and 
activities provided by agencies and organisations. 
Recognition that communities are diverse, and 
tailoring information and services to that diversity, 
is also a priority for the Loddon Campaspe.
28

Actions
3.1
Ensure that Traditional Owners are incorporated into decision-making forums that  
relate to drought resilience.
3.2
Provide support to local communities, to assist them to co-design programs that build 
drought resilience, by adopting a place-based approach.
3.3
Improve awareness of drought services by providing a single information portal  
and point of contact for multiple services.
3.4
Establish or use existing networks, committees or forums to ensure continuing,  
broad, sector drought resilience building.
3.5
Ensure that new residents in the region have access to information that supports  
them to be drought resilient.
3.6
Advocate for support to be provided to all the diverse elements that make up  
local communities; for example, the youth sector, gender specific groups and  
culturally diverse groups.
Photo: Coliban Water
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

RURAL 
ECONOMY
Theme 4
Outcome:  
The rural economy remains vibrant during droughts and drought impacts 
are minimised through resilience building before droughts.
A diverse economy provides more opportunities to 
absorb shocks. The Loddon Campaspe has areas 
with a strong emphasis on tourism. A broad sector 
of businesses in the region benefits from informed 
decision making in relation to drought resilience. 
These businesses may also provide opportunities 
for alternative incomes for people who are  
drought impacted. Regional land use initiatives 
have been ongoing, to find sustainable  
approaches in agriculture and to continue  
to support more climate resilient systems.
30

Actions
4.1
Continue promotion of the region to attract tourists and visitors from outside the region.
4.2
Promote and retain local business leadership/management within the region,  
for better informed decision making and early detection of drought impact.
4.3
Support networking of industry, businesses, and the financial sector to focus on  
drought preparedness.
4.4
Explore options to strengthen programs, to support and retain farm workers in their 
communities during drought (either on country, in alternative local employment,  
paid skill development or other education programs).
4.5
Partner with local governments to support and expand diversified agricultural industries.
4.6
Promote economic diversification as a way to build resilience for local businesses  
and economies.
4.7
Explore opportunities to diversify and modify land use and production systems  
based on future climates.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

INFRASTRUCTURE
Theme 5
Outcome:  
Infrastructure at an individual, community and regional level 
is sufficient to support increased drought resilience.
Regional infrastructure provides the tools required 
to build and strengthen drought resilience in the 
Loddon Campaspe. Improved water conveyance, 
and transport, energy and communication 
infrastructure, and uninterrupted operation of 
infrastructure during droughts and heat events 
supports people and community wellbeing. It also 
empowers communities, farming sectors and  
the rural economy and aids the management of 
natural resources.
32

Actions
5.1
Support water corporations and catchment agencies in their continuing efforts  
to upgrade infrastructure for efficient and reliable water delivery.
5.2
Advocate for electricity and telecommunication infrastructure to be maintained  
or expanded, so that the impact of drought on communities is minimised.
5.3
Encourage priority infrastructure projects in regional transport strategies to consider 
droughts during the planning and design phases.
5.4
Advocate for adequate transport infrastructure so disruptions due to heat are minimised.
5.5
Support climate-ready planning, to provide urban cooling and connect residents  
with community spaces.
5.6
Support opportunities for social interaction for isolated and vulnerable groups,  
by advocating for the expansion of mobility options and public transportation.
5.7
Advocate for consideration of drought resilience in local infrastructure initiatives  
and funding programs.
Photo: Coliban Water
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

FARM 
MANAGEMENT
Theme 6
Outcome:  
Primary producers are supported to maintain production systems during 
drought that are environmentally and financially sustainable and resilient.
Well-informed decision making in different  
farming systems in the Loddon Campaspe is 
critical to building drought resilience, and to 
adapting to changing environmental conditions. 
Education, awareness raising, learning from each 
other and support in planning are all important 
aspects that build decision making capabilities.
34

Actions
6.1
Co-design (with Traditional Owners and local communities) educational programs aimed  
at primary producers that incorporate Traditional Owners’ knowledge into production 
system design.
6.2
Support future-proofing of existing agricultural systems, while also exploring new  
systems that may be more resilient.
6.3
Assist farm businesses with whole-of-farm planning, including drought preparedness, 
treatment of drought as a business risk, system and income diversification, and alternative 
income streams, especially in periods of non-drought.
6.4
Support youth to pursue careers in agriculture through workshops, career days,  
meet and greets and on-farm traineeships.
6.5
Review and improve on-farm infrastructure, particularly in relation to livestock 
management, water and transport.
6.6
Support and promote activities which encourage increased water retention on farms,  
such as building biomass and improving pasture and dam management.
6.7
Review opportunities to diversify income streams and/or generate off-farm income.
6.8
Support the inclusion of shelterbelts in whole-farm planning, to protect stock and soil  
from heat and wind erosion and provide wildlife corridors through farmland.
6.9
Support landholders to improve soil health and biomass to build resilience to drought.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

ENVIRONMENT AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES 
MANAGEMENT
Theme 7
Outcome:  
Best management principles and practices are recognised and adopted 
by land managers to minimise drought impacts and ensure the natural 
environment can rebound effectively.
Initiatives by Traditional Owners and Landcare 
groups to support more climate resilient 
landscapes result in best management practices –  
specific to the Loddon Campaspe. Habitat 
restoration and interconnected wildlife corridors 
support landscape resilience, and environmental 
flow and waterway management contributes to 
drought resilience. Use of green-blue infrastructure 
supports improved urban water management and 
maximises benefit of green spaces.
36

Actions
7.1
In partnership with Traditional Owners, ensure Traditional Owner land management 
principles are incorporated into best practice land management practices utilised  
by private and public land managers.
7.2
Support Landcare and Caring for Country practices based on traditional land  
management approaches.
7.3
Support an interconnected network of diverse habitat types, which will support  
an ecologically healthy community during drought.
7.4
Develop and support habitat restoration programs to enhance ecosystem function  
and conserve threatened species.
7.5
Plan for and build more green-blue infrastructure in urban developments,  
to support native flora and fauna populations and provide urban cooling benefits.
7.6
Ensure waterways have sufficient environmental flows and connectivity to support 
culturally important species.
7.7
Support and promote activities which encourage increased water retention in the 
landscape, both at property and landscape scale.
Photo: Coliban Water
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

CASE STUDIES
Prioritising green spaces during drought
Water supports the wellbeing of rural and regional 
communities. It makes towns more liveable and 
provides places to relax, unwind and reconnect 
with nature. Water is fundamental to creating 
greener, cooler and more attractive urban spaces.
Water restrictions and periods of extreme heat 
place stress on many gardens and green assets 
in public spaces. Coliban Water supplies water to 
maintain the condition of home gardens, sports 
fields, parks, green spaces, water bodies and 
public trees. Because customers expect to be able 
to maintain green assets during dry periods, they 
need to work with communities and land managers 
to ensure our urban landscapes are green and 
water sensitive.
The Victorian Government expects water 
authorities to plan for, and provide, water services 
that consider recreational values. Some Coliban 
Water storages have the potential to be used for 
recreational purposes. Considering recreational 
values in water management will ensure that 
they can provide water services that improve the 
recreational value of public spaces. Working in 
partnership with other organisations will be crucial 
to ensuring communities have access to water  
for relaxation, play and adventure.
Eight local councils in the Coliban Water region 
have collectively saved almost $250,000, thanks 
to discounted water for public parks, gardens and 
recreation reserves. The councils include City of 
Greater Bendigo, and the shires of Campaspe, 
Central Goldfields, Gannawarra, Hepburn, Loddon, 
Macedon Ranges and Mount Alexander.
Coliban Water Managing Director Damian Wells 
said the Recreational Water Discount Program saw 
water offered at half the normal consumption fee 
for the 2022–23 financial year. “As we continue to 
navigate the challenges of climate change, rainfall 
variability and population growth, we want to work 
with councils to improve water efficiency and the 
38

liveability of our region. It’s important we maintain 
these green spaces, which are vital community 
assets, providing places for people to relax, 
exercise and connect with nature.”
In 2022-23, the fourth year of the program, 
councils were collectively offered up to 300 
megalitres of discounted water, with around 241 
megalitres being awarded the discounted rate. 
The program aimed to reward councils who had 
optimised their water use or used alternative 
fit-for-purpose water supplies. “It’s important to 
manage these green spaces in the most water-
efficient way, including watering at certain times 
of the day, selecting appropriate grass types, 
eliminating leaks, installing water saving devices, 
applying the right amount of water and carrying 
out infrastructure improvements to reduce water 
usage. We need to ensure green spaces are  
always available during periods of extreme heat 
and times of water scarcity. We hope councils 
have been encouraged by this program to further 
improve how they use water, and that money  
saved will go towards water saving initiatives  
and more green spaces.”
The strategically important actions to achieve 
these outcomes are: 
•	Optimise water use and ensure urban  
landscapes are green and water sensitive; 
•	Improve access to water by connecting to 
walking and cycling amenities in the region; 
•	Identify key assets with recreational value  
and maintain and promote their use; 
•	Work with other organisations to assess  
and plan for recreational water use; 
•	Ensure assets support recreational objectives.
Based on information from Coliban Water (2023a),  
Coliban Water (2023b).
Photo: City of Greater Bendigo
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

Multicultural diversity and multi-language programs
Bendigo Community Health Services (BCHS) has 
a very inclusive approach, with multi language 
support in videos, easy translations, and is locally 
known and trusted. BCHS has received awards 
for projects that apply innovative solutions for 
the benefit of a community, and which improve 
understanding of a culture with a wider audience.
In 2020, BCHS was recognised with a Victorian 
Multicultural Award of Excellence, for its 
outstanding care in looking after the health and 
wellbeing of refugee and multicultural communities.
BCHS Cultural Diversity and Relationships 
manager Kaye Graves said:
“We recognise this is a long journey and we are 
committed to supporting people of refugee 
background all the way. That care has never been 
more important than in 2020. The Coronavirus 
has been a tough time for all and we have worked 
tirelessly to keep our community informed and 
safe through initiatives such as client welfare 
checks and videos and information sheets 
translated in Karen, Dari and Dinka that feature 
in our online Coronavirus Refugee Resource 
Hub. We have kept talking with the community 
right through this time to ensure their needs 
are met and they understand the ever-changing 
Coronavirus landscape. That’s why we started a  
free Coronavirus Telephone Hotline - people told  
us they wanted someone to talk to so we provided 
that link to our Karen speaking staff. We have 
worked with businesses like Hazeldene’s Chicken 
Farm and KR Castlemaine to help manage 
outbreaks and organisations such as Bendigo 
Health to promote COVID-19 testing and explain 
complex things such as close contact and contract 
tracing in simple terms.
“Our partnership with Victoria Police and Believe 
in Bendigo generated a community campaign to 
call out Coronavirus-related racism aimed at our 
refugee communities. The award is recognition for 
the amazing amount of work and care our staff have 
put into the health and wellbeing of refugee and 
multicultural communities. It’s been inspiring for us 
to see their work. How much some of our Karen and 
Afghan staff have grown in learning so many new 
skills through this time and the dedication they 
have shown to keeping their communities safe”.
Recognizing cultural diversity and including the 
diverse population through ongoing programs 
help in building communities, and strengthening 
resilience for periods of stress, like droughts.
Based on information from BCHS (2017), BCHS (2020).
Djaara focus on Care for Country
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung People) have lived on 
traditional lands and cared for Djandak (Country) 
over many thousands of years. For Djaara, Djandak 
is more than just a landscape, it is more than what 
is visible to the eye – it is a living entity, which holds 
the stories of creation and histories that cannot be 
erased. Djaara’s ancestors looked after this Country 
and tie Djaara to Djandak culture and knowledge.
DJANDAK are land management services 
devoted to revitalising Dja Dja Wurrung Country 
for community benefit, blending economic 
development for Dja Dja Wurrung People. The 
program embeds Djaara values into infrastructure, 
and the environment. A professional team 
collaborates on diverse projects, working with 
government bodies, local industries, and the 
broader community. Services encompass design, 
natural resource management, waterways, 
forestry, fire management, bio-culture, and  
land management.
Djaara’s Land Management team does ‘end to end’ 
place based design and construction projects. 
These include JMP (Joint Management Plan) 
projects, VGO (Victorian Great Outdoors) projects 
and standalone projects (such as Goldfields Track). 
They are often multi-disciplinary projects that draw 
on DJAARA member input and other DJANDAK 
departments to provide specialist skills, knowledge 
and experience. The team does major construction 
of mayim-mayim (DJAARA shelters) and amenity 
blocks, as well as minor construction projects 
(fencing, stone walls, park furniture, signage) 
and work in collaboration with our Djaara Design 
Centred team. The team also delivers a range of 
civil works that major projects may require such  
as concreting, brickwork, carparks, roadworks.
There are six sites with Djaara title managed in 
partnership with Parks Victoria. These are: Greater 
Bendigo National Park, Paddy’s Ranges State Park, 
Hepburn Ranges National Park, Kara Kara National 
Park, Kooyoora State Park and Wehla Nature 
Conservation Reserve.
Based on information from Djaara (2014), Djaara (2023a), 
Djaara (2023b).
40

Rural schools providing more than education
One thousand schools in Victoria participate in 
the School Breakfast Club Program, with more 
than 50 schools located in the Loddon Campaspe 
region. While it is a year-round program and not 
bound to drought, the program itself supports 
the resilience of communities with opportunities 
for equal access to nutrition, socialising, and 
education. The program is one of several roles 
that the Department of Education supports in 
addition to their core mission. Interaction in 
schools and through extra-curricular events 
provides opportunities for socialising with peers 
for students and parents, thus reducing the risk 
of isolation and loneliness; feelings that are often 
increasing during periods of droughts.
It is common for rural properties throughout the 
Loddon Campaspe region to not be connected  
to mains water supply, remaining fully dependent 
on rain water storages. While years with average 
rainfall usually provide sufficient water to run  
a normal household, during dry years with limited 
rainfall, households will need to reduce their 
water consumption. This may result in families 
taking less showers or baths. During previous 
droughts, some schools have been able to open 
up their shower facilities to those students 
affected by limited water availability at their home, 
thus providing safe access to maintain personal 
hygiene, lifting spirits of students and parents.
Schools and the communities they support,  
have formal and informal ways to come together 
to strengthen their region’s resilience to climate 
shocks, including droughts. With grassroots 
initiatives, access to support programs, and  
a safe space to use as an organisational centre, 
schools provide more than education alone.
Lessons for resilience building from flood recovery
In the spring of 2022, excessive rainfall resulted  
in severe floods in parts of Victoria, with a  
strong impact in the Loddon Campaspe region.  
An immediate emergency response was initiated  
to prevent loss of life, followed by a phase of 
relief to support those that were affected and 
help manage acute flood impacts. In the following 
months, a recovery stage focused on rebuilding. 
Many themes that contribute to building drought 
resilience are also important in flood response and 
recovery. Reliable forecasting helps to prepare for 
impact. With floods, this has focused on predicted 
rainfall amounts, expected maximum river levels 
and extent of flooded regions. For droughts, 
seasonal forecasting of below-average rainfall helps 
with decision making on livestock management 
(for example, reducing number of heads before 
expected droughts) and cropping choices. 
Flood and drought both impact individual and 
community mental health. This is a result of 
property loss, as well as uncertainty about when 
the event will end and how long it will take to 
recover. Clear communication during and after 
the flood was found to be important in limiting 
uncertainty for those impacted. The community 
expected clear communication on relief and 
recovery opportunities, which was provided by a 
range of agencies. Impacted people and businesses 
preferred to access information from a single point, 
rather than from a wide range of programs.
While droughts have a slower onset and longer 
duration than floods, the same desire for 
coordinated support was expressed in discussions 
leading to this Drought Resilience Plan. A 
difference between floods and droughts is that 
action is often triggered quickly for immediate, 
relatively short-duration, events like floods. In 
contrast, droughts are less acute and steps to 
action are less well defined.
A lesson from the flood relief and recovery phase 
was that short-term, non-local, recovery support 
was less lasting than long-term local support. 
Community familiarity with programs and program 
providers helped to obtain more situation specific 
help. As one community member said: “we don’t 
need a mono-culture approach towards support; 
we need the diverse approach like a tropical rain 
forest instead.”
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

NEXT STEPS  
FOR THE LODDON 
CAMPASPE
This Plan identifies and 
communicates the actions and 
outcomes needed for communities 
and businesses in the region  
to be resilient to future droughts 
and a drier climate.
A handful actions in the Plan can be implemented 
by individual entities. However, most actions, 
related outcomes and the regional vision will only  
be realised through concerted and continuous 
collaboration that is driven by regional communities 
and organisations. The communities and 
organisations within the Loddon Campaspe region 
therefore have a critical role in implementing  
this Plan.
Some actions in the Plan will need regional 
stakeholders to reach out for broader collaboration 
and partnership with other governments, agencies, 
statutory bodies, not-for-profit organisations, 
Traditional Owners and the private sector.
The actions in this Plan represent a point in time. 
As economic, social and environmental conditions 
change, the community will need to adapt the 
actions in this Plan – and introduce new actions –  
to maintain the path towards the overall outcomes 
and vision for the region.
42

This Plan provides the pathway for the region  
to move towards drought resilience with:
•	an understanding of the regional impacts  
of drought
•	a common regional vision and common goals
•	desired outcomes and actions agreed by  
the community
•	a common picture of how existing and new 
investments are related to each other
•	a basis for developing new actions and  
programs to achieve the regional vision
•	a framework to monitor progress towards 
building resilience to future droughts
Next steps to support the implementation of  
the Plan include:
•	identifying a lead organisation to oversee  
and coordinate the delivery of activities that 
align with the region’s Plan
•	establishing a fit-for-purpose Advisory 
Group to guide delivery and ensure regional 
representation
•	detailing priority actions, budgets and timelines
•	monitoring and evaluation
•	reviewing the progress of the Plan and making 
any necessary updates
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

MONITORING, 
EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING
The collaborative effort and shared expertise used 
to prepare the Plan is the important first step in 
building drought resilience in the Loddon Campaspe. 
Work has been done by the region to articulate 
the actions needed to achieve desired regional 
outcomes. The next step is for the actions and 
activities identified in the Plan to be implemented, 
evaluated and adapted as needed to achieve  
the longer-term outcomes for drought resilience.
Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) is  
a key element of the RDRP program. Program 
objectives, outcomes and measures of success  
are clearly articulated at all levels of program 
delivery (national, state and regional) and are  
a range of short, medium and long timeframes.
1
Understand 
the context
Past, current 
and future 
understanding 
of drought 
in the region
2
Gather 
momentum
Bring together 
the experiences 
and perspectives 
to develop a 
regional Plan
3
Articulate the 
desired steps 
for change
Work together 
to determine 
desired outcomes 
and actions
4
Take the steps 
and actions
Implement the 
actions and activities 
to acheive change 
and build resilience
5
Determine 
next steps
Evaluate regional 
outcomes and 
identify learnings 
and gaps for 
future progress
We are here
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
44

Measuring success
The outcomes identified in this Plan are community 
and region wide, and dependent on the fourth  
step of implementation identified in the pathway  
of program delivery. Given the long-term outcomes 
of the Plan, the MEL framework below outlines 
how progress toward success will be measured. 
Management and Reporting
The organisation awarded as the lead organisation 
to coordinate the delivery of the Plan will work with 
Agriculture Victoria to provide up-to-date data and 
information to support program implementation 
and planning. Monitoring and reporting will enable: 
key learnings to be identified, effective reporting, 
and adaptive program management.
A range of assessment tools will be used to 
indicate progress including, but not limited to, 
surveys, case studies, stakeholder interviews and 
engagement data analysis. Data and information 
will be collected at various intervals across 
implementation planning, and during and after 
activities are being implemented.
Assumptions underpinning 
success of the RDRP
Measuring success and reporting on progress 
toward regionally specific outcomes is dependent 
on several key assumptions.
Key assumptions affecting short-term  
outcomes (1–2 years)
•	Regional stakeholders have the capacity to 
participate in strategic planning
•	Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other on regional planning
•	Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs
•	Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them
•	There are sufficient learnings to continuously 
improve program implementation
Key assumptions affecting medium term 
outcomes (2–4 years)
•	Supporting regional stakeholders through 
program implementation will result in changes  
in practice in Loddon Campaspe
•	There are sufficient opportunities and funding 
for the region to implement elements of the Plan
•	Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience
•	The Loddon Campaspe Plan Coordinator  
and regional stakeholders continue to review, 
update and implement the Plan
MEL Framework
Key regional themes and outcomes are matched 
with relevant Future Drought Fund (FDF) strategic 
priorities, regional progress measures (2–4 years) 
and indicators. 
The Framework is aligned with previously 
developed Program and Fund level MEL 
Frameworks, to ensure consistency and so that 
data collection tools provide information across  
a range of learning and reporting requirements. 
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Collaboration, knowledge gathering and sharing 
Regional networks are maintained to ensure open channels of communication,  
knowledge sharing and promotion of engagement from a diverse representation  
of sectors, communities and industries.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Improved collaboration and coordination 
between governments, industry, 
community, Traditional Owners and 
primary producers.
Communities are coming together to 
prepare for and respond to drought.
Communities are learning and building 
capability, capacity and expertise through 
sharing ways to build social resilience.
Implementation/planning  
groups and networks function 
well together.
Communities have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver  
on actions across the region.
Traditional Owners are 
increasingly involved in drought 
programs and activities.
People and community wellbeing
Drought resilience at the individual and community level is strengthened by supporting  
physical and mental wealth, peer-support and informal support groups, grassroots initiatives,  
and initiatives and actions by regional organisations and agencies.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities and individuals are  
coping with the physical and mental 
stresses of drought.
Improved community awareness 
of and access to health and 
wellbeing services.
Empowered communities
Communities are empowered to act and are supported where requested.  
Communities have local and regional leadership and are connected to regional and state  
networks to ensure a shared responsibility for improved drought resilience.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Community preparedness to drought  
has increased.
Communities are coming together and 
have a lead role to response to and  
prepare for drought.
Plan actions and opportunities are 
incorporated into other strategic planning 
across the region.
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
Leaders in the region are more 
confident to implement strategic 
actions.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver  
on actions across the region.
MEL Framework for the Mallee
1. Future Drought Fund
46

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Rural economy
The rural economy remains vibrant during droughts and drought impacts  
are minimised through resilience building before droughts.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Impacts of drought on the economies  
of region are known and prepared for. 
Businesses are identifying, managing and 
planning for the business risks associated 
with drought.
Increased community 
understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic 
characteristics. 
Innovative pathways and 
opportunities for business 
diversity are identified.
Infrastructure
Infrastructure at an individual, community and regional level is sufficient  
to support increased drought resilience.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Organisations and corporations responsible 
for infrastructure have drought plans.
Increased sector understanding 
of the region’s current and future 
drought resilience, considering 
the region’s unique economic, 
environmental and social 
characteristics.
Farm management
Primary producers are supported to maintain production systems during drought  
that are environmentally and financially sustainable and resilient.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Primary producers and farm businesses 
better understand their resilience to 
drought.
Farmers are learning about and 
implementing new business 
strategies and practices.
Farmers and agricultural 
industries have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Environment and natural resources
Best management principles and practices are recognised and adopted by land managers  
to minimise drought impacts and ensure the natural environment can rebound effectively.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Environmental resilience for sustainable 
and improved functioning of our natural 
landscapes.
Partnerships, networks 
and engagement between 
stakeholders managing natural 
resources are ongoing.
Stakeholders have increased 
understanding of natural  
resource management to build 
drought resilience.
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

Drought resilience in context
Across the region there are many issues impacting 
rural communities. Issues include prices received 
for farm outputs relative to the cost of farm inputs, 
challenges accessing international markets and 
goods, succession planning and business finances. 
To ask communities to prepare for drought can 
be difficult, particularly when this region has 
been significantly impacted by natural disasters 
in recent years, including the 2022 and 2023–24 
storm and flood events.
Drought Policy
Based on experiences in previous droughts,  
the Loddon Campaspe region would like clarity 
and transparency around existing drought  
policies and how they will be implemented during 
the next drought. The role of government in 
providing drought support should be clear and 
key contacts/support networks and information, 
to support people affected by drought, should be 
readily accessible.
Many lessons were learned from previous droughts, 
especially the Millennium Drought. It has been 
suggested that reviewing the region-specific 
responses and issues in providing drought support 
could be documented and used to improve 
responses when the next drought occurs. As an 
example, previous support systems used local 
government boundaries to provide drought support 
and access to grants. This sometimes resulted in 
farms next to each other, impacted by the same 
drought, receiving different levels of support.
A big issue in relation to drought support is the 
trigger for that support; in other words, when 
is a drought a drought? What support becomes 
available? Is the support adequate to meet 
community’s needs? Is it available in a timely 
manner?
Rural economy
Drought not only impacts on-farm production and 
productivity; it has an impact on the complete supply 
and value chain. For a rural economy to operate 
effectively, the whole value chain needs to be 
assessed for drought resiliency. This requires both 
pre-farm gate and post-farm gate considerations.
The impact of drought is experienced differently 
across the region. More diversified, larger 
communities can dampen the economic impact 
of drought, while smaller, agriculture-based 
communities can be hit very hard economically. 
Services during droughts are impacted. Especially 
in smaller shires, the ability of local government  
to provide support can be challenging – particularly 
when they have limited rate bases to draw upon 
and often large infrastructure networks, such as 
roads, to maintain.
Drought has a flow-through effect on local 
businesses. Smaller, localised businesses may 
have more connection with the community and 
may experience a greater financial impact.
Infrastructure
Good infrastructure, including transport/logistics, 
water distribution systems and housing, helps to 
build regional resilience to drought. Infrastructure 
is linked to regional requirements, which in turn 
are articulated in regional growth plans. Such 
plans need to be considered in terms of drought 
resilience building. Gap assessment is important 
to ensuring adequate regional coverage of 
infrastructure services and requires long-term 
planning. An extension of the Wimmera-Pyrenees 
pipeline in Central Goldfields, for example, may 
take up to 5 years to be in place if supported.
Appendix 1: Drought resilience insights 
from the Loddon Campaspe
48

Farm management
Farm management in the Loddon Campaspe 
covers a broad range of sectors and scales, 
including broad-acre, artisan, horticulture and 
livestock. Planning farming businesses according 
to land capabilities, and approaches such 
as regenerative farming, supports resilience 
building in farming. Changes in water policy have 
impacted the distribution of farming systems, and 
the communities historically built around these 
systems, impacting the social fabric of the region.
People and community wellbeing
Mental and physical health are placed under 
pressure during stressful periods triggered by 
droughts. Droughts are often accompanied by  
heat waves and generally hotter days. Publicly 
available places to cool down, including pools  
and green spaces, help to relieve stress. Pools, 
public gardens, sporting grounds and other  
green spaces require urban water strategies to 
recognise their importance during droughts, and 
benefit from (irrigation) water supply prioritisation. 
Sporting grounds not only provide stress relief 
from drought related stresses; they also facilitate 
shared community activities, provide an informal 
place for peer support and help people avoid 
feeling isolated. Last resort cooled places can  
be identified for community members to gather 
when there are no other options to stay cool.
Empowered communities
Communities can be empowered through 
knowledge sharing, learning and supported 
decision making. Communities have raised 
interesting concepts during the RDRP consultation 
processes, such as empowered communities 
organising ‘all hazard’ annual forums to keep 
people well prepared and to allow planning based 
on risks. Continuing these forums in non‑drought 
periods allows communities to continue 
preparedness preparations and share information 
on expected future events, thus reducing some of 
the uncertainty associated with drought events.
Another method raised relates to empowering 
communities by co-designing place-based 
resilience projects, which focus on story telling. 
The exchange of experiences and situations can  
be a powerful tool in terms of peer-to-peer 
learning. Exchanging knowledge and experience 
between communities can be created through 
regional networks.
These concepts will only be effective if they  
are implemented long-term. This requires 
investment, including in staff, and continuous 
effort to ensure success.
Place focused vs place based
There is a difference between place-focused and  
place-based approaches. Place-focused is driven 
from the outside, place-based is driven by local 
ideas and initiatives. The Loddon Campaspe 
community have expressed a clear preference  
for place-based initiatives.
A balance is needed between the capacity and 
experience of a community, and the responsibility 
placed on them to deliver services. Under the Plan, 
communities will consider this to provide a place 
based approach to implementation with localised 
activities and initiatives. 
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
49

Several region-specific action plans and  
strategies exist for the Loddon Campaspe.  
The review in this appendix does not attempt  
to be a complete overview. However, a select 
number of documents are reviewed to support  
the thematic framework and actions listed in  
the main part of the Loddon Campaspe Plan.  
The reviews in this appendix are ordered by year  
of publication, with the most recent documents 
listed first.
Appendix 2: Existing actions and 
strategies in the Loddon Campaspe
Drought 
Preparedness 
Plans
Plans for 
Local Lakes and 
Waterways
Local Drought 
Knowledge and 
Experiences
Water 
Plans and 
Strategies
Climate 
Adaption Plans 
and Pledges
Traditional 
Owner Country 
Plans
Water 
Catchment 
Regulatory 
Frameworks
Planned 
Strategic Water 
Investments
Established 
Regional 
Networks
Regional Drought Actions
50

Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023a. Turning ‘wrong way’ climate 
‘right way’ – Dja Dja Wurrung Climate Change 
Strategy 2023–2034
The Climate Change Strategy published by Djaara 
assesses the actions required to reverse negative 
climate impacts on Djaara Country. It includes 
a comprehensive review of existing plans and 
strategies that come together in the Climate 
Change Strategy. The strategy focuses on 6 
themes: Country, Fire, Water, Trees, People and 
Sky Country. The strategy includes indicators of 
success and stresses the need for integration of 
cultural heritage and joint management practises. 
The strategy also includes the need to work 
together and identifies partners.
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023b. Dhelkunyangu Gatjin – 
Working together to heal water. Djaara Gatjin 
Strategy
A water economy has evolved that is worth billions 
of dollars annually, produces food and fibre for 
Australia and the world, provides drinking water 
and underpins local and regional communities. 
This water system is governed by the State 
resulting in water on Djandak — Djaara’s water — 
being fully allocated to water users. Djaara are 
excluded from participating and benefiting in 
these water arrangements. Djaara consider their 
knowledge to be central to informing sustainable 
water management. Djaara currently own very little 
water resources and have very little say on how the 
water is managed on Djandak. 
The Strategy outlines 3 key outcomes which have 
been summarised here: 
1  Make decisions for Gatjin (water): to meet 
obligations to heal and manage Djandak and enjoy 
traditional rights, Djaara Culture and Lore must be at 
the heart of water policy, planning and management.
2  Secure a growing share of water rights and 
entitlements: increased water entitlement is some 
restitution of stolen water rights, enables the 
determination for the best use of water for cultural 
purposes, and allows direct involvement in the 
water economy.
3  A Djaara Gatjin Authority: a Djaara water 
authority is required to manage water and water 
interests and acknowledges that neighbouring 
mobs have authority for water on their country.
Integrated Water Management Forums, 2022. 
Coliban Strategic Directions Statement – 2022
The Coliban Integrated Water Management (IWM) 
Forum is one of ten regional IWM forums across 
Victoria that are realising the local implementation 
of the IWM Framework for Victoria. The Forum’s 
purpose is to work together to create water cycle 
outcomes that support the future health and 
resilience of environment and communities. Fifteen 
opportunities were identified, grouped under 
3 themes: Water for people, environment, and 
healing Country; Making more of water resources 
in a changing climate; Integrated planning for a 
sustainable future.
The following projects fall under the theme 
of ‘water for people, environment, and healing 
Country’:
•	Implementing the Reimagining Bendigo Creek 
Plan
•	Wanyarram Dhelk – Starting the Healing
•	Castlemaine Stormwater Outfall Retrofit Scheme 
and Pilot Program
•	Forest Creek Revitalisation Project
•	Echuca Aquatic Reserve
The following projects fall under the theme of 
‘making more of water resources in a changing 
climate’:
•	Improved Drought Resilience for Bendigo with 
Managed Aquifer Recharge
•	Diversifying Water Supply for the Castlemaine 
Botanical Gardens
•	Diversifying Water Supplies for Parks and 
Gardens
•	Increased Flows in the Coliban River for Cultural 
and Ecological Benefits
•	Managing Trentham Stormwater Quality and 
Quantity for Healthy Waterways
•	Recycled Water for a Greener Echuca
The following projects fall under the theme of 
‘integrated planning for a sustainable future’:
•	Water Sensitive Urban Design for New or 
Upgraded Developments (Land and Buildings)
•	Bendigo Regional Employment Precinct
•	Macedon Ranges North IWM Plan
•	Servicing Small Townships
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
51

Adapt Loddon Mallee, 2021. Loddon Mallee 
Climate Ready Plan
The Climate Ready Plan for the Loddon Mallee 
focuses on People, Places and Sectors, and 
uses the four themes of Knowledge, Connection, 
Wellbeing and Security to identify actions required 
to adapt to climate changes. The global objectives 
in the plan include: 
•	Individuals and communities have the knowledge 
and tools they need to become climate ready; 
•	People in Loddon Mallee feel connected to their 
communities and supported to become climate 
ready; 
•	Individuals and communities are happy and 
healthy; Individuals and communities have the 
housing, food, financial security and access to 
the services they require; 
•	Our region is continuously learning about the 
effects of climate change on our natural and 
built environments; 
•	Places in our region are connected by resilient 
infrastructure and environmental corridors; Our 
natural and built environments are healthy and 
sustainable; 
•	Our natural and built environments are protected 
from the impacts of climate change;
•	Businesses have the knowledge and resources 
they need to make confident decisions for 
operational continuity and competitive 
advantage; 
•	Local businesses feel connected, incentivised 
and rewarded to become climate ready; 
•	The health and safety of local workforces is 
protected; 
•	Local businesses have secure access to climate 
resilient markets, technologies, financing, and 
transport channels. 
In addition to 111 actions defined under these 
themes, the plan contains several stories of how 
people, places and sectors are getting ready for 
climate impacts.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2021. North Central Regional 
Catchment Strategy
The North Central Regional Catchment Strategy 
(RCS) is the overarching strategy for all involved 
in land, water and biodiversity management 
within the north central region. Through its vision 
– ‘working in partnership for a healthy catchment’ –  
it provides a roadmap for collective efforts to care 
for the catchments.
The RCS identifies likely climate change impacts 
on natural resources and provides direction that 
will support their protection in a hotter and drier 
future. Partnerships are essential in delivering it.
The RCS shows how it fits within the context of 
existing land, water, biodiversity, community, 
Traditional Owners and Aboriginal Victorians, 
and climate change policies. The first 5 listed 
also cover the themes that the RCS is setup 
around. Climate change is evaluated for each of 
these themes, and opportunities and threats are 
highlighted.
Government, 2019. Drought in Australia - 
Resilience and Preparedness Plan
The 2019 Commonwealth Drought Response, 
Resilience and Preparedness Plan focuses on  
3 areas: 
•	Immediate action for those who are in drought 
•	Support for the wider community affected  
by drought
•	Long term resilience and preparedness. 
The Commonwealth sets out their vision:  
to shift away from direct drought support and 
focus on preparedness and resilience building 
instead. The plan sets out the responsibilities 
the Commonwealth sees for different levels of 
government (Commonwealth and states and 
territories) and identifies a strong responsibility for 
industry. This includes industry organisations and 
leaders and also the individual farm business level. 
The vision of the plan is to have farm businesses 
and rural communities that are prepared for, and 
capable of managing, drought in pursuit of a 
prosperous and sustainable future.
52

Of the 6 foundations of the plan, 2 describe the 
expectation of more frequent drought occurrences 
and note that drought is not a natural disaster.  
The other 4 focus on responsibilities at the farm 
and community level, and include: 
•	Farming is a business and drought is one of 
many business risks that should be managed; 
•	Drought preparations must continue during 
times of no drought; 
•	Policies and programs should focus on planning 
and preparation for future droughts and be 
developed with industry and communities; 
•	Information (social, economic and environmental) 
about drought conditions and impacts should be 
collected and understood at the local level so 
that governments, communities, businesses  
and farmers can tailor their preparation, plans 
and responses.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2016. North Central Victoria  
Regional Sustainable Agriculture Strategy
In 2016 the North Central Victoria Regional 
Sustainable Agriculture Strategy was published, 
with the aim of supporting productive farming 
while protecting the region’s natural resources 
base. Two farming zones are identified that overlap 
with the Central Highlands region: a mixed farming 
zone in the west, covering Marnoo, St Arnaud, 
Avoca and Clunes, and a diverse farming zone 
around Creswick, Daylesford, Kyneton and 
Woodend. The characteristics of each zone 
are presented. Three scenarios for sustainable 
agriculture are discussed: 
•	A paradigm shift, where agriculture is shifted 
to be fully adapted to Australian conditions, 
e.g. moving towards a low input grazing system 
based on native grasses; 
•	A mid-level change, where farming aims for 
sustainability, such as through increasing soil 
carbon through sub-soil manuring; 
•	An incremental change, making small changes 
and allowing for adaptation to uncontrollable 
influences, without fully eliminating the risks  
to sustainable agriculture.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2015. North Central Climate Change 
and Mitigation Plan
In 2015, the North Central CMA published a 
Climate Change and Mitigation Plan. The process 
to develop this plan included climate projections, 
followed by a vulnerability assessment, community 
workshops, and the development of a mitigation 
plan. Mitigation options focus on the topics of 
vegetation, soil, carbon farming and carbon 
sequestration for multiple land uses. Community 
concerns related to climate change and the 
drought resilience plan include increased fire risk; 
declining water availability, quality and security; 
water pricing; and the impact of extreme heat on 
human and animal health. 
The capacity for the community to respond to 
events is listed as a concern, especially related to 
service provision, social cohesion and issues faced 
by smaller rural communities. A set of strategic 
goals is listed for the Goldfields region, covering 
the Central Highlands, with a focus on natural 
revegetation, monitoring of biodiversity, and 
implementing a large-scale carbon sequestration 
action across the landscape in the goldfields area.
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2014. Dhelkunya Dja Country Plan 
2014–2034
The Dhelkunya Dja - Dja Dja Wurrung Country 
Plan 2014–2034 describes 9 goals the Djaara 
aspires to. The Plan provides Country and cultural 
background, and provides an approach for the 
implementation of the Plan. The 9 goals and 
themes are framed around Djaara (our People), 
Cultural Practises and Customs, Cultural Heritage, 
Bush Tucker (edible and medicinal plants and 
animals), River and Waterways, Land, Self-
determination, Traditional Owner Economy and 
Joint management.
87% of Dja Dja Wurrung Country is privately 
owned and 65% of land is used for agriculture. 
The other 13% is a combination of parks, forests 
and reserves. A historical transformation of the 
natural landscape has been driven by agriculture, 
urban settlement and mining. The transformation 
is continuing, both driven by natural and human 
caused factors. The Vision for Country described 
in the Plan includes strong health and wellbeing of 
Dja Dja Wurrung People, underpinned by a living 
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
53

culture; Lands and water that are in good condition 
and actively managed to protect Dja Dja Wurrung 
values; and that Laws, culture and rights of all Dja 
Dja Wurrung People are promoted.
While there is no specific reference to drought, 
the themes of Rivers and Waterways, and Land are 
related to drought management.
The aspirations in the Plan for Rivers and 
Waterways are to ensure that rivers and waterways 
are healthy and meet the needs of our people and 
land. Actions defined under this theme include 
assuring a meaningful role in the development 
of water policy frameworks in Victoria and the 
Murray-Darling Basin, and the establishment of a 
formal role in regional water management through 
participation in development and implementation 
of Regional Water Strategies. 
Actions under the Land theme focus on remediation 
and restoration of mined land, with the objective 
that our upside-down country is healthy again.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2013. Caring for Country –  
A sustainable land management guide  
for rural living in north central Victoria
The North Central CMA (2013) published a 
document for new and existing landholders to 
support sustainable choices with the available 
resources. It contains suggestions for land 
planning, efficient irrigation and sustainable  
water sourcing.
In the section on water savings, it is suggested 
to install and use rainwater tanks for domestic 
water use, as well as several other domestic water 
savings tips. For gardens, it is suggested to use 
grey water for irrigation, reduce lawn areas, use 
native, climate adapted plants, and use mulching 
to reduce evaporative losses.
This is followed by a section on how to recycle 
water, and the best practices to manage recycled 
water. The chapter on biodiversity includes the 
benefits of native vegetation, and suggestions 
on how to manage native vegetation on rural 
properties.
A large section on soils explains the different 
types of soils landholders may encounter, and  
the most sustainable ways to use the different  
soil systems.
The plant and animal sections suggest best 
management practices for different land uses.
These are followed by a climate section, explaining 
the drivers of weather systems and climate.
A summary table shows the impact of a changing 
climate on the environment, the community,  
primary production, and water. This is concluded  
by a heading to prepare for weather emergencies, 
starting with risk assessment, then risk management, 
and preparation for specific weather-related 
events like fire, floods and thunderstorms. This 
document ends with a chapter on the community, 
and how to be good neighbours to each other.
Victorian Auditor-General, 2008. Goldfields 
Superpipe
This report was undertaken in recognition that, at 
the time, the Victorian Government was managing 
its water resources in unprecedented drought 
conditions. Water storages that serviced the key 
regional centres of Bendigo and Ballarat only had 
water volumes of approximately 10% of capacity 
– their lowest levels ever recorded. Despite the 
severe water restrictions introduced by the Coliban 
and Central Highlands water authorities, Bendigo 
and Ballarat almost exhausted their drinking water 
supplies in 2007.
In response to the extreme conditions, the State 
Government, in conjunction with Coliban and 
Central Highlands, constructed a major water 
pipeline, called the ‘Goldfields Superpipe’ that 
connects Ballarat and Bendigo to the Goulburn 
River system. This was finalised in 2008. The 
Superpipe aims to improve the security of water 
supplies in the region by allowing both water 
authorities to access the more reliable supplies  
in the Goulburn River.
The Superpipe has 3 components: a Bendigo 
pipeline that draws water from the Waranga 
Western Channel, delivers it to Bendigo via the 
Eppalock to Sandhurst pipeline, and supplies 
Lake Eppalock; a Ballarat pipeline, from Bendigo’s 
Sandhurst Reservoir to Ballarat; an augmentation 
of the existing Eppalock to Sandhurst pipeline. 
The 46.5km Bendigo pipeline is being managed 
by Coliban. The 87km Ballarat pipeline is being 
managed by Central Highlands. The Commonwealth 
and Victorian governments part-funded the Bendigo 
and Ballarat pipelines.
54

Photo: Macedon Ranges Shire
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
55

Adapt Loddon Mallee, 2021. “Loddon Mallee 
Climate Ready Plan”. https://climatereadyplan.
adaptloddonmallee.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2021/09/ADAPT-Loddon-Mallee-Climate-
Ready-Plan-.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
Aither, 2019. “Loddon Campaspe Regional Profile. 
An analysis of regional strengths and challenges. 
A Report prepared for Infrastructure Victoria”. 
https://www.infrastructurevictoria.com.au/ 
wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Aither-Loddon-
Campaspe-Regional-Profile-March-2019.pdf  
(last accessed 2023-12-07)
Agriculture Victoria, 2023. “Victoria’s Drought 
Preparedness and Response Framework”.  
https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/
managing-for-and-during-drought/drought-
preparedness-and-response-framework  
(last accessed 2023-12-07)
Bendigo Community Health Services (BCHS), 2017. 
“Wonderful recognition for Kaye Graves from 
Victorian Multicultural Commission”.  
https://www.bchs.com.au/blog/299-wonderful-
recognition-for-kaye-graves-from-victorian-
multicultural-commission (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Bendigo Community Health Services (BCHS), 
2020. “Victorian Multicultural Award of Excellence 
for BCHS”. https://www.bchs.com.au/blog/722-
media-release-victorian-multicultural-award-of-
excellence-for-bchs (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Coliban Water, 2023a. “News”.  
https://coliban.com.au/green-spaces-benefit-
water-discount (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Coliban Water, 2023b. “Green and active 
communities” https://connect.coliban.com.au/
green-and-active-communities (last accessed 
2024-02-16)
Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness 
Plan”. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-
land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fund/research-adoption-program (last accessed 
2023-07-06)
Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions (DJPR), 
2022. “Loddon Campaspe  Regional Economic 
Development Strategy”. https://www.rdv.vic.gov.au/ 
__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/2063912/Loddon-
Campaspe-REDS-2022.pdf (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2014. “Dhelkunya Dja Country Plan 
2014–2034”. https://djadjawurrung.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/Dhelkunya-Dja-Country-
Plan-2014-2034.pdf (last accessed 2023-06-14)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023a. “Turning ‘wrong way’ climate 
‘right way’ – Dja Dja Wurrung Climate Change Strategy 
2023–2034“. https://djadjawurrung.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2023/05/DJA46.-Climate-Change-
Strategy-230523.pdf (last accessed 2023-06-14)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023b. “Dhelkunyangu Gatjin – 
Working together to heal water. Djaara Gatjin 
Strategy”. https://djadjawurrung.com.au/
wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Dhelkunyangu-
Gatjin-Working-together-to-heal-water-Gatjin-
Strategy-2023.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
EY, 2019. “Loddon Campaspe”.  
https://assets.infrastructurevictoria.com.au/ 
assets/Resources/Addressing-Regional-
Disadvantage_Loddon-Campaspe-Fact-Sheet.pdf 
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Frontier Economics, 2022. “Drought in the Loddon 
Campaspe Region. Information to support the 
Loddon Campaspe Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan”. 8 pages.
Integrated Water Management Forums (IWMF), 
2022. “Coliban Strategic Directions Statement – 
2022”. 21 pages.
North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2013. “Caring for Country – A sustainable 
land management guide for rural living in north 
central Victoria” https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/ 
sites/default/files/publications/caring_for_
country_sustainable_land_management_guide_-_
final_web_version.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
References
56

North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2015. “North Central Climate Change 
and Mitigation Plan”. https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/ 
sites/default/files/publications/nccma_final_
climate_change_mitigation_plan_2015.pdf.  
(last accessed 2023-07-05)
North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2016. “North Central Victoria Regional 
Sustainable Agriculture Strategy”. https://www.
nccma.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/
nccma_sustainable_agriculture_strategy_2016_
final_web.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2021. “North Central Regional Catchment 
Strategy”. https://northcentral.rcs.vic.gov.au/wp-
content/uploads/print/rcs-8-all.pdf (last accessed 
2023-12-01)
Victorian Auditor-General, 2008. “Goldfields 
Superpipe”. https://www.audit.vic.gov.au/sites/
default/files/20080528-Goldfields-Pipeline-
Summary.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-2)
Victoria Environmental Water Holder, 2022. Loddon 
River system (including Tullaroop, Serpentine and 
Pyramid creeks). https://www.vewh.vic.gov.au/
rivers-and-wetlands/northern-region/loddon-river 
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
LODDON CAMPASPE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
57

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the 
Loddon Campaspe Region
Information to support the Loddon Campaspe Regional Drought Resilience Plan
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
November 2022

Regional summary
Loddon Campaspe is situated in central Victoria with Bendigo, 
Victoria’s fourth largest city, at its heart. The region is a major producer 
of dairy, sheep and beef and is well known for specialised food and 
beverage production. The mix of agricultural industries creates an 
agricultural processing and services hub for central Victoria with the 
Region having a Gross Regional Product of $11.75 billion. The region 
had a  population of 253,166 people in 2021. 
The southern part of the region extends to the Macedon Ranges 
incorporating towns such as Macedon, Kyneton and Gisborne. The 
northern part forms part of the New South Wales-Victorian border 
along the Murray River, with Echuca being the main regional centre 
in the far north-east of the region. The western reaches of the region 
border the Mallee and Wimmera and are primarily rural. Other 
moderately sized towns in the region include Castlemaine  
and Maryborough. 
The Loddon Campaspe region includes the traditional lands of the 
Dja Dja Wurrung peoples and small sections of the lands of the 
Taungurung, Wurundjeri and Yorta Yorta people as well as other 
Traditional Owner groups in Victoria who are not formally recognised.
Key industries for employment in the Loddon Campaspe region 
in 2021 included health care and social assistance, retail trade, 
construction, manufacturing and education and training, with 
agriculture, fishery and forestry contributing 5.7% employment  
to the region.
Aside from rainfall relied upon for dryland farming, water in the 
region is sourced predominately from Goulburn-Murray Water 
irrigation channels, with supplementary water also sourced from 
groundwater and rivers, creeks and lakes. Water is accessed from 
the Goulburn system via the Waranga Western Channel, the Murray 
system as well as the Campaspe, Coliban and Loddon systems. 
The region recently experienced drought and dry seasonal conditions 
during the Millennium drought (1997 to 2010) and 2017 to 2019.
Campaspe
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
Gippsland
Goulburn
Loddon
Macedon
Ranges
Campaspe
Mount
Alexander
Bendigo
Central
Goldﬁelds
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund.
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was undertaken for the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness  
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls  
on surface or subsurface  
water supply
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of drought 
in the past
How this may  
change in  
the future
The Loddon 
Campaspe region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These 
on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets 
(e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of 
drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market 
impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions  
+ 
Changes in the Loddon Campaspe region
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for  
ag farm services  
(but could increase  
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands  
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation  
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions.
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from  
green space
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region
Frontier Economics
3

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. The last 25 years has seen 
Loddon Campaspe experience extensive drought periods, starting 
with the Millennium drought from 1997 to 2009 and more recently 
the dry conditions experienced from 2017 to 2019.
The historical rainfall and temperature charts in Figure 3, provides 
evidence of the severity of these recent drought events, using 
Castlemaine as an example. The period of 2001 to 2009 was 
particularly hot and dry , with all of these years except for 2007 
receiving less than median rainfall, while 2006 received rainfall 
below the 10th percentile. At the same time the average maximum 
temperature was well above the median for the second half of the 
Millennium drought. Hot and dry periods were also experienced 
from 2013 to 2015 and again from 2017 to 2019. 
The lack of rainfall during the Millennium drought resulted in 
significant reductions in water availability across the southern 
Murray-Darling Basin and the regulated surface water systems of 
Campaspe and Loddon reached 0% for high-reliability water shares 
in 2008 and 2009. 
Agricultural impacts and 
implications of drought  
+ Non-agricultural impacts  
and implications
Irrigated agriculture makes up a significant portion of agricultural 
production in the Loddon Campaspe region (38% of agricultural 
production by value), primarily dairy and livestock. Dryland production 
is a mix of livestock grazing, cereal crops, hay and other broadacre 
crops. There is also a significant intensive livestock production of pigs 
and poultry. A key input to all livestock farms is reliable and clean 
stock water.
Given the region’s extensive use of irrigated agriculture in the north, 
production and profitability decreased significantly during the 
Millennium drought. Irrigated agriculture faced a high ‘cost’ of water, 
given the opportunities to sell or the requirements to purchase 
water from the water market. Water allocation prices reached 
monthly averages of $600+/ML during 2006 to 2009 (compared 
to <$100/ML in the wetter conditions of 2021 and 2022). As can 
be seen from Table 1, it is generally not viable for irrigators in the 
region to pay such high water prices. 
01
02
The high levels of irrigation throughout the region is likely to limit the 
impacts of short periods of drought. Unlike dryland farms which rely 
on rainfall, farms in irrigation districts have continued access to water 
that can be drawn upon during dry periods and water storages act 
as a buffer between years. However, during, extended periods of 
drought, such as during the Millennium drought, water allocations may 
not be sufficient to maintain production levels. Further, dry periods 
in the Loddon Campaspe and connected regions of the southern 
Murray-Darling Basin result in competition for water and high water 
prices for those looking to buy additional water.
The period of 2017 to 2019 also saw significant reductions in rainfall 
and hot temperatures, however the shorter time period led to only 
a single year of reduced water allocations in 2019-20.
01
02
03
Recently experienced droughts and dry 
seasonal conditions in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2013 to 2015
•	 2017 to 2019
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Castlemaine
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Table 1 Threshold water price for Loddon Campaspe irrigation 
industries
Threshold price for irrigation (above which  
irrigation becomes unviable) (median $/ML)
Dairy
200
Cropping
150
Horticulture (orchard)
500
Grazing
170
All irrigators
200
Annual
10th %ile
Long term median
Annual
90th %ile
Long term median
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Rainfall (mm)
Year
16.5
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
21.5
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Year
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region
Frontier Economics
4

Milk production is the single largest agricultural product (by value) 
in the region. Regional milk production in Northern Victoria, which 
includes the Loddon Campaspe region, declined from over 3.0 billion 
litres in 2001-02 to 1.7 billion litres in 2009-10. This decline was 
significantly larger than the declines in Western and Eastern Victoria, 
where production remained relatively flat during this same time period 
(see Figure 4). ABARES farm survey data in the period from 1999-00 to 
2007-08 shows total cash costs for dairy farms increased from $308,950 
to $645,900. 
The significant decline in milk production in Northern Victoria created 
implications for milk processing with reduced factory utilisation, 
changes in product mixes and retiring of different aspects of 
processing infrastructure.
Dryland productivity also declined significantly during the Millennium 
drought and 2017 to 2019 due to the lack of rainfall. Dryland 
production was significantly affected – for example, the harvest of 
cereal crops in 2018-19 was half the recorded tonnage of 2015-16 or 
2016-17.
Town water 
Water restrictions during the Millennium drought commenced early in 
the Loddon Campaspe region with some towns on Stage 3 in 2003 and 
many reaching Stage 4 in 2004. After a slight reprieve, many towns were 
on Stage 4 from 2006 and into 2009 or 2010. Stage 4 water restrictions 
prohibit the watering of any outdoor space, amongst other restrictions, 
which had profound impacts on the community’s liveability. 
Coliban Water purchased water entitlements and water allocations 
to assist with managing water security during this period, as well 
as investing in the Goldfields Superpipe Bendigo Link and a class A 
recycled water facility.
Recreation and Tourism
The Loddon Campaspe region has a number of lakes and rivers that 
are used for water tourism such as the Waranga basin, Lake Eppalock 
and the Murray River. These water systems are used for recreational 
fitness, such as rowing, as well as recreational boating and fishing. The 
Millennium drought significantly reduced the level of water tourism 
in the area, taking with it the additional income that enters the region 
from these activities. 
Environment 
There were negative impacts on riverbank and in-stream vegetation in 
the rivers and stream during the Millennium drought. Lack of rainfall 
causes serious problems for native animals, who moved closer to 
human life in search of water.
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or are water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable to 
damage. Additionally, the movement of stock to areas where there were 
feed reserves meant stock was placed in areas of cultural significance. 
Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the community.
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Milk production (Million Litres)
Year
Eastern Victoria
Northern Victoria
Western Victoria
Community outcomes  
in past droughts
Agriculture is an important segment of the regional 
economy — contributing 49% of the ‘value add’ in the Loddon SA3 
region and 22% in the Campaspe SA3 region. It is also an important 
employer, with the ‘Agriculture, fishery and forestry’ industry contributing 
5.7% employment to the region. In addition to the significant direct 
employment in primary production in the Loddon-Campaspe region, 
slightly more people are directly employed in the up- and down-
stream industries that provide services to agriculture and that process 
agricultural products.
This means that the decreases in agricultural production caused by 
drought created significant flow-on community impacts through reduced 
income and employment, especially on-farm labour and agricultural 
services. The impacts to irrigated and non-irrigated agriculture flowed 
through to impact the wider community through reduced overall 
spending in the community.
Economic modelling of the Millennium drought found that the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) of the Loddon Campaspe region declined by an 
average of nearly $95 million annually in the extended drought of 2006-07 
to 2009-10. The modelling accounted for drought impacts on dryland and 
irrigated production plus negative spending effects in the regions. The 
modelled production impacts were found to have significant employment 
impacts (averaging a loss of 367 jobs annually over the same period).
The prolonged dry conditions led to the closure of the Campaspe 
Irrigation District in 2010. Irrigators could sell their water entitlements 
to the Commonwealth Government as part of water recovery for the 
Basin Plan.
The lack of farm income being generated during the Millennium drought 
meant that farmers needed to seek off-farm income in the community. 
Off-farm income going into drought improves the drought resilience of a 
given farm, by supporting income during variable farm returns. Over 75% 
of farms across the region are likely to already be dependent on off-farm 
income to be economically resilient and viable.
Many communities in the Loddon Campaspe region had and still have 
a high proportion of people directly affected by agriculture, with smaller 
communities heavily reliant on agriculture more impacted by drought. 
Production impacts also affected the range of down-stream processing 
facilities in the region. This meant that the negative impacts of drought 
were concentrated in those communities. Further, businesses in smaller 
towns generally did not have many options to respond to a decline in the 
spending and economic activity. 
Overall, the cumulative effect of drought both on-farm and in the 
community led to significant impacts on the Loddon Campaspe 
community during the Millennium drought and 2017 to 2019 period 
of dry seasonal conditions. This also led to an increase in demand for 
services such as mental health and rural financial counselling.
03
Figure 4 Victorian annual dairy production
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region
Frontier Economics
5

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Loddon Campaspe region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Loddon Campaspe Region with future 
droughts likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate 
projections in Figure 5 show that by 2050 the Loddon Campaspe region 
will be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number of fire danger 
days. It is important to note that the changes in average measures are 
expected to have the same or increased variability around them in the 
future climate.
The high levels of irrigation concentrated in the north of the region 
is likely to limit the impacts of short periods of drought. Unlike 
dryland regions which rely heavily on rainfall, irrigated regions have 
continued access to water that can be drawn upon during dry 
periods. Although this is unlikely to limit the impact during extended 
periods of drought where water allocations may not be sufficient to 
maintain production levels.
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural  
impacts and implications
Agricultural production in dairy and mixed farming operations are 
likely to be most exposed to the increasing likelihood and severity of 
future droughts, as they are dependent on certain temperature and 
rainfall patterns. The adaptiveness of these producers and their ability 
to maintain sufficient reserves will be critical to their farm profitability, 
with farmers already having many strategies to manage drought. The 
prevailing circumstances of a future drought — such as commodity 
prices, interest rates and fuel and fertiliser costs — will also play a role 
in resultant impacts.
Further declines in dairy production will have flow on effects to 
dairy processing facilities, which may need to be rationalised if dairy 
production levels are not able to recover. A factory closure will have 
major implications for the town community and will also have a ripple 
effect through surrounding communities.
The region’s response to future drought will be boosted by increases in 
irrigation network efficiency and reduced network costs and the delivery 
of water savings to irrigators. However, these effects are expected to 
be outweighed by the reduced water use in the region due to Basin 
Plan water recovery and competition for water with horticultural 
developments in Lower Murray. During future droughts in the Loddon 
Campaspe and the broader southern Murray-Darling Basin, water trade 
out of the Loddon Campaspe is expected in response to competing 
demands from water uses in other regions (as seen in 2017 and 2019).
Changes in the Loddon Campaspe region
There have been a number of changes in the Loddon Campaspe region that 
will alter the impacts of drought in the future, including:
•	 Learnings and adaptations in agriculture since the Millennium drought, 
with the farming systems in the Loddon Campaspe region now more 
opportunistic and flexible. For example, dairy farmers and livestock 
producers can decide to use annual pastures, buy and store fodder and 
buy or sell water allocations depending on the prevailing conditions. 
Dryland livestock producers can utilise on-farm feed reserves, reduce 
stock numbers and purchase supplementary feed to manage periods of 
low rainfall.
•	 Competition for water has also significantly increased since the 
Millennium drought – particularly from Basin Plan water recovery 
(including water buybacks in the Loddon Campaspe and other regions, 
and on-farm water savings projects) and horticultural growth in the 
Lower Murray area. 
•	 Town water security planning and investment has increased in the 
region. Given the investment in water entitlements, pipelines and 
alternative water sources, restrictions would be less severe and not as 
prolonged if there was a repeat of the Millennium Drought.
•	 Population changes (including an increase in sea/tree-changers due to 
Covid19) bringing additional water demand to the region.
•	 Increase in peri-urban development and number of lifestyle/hobby 
farmers which will change the water demands in the region
•	 Continuing diversification of the region’s economy away from 
agricultural production.
01
02
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures in spring expected 
to increase by up to 3.3°C. Number of days over 
35°C increasing from 4 days to 5-16 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable, 
Average rainfall in spring expected to 
decrease by 10-22%.
4-14%
62%
Number of very high fire 
danger days to increase by 
11 days per year
1.7 to  
2.4 °C 
01
02
03
Figure 5 Climate projections  
for the Loddon Campaspe region
Future drought 
conditions  
+ 
Changes in the  
Loddon Campaspe region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region

03
Town water 
Changing attitudes to household water use has reduced per capita 
water use in the region, and town water security planning has improved 
— building on lessons from drought. Urban Water Strategies are now 
required to incorporate future impacts of climate change (including 
potential droughts). For example, Coliban Water has used the 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning’s 2020 ‘Guidelines 
for Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water Availability in 
Victoria’ to undertake water demand system forecasts and identify a 
range of climate scenarios to assess potential impacts on water supply 
and customer demand. Further, water trade will provide additional 
flexibility for town water supply in the Loddon Campaspe region.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought. Initiatives that are not dependent on water 
availability could boost visitors to the region. COVID-19 has provided 
a boost to regional travel and relocation, evidenced by an increase in 
population from 2016 to 2021.
Environment 
Inland lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during 
times of drought which will impact the native biodiversity living in and 
relying on these water bodies as well as on riverbank condition and 
in-stream vegetation. 
Traditional Owners 
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains and/
or are water dependent may be exposed and be vulnerable to damage. 
Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the community.
Community outcomes  
in future droughts
Economic modelling of potential future drought in 
Victoria found the Loddon Campaspe region would be significantly 
affected, with GDP falling by 22% and a reduction of almost 500 jobs 
in the region (see Figure 6). The modelled 3-year drought, while 
prolonged, is not equivalent to the most severe recorded in Victoria.
Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought conditions 
become more prevalent. Not only are mental health services important 
during times of drought, but improved mental health increases a person’s 
ability to adapt. This can improve drought resilience by allowing people 
to effectively plan for future drought conditions as well as make informed 
decisions during a drought period.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of 
community spirit and liveability within local communities in the region. 
Water Corporations and Councils now have a strong understanding 
of the importance of greenspace for their communities. Coliban water 
is working with councils and the community to identify priority green 
spaces to provide water security during dry periods. However, should 
town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will have a 
mental health toll on residents.
The diversity of the Loddon Campaspe region will continue to mean 
that some areas will be impacted by future droughts more than 
others. While it is not possible to predict which area within Loddon 
Campaspe will be more affected than others, smaller communities 
that are highly dependent on agriculture and more geographically 
isolated will be most exposed. Declining populations in smaller towns 
may mean they are more vulnerable to change.
Overall the Loddon Campaspe region’s high exposure to agricultural 
industries creates the potential for significant community impacts from 
future drought.
Figure 6 CGE Modelling for a future drought
Flow through impacts  
from agriculture to the 
community
The increased likelihood and severity of 
drought in the future and the increased 
competition for water under these 
conditions will mean that the drought 
impacts on the community from 
agricultural consequences of drought 
are expected to be larger than have 
been historically observed.
Impacts on GDP
Economic modelling of potential future 
drought in Victoria found the Loddon 
Campaspe region to be significantly 
affected, with: 
•	 GDP falling by 13.6% from direct drought 
impacts
•	 GDP from all impacts in the region falling 
by 22.4% 
•	 A fall in employment of almost 500 jobs.  
This would flow through the region 
reducing consumption/spending by nearly 
10%.
Employment and value  
add impacts
The effects on employment will not be 
distributed equally across the regions, with 
the more agriculturally dependent regions 
likely to experience larger decreases in 
employment. 
The economic modelling finds that 
the large impact of drought on value-
added output of agricultural primary 
production has significant impacts on 
the value-added output of:
•	 the agricultural services sector, and 
food processing (dairy products and 
meat products),
•	 construction, wholesale and retail trade.  
22.4%
GDP
500
jobs
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region
Frontier Economics
7

Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness 
The Loddon Campaspe region has learned from previous drought 
conditions and already has many drought resilience measures in 
place or in development. Previous experiences of drought means 
that primary producers and communities are highly familiar with the 
challenges of a serious drought, but they may be ‘worn down’ by the 
prospect of another prolonged drought. This fatigue could promote 
migration in response to another drought, creating a vulnerability to 
Loddon Campaspe.
Agricultural research, development and extension will remain 
important to support ongoing adaptation to build preparedness to 
future drought. Farmer’s capacity to adequately prepare for drought 
differs significantly within the Loddon Campaspe region. Addressing 
gaps in on-farm business and decision-making skills, such as  the skills 
required to maintain more adaptive farming practices and the ability 
to maintain buffers of financial assets or feed stocks, will help farmers 
better prepare for future droughts.
A continued vulnerability to the region is the increasing competition 
for water. Fodder management is also a continuing challenge and an 
important drought response given the prevalence of livestock industries.
Water quality in natural waterways that are used for stock drinking 
water is a particular vulnerability to livestock producers that do not 
have an alternative water source. More toxic strains of blue green 
algae have been observed, and a drying climate is expected to increase 
risks of water quality issues. Stock water access is also a vulnerability in 
a number of Coliban Water rural systems, with deliverability concerns 
in high loss systems if water allocations are below 100%.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to contain 
the drought impacts flowing from the agricultural sector. Towns 
throughout the Loddon Campaspe region have varying degrees 
of diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The major regional centre, Bendigo, will provide somewhat of a 
buffer to future drought impacts as it has a diverse economy. 
Bendigo itself will be buffered to some degree from reductions in 
agricultural output as it has alternative industries (such as health, 
education, retail). Townships near Bendigo may also benefit from 
this buffer in the face of agricultural declines during drought. 
This is especially the case for townships within an approximately 
50km radius of Bendigo, which offer the benefits of rural living 
while also allowing access to employment opportunities in the 
larger centre.
•	
Medium sized communities located towards the southern end 
of the region such as Woodend, Kyneton and Castlemaine are 
less dependent on irrigated agriculture, with additional buffering 
capability due to a range of factors, including increased levels  
of tourism.
•	
Smaller or more agriculturally reliant communities found in 
the north-west of the region such as Boort, Pyramid Hill and 
Serpentine will be more severely affected by drought, as 
there are limited alternatives that can replace the people and 
economic activity provided by irrigated agriculture or water-based 
recreational activities. 
The Tri-State Murray Natural Resource Management Drought 
Resilience Discussion Paper identified: to make the appropriate decisions 
farmers need to not only have the analytical and decision-making skills 
but also adequate mental health. Stress, delayed decision making, not able 
to spot opportunities and ‘giving up’ are all significant issues as a drought 
builds and during a drought.
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These 
kinds of health services have long wait times in the region, even 
outside of drought. Following the onset of a drought there is a general 
lag in the provision of additional health services. This means that 
individuals unable to access these services are having to make drought 
management decisions under significant stress.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the Loddon Campaspe Region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our  
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions, Visit Victoria and Ride High Country.
CGE Modelling credits: Centre of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from the BOM, NVRM, ARM online, Goulburn Broken Catchment Management Authority  
and Dairy Australia.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.