MALLEE 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge and respect Victorian 
Traditional Owners as the original custodians 
of Victoria’s land and waters, their unique 
ability to care for Country and deep spiritual 
connection to it. We acknowledge the First 
People of Millewa‑Mallee, the Latji Latji, Ngintait, 
Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Jugagulk, 
Wergaia, Wamba Wamba, Tatti Tatti, Waddi 
Waddi, Barapa Barapa and Yorta Yorta Peoples 
as the Traditional Owners of Country that 
the activities of the Mallee Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan are being held on. 
We honour Elders past and present, whose 
knowledge and wisdom have ensured the 
continuation of culture and traditional practices. 
We are committed to genuinely partner, and 
meaningfully engage, with Victoria’s Traditional 
Owners and Aboriginal communities to support 
the protection of Country, the maintenance of 
spiritual and cultural practices and their broader 
aspirations in the 21st century and beyond.

Preface
Drought causes significant financial, social and 
environmental impact on people, communities 
and the region. The Mallee region is committed 
to taking steps now to ensure well considered 
strategies are in place to prepare for and manage 
through future dry periods.
The Mallee Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan) 
is one of 9 regional drought plans developed in 
Victoria, as part of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning (RDRP) Program, under the Future 
Drought Fund (FDF).
The aim of the Plan is to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify and address 
their needs so they can be better prepared for  
and able to manage future dry seasonal conditions 
and droughts. The Plan may also inform future 
investments in building regional drought resilience.
The $5 billion FDF invests in a wide range of 
drought resilience initiatives to help Australian 
farms and communities prepare for the impacts of 
drought. These are implemented through a suite  
of programs under 4 focus areas:
•	Better climate information
•	Better planning
•	Better practices
•	Better prepared communities
The RDRP Program is included under the ‘better 
planning’ focus area. However, regional drought 
resilience includes elements that cover all focal 
areas. The Mallee Plan therefore bridges all FDF 
categories, informing future investment in actions 
that build regional drought resilience.
This Plan is founded on historic and recent 
experiences of drought within the region as well  
as relevant existing regional strategies, programs 
and activities that aim to manage, mitigate or 
adapt to a drier climate. All 9 of Victoria’s plans 
were developed using a consistent methodology 
across Victoria:
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify and  
collate issues and develop actions to build 
drought resilience
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.
1

Contents
Preface	 	
1
Collaboration	
4
Summary	
5
Introduction	
6
Vision	
8
Regional principles, drivers of change and goals	
9
A snapshot of the Mallee	
10
Environment	
12
Climate trends	
13
Communities and Culture	
14
Industry and employment trends	
14
Drought impacts in the region	
16
Resilience in the region	
19
Concepts considered in the Plan	
20
Themes, outcomes and actions for a drought resilient community	
22
Theme 1:	 Collaboration	
24
Theme 2:	People and community wellbeing	
26
Theme 3:	Culture	
28
Theme 4:	Farming	
30
Theme 5:	Finance	
32
Theme 6:	Rural Economy	
34
Theme 7:	Sustainable use and management of natural resources	
36
Case Studies	
38
Next steps for the Mallee	
40
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning	
42
Appendices		
46
Appendix 1:	 Drought resilience insights from Mallee	
46
Appendix 2:	Existing actions and strategies in the Mallee	
48
References	
54
3

The Reference Group met 5 times between July 
2022 and December 2023. The members guided 
the RDRP development approach, identified 
key regional strategies and plans containing 
existing public participation summaries and 
actions related to drought resilience building, 
provided input in past regional drought impacts, 
identified stakeholder groups to be engaged, and 
contributed to the contents of the Plan. 
Individual meetings with key stakeholders were 
also held in person or using online tools, and input 
from these meetings was used to populate the 
initial thematic framework. This framework was 
then used in a series of online workshops, inviting 
representatives of stakeholder groups identified 
by the Reference Group to provide feedback.  
The improved regional thematic framework was 
then opened for broad public engagement using 
the Engage Victoria online platform.
The process was paused from October 2022 to 
April 2023 due to major flooding in the Mallee 
region, which shifted the focus of Reference Group 
members and stakeholder groups to flood relief 
and recovery.
Development of the Plan was facilitated by 
Agriculture Victoria and jointly funded by the 
Victorian and Commonwealth Government under 
the FDF.
Collaboration
The Plan is the culmination of a co-design process 
led by the Mallee Regional Reference Group, 
with wider community engagement sought 
through stakeholder interviews and the open 
online platform, Engage Victoria. Members of the 
Reference Group and other stakeholders were 
drawn from a broad range of organisations and 
sectors within the region that have responsibilities 
for, or interests in, agriculture, water, liveability, 
regional and local communities, and regional 
development. Consultation with a broad range 
of regional stakeholders was critical to the 
development and aggregation of themes and 
actions that will achieve the overall vision for  
the region. 
Organisational members of the Mallee Regional Reference Group:
•	Agriculture Victoria
•	Birchip Cropping Group
•	Buloke Shire Council
•	Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action
•	Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
•	Department of Health
•	First People of the Millewa Mallee  
Aboriginal Corporation
•	Gannawarra Shire Council
•	Goulburn Murray Water
•	Grampians Wimmera Mallee Water
•	Lower Murray Water
•	Mallee Catchment Management Authority
•	Mallee Regional Innovation Centre
•	Mallee Regional Partnership
•	Mildura Regional Development
•	Mildura Rural City Council
•	Rural Financial Counselling Services
•	Swan Hill Rural City Council
4

Summary
The long-term objectives of the Plan are to build 
regional, community and individual resilience to 
drought through recognising and mitigating risks, 
strengthening preparedness, and recognising 
opportunities for change that will improve the 
economic, environmental and social opportunities 
in the Mallee region.
A list of actions was developed and agreed by the 
Mallee Reference Group. The actions were grouped 
in themes and contribute to specific outcomes that 
together build regional drought resilience.
The key themes and corresponding outcomes  
that emerged through the Plan’s development are:
•	Collaboration: Regional networks are 
maintained to ensure open channels of 
communication and promotion of engagement 
from a diverse representation of sectors, 
communities and industries.
•	People and community wellbeing: The physical 
heath and mental wealth of communities is strong 
and supported  during all phases of drought.
•	Culture: A culture of inclusiveness, collaboration, 
cooperation, support and equality builds stronger 
resilience for people and communities and is 
maintained across the region.
•	Farming: Farms are resilient to droughts as 
individual businesses, land and soil managers, 
and as a sector.
•	Finance: A financial sector that understands  
the large fluctuations of income and expenses  
in agricultural businesses and provides support 
to farms and businesses through all phases  
of drought.
•	Rural economy: The rural economy can diversify 
and bounce back from droughts, with direct 
impacts of droughts on the agricultural sector 
buffered by the larger regional economy. 
Tourism remains an important part of regional 
economies during droughts.
•	Sustainable use and management of natural 
resources: Landscapes remain vibrant and 
can recover from droughts. Droughts do not 
permanently damage natural resources,  
which are shared equitably between users,  
even when in limited supply.
Photo: Anthony Plummer
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

INTRODUCTION
Drought is a recurring feature in the 
Australian landscape, and has been for 
thousands of years. However, the impacts 
of climate change are increasing the 
frequency and severity of drought.
The Commonwealth and Victorian governments 
have partnered to support regional areas to ensure 
they are better prepared to manage and build 
resilience to future droughts, with an increasing 
focus on adaption and change. The Commonwealth 
Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness 
Plan’s vision is farm businesses and rural 
communities that are prepared for, and capable  
of managing, drought in pursuit of a prosperous 
and sustainable future.
The Mallee Drought Resilience Plan seeks to 
facilitate a cohesive and coordinated approach  
to building community drought resilience.  
The Plan aims to build:
•	economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector
•	environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of landscapes
•	social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities
Given the existing work related to drought and 
water management in the region, one of the main 
objectives of the Plan is to align, strengthen and 
coordinate existing drought-related strategies, 
plans, actions and aspirations to increase overall 
drought resilience in the region.
6

The Plan was developed through engagement with 
regional stakeholders and local community groups. 
The Plan aligns with Commonwealth and Victorian 
government principles and approaches to drought 
preparedness and response. The Plan supports 
Mallee communities to be better prepared and 
more resilient to future drought events. The Plan 
leverages regional strengths and addresses 
vulnerabilities in the region’s ability to prosper 
during dry seasons and droughts.
Agriculture Victoria coordinated the development 
of the Plan, utilising a Reference Group comprised 
of representatives from community (including 
Traditional Owners), industry and government. 
Consultation with other community groups with an 
interest in drought resilience was also undertaken. 
Reference Group members and their affiliated 
organisations guided drought resilience thinking 
to ensure that the Plan will accommodate changes 
through adaptive planning and community 
engagement processes. Workshop-style meetings 
were also held by the Reference Group to guide 
development of Plan content and actions. The Group 
also provided access to local reports, regional 
priorities, organisational strategies and ensured 
coordination of place-based strategies. Additional 
regional stakeholders were engaged to inform 
development of the Plan, and public consultation 
was completed through an online platform.
This Plan considers the broad need for the  
regional community, environment and economy  
to be resilient to drought.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

The Mallee region is prepared for future droughts, with reduced 
drought impacts and improved guidance for regional communities, 
economies and environments to cope with droughts in a long-term 
and sustainable manner.
VISION
Photo: Goulburn Murray Water
8

Regional principles, drivers of change and goals
The Mallee is a region in constant flux and 
development. Drivers of change identified for  
the region include:
•	Larger farm sizes that require less labour per area
•	More frequent and severe weather extremes 
such as drought, flood, heavy frosts, hail, heat 
waves and high winds 
•	Different greenhouse gas profiles impacting 
plant growth
•	Emerging carbon markets and the opportunities 
for land managers to participate, including 
carbon sequestration through revegetation and 
land management practices
•	Increased competition in the water market and 
risk to supply if irrigated horticulture continues 
to expand without associated reductions  
in water demand (i.e. adaptive management, 
industry restructuring).
•	Changing demographics; for example, small 
rural communities in the Mallee continue to 
experience population decline and increasingly 
older age profiles
•	Enhanced connectivity, together with increased 
awareness of the efficiencies that new 
technologies can provide
•	Commitment to First Nations’ self-determination 
and their connection to Country and culture
•	Connections to nature, which are important 
for the wellbeing and social fabric of our 
communities
•	Salinisation of soils in agricultural landscapes
The Plan’s goals of building drought resilience are 
based on a set of guiding principles. These principles 
guide actions for the Mallee region and are:
•	Self-reliance and risk mitigation: drought is 
not an exceptional circumstance, but a risk 
to be managed along with other business 
threats. Primary producers and other small 
businesses mitigate the impacts of drought by 
understanding and reducing risk and impacts.
•	Encourage preparedness: investment should 
focus on encouraging preparedness in good 
years and supporting community connectedness 
and wellbeing in times of drought.
•	Collaboration and co-design: drought 
preparedness and resilience programs should be 
co-designed with Local Government Authorities 
(LGAs), Traditional Owners and other relevant 
stakeholders to ensure they effectively address 
local community priorities. Co-design means that 
the programs are developed with local stakeholders 
– not by an external party for local stakeholders.
•	Improved decision-making: business skills 
and improved access to timely drought-related 
information is essential to support evidence-based 
decision-making for businesses and communities.
•	Integration: foster collaboration between 
organisations to deliver timely, place-based, 
integrated services which simplify processes for, 
and access by, users.
•	Leadership and community networks: 
the Mallee region has a strong record of 
collaboration and community leadership. Drought 
programs should be designed and delivered in 
partnership with those established networks.
•	Traditional Owner Self-Determination: 
Traditional Owners will be provided opportunities 
to be involved in, and have their self-determined 
goals reflected in, drought preparedness and 
resilience activities.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

A SNAPSHOT 
OF THE 
MALLEE
In this Plan, the Mallee region is defined by 
the Mallee Regional Partnership boundary and 
includes the 4 LGAs of Mildura Rural City,  
Swan Hill Rural City, Gannawarra and Buloke.
The Mallee is a culturally diverse area, with 
a strong Aboriginal heritage and community 
and a growing number of new migrants and 
humanitarian visa holders.
The Murray River, which runs along the northern 
border of the region, provides a substantial 
irrigation water supply. It also attracts tourists and 
people seeking a lifestyle change.
Bordered by New South Wales to the north and 
South Australia to the west, the region is home  
to some of Victoria’s most remote communities.  
For 3 of the region’s 4 LGAs, prosperity  
is driven by their proximity to the Murray River.  
The region’s two regional cities, Mildura and 
Swan Hill, are located on the river’s banks and 
the waterway remains vital for driving economic, 
socio-cultural, and environmental outcomes. 
Agriculture and related industries such as food 
and beverage manufacturing are the principal 
engines for economic activity. Areas proximate to 
the Murray typically produce horticultural goods 
like fruit, citrus and grapes, while inland areas 
focus on dryland farming for commodities such  
as grains (Infrastructure Victoria, 2021).
The Mallee Catchment Management Authority 
(CMA) covers the largest area of the region, with 
North Central CMA covering a large part of the 
Gannawarra Shire, and Wimmera CMA covering a 
small part in the south-west of Buloke Shire. Lower 
Murray Water and Grampians Wimmera Mallee 
Water (GWM-Water) are the water corporations 
that service the Mallee region.
Source: Mallee Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2022) 
Local Government 
Area
Population  
(2020)
Area  
(km2)
Economic Output  
($ Million)2
Main shire  
service centres
Mildura
55,900
22,083
7,311
Mildura, Ouyen
Swan Hill
20,500
6,115
3,293
Swan Hill, Robinville
Gannawarra
10,400
3,735
640
Kerang, Cohuna
Buloke
6,100
8,000
782
Wycheproof, Birchip, 
Charlton, Donald, Sea Lake
10

3.8%
POPULATION 
(2020)
POPULATION GROWTH 
(2011–2020)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
92,900
$5.3
billion
Source: Mallee Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2022)
MILDURA
BULOKE
GANNAWARRA
SWAN  
HILL
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Environment
Mallee is found on flat-to-undulating landscapes  
on sandy soils, old sand dunes, heavy clay or  
rocky calcareous soils in north-western Victoria. 
The altitude range is generally between 50 and 
200 meters above sea level and rainfall varies 
between 250 and 400 mm a year. About 45% of 
Mallee is public land, of which a little under one 
third comprises conservation parks and reserves. 
About 35% of Mallee has been permanently cleared 
for agriculture, urban development or mining.
Many of Mallee’s birds are not permanent residents 
of any one place, following food and water over 
often large distances. Some frog species found 
in the region employ a burrowing lifestyle, where 
adults can remain in a low-energy state beneath 
ground for long periods between rains and then 
emerge to breed during wet weather.
Of all the regions that have been successfully 
converted to agricultural, the Mallee stands out as 
having caused the greatest amount of ecological 
change. Along with dryland salinity caused by 
clearances, there are other salinity problems 
related to irrigation, soil erosion problems caused 
by overgrazing on fragile soils in drought years and 
high-level weed invasion of both crops and pasture 
land (Viridans Flora and Fauna System).
The Mallee contains some 1,600 km of river 
assets, which can be divided into 3 distinct groups 
according to the river basin in which they are located: 
the Mallee, Avoca or Wimmera Basin. The Mallee 
Basin contains the Murray River, which forms the 
northern boundary of the region, as well as the 
boundary between Victoria and New South Wales.
12

There are some 900 wetlands in the Mallee, 
occupying almost 50,000 hectares. Mallee 
wetlands are diverse and include riverine wetlands, 
natural saline wetlands fed by groundwater, 
shallow depressions in the south of the region 
filled by local catchment run-off, and artificially 
maintained wetlands such as the Cardross Lakes 
and Koorlong Basins (Waterwatch Victoria).
Semi-permanent saline wetlands are the most 
prevalent wetland type in the Mallee. These 
wetlands have increased in both number and 
area since European settlement due to altered 
hydrological regimes, clearing of native vegetation, 
changes in surrounding land use, and the use of 
natural wetlands and low-lying areas for salinity 
management (Mallee CMA, 2022).
Climate trends
Climate projections based on climate change 
scenarios indicate that the climate will change with:
•	Average maximum temperature increase of 2.8°C
•	Twice as many days above 40°C
•	Annual rainfall decreasing by as much as 19 mm
•	More intense extreme rainfall and flooding events
•	Longer fire seasons and 50% more “very high” 
fire rating days
•	Mildura’s climate trending towards the current 
climate of Menindee, New South Wales  
(roughly 250 km north of Mildura)
These projected climate scenarios will have 
implications for agriculture in the region.
Photo: Mallee CMA
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Industry and employment trends
In 2020, there were 41,400 employed persons in 
the region. Agriculture, forestry and fishing was 
the largest employing sector in the region until 
2020, when it was overtaken by health care and 
social assistance. Consistent with trends across 
the state and supported by population growth 
and ageing, the health care industry has now 
become the major employment sector, currently 
employing 13.9% of the region’s total workforce. 
Other population-driven sectors, including retail 
trade, education and training and construction, 
have similarly experienced steady growth and are 
among the region’s 6 largest employing sectors.
The agriculture, forestry and fishing sector has 
experienced a steady decline in employment 
since 2003, with employment levels beginning 
to level out in 2013. Although underpinned 
by the region’s diverse production systems of 
irrigated horticulture, dryland cropping and 
livestock grazing, the sector has felt the impacts 
of the Millennium Drought and consolidation of 
farming enterprises, as well as technological 
advancements that have increased capital 
intensity in production.
With a long history in agricultural production, the 
food industry is the region’s most important sector 
by output and employment. The region’s diverse 
production systems of irrigated horticulture, 
dryland cropping and livestock grazing support 
significant outputs of high value fruit, nuts and 
grains. The food industry’s success is attributed to 
the warm climate and unique water infrastructure 
Communities and Culture
The Mallee has been occupied for thousands of 
generations by First Peoples, with human activity 
currently dated as far back as 23,400 years ago. 
The region is home to Latji Latji, Ngintait, Nyeri 
Nyeri, Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia, 
Jupagalk, Barengi Gadjin, Dja Dja Wurrung, 
Taungurung and Yorta Yorta Nations who have 
lived, worked and cared for their lands and 
waters for thousands of years. First People of 
the Millewa-Mallee, Barengi Gadjin Land Council, 
Wamba Wemba and Yorta Yorta Nation Aboriginal 
Corporations are the Registered Aboriginal Parties 
of the Mallee region.
The region’s rich and diverse Aboriginal heritage 
has been formed through the historical and 
spiritual significance of sites associated with this 
habitation, together with the strong connection 
Traditional Owners continue to have with the 
Mallee’s natural landscapes (Mallee CMA).
The Murray River and its associated waterways 
were important habitation areas for multiple 
First Nations groups, containing many places of 
spiritual significance. The high number of cultural 
heritage sites throughout the Murray floodplain 
is unique in Victoria, for both concentration and 
diversity. They include large numbers of burial, 
midden and hunting sites (Mallee CMA, 2018).
Mildura and Swan Hill are the main regional 
centres. Mildura is a major centre for jobs and 
services for the Mallee’s smaller towns and rural 
areas. The Mallee is one of Victoria’s more remote 
regions and one of the furthest from Melbourne 
(DJPR, 2022b).
Demographic changes, such as an ageing 
population, are affecting the scope and mix 
of services councils need to provide. Regional 
councils can lack the revenue to upgrade and 
repurpose existing infrastructure, often relying  
on Victorian Government grants.
The Mallee faces challenges in ensuring that 
residents have access to the services that they 
need. For instance, smaller rural councils such 
as Buloke and Gannawarra have a small (and 
declining) ratepayer base, which is further 
constrained by below average incomes of 
residents. These councils face additional 
complexities in continuing to provide services 
over a relatively dispersed area. Areas of relative 
socio-economic disadvantage such as Buloke, the 
tenth most disadvantaged LGA in Victoria, have 
a higher per capita need for a range of health 
and community services. As regional centres for 
relatively remote communities, it is important that 
Mildura and Swan Hill provide a range of services 
to the wider region, and that these services are 
accessible to all (Infrastructure Australia, 2021).
14

Catchment Scale Land Use of the Mallee 
Source: ABARES 2021
provided by the Murray River, while extensive land 
zoned for agricultural use, modern infrastructure, 
a skilled workforce and access to markets provide 
beneficial economic conditions.
The region has many small-scale farms which 
contribute towards local food systems. Fostering the 
continued success of these farms may create further 
agritourism opportunities which directly connect 
primary producers of food and drink with the end 
consumer and showcase the region’s amenity 
and produce. Supporting small-scale activities, 
including connecting businesses through farmgate 
trails and enhancing major food and wine events 
will attract visitors to the region, raise the profile 
of the region’s produce and benefit other tourism 
businesses. Identifying export pathways for smaller 
producers and niche products could increase the 
profile of the region as well (DJPR, 2022a).
	 Nature conservation
	 Managed resource protection
	 Other minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Grazing modified pastures
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Dryland cropping
	 Dryland horticulture
	 Land in transition
	 Irrigated pastures
	 Irrigated cropping
	 Irrigated horticulture
	 Urban intensive uses
	 Intensive horticulture  
and animal production
	 Rural residential and  
farm infrastructure
	 Mining and waste
	 Water
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

DROUGHT 
IMPACTS 
IN THE 
REGION
Many definitions of drought exist, generally 
depending on what indicators are used to describe it.
•	Meteorological drought relates to the lack  
of rainfall, at least below expected rainfall. 
•	Hydrological drought relates to the lack of 
runoff, measured by river and creek flow 
volumes, a lack of groundwater availability,  
and a lack of water storage in catchments. 
•	Agricultural drought can be defined by reduced 
productivity on-farm resulting from a lack of water.
•	Institutional drought is where decisions on  
water allocation have induced a water shortage.
•	Economic drought can be defined as an 
economic downturn resulting from a lack  
of water availability. 
•	Green droughts exist where limited rainfall 
shows the appearance of green paddocks,  
but insufficient water is available for agricultural 
crop production.
16

Definitions of drought are important because  
they help define the issues to be addressed.  
No single definition will be used for this Plan, 
as every individual, business, organisation and 
community will have their own unique drought 
experience. For example, the impact of drought 
is felt differently in broadacre cropping than in 
livestock farming, while the health care sector 
requires a different approach to the educational 
sector to cope with drought.
Droughts also pose a key threat for Traditional 
Owners, impacting the health of Country, and 
affecting their rights and responsibilities in caring 
for Country. For Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
Victorians, caring for Country extends beyond 
physical landscapes and involves the natural 
waters, animals and resources and how they 
influence and impact each other. Healing Country 
in the wake of drought events is essential to 
ensuring positive health and wellbeing outcomes 
for Aboriginal Victorians.
While this Plan aims to build resilience across 
communities, businesses and sectors, each 
experiences the impact of drought differently and 
a range of different resilience-building actions  
is required.
It is important to note that duration and intensity of 
drought has an impact on how resilient a community 
can be. While on-farm drought management can 
be effective for a seasonal drought, it may be less 
effective for a 5 year drought. A meteorological 
drought with “only” low rainfall may have less 
impact than a hydrological drought combined with 
heatwaves, dust storms and fires.
In developing this Plan, organisations and 
individuals came together to discuss drought 
and chart a course for a smarter, more resilient 
future. The Plan was not developed to deal with an 
emergency, or an acute drought. It was developed 
to assist the Mallee community to prepare for, and 
become more resilient to, drought across a range 
of future scenarios. The Plan proposes actions that 
individuals, communities, industry and government 
can take to achieve this.
Photo: Mallee Catchment Management Authority
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

The region has recently experienced extended 
drought and dry seasonal conditions, including the 
Millennium Drought (1997 to 2009), 2014 to 2015 
(notably in southern Mallee), and from 2017 to 2019.
Water allocations in the Murray system were 
significantly decreased during the Millennium 
Drought, dropping to 43% in 2007 to 2008, and 
35% in 2008 to 2009. 2017 to 2019 also saw 
significant reductions in rainfall and increased hot 
temperatures, however water allocations were only 
decreased for the Murray system in 2019 to 2020.
The variance of agricultural employment in the 
region, and the diversity of agricultural enterprises 
(from irrigated horticulture near the Murray River 
and dryland cropping and grazing further south), 
means that communities within the Mallee will be 
impacted differently. There is a high proportion 
of agricultural employment in the Buloke and 
Gannawarra LGAs, making them highly susceptible 
to drought. Although somewhat more economically 
diverse, the LGAs of Mildura and Swan Hill also 
have relatively high reliance on agriculture for 
direct employment. However, there may be other 
opportunities for a secondary income for affected 
agricultural workers during a drought.
The Mallee Region is heavily dependent on 
irrigation. Drought periods are associated 
with lower water availability and high prices. 
Horticultural farmers will seek to access water 
to maintain their production (through trade and 
carryover), which may not be as significant for 
farmers who have larger reserves (of cash or 
entitlements). Annual allocations compound the 
issue, as during dry years allocations are lower and 
prices higher, despite more water being required.
The impacts of the 2017 to 2019 drought were 
mitigated somewhat by the experience and 
lessons farmers learnt from the Millennium 
Drought. Farmers had some actions and strategies 
to be more prepared and resilient. For example, 
livestock producers have honed drought 
preparedness and operational practices such as 
buying and/or storing fodder and utilising on-farm 
dam storages.
Towns in the Mallee were faced with prolonged 
periods of Stage 3 and Stage 4 urban water 
restrictions1 during the Millennium Drought.  
This was a challenge for towns such as Mildura 
with a legacy of typical “English gardens” of lush 
green grass and gardens.
The Millennium Drought also had negative impacts 
on riverbank and in-stream vegetation in the 
rivers, lakes and dams of the Mallee. Furthermore, 
drought has impacted the habitats of native 
wildlife in the region. Particularly impacted species 
include the Mallee Emu-wren, with conservation 
areas providing refuge for many native animals.
Studies have found that smaller communities have 
a greater reliance on the agricultural sector, with 
larger communities being less reliant. As a result, 
drought is likely to have a greater negative impact 
on the small communities (Frontier Economics, 
2022) of the Mallee.
1 Water restrictions can be implemented in 4 stages from 1 - Mild to 4 - Severe. Stage 4 water restrictions prohibit 
the watering of public, residential and commercial gardens, lawns and playing surfaces at all times. Stage 3 
restrictions prohibit types of urban water use outside of set days and times (e.g. watering of residential gardens 
is only permitted on alternate days, from 6 to 8 am, using a hand-held hose fitted with a trigger nozzle).  
Source: www.water.vic.gov.au/for-households/water-restrictions-and-rules/stage-3-water-restrictions
Photo: Gannawarra Shire
18

Resilience in the region
Drought resilience in the Mallee is described for 
this Plan as communities that are able to adapt, 
modify and transform their practices, knowledge 
and attitudes to overcome climatic adversity or the 
“new normal” of a drier climate.
Resilience is used in this Plan to shape intended 
outcomes and actions, with an understanding that 
there is an opportunity to strengthen communities 
rather than simply maintain existing systems, 
processes and culture.
There is no one-size-fits-all route to becoming a 
resilient community. However, certain community 
characteristics are known to contribute to 
resilience. These characteristics have been 
used to build the suite of outcomes and actions 
documented in the Plan.
Similarly, it is acknowledged that for many 
Traditional Owners, connection to Country is 
more holistic and not bound by the region and 
constructs of the Plan. Impacts are also likely to be 
broader than the Mallee region and what can be 
addressed by the actions identified in the Plan.
Resilient regions have:
•	a common vision and goal
•	cooperative and interconnected leadership  
and governance
•	strong connections and relationships  
through formal and informal networks
•	genuine collaboration
Resilient communities have:
•	local leadership and initiative
•	governance that embraces change
•	willingness to work together in the pursuit  
of common goals
•	drive for self-responsibility
•	a willingness to be adaptable and learn  
lessons from change
•	the skills needed to anticipate issues and 
effectively manage risk
•	foresight to consider different perspectives  
and options to solve complex problems
Photo: Gannawarra Shire
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

CONCEPTS CONSIDERED 
IN THE PLAN
Cultural and Environmental Flow
Cultural flow is a concept in water management 
that recognises the importance of water to 
Traditional Owners for cultural, economic, 
customary, and spiritual purposes. It refers to the 
quantity, quality, timing, and variability of water 
flows that are required to maintain and enhance 
Traditional Owners cultural values.
Traditional Owners in the Murray–Darling Basin 
have a strong spiritual connection to water,  
and a moral obligation to care for it, as they  
have done for many thousands of years.
Cultural flows benefit practical activities like 
fishing, hunting, ceremonies and harvesting 
medicinal plants and herbs. They also preserve and 
protect important assets including burial mounds, 
scarred trees, and campsites which help maintain 
connections to Country. Identity, wellbeing, 
capacity building and inter-generational teaching 
are also key components of cultural flows.
The Victorian Government is committed to working 
with Traditional Owners to recognise and protect 
cultural flows. This includes developing and 
implementing water management plans that 
incorporate cultural flow considerations.
While cultural flows can also be used to improve 
the health of the rivers, that is not their only 
purpose – cultural flows is therefore different to 
environmental flows. 
Environmental flows are used to improve the health 
of our rivers, wetlands and floodplains. Water is 
allocated to federal and state environmental water 
holders across the Basin. In Victoria this is managed 
by the Victorian Environmental Water Holder, who 
make decisions about when, where and how much 
water is released for the environment, and with 
measurable environmental outcomes in mind.
Mental Wealth and Mental Health
Mental health is a state of wellbeing in which an 
individual realises their own abilities, can cope with 
the normal stresses of life, can work productively 
and fruitfully, and is able to contribute to his or  
her community.
Mental wealth is a term used to describe the 
emotional, psychological, and social well-being 
of an individual or community. It goes beyond 
the absence of mental illness to encompass 
the positive aspects of mental health, such as 
resilience, coping skills, and a sense of purpose.
Another way to think about the difference 
between mental health and mental wealth is that 
mental health is about managing symptoms and 
conditions, while mental wealth is about thriving 
and flourishing.
While mental health and mental wealth are related, 
they are not the same thing. It is possible to have 
good mental health but not great mental wealth. 
For example, someone with a chronic mental 
illness may be able to manage their symptoms and 
live a fulfilling life, but they may still experience 
some challenges that impact their mental wealth.
Mental wealth is important because it can help 
people to live happier and more fulfilling lives.  
It can also help in terms of individuals being more 
resilient in the face of adversity. Good mental 
wealth supports a better ability to cope with 
stress, manage our emotions, and build positive 
relationships.
20

Climate Anxiety
For most young people, the awareness and 
concern about the impact of climate change is a 
healthy response to a serious problem and doesn’t 
impact their mental health. This awareness can 
motivate young people to be actively involved 
in positive change. Examples of young people’s 
contribution to positive change include attending 
public marches, raising awareness through 
conversations, and reducing their ‘carbon footprint’ 
through changes in lifestyle.
‘Climate anxiety’ and ‘eco-anxiety’ are terms being 
used to describe feelings of helplessness, stress, 
worry and frustration about the effects of climate 
change. There is growing research in this area to 
understand how concerns about climate change 
can significantly interfere with some people’s 
daily lives. Young people may experience ‘climate 
anxiety’ because they are aware that it is their 
generation and future generations that will be 
most affected by climate change. They can feel  
a sense of urgency to create immediate change 
and make a difference to future generations.
Green-Blue Infrastructure
‘Green’ infrastructure refers to living vegetation 
such as gardens, nature strips, trees, parks and 
green open spaces. ‘Blue’ infrastructure are the 
assets associated with managing stormwater, such 
as gutters, pits, pipes and drains, ponds, wetlands 
and waterways. Green-blue infrastructure (GBI) is 
a term designed to help explain that these green 
and blue infrastructure assets are as critical to 
a town’s liveability and resilience as are roads, 
buildings and carparks. GBI principles aim to 
protect and enhance a town’s natural assets, 
combined with better retention, treatment and 
use of rainwater where it falls. By improving the 
way urban stormwater is conveyed, stored and 
used, a town can make the most of the water that 
falls within its boundaries. The combination of GBI 
provides the space to retain stormwater close to 
where it falls and use it to irrigate the living assets 
valued for liveability while improving downstream 
water quality. This in turn supports strengthening 
drought resilience.
The principles of GBI can be applied at 4 scales: 
lot, streetscape, precinct and township. At the lot 
scale, these techniques include gardens, green roofs, 
green walls, water tanks and raingardens. At the 
streetscape scale, techniques include nature strips, 
footpaths, roadside raingardens, street trees and 
swales, shallow channels that convey and treat 
stormwater. Techniques at the precinct scale 
include parks, green links, open drains, wetlands, 
detention basins and sport grounds. The township 
scale techniques include urban forests, expansive 
open spaces, waterways and lakes.
Social, environmental and economic benefits 
include improving township amenities and 
liveability, reducing urban heat for cooler streets, 
and contributing to improved community physical 
and mental health. GBI also enhances urban and 
aquatic biodiversity, increases tree canopy and 
decreases air pollution, and increases stormwater 
and rainwater infiltration and improves soil water 
retention. The economic benefits include an 
improved township entrance to make it attractive 
for visitors, better and more significant use of open 
spaces, and increased use of alternative water, 
freeing up domestic water.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

THEMES, OUTCOMES 
AND ACTIONS FOR  
A DROUGHT RESILIENT 
COMMUNITY
The Plan’s themes and outcomes were developed 
and agreed by the Mallee Regional Reference 
Group. Themes provide the broad areas of interest 
of regional stakeholders related to building 
drought resilience. The outcome for each theme 
reflects the overall goal for a set of actions that 
have a common purpose, beneficiary or instigator. 
Although theme headings may appear similar to 
those in other Regional Drought Resilience Plans, 
the content of themes have regional context.
The actions listed under each theme drive the 
region towards its overall vision to be prepared for 
future droughts, with reduced drought impacts 
and improved guidance for regional communities, 
economies and environments to cope with 
droughts in a long-term and sustainable manner.
Some actions are the responsibility of an  
individual agency or organisation; however,  
most actions will require a collaborative 
approach by several organisations, businesses 
and communities. A partnership approach will be 
needed with Traditional Owners, in line with the 
Government’s policy and legal commitments, 
which include the Victorian Aboriginal Affairs 
Framework and the Department of Energy, 
Environment and Climate Action’s Pupangarli 
Marnmarnepu ‘Owning Our Future’ 2020–2025  
self-determination reform strategy.
Themes and actions are not prioritised in this Plan. 
Rather, the holistic approach to resilience building 
and strengthening requires simultaneous investment 
in all themes – a drought resilient farming system 
without a resilient community and financial system 
does not result in regional drought resilience. 
Themes also have overlapping areas for action, 
which reflect and support the need for integrated 
approaches, collaborative efforts and strong 
networking and linkages.
Outcomes and actions draw on the local experiences 
of people who live in the community. They also 
draw on existing plans and strategies, which drive 
the actions and priorities of the organisational 
members of the Regional Reference Group.
The 7 themes for the RDRP in the Mallee are:
•	Collaboration
•	People and community wellbeing
•	Culture
•	Farming
•	Finance
•	Rural Economy
•	Sustainable use and management  
of natural resources
22

Photo: Mallee Catchment 
Management Authority
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

COLLABORATION
Theme 1
Outcome:  
Regional networks are maintained to ensure open channels of 
communication and promotion of engagement from a diverse 
representation of sectors, communities and industries.
Before, during and after drought, collaboration 
between sectors, organisations, and service 
providers is critical to ensure a broadly integrated 
approach to drought resilience building and 
response. As the Mallee borders South Australia 
and New South Wales, and with urban centres 
providing regional and cross-state services, 
collaboration needs to extend further than the 
Mallee itself. The region identified the importance 
of single-point information access combining the 
services and information available from a variety  
of initiatives.
24

Actions
1.1
Establish or use existing networks, committees or forums to ensure continuing, broad 
sector drought resilience building that incorporates Traditional Owner and local knowledge.
1.2
Convene partnership meetings between government, industry and Traditional Owners  
to coordinate and share information on measures applicable to phases of drought.
1.3
Co-design (with local communities) coordinated information hubs that link individuals  
and communities to organisations that encourage, enable and support people to build 
drought resilience into their personal and/or business planning.
1.4
Communicate and support region-specific actions contained within Sustainable  
Water Strategies.
1.5
Support and expand climate leadership capacity building programs within the region, 
including a drought resilience advisor/ambassador program.
1.6
Support opportunities for Traditional Owners to build drought resilience and  
preparedness efforts, in line with their self-determined values, goals and aspirations  
for Country and community.
Photo: Gannawarra Shire
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

PEOPLE AND 
COMMUNITY 
WELLBEING
Theme 2
Outcome:  
Physical and mental wealth of people and communities is strong  
and is supported during all phases of drought.
Many people and communities in the Mallee 
have experienced severe drought. The mental 
and physical impact of droughts on people and 
communities has been identified as an important 
aspect that requires strategic preparedness. 
Local communities, in some cases isolated 
through remoteness, are best situated to develop 
initiatives to be better prepared for drought and 
the changing climate. Focusing on mental wealth, 
as a continuous effort to build resilience, rather 
than mental health, which may be associated with 
incidental responses, and a focus on the most 
vulnerable people living in the Mallee has been 
identified as a priority.
26

Actions
2.1
Support community driven drought resilience initiatives that address the needs of our 
diverse communities, particularly those initiatives that utilise existing local networks.
2.2
Invest in mental wealth-building and support programs throughout the region.
2.3
Invest in targeted support for people living with disabilities, health issues and the elderly 
during drought events, including the creation of mobile climate wellness clinics.
2.4
Co-design support projects with youth that address climate anxiety.
2.5
2.6
Partner with Traditional Owners to support culturally appropriate practices in  
emergency events.
Photo: Gannawarra Shire
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

CULTURE
Theme 3
Outcome:  
A culture of inclusiveness, collaboration, cooperation, support and 
equality that builds stronger resilience for people and communities 
is maintained across the region.
The Mallee has a diverse population, including 
Traditional Owners, people with different cultural 
backgrounds, and seasonal workers. This provides 
opportunities to use knowledge exchange to learn, 
but also requires a multitude of approaches when 
raising awareness about drought preparedness 
and resilience-building. Differences between 
drought preparedness of urban centres and rural 
communities is also identified as requiring tailored 
approaches to drought resilience building and 
strengthening. The strong communal sense and 
peer-support by neighbours is exemplified by 
strong volunteerism in the region, but economic 
and societal changes may require a reduction of 
reliance on volunteers.
28

Actions
3.1
Recognise the importance of partnering with Traditional Owners to incorporate their 
knowledge and practices into building drought resilience across the region at individual, 
business and community levels.
3.2
Recognise and protect culturally and spiritually important sites and locations from  
the impacts of drought.
3.3
Recognise and address diversity in communities with respect to drought information, 
including language, cultural heritage and gender diversity.
3.4
Recognise different approaches for urban and rural areas with respect to drought  
resilience building, with a particular emphasis on ground up approaches that incorporate 
local knowledge.
3.5
Address the risk posed by decreased volunteerism across the region and the consequence 
of this on community cohesion during times of drought.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

FARMING
Theme 4
Outcome:  
Farms are resilient to droughts as a business, as land and soil managers, 
and as a sector.
Several farming systems (e.g. broad-acre, 
horticulture, dairy, etc) exist in the Mallee,  
each having their own needs in terms of drought 
resilience-building. Research and innovation  
have developed a range of guides and options  
that support agribusinesses, both at the  
systems-based level as well as commodity 
based. On farm infrastructure, ranging from 
improved water management through to stock 
containment and fodder storage, helps to 
build drought resilience. Traditional Owners’ 
knowledge of drought tolerant native food could 
drive transformational change in Mallee farming 
systems. Improved land management operations, 
e.g. low or no-till, support maintaining soil fertility 
and reduce risk of dust storms.
30

Actions
4.1
Ensure literature and information that summarises experiences and research in  
specific commodity farming and horticulture systems is available in a manner that  
suits the requirements of our diverse farming communities.
4.2
Support new research and development, new technology and innovations on-farm.
4.3
Promote infrastructure improvement on-farm and advocate for off farm  
infrastructure improvements.
4.4
Improve business and land management practices to aid landowners in managing  
natural resource assets.
4.5
Support participation in local and wider networks for learning and growing.
4.6
Support the development of drought tolerant native foods, including research  
into the development of a staple food from native grains, in partnership with Mallee 
Traditional Owners.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

FINANCE
Theme 5
Outcome:  
A financial sector that understands the large fluctuations of income  
and expenses in agricultural businesses and provides support to farms 
and businesses through all phases of drought
The finances of households and businesses across 
the region are often impacted by the fluctuations 
in farm production during drought. While the 
impact of high year-to-year financial fluctuations 
can be reduced by maintaining financial buffers, 
efforts by households and businesses must be 
recognised and supported by the financial sector. 
During drought, sourcing alternative off-farm 
income can help but often needs to be supported 
by the local economy. Trigger points exist for an 
individual farm or agribusiness to reduce stock, 
limit cropping, or exit the industry permanently; 
however, farmers and businesses may require 
advice or support to make these decisions.
32

Actions
5.1
Encourage involvement of the local and regional financial sector in drought planning  
and support of primary producers and other small businesses.
5.2
Co-design (with local communities) solutions and support services to assist primary 
producers who wish to exit the industry.
5.3
Encourage business owners to consider what alternative income streams may be  
available to them that can be established during non-drought years to provide greater 
overall business resilience.
5.4
Encourage the building of financial buffers during non-drought years that can be used  
to support businesses during droughts.
Photo: Gannawarra Shire
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

RURAL ECONOMY
Theme 6
Outcome:  
The rural economy can diversify and bounce back from droughts, 
with direct impacts of droughts on the agricultural sector buffered 
by the larger regional economy. Tourism remains an important part 
of regional economies during droughts.
While financial decisions can be made on an 
individual basis, the regional economy needs  
to be developed to support individuals and 
businesses. A diverse economy is more resilient 
to sector-specific fluctuations. The Mallee, and 
Mildura and Swan Hill in particular, has developed 
a strong tourism and hospitality sector related 
to local products. Special employment programs 
during droughts help to provide an alternative 
income stream, and a diverse industrial sector 
allows for continually vibrant communities during 
droughts. To enable this diversity, all economic 
activities benefit from being drought prepared.
34

Actions
6.1
Support networking of industry, businesses, and the financial sector to focus  
on drought preparedness.
6.2
Promote regional economic diversification as a way to build resilience for local  
businesses and local economies.
6.3
Advocate for consideration of drought resilience in existing industry, business and 
government plans and strategies.
6.4
Support food-tourism through combined advertising of food production and regional 
hospitality industry.
6.5
Co-design (with local communities, including Traditional Owners) targeted programs 
that support long-term local employment opportunities for those most disproportionally 
impacted by drought.
6.6
Support the establishment of equitable funding or financing opportunities for  
businesses to invest in technology or equipment that increase drought resilience.
6.7
Develop mechanisms to allow businesses to collaborate with government agencies and 
industry partners to identify opportunities that lead to faster restoration and recovery 
works and services critical to their business operations.
Photo: Gannawarra Shire
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

SUSTAINABLE USE 
AND MANAGEMENT OF 
NATURAL RESOURCES
Theme 7
Outcome:  
Landscapes remain vibrant and can recover from droughts. Droughts do 
not permanently damage natural resources, which are shared equitably 
between users, even when in limited supply.
The Mallee region contains several national and 
regional areas of natural importance, as well as an 
agricultural landscape that transforms depending 
on seasonal conditions. Natural resources,  
such as water, must be managed and shared 
equitably, particularly in dry periods. Landscape 
drought resilience can be strengthened by 
maintaining and growing the diversity of natural 
capital in non-drought years. Green-blue 
infrastructure in urban areas maximises urban  
land and water management to provide benefits  
of green spaces. A reliable energy production, 
supply, storage and transport network supports 
the region during times of peak demand caused 
by heat waves, which are often associated with 
drought periods.
36

Actions
7.1
Support Traditional Owners to lead healing Country practices in accordance with  
any Land Use Activity Agreements or other strategies.
7.2
Identify and encourage adoption of best management practices to avoid adverse 
consequences of drought.
7.3
Advocate for urban and rural stock and domestic water supply to be maintained  
at levels that support local communities and cultural practices.
7.4
Advocate for efficient and resilient water conveyance and electricity infrastructure.
7.5
Support programs that aim to create permanent bio links around wetlands and along 
natural watercourses.
7.6
Support habitat restoration programs on farmland to enhance ecosystem function  
and conserve threatened species that may be significantly impacted by drought.
7.7
Support the establishment of increased green-blue infrastructure in urban developments, 
which in turn supports native flora and fauna populations and provides urban cooling.
7.8
Identify locations suitable for renewable Stand-Alone Power Systems to improve the 
electricity grid’s strength, reduce emissions and increase energy efficiency to reduce 
interruptions due to the impacts of drought.
Photo: Goulburn Murray Water
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

CASE STUDIES
Cultural diversity in Robinvale
Robinvale is a community in the Rural City of 
Swan Hill on the banks of the Murray River. On the 
New South Wales side, it borders the township 
of Euston. The official population of Robinvale 
was 3,740 at the 2021 census. However, a high 
proportion of semi-permanent and seasonal 
workers result in an actual population of 
approximately 7,000 to 8,800 people. Robinvale 
has a diverse and culturally rich community  
made up of some 40 cultures and with over 20 
languages being spoken. Several news articles 
over the past 25 years have listed Robinvale as  
the most multicultural town in Victoria. There is 
strong Aboriginal history and culture, as well as  
an art centre in the area. The Tongan community  
is actively involved with the brass band, a choir  
and Carols by Candlelight.
Robinvale is a hub for food production. The district 
around Robinvale produces approximately 60% 
of Australia’s table grapes, 70% of Australia’s 
almonds and 80% of Australia’s olive oil. 
Agriculture and horticulture also make up 38%  
of jobs in Robinvale.
Access to services is a crucial part of making 
any community liveable. Services like healthcare, 
telecommunications, specialist medical services, 
community safety and a range of shops and 
employment opportunities were all raised during 
the development of a community plan as important 
for Robinvale’s future. 
The community centre, community garden, Rotary 
Park, museum, river, riverside caravan park, walking 
paths, tennis courts, pool, pub and golf club were 
identified as valuable local and tourist facilities. 
NAIDOC Week, the Mallee Almond Blossom 
Festival, Lunar New Year, NACHOS community 
cooking, and the annual ski race were identified  
as positive and enjoyable community activities.
Engagement, awareness raising, and communication 
with the Robinvale community, and several other 
communities in the Mallee, benefit from recognition 
of the multilingual and multicultural interpretation 
of information. Drought resilience building needs 
to be inclusive and actively reach out to ensure the 
whole community is engaged.
Based on information from Swan Hill Shire  
and La Trobe University (2016).
Neds Corner
Neds Corner Station is a 30,000 hectare 
conservation reserve on Ngintait Country in the far 
north-west of Victoria, bordering Murray-Sunset 
National Park and the Murray River. The property 
features numerous important cultural heritage 
sites including ancestral burials, scar trees, 
fireplaces and shell middens.
Ngintait Traditional Owners lived on and managed 
the land that includes Neds Corner for many 
thousands of years. Prior to becoming a conservation 
reserve, the area was a heavily grazed agriculture 
property. Since Trust for Nature purchased the 
property in 2002, an extensive revegetation program 
has been undertaken. Neds Corner has shown great 
recovery from a heavily grazed agricultural property 
to a conservation reserve of national significance. 
What were bare sand hills and hard, compacted 
plains are now vegetated with saltbush and blue 
bush vegetation, and significant cultural sites are 
being protected.
In 2022, Trust for Nature committed to enabling 
the transfer of ownership of Neds Corner Station 
to its Traditional Owners. Neds Corner Station is 
frequently visited by nature lovers and educational 
groups (schools and universities) and is enabling 
research of the landscape through archaeological 
digs and engagement with Traditional Owners  
to further knowledge and conservation science.
Based on information from Trust for Nature (2017),  
ABC News (2022) and FPMM (2022)
38

Building drought resilience  
of vulnerable soils in low rainfall 
cropping and grazing systems
The Victorian Mallee region presents several 
challenges for dryland farming communities, 
particularly during periods of drought and acute 
rainfall deficiency. Insufficient ground cover 
often results in severe wind-driven erosion, 
events impacting soil health, crop potential, 
native vegetation and the broader region through 
extensive dust storms.
A two-year project (2022-2024), developed under 
the Drought Resilient Soils and Landscapes 
Grants Program and managed by Mallee CMA, 
is supporting dryland farmers in low rainfall and 
high wind erosion-risk landscapes to build their 
capacity to implement best practice strategies  
that provide for ground cover and productivity 
gains, while increasing resilience to drought  
and climate shocks.
The project is delivered in partnership with 
Agriculture Victoria, and the region’s not-for-profit  
dryland agricultural research and extension 
organisations Birchip Cropping Group and Mallee 
Sustainable Farming.
Several demonstration sites have been  
established across the Mallee in areas which are 
vulnerable to wind erosion to demonstrate the 
effective integration of best practice strategies 
that improve ground cover, which in turn stabilise 
vulnerable soils. Targeted engagement and 
capacity activities are delivered to support farmers 
to improve their cropping and grazing strategies 
and move towards a system that continues to be 
productive and profitable even through highly 
variable climatic conditions.
Based on information provided by Mallee CMA.
Drought Employment Program with 
Mallee and North-Central CMA
In 2016, the CMA Drought Employment Program 
employed people in communities affected by 
drought to undertake a range of environmental 
projects. These included works such as weed and 
rabbit control, watering revegetation sites, fencing 
off rivers and native vegetation and activities to 
improve soil health.
The Mallee CMA worked with regional communities 
to ensure natural resources are well-placed to 
recover from the drought. The Drought Employment 
Program provided employment and training 
opportunities to drought affected people from the 
agriculture sector who experienced unprecedented 
hardships within the dryland farming areas around 
the Millewa and Carwarp areas.
The program aimed to provide drought-affected 
people with the opportunity to earn off-farm 
income to support their families and rural 
communities, contribute towards local natural 
resource management outcomes and increase 
their confidence and skills for the future.
The employment program provided participants 
with increased financial stability during a difficult 
emotional time. Participants reported broad 
personal benefits, including boosted health and 
morale from being employed, earning an income 
and subsequently relieving stress from their 
farm situation. Other benefits included forming 
friendships with others in similar situations, having 
an atmosphere where experiences and discussions 
about the future could be shared, getting useful 
training and upskilling, increased motivation and a 
sense of achievement and participation.
The Drought Employment Program employed 92 
people across 4 CMAs in western Victoria and 
provided more than 70,000 workhours. A similar 
“Working for Victoria” program was implemented 
by the Mallee CMA during COVID-19 lockdown 
periods in 2021, which reduced tourism, trade and 
economic opportunities in the region. 
Based on information from North Central CMA  
(2015b), Premier Victoria (2016), DELWP (2017)  
and Mallee CMA (2021)
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

NEXT STEPS  
FOR THE MALLEE
This Plan identifies and 
communicates the actions and 
outcomes needed for communities, 
businesses and people in the  
region to be resilient to future 
droughts and a drier climate. 
A handful actions in the Plan can be implemented 
by individual entities. However, most actions, 
related outcomes and the overall regional 
vision will only be realised through concerted 
and continuous collaboration that is driven 
by communities and organisations within this 
region. The communities and organisations 
within the region therefore have a critical role in 
implementing this Plan. 
Some actions in the Plan will need regional 
stakeholders to reach out for broader collaboration 
and partnership with other governments, agencies, 
statutory bodies, not-for-profit organisations, 
Traditional Owners and the private sector. 
The actions in this Plan represent a point in time. 
As economic, social and environment conditions 
change, the community will need to adapt the 
actions in this Plan and introduce new actions to 
maintain the path towards the overall outcome and 
vision for the region.
This Plan provides the pathway for the region 
to move towards drought resilience with: 
•	an understanding of the regional impacts  
of drought
•	a common regional vision and common goals
•	desired outcomes and actions agreed  
by the community
•	a common picture of how existing and new 
investments are related to each other
•	a basis for developing new actions and  
programs to achieve the regional vision
•	a framework to monitor progress towards 
building resilience to future droughts
Next steps to support the implementation 
of the Plan include:
•	identifying a lead organisation to oversee  
and coordinate the delivery of activities that 
align with the region’s Plan 
•	establishing a fit-for-purpose Advisory 
Group to guide delivery and ensure regional 
representation 
•	detailing priority actions, budgets and timelines 
•	monitoring and evaluation 
•	reviewing the progress of the Plan and making 
any necessary updates 
40

MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

The collaborative effort and shared expertise  
used to prepare the Plan is the important first 
step in building drought resilience in the Mallee. 
Work has been done by the region to articulate 
the actions needed to achieve desired regional 
outcomes. The next step is for the actions  
and activities identified in the Plan to be 
implemented, evaluated and adapted as  
needed to achieve the longer-term outcomes  
for drought resilience. 
MONITORING, 
EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING
Pathway of program delivery through discovery, 
engagement, development, implementation 
and evaluation
1
Understand 
the context
Past, current 
and future 
understanding 
of drought 
in the region
2
Gather 
momentum
Bring together 
the experiences 
and perspectives 
to develop a 
regional Plan
3
Articulate the 
desired steps 
for change
Work together 
to determine 
desired outcomes 
and actions
4
Take the steps 
and actions
Implement the 
actions and activities 
to acheive change 
and build resilience
5
Determine 
next steps
Evaluate regional 
outcomes and 
identify learnings 
and gaps for 
future progress
We are here
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
42

Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) is 
a key element of the RDRP program. Program 
objectives, outcomes and measures of success are 
clearly articulated at all levels of program delivery 
(national, state and regional) and are a range of 
short, medium and long timeframes.
Measuring success
The outcomes identified in this Plan are community 
and region wide, and dependent on the fourth step 
of implementation identified in the pathway of 
program delivery. Given the long-term outcomes  
of the Plan, the MEL framework below outlines 
how progress toward success will be measured. 
Management and Reporting
The organisation awarded as the lead organisation 
to coordinate the delivery of the Plan will work 
with Agriculture Victoria to provide up-to-
date data and information to support program 
implementation and planning. Monitoring 
and reporting will enable: key learnings to be 
identified, effective reporting, and adaptive 
program management. 
A range of assessment tools may be used to 
indicate progress including, but not limited to, 
surveys, case studies, stakeholder interviews and 
engagement data analysis. Data and information 
will be collected at various intervals across 
implementation planning, and during and after 
activities are being implemented.
Assumptions underpinning 
success of the RDRP
Measuring success and reporting on progress 
toward regionally specific outcomes is dependent 
on several key assumptions.
Key assumptions affecting short-term  
outcomes (1–2 years)
•	Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning
•	Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other on regional planning
•	Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs
•	Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them
•	There are sufficient learnings to continuously 
improve program implementation 
Key assumptions affecting medium term 
outcomes (2–4 years)
•	Supporting regional stakeholders through 
program implementation will result in changes  
in practice in the Mallee
•	There are sufficient opportunities and funding 
for the region to implement elements of the Plan
•	Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience
•	The Mallee Plan Coordinator and regional 
stakeholders continue to review, update and 
implement the Plan
MEL Framework
Key regional themes and outcomes are matched 
with relevant Future Drought Fund (FDF) strategic 
priorities, regional progress measures (2–4 years) 
and indicators. 
The Framework is aligned with previously 
developed Program and Fund level MEL 
Frameworks, to ensure consistency and so that 
data collection tools provide information across  
a range of learning and reporting requirements.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Collaboration
Regional networks are maintained to ensure open channels of communication and promotion  
of engagement from a diverse representation of sectors, communities and industries.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Improved collaboration and coordination 
between governments, industry, 
community, Traditional Owners and 
primary producers.
Communities are coming together to 
prepare for and respond to drought.
Plan actions and opportunities are 
incorporated into other strategic planning 
across the region.
Implementation/planning groups 
and networks function well 
together.
Communities have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver on 
actions across the region.
Traditional Owners are 
increasingly involved in drought 
programs and activities.
Regional drought preparedness 
activities reflect Traditional 
Owners’ priorities.
People and community wellbeing
Physical health and mental wealth of people and communities is strong  
and is supported during all phases of drought.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities and individuals are coping 
with the physical and mental stresses of 
drought.
Improved community awareness 
of and access to health and 
wellbeing services.
Culture
A culture of inclusiveness, collaboration, cooperation, support and equality that builds  
stronger resilience for people and communities is maintained across the region.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities are learning and building 
capability, capacity and expertise through 
sharing ways to build social resilience.
Community preparedness to drought has 
increased.
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
Leaders in the region are more 
confident to implement strategic 
actions.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver on 
actions across the region.
MEL Framework for the Mallee
1. Future Drought Fund
44

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Farming
Farms are resilient to droughts as a business, as land and soil managers, and as a sector.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience for an 
innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector
Primary producers and farm businesses 
better understand their resilience to 
drought.
Primary producers are better able to 
identify business risks and make timely 
decisions.
Farmers are learning about and 
implementing new business 
strategies and practices.
Farmers and agricultural 
industries have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Finance
A financial sector that understands the large fluctuations of income  
and expenses in agricultural businesses and provides support to farms  
and businesses through all phases of drought.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
The financial sector’s support to drought 
impacted businesses has increased.
Increased sector understanding 
of the region’s current and future 
drought resilience, considering 
the region’s unique economic, 
environmental and social 
characteristics.
Rural economy
The rural economy can diversify and bounce back from droughts, with direct  
impacts of droughts on the agricultural sector buffered by the larger regional economy.  
Tourism remains an important part of regional economies during droughts.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Impacts of drought on the economies of 
region are known and prepared for. 
Businesses are identifying, managing and 
planning for the business risks associated 
with drought.
Increased community 
understanding of the regions 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic 
characteristics. 
Innovative pathways and 
opportunities for business 
diversity are identified.
Sustainable use and management of natural resources
Landscapes remain vibrant and can recover from droughts. Droughts do not  
permanently damage natural resources, which are shared equitably between users,  
even when in limited supply.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Natural resource management to build 
resilience to drought across the region is 
improved.
Partnerships, networks 
and engagement between 
stakeholders managing natural 
resources are ongoing.
Stakeholders have increased 
understanding of natural 
resource management to build 
drought resilience.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

Regional collaboration
The Mallee borders the Victorian regions of 
Wimmera Southern Mallee, Central Highlands 
and Loddon Campaspe. It also borders New South 
Wales and South Australia. Feedback provided 
during several engagements pointed to the 
need to collaborate not only within the region, 
but also across the region’s boundaries. Mallee 
CMA collaborates with North Central CMA and 
Wimmera CMA. Mallee Sustainable Farming has 
members across the Mallee region in Victoria, 
New South Wales and Australia. Mildura, Renmark, 
Adelaide and Bendigo provide medical services  
to Mallee residents. 
Dust impact and soil erosion
Previous droughts in the Mallee resulted in wind-
blown soil erosion and dust formation. Dust results 
in lower air quality and associated health concerns, 
as well as impacting on road infrastructure via 
sand drifts. Agricultural soil management has 
changed, e.g. high adoption rate of no or low 
tillage, and soil erosion prevention projects have 
been implemented, e.g. through revegetation. 
Although less soil erosion and dust storms are 
anticipated, continuous care needs to be taken to 
prevent wind-blown soil erosion.
Native food and pastoral systems
Native food systems are adapted to local soil 
and climate conditions. Native food systems are 
important for Traditional Owners. Production 
of native foods, but also support of native food 
industry, is important. Current crop research 
priorities increases the gap between non-native 
agricultural systems and native food systems.  
A drive to staple native food systems is important 
(e.g. Macadamia nuts, originally from Australian 
East Coast rain forests). In the USA, some nut 
crops are failing because their whole production 
is based on a single genotype system. Native 
pastoral systems are important for resilience as 
well. Native grasses also provide food for stock 
during droughts.
Connection to Country
Drought results in cultural and environmental 
impact. Cultural and environmental value of  
the land could be affected by water levels in  
river. For example, Ned’s Corner has lost many 
blackbox trees resulting in a dead landscape. 
Spiritual, cultural and environmental values can  
be revitalised through infrastructure to provide 
water to dry lands.
Mallee broadacre farming systems
While Mallee crop types in the broadacre 
farming systems are similar to those in other 
regions in Victoria, operations are unique in 
the region. Higher temperatures and less rain 
impacts grain productivity per area, with larger 
farms; the average broad-acre farm size in the 
Mallee is 1400 ha. The relative remoteness of 
farms requires a high level of independence and 
a strong interdependence on neighbours and 
local communities. Larger on-farm storage of 
consumables is required to reduce dependency on 
far-away suppliers. The Mallee broadacre farming 
systems have the highest adaptation of no-till 
systems, where no cultivation other than seeding  
is used. This also contributes to a reduction in 
wind-blown soil erosion.
Carbon-neutral farming
Some farms in the Mallee are asked by their 
financial institution about their ability to reach 
carbon-neutral operations. This is different from 
carbon farming, where a farm operation focuses 
on increasing carbon storage with an opportunity 
to monetise. Carbon neutral farming achieves 
a net-zero emission from farming operations. 
In RDRP engagement discussions, drought was 
identified as a threat to the ability to farm  
carbon-neutral. A possible option to overcome  
this is to manage carbon-neutral farming similarly 
to farm finances, where multiple seasons need to 
be taken into account, rather than a single season, 
thus allowing for saving of carbon-credits from  
a good set of seasons to offset carbon losses in  
a bad set of seasons.
Appendix 1 
Drought resilience insights from Mallee
46

Agricultural systems have changed
Agricultural production systems have changed 
since the Millenium Drought, with more permanent 
plantations resulting in higher competition for 
water. There has also been a shifting to high value 
crops, which could impact low-value growers 
during the next drought. Properties have increased 
in size, thus there are less customers but they 
can be larger water consumers. These larger 
properties may have larger capital to be able to 
manage drought. More diversification has occurred 
as well. Producers in Gannawarra have shifted to 
more poultry and pigs as well as dairy. 
Domestic water demand  
has changed
Not only agriculture has changed, but residential 
consumption has as well. Generally, consumers 
have reduced their water consumption by 30%, 
but the total number of customers has increased 
by 30% also. Community fears the increased 
competition between agriculture and residential 
water demand.
Modernisation of water supply infrastructure in 
the Mallee has resulted in many communities and 
households in the Mallee connecting to the water 
infrastructure system. Upgraded piping systems 
were identified as one of the larger contributions 
to domestic water security and drought resilience. 
Water use restrictions still apply during droughts, 
but piped systems provide for more secure 
delivery of water.
Water quality
While the focus during drought is often on water 
quantity, water quality is equally an important 
aspect of drought management. The occurrence 
of algae blooms during periods of low water 
availability and hot periods can have a negative 
impact on livestock health and require more 
treatment for urban and rural water supply.
Positive attitude
Feedback received through the Engage Victoria 
platform stressed that it is important to remain 
positive and make use of the opportunities that 
experience, insights and knowledge provide.  
For example, a long-term focus on healthy soils  
in farming systems will support the yields through 
seasonal variability. This may still return good 
yields, even in dry years.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

Drought 
Preparedness 
Plans
Plans for 
Local Lakes and 
Waterways
Local Drought 
Knowledge and 
Experiences
Water 
Plans and 
Strategies
Climate 
Adaption Plans 
and Pledges
Traditional 
Owner Country 
Plans
Water 
Catchment 
Regulatory 
Frameworks
Planned 
Strategic Water 
Investments
Established 
Regional 
Networks
Regional Drought Actions
Appendix 2 
Existing actions and strategies in the Mallee
Several region-specific action plans and  
strategies exist for the Mallee. The review in 
this appendix does not attempt to be a complete 
overview. However, a select number of documents 
are reviewed to support the thematic framework 
and actions listed in the main part of the  
drought resilience plan for the Mallee.  
The reviews in this appendix are ordered  
by year of publication, with the most recent 
documents listed first.
48

Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. Turning ‘wrong way’ climate 
‘right way’ – Dja Dja Wurrung Climate Change 
Strategy 2023–2034
The Climate Change Strategy published by Djaara 
assesses the actions required to reverse negative 
climate impacts on Djaara Country. It includes 
a comprehensive review of existing plans and 
strategies that come together in the Climate 
Change Strategy. The strategy focuses on 6 
themes – Country, Fire, Water, Trees, People and 
Sky Country. The strategy includes indicators of 
success and stresses the need for integration of 
cultural heritage and joint management practises. 
The strategy also includes the need to work 
together and identifies partners.
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. Dhelkunyangu Gatjin – 
Working together to heal water.  
Djaara Gatjin Strategy
A water economy has evolved that is worth billions 
of dollars annually, produces food and fibre for 
Australia and the world, provides drinking water 
and underpins local and regional communities. 
This water system is governed by the State 
resulting in water on Djandak — Djaara’s water — 
being fully allocated to water users. Djaara are 
excluded from participating and benefiting in 
these water arrangements. Djaara consider their 
knowledge is central to informing sustainable 
water management. Djaara currently own very  
little water resources and have very little say on 
how the water is managed on Djandak. 
The Strategy outlines 3 key outcomes which have 
been summarised here: 
1  Make decisions for Gatjin (water); To meet 
obligations to heal and manage Djandak and enjoy 
traditional rights, Djaara Culture and Lore must be at 
the heart of water policy, planning and management.
2  Secure a growing share of water rights and 
entitlements; Increased water entitlement is some 
restitution of stolen water rights, enables the 
determination for the best use of water for cultural 
purposes, and allows direct involvement in the 
water economy.
3  A Djaara Gatjin Authority; A Djaara water 
authority is required to manage water and water 
interests and acknowledges that neighbouring 
mobs have authority for water on their country.
Mallee Catchment Management Authority, 2022. 
Mallee Regional Catchment Strategy 2022–2028
The 2022–28 Mallee Regional Catchment Strategy 
(RCS) aims to provide a 6 year framework for 
action that supports and focuses the ongoing and 
coordinated efforts of all regional stakeholders. 
The RCS sets long-term (20-year) and medium-
term (6-year) outcomes for the themes 
biodiversity, waterways, agricultural land, culture 
and heritage, and community asset. Each of the  
5 themes has a description of the current status, 
the trends, the priorities and expected outcomes 
from the RCS.
Climate variability is one of the threats identified 
in the RCS. It mentions specifically drought in 
the context of an exception in terms of extreme 
weather as it typically impacts across large 
swathes of the landscape. The RCS stresses that 
is important that there is a range of management 
responses available to NRM stakeholders that 
can benefit both the landscape and communities. 
Drought is also sees as a threat to water 
availability and water allocation.
One priority decision for agricultural land is listed 
as: Diverse, adaptable, and resilient agricultural 
systems that maximise production potential, 
minimise risk, and enhance viability – including 
drought preparedness and climate ready 
strategies. The Catchment Strategy includes 
several references to previous drought and its 
impact on the landscape. One beneficial result 
of drought appeared to be the reduction of soil 
salinity due to a reduction of irrigated lands in  
the region.
Lower Murray Water, 2022. Urban Water 
Strategy 2022
The Urban Water Strategy of Lower Murray Water 
(LMW) identifies several activities that were 
involved in the strategy. One of the 8 activities 
listed is the preparation of a drought preparedness 
plan. LMW sets an acceptable level of at least 65% 
of the unrestricted demand as a minimum supply 
level of service during drought.
To ensure the security of water supply, LMR 
evaluates options, one of which is to buy water 
shares. It evaluates this as expensive and having 
reputational impacts associated with competing 
with irrigation customers but remains a valid risk 
management tool during multiple years of drought. 
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
49

The Drought Preparedness Plan (DPP), which is 
included in the strategy as appendix 1, details 
practical approaches for system operating during 
periods of water shortage. The purpose of the  
DPP is to detail management actions to meet 
critical human needs during an extreme dry period, 
or a water quality event of an intensity, magnitude 
and duration that is sufficient to render water 
acutely toxic or unusable for established local 
uses and values.
In the section on engagement with local councils, 
input was received that maintaining community 
assets such as public open spaces, gardens and 
ovals are important to improve liveability. Based  
on the millennium drought experience, severe 
water restrictions can cause significant damage  
to public green amenities e.g. trees may take 
a long time to re-establish. Mildura Council is 
looking at introducing drought tolerant plants  
for future public green amenities and use of raw 
water and other alternative water for irrigating 
public open spaces.
Adapt Loddon Mallee, 2021.  
Loddon Mallee Climate Ready Plan
The Climate Ready Plan for the Loddon Mallee 
focuses on People, Places and Sectors, and uses 
the 4 themes Knowledge, Connection, Wellbeing 
and Security to identify actions required to adapt 
to climate changes. The global objectives in the 
plan include: 
•	Individuals and communities have the knowledge 
and tools they need to become climate ready; 
•	People in Loddon Mallee feel connected to  
their communities and supported to become 
climate ready; 
•	Individuals and communities are happy and 
healthy; Individuals and communities have the 
housing, food, financial security and access to 
the services they require; 
•	Our region is continuously learning about the 
effects of climate change on our natural and 
built environments; 
•	Places in our region are connected by resilient 
infrastructure and environmental corridors;  
Our natural and built environments are healthy 
and sustainable; 
•	Our natural and built environments are protected 
from the impacts of climate change;
•	Businesses have the knowledge and resources 
they need to make confident decisions  
for operational continuity and competitive 
advantage; 
•	Local businesses feel connected, incentivised 
and rewarded to become climate ready; 
•	The health and safety of local workforces  
is protected; 
•	Local businesses have secure access to climate 
resilient markets, technologies, financing,  
and transport channels. 
In addition to 111 actions defined under these 
themes, the plan contains several stories of how 
people, places and sectors are getting ready for 
climate impacts.
Barengi Gadjin Land Council, 2017.  
Growing what is good – Country Plan.  
Voices of the Wotjobaluk Nations
The Barringgi Gadyin Country landscape varies 
from undulating grassy plains, rivers and wetlands 
to sand-hill and Mallee country. Plains are  
covered by woodlands, heathlands, and to the 
south‑west, many wetlands. The vision of the 
Plan is explained in 8 statements: A strong and 
healthy Wotjobaluk Culture; a healthy Wotjoboluk 
Country; An engaged and connected Wotjobaluk 
Community; Recognition and respect, economic 
sustainability; Healthy Wotjoboluk People, A strong 
corporation with excellent governance; and a 
strong voice for Wotjobaluk Peoples. A prioirity 
stated under the Caring for Our Country priority  
is to care for Significant Places and Reserves.
Several actions identified are focused on 
strengthening the connection to Country, Culture, 
Education and Jobs. In the section on partnerships, 
strategic partnerships are prioritised for Parks 
management, cultural burning, and influencing 
land management on private land. 
Although no specific references to drought are 
given, the linkage to improving land management 
on private land and parks includes drought 
preparedness and resilience building. Economic 
strengthening also includes drought resilience 
strengthening, especially if jobs are focusing on 
environmental management and tourism.
50

North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2016. North Central Victoria Regional 
Sustainable Agriculture Strategy
In 2016 the North Central Victoria Regional 
Sustainable Agriculture Strategy was published 
with the aim of productive farming while protecting 
the natural resources base. Two farming zones are 
identified that overlap with the Central Highlands 
region: a mixed farming zone in the west covering 
Marnoo, St Arnaud, Avoca and Clunes, and a 
diverse farming zone around Creswick, Daylesford, 
Kyneton and Woodend. The characteristics of 
each zone are presented. Three scenarios for 
sustainable agriculture are discussed; a paradigm 
shift, where agriculture is shifted to fully adapted 
to Australian conditions, e.g. moving towards a 
low input grazing system based on native grasses; 
a mid-level change where farming aims towards 
sustainability, e.g. increasing soil carbon through 
sub-soil manuring; and an incremental change, 
making small changes and allowing for adaptation 
to uncontrollable influences, without fully 
eliminating the risks to sustainable agriculture.
Mallee Catchment Management Authority, 2016. 
Mallee Natural Resource Management Plan for 
Climate Change
The Mallee Natural Resource Management (NRM)  
Plan for Climate Change describes a planning 
framework to foster adaptation under a changing 
climate. It provides a summary of climate 
projections published by the CSIRO and the 
Bureau of Meteorology and details the potential 
implications to landscapes and NRM in the 
Victorian Mallee. The primary aim of the Plan  
is to re-evaluate the region’s priority landscapes 
and management actions.
The Plan describes the future climate predictions 
for the Mallee. It then evaluates the natural 
assets managed by the CMA and identifies the 
largest threatening processes. The Plan identifies 
constrained regenerative capacity as the highest 
threat. The Plan uses a value evaluation for  
9 types of impacted areas, including rivers, 
wetlands, threatened species, terrestrial species, 
soils, agricultural land, groundwater, cultural 
heritage and community capacity. A detailed 
spatial analysis using this value evaluation  
assigns different natural assets in the region  
with these values.
The Plan then describes the implementation 
actions that are to be undertaken to reduce the 
threats with interventions and responsible actors. 
An appendix compares the interventions with  
the overall CMA planning and identifies which 
actions have an increased priority due to climate 
change drivers.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2015a. North Central Climate Change 
and Mitigation Plan
In 2015, the North Central CMA published a 
Climate Change and Mitigation Plan. The process 
to develop this plan followed climate projections, 
followed by a vulnerability assessment, community 
workshops, and the development of a mitigation 
plan. Mitigation options focus on the topics of 
vegetation, soil, carbon farming and carbon 
sequestration options for multiple land uses. 
Community concerns related to climate change 
and related to the drought resilience plan include 
increased fire risk, declining water availability, 
water quality water security and water pricing, 
and the impact of extreme heat on human and 
animal health. The capacity for the community to 
respond to events is listed as a concern, especially 
related to service provision, social cohesion and 
issues faced by smaller rural communities. A 
specific set of strategic goals is listed for the 
Goldfields region, covering the Central Highlands, 
with focus on natural re-vegetation, monitoring 
of biodiversity, and implementing a large-scale 
carbon sequestration action across the landscape 
in the goldfields area.
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2014. Dhelkunya Dja Country Plan 
2014–2034
The Dhelkunya Dja - Dja Dja Wurrung Country 
Plan 2014–2034 describes 9 goals the Djaara 
aspires to. The Plan provides Country and cultural 
background and provides an approach for the 
implementation of the Plan. The 9 goals and 
themes are framed around Djaara (our People), 
Cultural Practises and Customs, Cultural Heritage, 
Bush Tucker (edible and medicinal plants and 
animals), River and Waterways, Land, Self-
determination, Traditional Owner Economy and 
Joint management.
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
51

87% of the Dja Dja Wurrung Country is privately 
owned; 65% of land is used for agriculture.  
The other 13% is a combination of parks, forests 
and reserves. A historical transformation of the 
natural landscape has been driven by agriculture, 
urban settlement and mining. The transformation 
is continuing, both driven by natural and human 
caused factors. The Vision for Country described  
in the Plan includes a strong health and wellbeing 
of Dja Dja Wurrung People, underpinned by a  
living culture: 
•	Lands and water that are in good condition  
and actively managed to protect Dja Dja 
Wurrung values
•	Laws, culture and rights of all Dja Dja Wurrung 
People are promoted.
While there is no specific reference to drought,  
the themes of Rivers and Waterways, and Land  
are related to drought management. 
The aspirations in the Plan for Rivers and 
Waterways are to ensure that rivers and waterways 
are healthy and meet the needs of our people and 
land. Actions defined under this theme include the 
assurance of a meaningful role in the development 
of water policy frameworks in Victoria and the 
Murray Darling Basin; the establishment of a 
formal role in regional water management through 
participation in development and implementation 
of Regional Water Strategies. 
Actions under the Land theme focus on remediation 
and restoration of mined land, with the objective 
that our upside-down country is healthy again.
North Central Catchment Management 
Authority, 2013. Caring for Country –  
A sustainable land management guide for  
rural living in north central Victoria
The North Central CMA (2013) published a 
document for new and existing landholders to 
support sustainable choices with the available 
resources. It contains suggestions for land 
planning, efficient irrigation and sustainable  
water sourcing. 
In the section on water savings, it is suggested 
to install and use rainwater tanks for domestic 
water use, as well as several other domestic water 
savings tips. For gardens, it is suggested to use 
grey water for irrigation, reduce lawn areas, use 
native, climate adapted plants, and use mulching 
to reduce evaporative losses. 
This is followed by a section on how to recycle 
water, and the best practices to manage recycled 
water. The chapter on biodiversity includes the 
benefits of native vegetation, and suggestions 
on how to manage native vegetation on rural 
properties. 
A large section on soils explains the different types 
of soils landholders may encounter, and the most 
sustainable ways to use the different soil systems. 
The plant and animal sections suggest best 
management practices for different land uses. 
These are followed by a climate section, explaining 
the drivers of weather systems and climate. 
A summary table shows the impact of a changing  
climate on the environment, the community, primary 
production, and water. This is concluded by a heading 
to prepare for weather emergencies, starting 
with risk assessment, then risk management, and 
preparation for specific weather-related events 
like fire, floods and thunderstorms. This document 
ends with a chapter on the community, and how to 
be good neighbours to each other.
52

Photo: Goulburn Murray Water
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
53

References
ABC News, 2022. “Neds Corner handed back  
to Ngintait traditional owners in record Victorian 
land transfer”. https://www.abc.net.au/news/ 
2022-05-10/neds-corner-station-handed-back- 
to-ngintait-traditional-owners/101053542  
(last accessed 16-02-2024)
Adapt Loddon Mallee, 2021. “Loddon Mallee 
Climate Ready Plan” https://climatereadyplan.
adaptloddonmallee.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2021/09/ADAPT-Loddon-Mallee-Climate-
Ready-Plan-.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
Barengi Gadjin Land Council (BGLC), 2017. 
“Growing what is good - Country Plan. 
Voices of the Wotjobaluk Nations”. https://
www.bglc.com.au/_files/ugd/0065da_
bac8b69323c54d1d838862d5b74ba46c.pdf  
(last accessed 2023-06-14)
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning (DELWP), 2017. “Drought Employment 
Plan, 2015-2017 – Final Evaluation Report”.  
https://vgls.sdp.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/
search/asset/1296725/0 (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions (DJPR), 
2022a. “Mallee Regional Development Strategy”. 
https://www.rdv.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0006/2063913/Mallee-REDS-2022.pdf  
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions (DJPR), 
2022b. “Mallee Regional Development Strategy – 
Supporting Analysis” https://www.rdv.vic.gov.au/ 
__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/2063904/ 
Mallee-REDS-2022-Supporting-Analysis.pdf  
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2014. “Dhelkunya Dja Country Plan 
2014-2034”. https://djadjawurrung.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/Dhelkunya-Dja-Country-
Plan-2014-2034.pdf (last accessed 2023-06-14)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. “Turning ‘wrong way’ climate 
‘right way’ – Dja Dja Wurrung Climate Change 
Strategy 2023-2034”. https://djadjawurrung.com.au/ 
wp-content/uploads/2023/05/DJA46.-Climate-
Change-Strategy-230523.pdf (last accessed 
2023-06-14)
Djaara (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation), 2023. “Dhelkunyangu Gatjin – Working 
together to heal water. Djaara Gatjin Strategy”. 
https://djadjawurrung.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2023/06/Dhelkunyangu-Gatjin-Working-
together-to-heal-water-Gatjin-Strategy-2023.pdf 
(last accessed 2023-07-05)
First People of the Millewa-Mallee Aboriginal 
Corporation (FPMM), 2022. “Neds Corner Station  
is set to be returned”. https://fpmmac.com.au/
neds-corner-station-is-set-to-be-returned/  
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Frontier Economics, 2022. “Drought in the  
Mallee Region – Information to support the  
Mallee Regional Drought Resilience Plan”.
Infrastructure Australia, 2021.  
“Regional Priorities – Victoria’s infrastructure 
strategy 2021–2051 – Mallee Summary”.  
https://assets.infrastructurevictoria.com.au/ 
assets/Resources/Regional-Brochure_Mallee-1.pdf 
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Lower Murray Water (LMW), 2022. “Urban Water 
Strategy 2022”. https://www.lmw.vic.gov.au/about-
us/publications/urban-water-strategy/  
(last accessed 2023-12-01)
Mallee Catchment Management Authority  
(Mallee CMA). “Culture and Heritage in the Mallee”. 
https://malleecma.com.au/culture-and-heritage/ 
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Mallee Catchment Management Authority 
(Mallee CMA), 2016. “Mallee Natural Resource 
Management Plan for Climate Change”.  
https://malleecma.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/Mallee-NRM-Plan-for-Climate-
Change-Smaller.pdf (last accessed 2023-08-15)
54

Mallee Catchment Management Authority  
(Mallee CMA), 2018. “Mallee Floodplain 
Management Stategy 2018-2028”.  
https://malleecma.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/ECM_7899_v1_Mallee-
Floodplain-Management-Strategy-2018-28.pdf 
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Mallee Catchment Management Authority  
(Mallee CMA), 2021. “Locals Working For Victoria 
And The Region.“  https://www.malleecma.com.au/ 
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Media-release-
Working-for-Victoria-positive-outcomes-FINAL- 
9-March-2021.pdf (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Mallee Catchment Management Authority (Mallee 
CMA), 2022. “Mallee Regional Catchment Strategy 
2022-2028”.  https://www.malleecma.com.au/
wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Mallee-RCS-Public-
consult-draft_final.pdf (last accessed 2023-12-01)
North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2013. “Caring for Country – A sustainable 
land management guide for rural living in north 
central Victoria”. https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/ 
sites/default/files/publications/caring_for_
country_sustainable_land_management_guide_-_
final_web_version.pdf (last accessed 2023-07-05)
North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2015a. “North Central Climate Change 
and Mitigation Plan”. https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/ 
sites/default/files/publications/nccma_final_
climate_change_mitigation_plan_2015.pdf  
(last accessed 2023-07-05)
North Central Catchment Management Authority 
(NCCMA), 2015b. “North Central CMA Drought 
Response Package.” https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/
sites/default/files/publications/dep_faqs.pdf  
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
North Central Catchment Management  
Authority (NCCMA), 2016. “North Central Victoria 
Regional Sustainable Agriculture Strategy”.  
https://www.nccma.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/
publications/nccma_sustainable_agriculture_
strategy_2016_final_web.pdf (last accessed  
2023-07-05)
Premier of Victoria, 2016. “$3.15 Million  
Expansion Of Drought Employment Program”  
https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/site-4/315-million-
expansion-drought-employment-program.  
(Last accessed 2024-02-16)
Swan Hill Shire, no date. “Welcome to the 
Robinvale Region – A guide to living and 
working in Robinvale, Euston, and Surrounds”. 
https://www.swanhill.vic.gov.au/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/19367_Robinvale_Resident_Guide 
_RESIZED090418.pdf. (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Swan Hill Shire and La Trobe University, 2016. 
“Robinvale 2031 – Community Plan (Draft)”. 
https://www.swanhill.vic.gov.au/wp-content/
uploads/2018/05/Robinvale_2031_-_Community_
Plan_-_FINAL.pdf (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Trust for Nature, 2017. “Neds Corner Station” 
https://trustfornature.org.au/what-we-do/ 
neds-corner-station (last accessed 2024-02-16)
Viridans Flora and Fauna Information System. 
“Victorian Ecosystems – Mallee”.  
https://www.viridans.com/ECOVEG/mallee.htm 
(last accessed 2024-02-16)
Waterwatch Victoria. “Mallee Catchment 
Management Authority”.  
https://www.vic.waterwatch.org.au/cb_pages/
mallee_catchment_management_authority.php 
(last accessed 2023-02-16)
MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
55

56

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the Mallee Region
Information to support the Mallee Regional Drought Resilience Plan
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
November 2022

The region is home to key road, rail, and air infrastructure, with the 
main freight route between Adelaide and Sydney passing through 
the Mildura Local Government Area (LGA). 
The Mallee region includes the traditional lands of the First Peoples 
of the Millewa-Mallee (being Latji Latji, Ngintait and Nyeri Nyeri 
Traditional Owners); the  Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia 
and Jupgalk Nations; Dja Dja Wurrung; and Yorta Yorta People, 
as well as other Traditional Owner groups in Victoria who are not 
formally recognised.
The Mallee has a Gross Regional Product (GRP) of $6 billion and 
a population of 93,000. In 2021, key industries for employment in 
the Mallee were agriculture, forestry and fishing (16%) and health 
care and social assistance (14%). The 2021 census showed a slight 
increase in agricultural employment from 2016, following a decrease 
between 2006 to 2016.
The Mallee region contributed $2.7 billion gross to 15% of Victoria’s 
total gross value. 
The region has experienced drought and dry seasonal conditions 
of extended duration including the Millennium drought of 1997 to 
2009, 2014 and 2015 (notably in southern Mallee), and from 2017 
to 2019.
Regional summary
The Mallee is considered one of Victoria’s most remote regions, 
bordering the Murray River in the north and South Australia in the 
west. The region’s economy is driven by irrigated agriculture along 
the Murray River (the region includes Victoria’s most productive 
horticultural areas of Mildura, Robinvale and Swan Hill) and cropping 
further south. There are large processing, manufacturing, and services 
sectors to process agricultural products in the region. 
Campaspe
Goulburn
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
Gippsland
Mildura
Buloke
Gannawarra
Swan 
Hill
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund.
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was a key factor to the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are four ways to measure whether a region is in 
drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socio-economic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may  
change in  
the future
The Mallee region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness  
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls  
on surface or subsurface  
water supply
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Mallee Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These 
on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets 
(e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of 
drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market 
impacts of drought.
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions  
+ 
Changes in the Mallee region
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for  
ag farm services  
(but could increase  
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands  
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation  
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from  
green space
Drought in the Mallee Region
Frontier Economics
3

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. The last 25 years 
has seen Mallee experience extensive drought periods, starting 
with the Millennium drought from 1997 to 2009 and more recently 
the dry conditions experienced in 2014 and 2015 (in southern 
Mallee) and from 2017 to 2019.
The historical rainfall and temperature charts for Mildura shown in 
Figure 3, provide evidence of the severity of these recent drought 
events. Rainfall was below the 10th percentile in 2018 and 2019 
coupled with mean maximum temperatures over the 90th percentile. 
From 2001 to 2009, the region experienced consecutive years of well 
below median rainfall and above median temperatures.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Rainfall (mm)
Annual
10th %ile
Median
Agricultural impacts and 
implications of drought  
+ Non-agricultural impacts  
and implications
The variance of agricultural employment in the region, and the 
diversity of agricultural enterprises (from irrigated horticulture 
near the Murray River and dryland cropping and grazing further 
south), means that communities within the Mallee will be impacted 
differently. There is a high proportion of agricultural employment in 
the Buloke and Gannawarra LGAs that makes them highly susceptible 
to drought impacts. Although somewhat more economically diverse, 
the LGAs of Mildura and Swan Hill also have relatively high reliance 
on agriculture for direct employment, however there may be other 
opportunities for a secondary income for affected agricultural workers 
during a drought. 
Agriculture is the largest exporting sector in the Mallee. Nuts, grains 
(including cereals, pulses, legumes, and oilseeds) and table grapes 
are the region’s most valuable agricultural products. Along with 
manufacturing, the two sectors comprise 81.7% of the region’s  
export value.
Water trade into the region has also been an essential drought 
management tool enabling horticultural production to continue 
through provision of irrigation water. While the impacts to production 
of horticultural crops are mitigated, farm income can be significantly 
affected as high water prices often result during periods of scarcity.  
01
02
Agriculture in the Mallee relies on rainfall and regulated surface 
water (where available) taken from irrigation channels or directly 
diverted from the river. The above charts show an annual average 
rainfall, however the success of dryland cropping and grazing is 
dependent on the timing of rainfall throughout the year. Although 
not observed in rainfall in Mildura, rainfall in the southern Mallee 
was also extremely low in 2014 and 2015.
Water allocations in the Murray system were significantly 
decreased during the Millennium drought, dropping to 43% in 
2007 to 2008 and 35% in 2008 to 2009. The years of 2017 to 
2019 also saw significant reductions in rainfall and increased hot 
temperatures, however water allocations were only decreased for 
the Murray system in 2019 to 2020.
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Year
Annual
90th %ile
Median
01
02
03
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Recently experienced droughts and dry 
seasonal conditions in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2014 and 2015 (in southern Mallee)
•	 2017 to 2019
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Mildura
Drought in the Mallee Region
Frontier Economics
4

In 2019 to 2020 the highest water price for Mallee irrigators was 
observed and water prices peaked at $950/ML (compared to <$100/
ML in wetter years). This reflected the water scarcity observed across 
the southern-connected Murray-Darling Basin, across which trade is 
possible.
The impacts of the 2017 to 2019 drought were mitigated somewhat 
due to experience and lessons farmers learnt from the Millennium 
drought. Farmers had some actions and strategies to be more 
prepared and resilient.  For example, livestock producers have honed 
drought preparedness and operation practices such as buying and/
or storing fodder and utilising on farm dam storages. We note that the 
timing of rainfall has a significant impact on fodder growth. 
Town water 
Towns in the Mallee were faced with prolonged periods of Stage 3 
and Stage 4  urban water restrictions during the Millennium drought. 
This was a challenge for towns such as Mildura with a long legacy 
of typical “English gardens” of lush green grass and gardens. Lower 
Murray Water (LMW) have reported that Stage 4 restrictions had an 
impact not only on the community but staff with anecdotal stories of 
LMW staff being accosted in public and blamed for water restrictions). 
Stage 4 water restrictions prohibit the watering of any outdoor space, 
amongst other restrictions, which had profound impacts on the 
community’s liveability.
Most greenspaces and playing surfaces in Mildura are on a rural 
supply so they are not generally subject to urban restrictions although 
watering occurs in cooler hours for public perception.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism in the region is both water dependent and non-water 
dependent. The Murray River and surrounding lakes including Lake 
Tyrrell and Sea Lake offers a range of water sport opportunities in 
the region. Increasing temperatures and less rainfall is likely to affect 
tourist’s amenity benefit from visiting the towns and landscapes in 
the region. Blue-green algae issues associated with drought also 
presented risks for drinking and swimming.
Environment 
There were negative impacts on riverbank and in-stream vegetation 
in the rivers, lakes and dams of the Mallee during the Millennium 
drought. Furthermore drought impacts the habitats of native wildlife 
in the region. Drought particularly impacts species such as the 
Mallee Emu-wren and conservation areas provide refuge for many 
native animals. 
Traditional Owners 
Culturally significant sites, particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or water dependent, can be exposed and vulnerable to damage 
during drought. Damage to these sites can lead to distress within 
the community. Consultation identified that indigenous members 
of other drought affected communities (such as in the NSW Darling) 
frequented the Mallee in order to access water in the landscape, given 
the Murray River was still running.
03
Community outcomes  
in past droughts
Farming communities are severely impacted during 
periods of drought, due to:
•	
Financial pressures from decreased on-farm income  
and increased costs
•	
The on-farm challenges mostly relating to lack of water  
and feed for stock, and poor yields on crops
•	
Pressures from invasive native and pest animals on farms
•	
Physical and mental health and wellbeing impacts on individuals 
and families
•	
Flow on financial pressures being experienced by supporting 
businesses in the community.
Economic modelling of the Millennium drought found that the Gross 
Domestic Product of the Mallee declined by an average of over $350 
million each year between 2006 - 2010. The decreased attributed 
to drought impacts on irrigated and dryland agricultural production 
plus decreased spending in the regional communities. The modelled 
production impacts were lessened by net water trade into the Mallee, 
but still were found to have significant employment impacts (averaging 
over 1000 jobs annually over the same period).
The impact on agricultural production during drought in the Mallee 
also affects a range of agricultural farm service providers, support 
businesses, processing facilities in the region, in turn affecting spending 
and business activity across the broader communities. 
Overall, the cumulation of impacts on production, regional economies, 
and liveability from drought led to significant impacts on the regional 
communities. An increase demand for mental health services and Rural 
Financial Counselling Services was evident.
Drought in the Mallee Region
Frontier Economics
5

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Mallee region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Mallee with future droughts expected 
to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate projections 
show that by 2050 the Mallee on average will be hotter, drier and be 
exposed to a growing number of fire danger days. Similar to the past, 
the region and sub-regions will continue to face variable conditions 
within and across seasons, however in the future this variability will 
be around a lower average rainfall and higher average temperature 
than previously experienced. This means that, compared to current 
conditions, it is likely that parts of Mallee will face some seasons 
with rainfall significantly below and temperatures significantly above 
current averages.
The significant prevalence of dryland agriculture, which relies on timing 
and quantity of rainfall, does not offer resilience options that irrigated 
agriculture has access to (as they have continued access to water that 
can be drawn upon during dry periods).
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural impacts 
and implications
In response to the future increase in the likelihood and severity of 
drought (given expected increasing temperatures and decreasing 
rainfall), agricultural production in livestock and cropping farming 
operations will be most exposed. The adaptiveness of these 
producers, with farmers already having many strategies to manage 
drought, and their ability to maintain sufficient reserves will be critical 
to their farm profitability. The prevailing circumstances of a future 
drought — such as commodity prices, interest rates and fuel and 
fertiliser costs — will also play a role in resultant impacts.
Irrigated agriculture in the Mallee generally finds it viable to purchase 
water allocations (and use carryover) to maintain water use during 
dry periods. However, due to the significant increase in the area of 
horticulture plantings, in a repeat of the Millennium drought there 
would not be sufficient water in the entire southern-connected 
Murray-Darling Basin to meet Mallee water demands1, no matter 
the price paid. This means that a severe drought that significantly 
Changes in the Mallee region
There have been a number of changes in the Mallee that will alter 
the impacts of drought in the future, including:
•	
Significant increase in the area of horticultural plantings (and 
the associated water requirements) since the Millennium 
drought
•	
Water recovery for Basin Plan reducing water availability for 
agriculture, and increasing water for the environment
•	
On-farm water savings projects
•	
Town water security planning and investment has increased 
in the region
•	
Population changes (including an increase in tree-changers 
due to Covid19 which will likely increase water demand)
•	
Continuing diversification of the region’s economy.
It is noteworthy that the continued opportunities for water trade 
mean that the Mallee can access water from the southern-
connected Murray-Darling Basin and is influenced by broader 
‘system level’ responses to drought and a changing climate — 
including interregional water trade and Basin Plan water recovery. 
There are, however, a number of system constraints (such as 
the Barmah Choke (which constricts the flow of the Murray 
River) and trade rule limits from neighbouring river systems the 
(Murrumbidgee and Goulburn) that are increasingly binding.
01
02
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures are expected to 
increase by 1.7 to 2.2°C. Number of days over 40°C 
in Mildura are expected to increase from 7.8 days  
to 15-23 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable.
Average rainfall expected to decrease by  
5 to 12%.
5-12%
44%
Number of very high fire 
dangers days expected to 
increase by 9.1 days per year.
1.7 to  
2.2 °C 
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions  
+ 
Changes in the  
Mallee region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 4 Climate projections for the Mallee region
1 TCA & Frontier Economics 2017; Aither 2022; Frontier Economics & TCA 2022.
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Mallee Region

decreases water allocations would be expected to lead to many 
horticultural developments being dried off and production lost until 
the vines/trees can be re-established.
Future droughts are likely to continue to impact the wellbeing and mental 
health of the local communities. Farmers and community businesses are 
likely to continue to rely on financial counselling services and the broader 
community will continue to rely on mental health supports and services. 
Access to mental health services need to be emphasised moving into 
the next drought. People trying to make tough decisions in drought are 
in a vulnerable space and support needs to be readily available. The 
physical and mental health of the community may also be impacted as 
community green spaces, trees and waterways are impacted. 
Town water  
Town water security planning has improved with lessons from 
drought. Likewise, Urban Water Strategies are now required to 
incorporate future impacts of climate change (including potential 
droughts). For example, Lower Murray Water has used the 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning’s 2020 
‘Guidelines for Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Availability in Victoria’ to undertake water demand system forecasts 
and identify a range of climate scenarios to assess potential impacts 
on water supply and customer demand. 
Given that there are no substantial alternatives to sourcing water from 
the Murray River, the 2022 Urban Water Strategy is looking to ensure 
the security of supply through the purchase of 360 ML of entitlement 
per annum out to 2066. This will increase the region’s entitlement and 
provide a buffer for security of supply.
Recreation and Tourism  
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought. Initiatives that are not dependent on water 
availability could boost visitors to the region. COVID-19 has provided 
a boost to regional travel and relocation, evidenced by an increase in 
population from 2016 to 2021. 
Environment 
Inland lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during times 
of drought impacting native biodiversity living in and relying on these 
water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food and drinking water for 
wild animals living in the region.
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains and/
or water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable to damage. 
Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the community.
03
Figure 5 Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modelling for a future drought
Economic modelling of potential future drought in Victoria, undertaken 
by Victoria University’s Centre of Policy Studies, found the Mallee to 
be significantly affected with GDP falling by 11.4% and a reduction of 
almost 1,880 jobs in the region (see Figure 5).  
The modelled three-year drought, while prolonged, is not equivalent  
to the most severe recorded in Victoria.
Community outcomes  
in future droughts
Flow through impacts  
from ag to the community
The increased likelihood and 
severity of drought in the future 
and the increased competition for 
water under these conditions will 
mean that the drought impacts on 
the community from agricultural 
consequences of drought are 
expected to be larger than have 
been historically observed.
Impacts on GDP
Economic modelling of potential future 
drought in Victoria found the Mallee to be 
significantly affected, with:
GDP impact: 
•	 Direct agriculture impact -7.8%
•	 Regional impact -11.4%
•	 A fall in employment of more than 1,800 
jobs.
•	 This flowed through the region reducing 
consumption/spending by 5.5%.
Employment and value add impacts
The effects on employment will not be 
distributed equally across the regions, with the 
more agriculturally dependent regions likely to 
experience larger decrease in employment. 
The economic modelling finds that the large 
impact of drought on value-added output of 
agricultural primary production has significant 
impacts on the value-added output of:
•	 the Agricultural Services sector, and food 
processing (dairy products and meat 
products)
•	 construction, wholesale and retail trade, 
hotels/cafes 
•	 the road transport sector 
11.4%
GDP
1,800
jobs
Drought in the Mallee Region
Frontier Economics
7

Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought and 
dry conditions become more prevalent. Not only are mental health 
services important during times of drought, but improved mental 
health increases a person’s ability to adapt. This can improve drought 
resilience by allowing people to effectively plan for future drought 
conditions.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of 
community spirit and liveability within local communities. Water 
Corporations and Councils now have a strong understanding of the 
importance of greenspace for their communities. However, should 
town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will have a 
mental health toll on residents.
The diversity of the Mallee region will continue to mean that some 
areas will be impacted by future droughts more than others — 
especially between river communities and those further south. While 
water trading may enable horticulture in the river communities to 
maintain production during drought, a severe drought could be 
devastating. Southern communities will continue to be exposed to 
dry and drought conditions, and smaller communities that are highly 
dependent on agriculture and more geographically isolated will be 
most exposed. Declining populations in smaller towns, due in part to 
larger farm properties and remote farming, may mean they are more 
vulnerable to change.
Overall, the Mallee region’s high reliance to agricultural industries creates 
the potential for significant impacts on community from future drought.
Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness
The diverse Mallee region already has many drought resilience 
measures in place or in development. Agricultural research, 
innovation and extension will remain important to support the 
ongoing adaptation in agriculture and will aid preparedness to future 
drought. Farmers capacity to adequately prepare for drought differs 
significantly within the Mallee region. Farmers can be better prepared 
for future droughts by addressing gaps in on-farm business and 
decision-making skills. There is an ongoing need to close the gap in 
farmers skills and capabilities to be more adaptive and prepared for 
the next drought. 
A significant vulnerability of the Mallee region is the reliance on water 
trade to meet the fixed water demands of horticulture in the region. 
The expansion of horticultural development in the region has reached 
the scale that there are significant deliverability concerns during 
peak periods of water use, or during periods of peak temperature. 
Insufficient water to sustain all businesses is likely to be associated 
with the next severe drought.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. Towns 
throughout the Mallee have varying degrees of diversification with 
larger, centrally located towns more likely to experience these 
benefits. Specifically:
•	
The regional centres of Mildura and Swan Hill will provide a 
buffer to some drought impacts as it is a diverse economy 
providing service and employment centres to the region. 
Townships near Mildura also benefit from some of this 
buffering as those within approximate 50 km radius of Mildura 
experiencing the attraction of living in a smaller community 
and lower cost of housing, but have access to employment 
opportunities in the larger centre.
•	
Smaller communities such as Kerang, Donald, Robinvale are likely 
to feel impacts of drought due to reliance on agriculture. 
However, even Mildura is highly exposed to the flow-on impacts 
of drought given the prevalence of agricultural support services, 
agriculture-related processing and manufacturing, as well as transport 
and logistics. 
The Tri-State Murray NRM Drought Resilience Discussion Paper 
identified that “to make the appropriate decisions farmers need to not 
only have the analytical and decision-making skills but also adequate 
mental health. Stress, delayed decision making, not able to spot 
opportunities and ‘giving up’ are all significant issues as a drought builds 
and during a drought”.
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These 
kinds of health services have long wait times in the region, even 
outside of drought. Following the onset of a drought there is a 
general lag in the provision of additional health services. This means 
that individuals unable to access these services are having to make 
drought management decisions under significant stress.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the Mallee Region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our  
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Visit Swan Hill, Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions, and Visit Victoria.
CGE Modelling credits: Centre of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from BOM and ARM online.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.