REGIONAL 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN
For the Mid West region incorporating the 
City of Greater Geraldton and the Shires of 
Chapman Valley and Northampton

CONTACT DETAILS
Mid West Development Commission
20 Gregory St, Geraldton WA 6530
Telephone: (08) 9956 8555
Email: info@mwdc.wa.gov.au
Website: www.mwdc.wa.gov.au
This document was compiled by partner organisations 
Mid West Development Commission and Northern 
Agricultural Catchments Council (NACC NRM) with 
contributions from Dr Fiamma Riviera (NACC NRM), 
Katherine Allen (NACC NRM), Mike Bowley (Mid West 
Development 
Commission), 
Kaylene 
Parker 
(Great 
Southern Development Commission) and Renee Manning 
(Wheatbelt Development Commission).
The information, data, opinions, evaluations, assessments 
and analysis referred to in, or relied upon in the 
preparation of, this document have been obtained from 
and are based on sources believed by us to be reliable 
and up to date, but no responsibility will be accepted for 
any error of fact or opinion. To the extent permitted by 
law, the opinions, recommendations, assessments and 
conclusions contained in this document are expressed 
without any warranties of any kind, express or implied. 
It is anticipated that elements of this inaugural Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan will require review and updating 
as new information and research become available.
The interventions identified in this Plan are conceptual 
and not endorsed by the State of Western Australia. The 
implementation of these resilience building interventions 
and the proposed actions is subject to further 
development, feasibility studies and endorsement with 
consortia stakeholders and lead delivery agencies.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Mid West Development 
Commission and the State of Western Australia accept no 
liability whatsoever by reason of negligence or otherwise 
arising from the use or release of this information or any 
part of it.
An electronic copy of this plan may be obtained at www.mwdc.wa.gov.au

3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
Foreword
Executive summary
Introduction
Vision, goals and outcomes
Developing our vision
Goals and outcomes
Definitions
Stakeholder engagement and consultation
Developing the evidence base
Stakeholder engagement
Desktop review
Spatial priorisation
Risk assessment
Technical expertise
Plan alignment
Regional description
Geography and population
Economy
Landscapes and natural resources
Regional strategic priorities
Assessing the vulnerability and resilience of the Mid 
West region
Measuring vulnerability and resilience
Impacts of drought
Current responses to drought and dry seasons
The plan
Plan implementation and enduring governance
Monitoring, evaluation and learning
4
6
7
8
13
14
14
15
17
21
23
23
24
24
25
26
27
27
28
31
32
33
33
38
45
47
60
60

4
We respectfully acknowledge the Southern Yamatji people, 
who are the Traditional Owners and original natural 
resource managers of the lands and waters in the City of 
Greater Geraldton, the Shire of Chapman Valley and the 
Shire of Northampton, including the Amangu, Widi, Wadjari, 
Wilunyu, Naaguja, Nhanda and Nhanhagardi people. 
We pay our respect to their Elders and leaders, past, present and emerging.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COUNTRY

5
Primary Industries and Regional Development. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program for the 
Mid West is a locally led project that champions drought 
resilience and preparedness in the region. It has been led 
by the Mid West Development Commission in partnership 
with the Northern Agricultural Catchments Council NRM, 
and supported by the City of Greater Geraldton, the Shire 
of Chapman Valley and the Shire of Northampton. 
We would like to thank the nearly 600 people representing 
at least 140 different organisations who contributed to 
the development of this plan through their participation 
in interviews, meetings and workshops. This includes a 
diversity of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal organisations, 
with direct grower representation from groups such as the 
Northern Agri Group, Mullewa Dryland Farmers Initiative, 
Yuna Farm Improvement Group, Midwest Horticulture 
Grower Group, and the Northern Biosecurity Group.
We particularly thank the members of the Mid West Project 
Advisory Group for their enthusiastic input and advice on 
the stakeholder engagement and consultation process, 
technical components, and drought resilience actions to 
ensure the needs and priorities of the region are met. 
In-kind contributions from the Climate Science, Geographic 
Information, and Policy, Innovation and Performance 
teams at the Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development, and the work of consultants who 
undertook literature reviews and data syntheses on our 
behalf were integral to the development of this document.
We thank the members of the RDRP Steering Committee 
and the RDRP Technical Working Group for their 
contributions to development, review and refinement of 
the Drought Vulnerability Assessment for the Mid West 
incorporating the City of Greater Geraldton and Shires of 
Chapman Valley and Northampton, and this plan. 
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the support, 
contribution and working relationships with the Wheatbelt 
and Great Southern Development Commissions. 
Nicole Batten
Shire of Chapman Valley 
Yuna Farm Improvement Group
Maurice Battilana
Shire of Chapman Valley
Amanda Bourne
NACC NRM
Mike Bowley
Mid West Development 
Commision
Fleur Coaker
Department of Water and 
Environmental Regulation
Rob Grima
Planfarm
Candy Hudson
National Recovery and 
Resilience Agency
Marieke Jensen
Northern Biosecurity Group
Megan O’Grady
City of Greater Geraldton
Tina Parkhurst
Bush Heritage Australia
Murdoch University
Fiamma Riviera
NACC NRM
Trevor Royce
Shire of Chapman Valley
Liz Sudlow
Shire of Northampton
Christine Zaicou-
Kunesch
Department of Primary 
Industries and Rural 
Development
Mid West Project Advisory Group

6
The Northern Wheatbelt of Western 
Australia, also known as the Mid West 
region, has been a sentinel for climate 
variability in recent decades with 
defining droughts being a feature of 
the changing climate.
The back-to-back droughts of 2006 and 2007 has defined 
this region’s capability to respond to droughts. This 
region undertook good planning, implemented ‘hand 
up, not hand out’ support measures, and built effective 
community networks that focus on preparedness and 
ongoing resilience.
The Mid West Development Commission recognises it 
is the people of the region who manage our sustainable 
resources of land and water, and they drive the economic 
benefits which sustain our communities. Our people are 
the social fabric that bind us together when times are 
tough and strengthen our ability to respond to events or 
disasters. This has been again exemplified in the wake 
of Severe Tropical Cyclone Seroja, which impacted on 
the Shires of Northampton, Chapman Valley, and City of 
Greater Geraldton – among numerous other Mid West 
local government areas – in April 2021.
We have been pleased to join with these Shires as key 
partners, with Northern Agricultural Catchments Council 
(NACC NRM) and the Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development to develop this plan.
The Mid West region plan leverages from the vast 
knowledge of our people through a deep engagement 
and consultative approach. It identifies the priorities to 
deliver a shared vision of continued leadership in drought 
adaptation and preparedness, using collaborative and 
integrated approaches.
We look forward to the successful implementation of 
this plan.
Nils Hay
Chief Executive Officer
Mid West Development 
Commission
FOREWORD

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Mid West region, as defined in this document, is one 
of three regions developing Regional Drought Resilience 
Plans (RDRPs) in Western Australia. The Mid West 
Development Commission (MWDC) partnered with the 
Northern Agricultural Catchments Council (NACC NRM) 
and the Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development to support the delivery of the RDRP for 
the area encompassing the City of Greater Geraldton 
and the Shires of Chapman Valley and Northampton. 
Stakeholder consultation facilitated the contributions of 
almost 600 individuals representing 140 organisations to 
the RDRP and its evidence base, the Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment (DVA). The DVA informs and should be read 
in conjunction with the RDRP.
The Mid West region’s agricultural sector has a history 
of active engagement in climate adaptation and drought 
preparedness, and has been active in its response to 
prolonged dry conditions. However, it is recognised that 
more can be done to build on existing drought resilience 
interventions. 
The Mid West RDRP outlines key priorities for building 
regional drought resilience and preparedness which align 
with the Future Drought Fund’s strategic priorities of 
social, environmental and economic resilience. 
The Mid West region’s stakeholders identified three top 
priorities to build drought resilience in the region, including: 
•	
Continued improvement and uptake of adaptive 
farming practices
•	
Increased support for community networks and 
groups
•	
Improved financial mechanisms 
The priorities and actions within the Mid West RDRP 
include a  broad range of investment opportunities and 
align with the actions of the Drought Resilience Funding 
Plan 2020-2024.
The Mid West RDRP is intended to be a living document, 
guiding State, Federal and local government, community 
and industry action on drought resilience. Implementation 
of the RDRP is subject to further discussion with 
project partners and local government stakeholders. An 
Investment Framework will identify high impact and high 
feasibility interventions that can be further developed into 
investable projects.

8
Australia is a country with a history of drought. In 
the Mid West region, unprecedented dry weather 
over several decades, has adversely affected the 
agricultural sector and agriculturally dependent rural 
and regional communities. 
These impacts are expected to become more frequent and severe with 
climate change. Proactive regional drought resilience planning is imperative 
to developing locally applicable solutions and responses.  
INTRODUCTION

9
initiatives, including the development of regional drought resilience plans (RDRP) across States and Territories. RDRPs 
focus on innovative ways to build regional drought resilience across the agricultural sector and supporting industries, 
through a triple bottom line, collaborative, and evidence-based approach.  
As part of the inaugural year of the program in Western Australia (WA), RDRPs have been developed for three regions, 
selected due to their reliance on agriculture, and their location in the Bureau of Meteorology’s South West Land Division 
forecasting area. This is amongst the regions most impacted by climate change in Australia, experiencing consistent 
reduction in rainfall over the last several decades (Figure 1).
Listen to Jerry talk about his long experience 
with drought and drought preparedness in the 
Mid West region, here.
“The first one I experienced as a 
young fella was in 1969… coming 
home and seeing no feed and 
hungry cattle, hungry sheep… it 
caught us unawares, it was a big 
learning curve.”
– Jerry Clune, Bringo, City of Greater Geraldton
The three regions and their local consortia are:
•	
Northern Agricultural – MWDC, NACC NRM and the three local government areas (LGAs) of Greater Geraldton, 
Chapman Valley and Northampton 
•	
Southern Wheatbelt – Wheatbelt Development Commission and the five LGAs of Dumbleyung, Kulin, Kondinin, Lake 
Grace and Wagin 
•	
Great Southern Inland – Great Southern Development Commission and the eight LGAs of Jerramungup, Kent, 
Gnowangerup, Katanning, Kojonup, Cranbrook, Woodanilling and Broomehill-Tambellup.

10
Figure 2: Change in growing season rainfall between 1975 and 1999 (left) and 2000 and 2021 (right) using data from the Patched Point 
Bureau of Meteorological Stations and Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development weather stations. 
Gascoyne
LAKE GRACE
WAGIN
JERRAMUNGUP
KONDININ
KATANNING
Regional Development Commission boundary
Participating Shire
Partner Development Commission
GOLDFIELDS-
ESPERANCE
WHEATBELT
GREAT
SOUTHERN
SOUTH WEST
PEEL
MID WEST
KALGOORLIE
MEEKATHARRA
GERALDTON
ALBANY
PERTH
BUNBURY
ESPERANCE
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
REGIONAL DROUGHT
RESILIENCE PLANNING
NORTHAMPTON
Figure 1. WA RDRP regions in context of 
Regional Development Commission (RDC) 
regional boundaries.

11
The planning process for the Regional Drought Resilience Plan for the Mid West region: incorporating the City of Greater 
Geraldton and Shires of Chapman Valley and Northampton involved a four stage process (Figure 3).
1.	
A broad governance structure.
2.	
A Drought Vulnerability Assessment to provide a robust evidence base using wide consultation 
3.	
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan, which provides a high-level summary of the findings from the DVA.  
The Plan includes actions and interventions to mitigate drought impacts in the region. 
4.	
An Investment Framework 
The Mid West RDRP should be read in conjunction with the Mid West DVA.

12
Figure 3: Regional Drought Resilience Program framework.

13
The Mid West region is often referred to as the 
‘sentinel’ of drying and heating trends forecast 
for the South West Land Division under all climate 
change scenarios due its location at the limit of 
the winter rainfall climatic zone.
VISION, GOALS AND OUTCOMES
As such, primary producers in the 
region have been the vanguard of 
adaptive agricultural practices.  
The drought of 2006 and 2007 
delivered the Mid West region’s lowest 
and third lowest rainfall on record.
Economic, environmental and social impacts were wide 
ranging, and endured into 2008 and beyond. In response, 
primary producers demonstrated a strong commitment 
to continued changes across agricultural practices, 
increases in agronomic effectiveness and efficiency, 
and a vision on increased resilience through a ‘hand-up 
approach’, not ‘hand-outs’.

14
DEVELOPING OUR VISION
The purpose of the RDRP is to identify actions to prepare for increased climate variability, reduced growing season rainfall, 
and an increased number of drought events. This plan will inform future investments and assist in securing future funding 
for communities, the agricultural sector and regional businesses to help increase drought resilience in our region.  
Our drought resilience vision for the Mid West region is based on a grass roots assessment of what can realistically be 
achieved at a community, government and industry level to ensure the region is prepared for more frequent and severe 
droughts in the future. By creating a shared vision and agreed goals and outcomes, we have set a common direction and 
aspirational view of our region’s future from a drought resilience perspective. 
The broad engagement and consultation in the development of this Mid West RDRP revealed the vision:
A self-reliant agricultural community, capable of withstanding the challenges 
of drought through shared responsibility and an integrated approach to 
drought management and preparedness.
GOALS AND OUTCOMES
The insights outlined in the Mid West RDRP recognise the ongoing economic, environmental, and social impacts of drought 
and are intended to be a practical and applicable resource that can be used by farming communities, local governments, 
academics, industry groups and government agencies to inform decision making, attract funding and guide investment. 
The goal is that this RDRP will position the Mid West region to take advantage of emerging opportunities to continue to build 
sustainable agri-businesses, landscapes and communities, and for regional organisations, local government, community 
and industry to work in partnership. 
The Mid West RDRP also outlines key priorities which community stakeholders have identified as crucial to further addressing 
drought resilience in the region. Associated actions to address these priorities have been developed which capture local and 
regional initiatives, industry innovations and diversification, and best-practice initiatives from outside the regions. 
By aspiring to its vision, goal, priorities and actions, the following outcomes in the Mid West region will be achieved:
•	
The ability to identify and plan for the impacts of drought;
•	
Strengthen the ability to adapt to changes and take advantage of opportunities as they arise;
•	
Build economic, environmental and social resilience to future droughts;
•	
Learn from other regions’ RDRPs, sharing what is working and what is not;
•	
Form stronger connections and relationships within and between regions;
•	
Access best practice data and information to make better decisions and inform investment opportunities as they 
arise; and
•	
Improving natural resource management across the region.
The Mid West region’s vision, goal and priorities reflect the vision, aim, strategic priorities and objectives of the Drought 
Resilience Funding Plan 2020-2024.

15
DEFINITIONS
Adaptive Capacity
The extent to which a system is able to exploit opportunities and resist or adjust to change. For the Mid West RDRP, adaptive 
capacity is measured in terms of historical response to droughts in the Mid West region or estimated according to a set of 
vulnerability proxies such as income, education, community participation rates and drought resilience of natural features.
Drought
The need for a regionally appropriate definition of drought was raised during all stakeholder engagement for the RDRP. 
Engagement with primary producers and agribusiness indicated that growing season rainfall was most important to the 
Mid West region, with several noting the recent trend of the early onset of hot days in spring. 
Community groups defined drought as ‘consecutive dry seasons where there is inadequate growing season rainfall over 
two or more seasons.’ Indicators that they are in a drought were the lack of opening rains to commence their seeding 
operations, reduced growing season rainfall, less rainfall events that result in reduced run-off, and reduced spring rainfall.
The Technical Working Group further expanded the need for drought definitions to include social, environmental and 
economic impacts. The technical working group (TWG) defined drought for the WA RDRP program as follows:
The term drought refers to a prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions 
that impact negatively on water availability and agricultural production 
in a region and, consequently, impacts negatively on the economy and 
environment of the region and the health and well-being of its residents. 
Listen to Liz talk about her thoughts on drought 
definition, and more, here.
“We really feel that we need at 
least a 150mm of rainfall during 
the growing season… a drought is 
anything less than that… One of the 
other issues is what they call a hot 
drought…”
– Liz Sudlow, Northampton, Shire of Northampton
An assessment of meteorological definitions of drought indicated that a definition based on growing season rainfall (between 
April to October) is considered more appropriate for the South West Land Division than a definition based on total annual rainfall, 
and that the inclusion of heat in definitions should be further investigated, particularly for the Mid West region. Growing season 
rainfall better represents agricultural drought in the region, where dryland cropping in autumn and winter is the primary land use. 
Livestock also require water for runoff into dams and/or bore water to meet their demands during droughts.

16
Exposure
The extent to which a given system, community or region will be subjected to a particular hazard. For the Mid West RDRP, 
exposure is measured in terms of the extent to which the Mid West region will be exposed to drought and drought-related 
climate change processes. 
Resilience
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain 
or change functions and feedbacks so as to continue to deliver values.
Sensitivity
The extent to which a given system, community or region will be affected by a particular hazard. For the Mid West RDRP, 
sensitivity is fundamentally about the ways in which the Mid West region is impacted by drought.
A more in-depth analysis of terms and definitions can be found in the Mid West DVA.

•	
Demonstrate the Federal and WA Governments’ 
commitment to supporting farm businesses and 
communities to become more prepared for, and 
resilient to, the impacts of drought;
•	
Identify the appropriate target audiences, share 
program benefits and promote the importance of 
becoming drought-resilient and drought-prepared;
•	
Engage 
local 
stakeholders 
in 
each 
region, 
undertaking 
communication 
activities 
that 
promoted 
the 
importance 
of 
regional-scale 
planning, building commitment to the process 
and strengthening partnerships between relevant 
stakeholders; and
•	
Maximise participation and engagement in regional 
planning processes.
Strong partnerships were key in 
the successful delivery of the 
RDRP program. Figure 4 outlines 
the governance framework which 
supported the achievement of the 
engagement goals.
As part of a deliberative regional Mid West stakeholder 
engagement process, project partners worked 
collaboratively to:
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND CONSULTATION

18
Figure 4: Governance framework for the WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning program.
Broad stakeholder engagement and consultation was key to the development of the Mid West RDRP and Mid West DVA. 
The TWG was instrumental in informing the evidence base required for the development of these documents. The Mid 
West Project Advisory Group (PAG) provided local knowledge to support targeted engagement, review of technical inputs, 
and advice on identified drought resilience actions. Community consultation, conducted by MWDC and NACC NRM, was a 
critical component in the development of this plan and the DVA. 
Consultation was guided by the FDF’s three strategic priorities of economic, environmental and social resilience. Sessions 
focused on identifying the perceptions, experiences and associated risks of drought, reviewing emerging technical analyses 
from the Mid West DVA, sharing the results of earlier engagement efforts, and identifying drought resilience actions for 
inclusion in the Mid West RDRP. Stakeholder engagement and consultation occurred between October 2021 and June 2022 
with participation from almost 600 people representing 140 different organisations and businesses (Figure 5). 
In addition to this consultation work, a review of drought innovation was commissioned to identify transformative resilience 
projects and assess their potential application to regional WA (Appendix 1). The review was conducted under seven 
resilience research areas: water, digital, farm business, farming system, natural capital, community and regional economy. 
Areas of research were developed and workshopped with each WA region to further identify and support key local priorities 
and actions. 
Effective, early and on-going engagement throughout the project allowed for a diverse range of region-specific knowledge 
and skills to be harnessed, resulting in a collectively owned region-specific plan for the Mid West region. As a result of this 
process key Mid West priorities were identified within each of the three FDF strategic priorities (Figure 6).

19
Figure 5. Mid West RDRP stakeholder engagement summary.

20
Figure 6. Mid West RDRP community consultation drought resilience priorities aligned with FDF strategic priorities.

The development of the DVA provides the evidence 
base for the actions identified in the RDRP to 
mitigate drought impacts in the Mid West region.
The DVA comprised of a literature review, socio-economic analysis, spatial 
prioritisation, risk assessment, and additional input and analysis from 
technical experts, research professionals and industry leaders.
DEVELOPING THE EVIDENCE BASE

22
Extensive stakeholder and community engagement allowed for the harnessing of perspectives and insights from people’s 
lived experience and provided the opportunity to better understand how the region has been affected by drought in the past, 
and what has already been done to mitigate the impacts of future droughts. 
This in-depth evidence base supports:
•	
Improved understanding of the impacts of drought in the Mid West region;
•	
Synthesis of program and policy initiatives related to drought at a local, regional, State and Federal level;
•	
Investigation of alternative definitions of drought, based on growing season rainfall, better suited to the broadacre 
cropping areas of the Mid West region;
•	
In depth analyses of the economic, environmental, social and water impacts of drought, including the impacts of 
drought on Aboriginal communities;
•	
Development of a multi-criteria mapping methodology that synthesises a large number of datasets into a single 
decision-support tool highlighting priority areas for investment in resilience building activities; 
•	
An exploration of how readily measurable biophysical and socio-economic factors, often publicly available data, 
might serve as indicators of drought and be used to understand and/or predict the impacts of drought; and
•	
A drought vulnerability index using the data collected to create the drought risk priority areas map. 
Figure 7 outlines the key information sources used to develop the Drought Vulnerability Assessment in WA, with the broad 
range of information sources that contribute to the final Drought Resilience Assessment.
Figure 7. Overview of the Drought Vulnerability Assessment development process.

23
DVA METHODOLOGY COMPONENTS
Stakeholder Engagement
Stakeholder engagement was a critical component of the vulnerability assessment process (Figure 3). A stakeholder 
mapping process was undertaken to identify groups and individuals to consult on the development of the RDRP. Stakeholders 
identified through this process included local government authorities, farmers and their representative bodies, agribusiness, 
Traditional Owners, community groups and NGOs, research institutions and the local offices and technical teams of State 
and Federal Government agencies.
Consultation with stakeholders enabled an understanding of how people living in the region had experienced and responded 
to drought in the past, what they had done to mitigate drought risk, their perceived risk of being impacted by drought in 
the future, what a drought resilient region looked like to them and what priority actions they had in mind to ensure drought 
resilience in the future. A Technical Working Group (TWG) provided input and review of the key elements of the DVA model, 
including identification of important datasets to inform the assessment process. Membership of the TWG membership 
included DPIRD climate scientists, CSIRO, University of Western Australia’s Centre for Social Impact, Curtin University’s 
Centre for Crop Disease Management, Murdoch University’s Harry Butler Institute, Planfarm and Noongar Land Enterprises.
A Steering Committee provided high level support and direction to the project team and was chaired by the CEO of the 
Wheatbelt Development Commission, with representation from the participating RDCs and local governments, and the 
Director of the South-West of WA Drought Resilience and Adoption Hub. NACC-NRM was contracted to assist with 
consultation with grower groups, farm advisors, farming champions and the Project Advisory Group. They also worked in 
cooperation with First Nations representatives across the region. They used a range of methods including participatory 
workshops, interviews and regional surveys. 
Stakeholder consultation followed the RDRP conceptual framework, investigating aspects of exposure, sensitivity, impact 
and adaptive capacity and the ways in which each of these relate to and inform vulnerability and resilience to drought in 
the region. Stakeholder engagement between October 2021 and February 2022 focused on identifying the ways in which 
the local community understands and defines drought, how they have been impacted by drought in the past, how they 
responded during the most recent severe drought in 2006 and 2007, and how they now prepare and plan for future droughts. 
Consultation sessions from February to June 2022 focused on reviewing emerging technical analyses, sharing the results 
of earlier consultation efforts, identifying key priorities for the region, and identifying drought resilience actions for inclusion 
in the RDRP and development into future projects. From June 2022 onwards, consultation focused on reviewing and 
finalising the draft RDRP. 592 people were consulted, representing 140 organisations and businesses.
Desktop Review
Desktop review is a critical component of any vulnerability assessment process. It involves identifying, summarising 
and interpreting what is already known about the impacts of the hazard on drought. The desktop review followed the 
development of the RDRP conceptual framework, and investigated aspects of exposure, sensitivity, impact and adaptive 
capacity and the ways in which each of these relate to and inform vulnerability and resilience to drought in the regions. 
The desktop review included an overview of existing data, research, tools and resources that informed our stakeholders’ 
understanding of drought impacts and drought preparedness across the focus regions. It included a socio-economic 
and land-use profile of the region, describing the population, major land-uses and economic activities, the threatening 
processes they face and what that means in terms of drought resilience. 
The review identified those actively working to support drought resilience in the region, including their respective roles and 
relationships between them, and summarised existing and past drought resilience policies and plans across a range of 
levels, from local to international, and the suite of drought resilience programs currently operating in Western Australia and 
Australia.

24
Spatial Prioritisation
The spatial component of the DVA used mapping software to map drought resilience priority areas. All spatial data was 
prepared and presented at the scale of local administrative boundaries, to best support local level decision-making and 
investment.
Inputs into the multi-criteria analysis (MCA) were determined following the development of the RDRP conceptual framework, 
and include exposure, sensitivity, impact and adaptive capacity and the ways in which each of these relate to and inform 
vulnerability and resilience to drought in the regions. Spatial data layers include:
•	
climate data (historical and projected change in rainfall, temperature, soil moisture and drought frequency and 
severity);
•	
environmental data (soil type, topography, ground and surface water resources, native vegetation extent, ground 
cover, normalized difference vegetation index);
•	
production data (crop yields, animal production, type of farming system);
•	
financial data (household income, farm profitability, use of farm management deposit schemes);
•	
social data (population trends, access to services, community participation rates); and
•	
infrastructure data (roads, water supplies).
Composite maps showing how different features of drought risk and resilience are overlaid in the regional landscapes are 
created using a standard multi-criterion GIS analysis (MCA). Priority areas for investment in drought resilience projects or 
programs are highlighted at the overlap between spatial datasets that highlight where drought is likely to occur, where there 
are features that are likely to provide resilience to the impacts of drought (e.g. high ground cover, lots of water resources, 
drought resilient farming systems) and where vulnerable communities of people are likely to be impacted by drought (e.g. 
remote communities with limited access to services). 
Risk Assessment
A drought risk assessment collates all the data collected and analysed from the stakeholder engagement, desktop review 
and spatial prioritisation components, and provides local decision-makers with a summary of vulnerability to drought in 
their region. Synthesis of the data into a risk assessment followed the development of the RDRP conceptual framework 
and investigated aspects of exposure, sensitivity, impact and adaptive capacity and the ways in which each of these relate 
to and inform vulnerability and resilience to drought in the regions. 
The aim of a risk assessment summary is to assist local decision makers and managers in the rapid evaluation of drought 
vulnerability for the region and enable tracking of change over time. Data in each drought impact category (i.e., social, 
financial, production, environmental) can be scored along a sliding scale and assessed over medium and long-term 
timeframes in terms of drought risk and resilience.

25
Technical Expertise
To strengthen the evidence base, the following technical reports were commissioned to gain regionally specific insights 
into drought resilience. These insights informed the Mid West DVA and were drawn from:
•	
Socio-economic and drought policy review (Anna Dixon Consulting): review for the three WA regions.
•	
Drought Indices (CSIRO): Repeated the recent CSIRO NSW drought indicators exercise by deploying a Random 
Forest Analysis to Nous data relevant to the three WA regions.
•	
Defining Drought in WA (Curtin University): Assessment of the suitability of the current BoM definition of drought in 
decile 1 over two or more consecutive years and investigation of other drought definitions or indices appropriate for 
the regions. 
•	
Drought Risk Assessment (DPIRD): Analysis of historical and future drought risk scenarios for each region. 
•	
Economic and Environmental Impacts of Drought (LA One Economics and Consulting): Review of historical and 
potential future economic and environmental impacts of drought on farming businesses, communities, agribusiness 
and supply chain sectors in the region. 
•	
Social Impacts of Drought (UWA): Identification of primary social impacts of drought in the region and assessment 
of the effectiveness of actions taken in the past.
•	
Drought Impacts on Water Resources in the Mid West (MWDC): overview of drought impacts on current water 
sources in the Mid West, and the identification of future supplies and opportunities to build greater water resilience. 
•	
Farm business viability analysis (Planfarm): analysis of the financial response of a cohort of farm businesses in the 
Mid West region to drought. 
The DVA also considered specific knowledge and skills from the following sources:
•	
Relevant Council plans  
•	
Economic Development Plans
•	
Strategic Community Plans
•	
Australian Drought Plan 
•	
Regional Development Commission Strategic Plans 
•	
WA Government Climate Policy 
•	
State Infrastructure Plans 
•	
South West WA Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub
The Mid West RDRP evidence base was further informed by previous and current strategies such as the North Eastern 
with a review of relevant science-based initiatives, such as the DPIRD WaterSmart Farms project. 
There are limitations to some of the datasets used in the assessment process, due to the granularity, frequency of data 
capture and scale of the data. It is recommended that the Mid West DVA be reviewed on a regular basis to integrate updated 
or new datasets of relevance. This will not only inform future planning and investment but enable longitudinal monitoring 
of drought resilience.

26
Plan Alignment
The Mid West RDRP is consistent with National Framework for Drought Policy (National Drought Agreement) and Australian 
Government Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan. The Plan has a focus on long term resilience and 
preparedness. The RDRP also has strong alignment with national, state, regional and local plans, strategies and policies, 
including: 
National: 
•	
•	
South West WA Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub
State:
•	
WA Government: Diversity WA 2019, Western Australian Climate Policy 2020
•	
Department of Water: Water for Growth 2016
•	
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development: Strategic Intent 2018-2021, Primary Industries Plan 
2020-2024, Western Australian Soil Health Strategy 2021-2031
•	
Water Corporation: Water Forever - Towards Climate Resilience 2009
•	
Western Australian Agricultural Research Collaboration
Regional:
•	
WA Government: Mid West Regional Planning and Infrastructure Framework, Mid West Sub-Regional Strategy 
(Guilderton to Kalbarri)
•	
NACC NRM: NARvis (Regional NRM Strategy for the Northern Agricultural Region)
Local:
•	
City of Greater Geraldton Strategic Community plan 2021-2031
•	
Shire of Chapman Valley: Strategic Community plan 2022-2032
•	
Shire of Northampton: Community Strategic Plan 2020-2030

27
REGIONAL DESCRIPTION
Geography and Population
The portion of the Mid West region which is covered by this plan, covers an area of 26,490 km2, and includes the City of 
Greater Geraldton, and the Shires of Chapman Valley and Northampton (Figure 8). It is home to over 42,000 people. The 
majority of the population, services and administration are centered in Geraldton. 
Figure 8: Geographic scope of the Mid West RDRP.
The region is located on Yamatji Country and resident Aboriginal language groups include the Amangu, Badimia, Naaguja, 
Nhanaghardi, Nhanda, Mullewa Wadjari, Wattandee, Widi and Wilunyu peoples. The Yamatji Southern Regional Corporation 
is the entity responsible for implementing the region’s Indigenous Land Use Agreement. 
The region covers the north west portion of the Mid West Development Commission’s total region, and is the northern 
most limit of the WA grainbelt, bordered by the southern rangelands to the north and east, and the Indian Ocean to the 
west. It includes the H1 (high rainfall north), M1 (medium rainfall north) and L1 (low rainfall north) agro-economic zones as 
identified by the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development.
The Index of Relative Socio-economic Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD) Socio-economic Index for Areas (SEIFA) 
score, which measures both advantage and disadvantage, shows that Greater Geraldton and Northampton are more 
disadvantaged than greater regional WA and greater WA, while the Shire of Chapman Valley is more advantaged than 
greater regional WA and greater WA. 
The Dropping off the Edge index ranks locations from 1 to 5 across 37 indicators, with 1 the highest disadvantage and 5 
the least. It uses SA2 boundaries which are different to local government areas, however it can give a useful macro view 
of issues. The Mid West region had scores from 1-2, indicating high disadvantage and highlighting areas of vulnerability in 
terms of low family incomes, no internet at home, juvenile convictions, prison admissions, air quality and heat vulnerability 
(days over 38°C).

28
Economy
The largest industry sector for economic output in the Mid West region is construction with 13.85% of total output. 
Agriculture accounts for 7.57% of economic output in the region. While agriculture makes up only a small proportion of the 
overall economic output in the City of Greater Geraldton, the annual output from this sector is larger than the other two 
participating LGAs and is valued at $334.74 million. Agriculture is the main economic output in both the Shires of Chapman 
Valley and Northampton. Broadacre cropping is the dominant land use in all three LGAs, and accounts for 80-85% of 
agricultural value in the each, mostly from wheat production (Figure 9). The Mid West region also supports a diverse range 
of other agricultural activities including livestock production and horticulture (Figure 9).

29
Figure 9. Agricultural outputs and statistics for the entire Mid West agricultural area. Note, this is a broader area of the Mid West region than the one defined in this Mid West RDRP 
(Source: DPIRD).

30
The largest employment sector within the Mid West region is the health care and social assistance sector, with 13.6% of 
jobs. Across the region 6.64% of jobs are in the agriculture, forestry and fishing sector, although individual proportions for 
the Shires of Chapman Valley and Northampton are much higher.
The City of Greater Geraldton has a higher level of business diversity compared to the Shires of Chapman Valley and 
Northampton, as is to be expected for a major regional centre. However, while primary production accounts for just 18% of 
businesses, at 574 the City of Greater Geraldton has the highest number of such business of the three LGAs. 
While there are considerably fewer primary production-based businesses in the Shires of Chapman Valley and Northampton, 
they make up a much greater proportion of total business, at 53% and 40% respectively. Annual turnover in primary 
production businesses in the Mid West region range from less than $50,000 to more than $10,000,000.
Table 1 summarises key socio-economic statistics for the Mid West regions and each of the three LGAs.
Mid West region 
combined
City of Greater 
Geraldton
Shire of  
Chapman Valley
Shire of 
Northampton
Area (km2)
26,490
9,889
3,983
12,618
Population
42,647
38,231
1,540
2,876
Median age (years) 
-
38
43
51
Labour force par-
ticipation rate (%)
-
62.2
71.1
52.7
SEIFA - IRSAD 
Score
-
956
1,028
937
Dropping off the 
Edge Index
1-2
1-2
2
2
Annual economic 
output
$7.1 billion
$6.5 billion
$142.7 million
$425.7 million
% Economic output 
from agriculture
7.57%
5.15%
45.82%
32.44%
% Employment in 
agriculture
6.64%
4.19%
50.2%
28.9%
Table 1: Key socio-economic indicators for the Mid West region and participating LGAs.

31
Landscapes and Natural Resources
The Mid West region landscapes are a mixture of distinctive flat-topped hills, mature valleys and extensive areas of 
undulating sandplains. The region is dissected by a number of rivers, the main ones being the Irwin, Greenough, Chapman, 
Bowe, Hutt and Murchison. 
There are a variety of duplex soils and red earths on the valley sides and river flats. The sandplains comprise of pale deep 
sands and yellow deep sands which have low to moderate water holding capacity, low natural fertility, and are prone to 
erosion and water repellence. 
Water resources in the Mid West region comprise of underground aquifers, recharged from rainfall. Most recharge occurs 
in the cooler months of June to September when rainfall exceeds evaporation and when rain falls over consecutive days. 
Aquifers support residential, agricultural, industry and environmental needs.
The Mid West region is part of the South West WA global biodiversity hotspot. Vegetation comprises largely of species rich 
scrub heath and thickets. Wildflowers, coastal landscapes and marine wildlife attract tourists to the region.
The WA grainbelt has experienced transformational change since European settlement and much is cleared of its natural 
vegetation. However, significant remnants of native vegetation on both private land and in conservation reserves remain in 
the Mid West region, particularly on the border of the agricultural zone and the southern rangelands. Kalbarri National Park 
and Wandana Nature Reserve are notable. 
The region has abundant solar and wind resources, potentially well suited to in situ renewable energy production.  
Listen to Jason talk about the different soil 
resources on his property, and more, here.
“Changing our focus on what is 
good cropping land and what 
is not so good cropping land… 
concentrating the cropping onto the 
loams, the better heavier soil types, 
and on some of the weaker sands 
we now establish perennials… The 
yellow sandplain around here can be 
quite fragile…”
– Jason Batten, East Yuna, Shire of Chapman Valley

32
REGIONAL STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
The WA State Government Mid West Sub-Regional Strategy, focused on well-planned regional growth and development, 
highlights the agriculture sector as a high value industry for the sub-region. The Mid West Regional Planning and 
Infrastructure Framework also highlights agriculture as a significant industry in this region. The Mid West Development 
Commission, focused on diversifying the region’s economic base and maximising investment in local industry, has identified 
regional water infrastructure, economic development in the agriculture sector and regional leadership on climate change 
adaptation and natural resource management as priorities. The North Eastern Agricultural Region (NEAR) Strategic Plan 
guided the implementation of several projects in the region to increase resilience to drought, including Decision Making and 
Tactical Tools for 2008 and Beyond in the NEAR and Adapting to Climate Change in the NEAR. State Government priorities 
include expansion of the freight network in the Mid West to support agriculture, the resources sector and the local port.
Local governments in the area work together under the Batavia Regional Organisation of Councils and the City of Greater 
Geraldton is part of the WA Regional Capitals Alliance. 
The Yamatji Southern Regional Corporation, representing Traditional Owners in the area, prioritise projects that will ensure 
the sustainable management of groundwater resources and water catchments.
The regional NRM Strategy for the Northern Agricultural Region (www.narvis.com.au) identifies and prioritises opportunities 
for NRM investment in the region. Specific areas of importance include sustainable production, soil health, water quality, 
adapting to climate change, and managing feral animals and weeds. 
Listen to Jason talk about revegetation and water 
capture projects on his property, and more, here.
“We’ve got lots of creek lines… they’ve 
been reveg-ed or maintained… this 
allows us to utilise those areas and 
provide a service in natural resource 
management as well… We are also 
looking at doing some earthworks 
and reveg work… to help with keeping 
water on the farm…”
– Jason Stokes, Chapman Valley, Shire of Chapman Valley

33
Measuring Vulnerability and Resilience
ASSESSING THE VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE OF THE MID WEST REGION
Methodology
Using GIS-based multi-criteria analysis (MCA), relevant 
economic, environmental and social data was spatially 
integrated at an appropriate decision-making scale 
(LGA boundaries) to produce a set of maps of drought 
vulnerability and resilience priority areas for the South 
West Land Division and at the local Mid West scale. 
Inputs into the MCA followed the DVA conceptual 
framework, investigating aspects of exposure, sensitivity, 
impact and adaptive capacity.

34
These maps took into consideration farm water supply, agricultural production, soil health and erosion potential along with 
a range of socio-economic and landscape features that contribute to drought resilience or exacerbate drought risk. These 
features include water-related ecological infrastructure, high value agricultural land and areas of higher socio-economic 
vulnerability. The approach consolidates complex information into user-friendly spatial products designed to enable fine-
scale, local-level decision making on drought resilience. Map products were ground-truthed through workshops with Mid 
West stakeholders representing Aboriginal community groups, broadacre farmers, agribusiness, the Mid West PAG and the 
TWG. Participants were asked to identify the locations most vulnerable to drought based on their past experiences with 
drought in the region (Figure 10). Their feedback was incorporated into the final products.
Figure 10. Ground-truthing process for MCA map products by Mid West region stakeholders.
Vulnerability Index
A Vulnerability Index was developed for the Mid West region with ten indicators chosen to reflect exposure, sensitivity and 
adaptive capacity. It provides a snapshot of vulnerability to drought which can be repeated and tracked over time and aims 
to assist local decision makers and managers in the rapid evaluation of drought risk in the region. Each indicator was rated 
on a sliding scale from 1-5, with 1 being the lowest vulnerability and 5 the highest. 
While the vulnerability index suggests that vulnerability to drought in the region is moderate (3.3 out of 5), risk is not evenly 
spread amongst the factors assessed. While the region is resilient in terms of soil and production capability, it is highly 
exposed to the impacts of climate change (increasing temperatures, decreasing rainfall, changes in the timing of rainfall 
and increasingly frequent drought) and faces several general resilience challenges including economic diversification and 
access to infrastructure, services and reliable, good quality water.
There are limitations to some of the data in these analyses, particularly the publicly available human capital datasets utilised 
to inform adaptive capacity to drought. It was noted during consultation and in development of the mapping products, that 
the availability, quality and resolution of human capital datasets was not sufficient to provide maximum confidence in the 
adaptive capacity assessment. There are opportunities to continue to build and review the model to incorporate further 
socio-economic information to strengthen understanding and measurement of resilience in regional areas.
The average score across indicators gave an overall drought index of 3.3 for the Mid West region, indicating considerable 
vulnerability to drought, supporting the vulnerability mapping. Due to the degree of variation between indicators it is 
important to consider them individually (Table 2). Areas of strength in drought resilience which should be maintained and 
developed are the region’s good soil capability and low production risk. Weaker areas in terms of drought resilience include 
expected impacts of climate change on temperature and rainfall patterns, increasing drought frequency, NDVI trends and 
the level of direct dependence of local economies and livelihoods on agriculture.

35
Results
Drought vulnerability in the Mid West region is a function of three major drivers:
•	
Exposed areas – show long-term increases in temperature and decreases in rainfall, decline in growing season 
rainfall, measurable increases in drought frequency, and measurable declines in potential wheat yield and root zone 
soil moisture. 
•	
Sensitive areas – exhibit low farm profits, low vegetation cover, low water asset count, high levels of economic 
dependence on agriculture, and demographic factors such as lower household income and relative remoteness. 
•	
Areas with low adaptive capacity – have relatively poor access to water infrastructure, high unemployment, a large 
percentage of the population over 65 years of age, and reliance on degraded or poorer quality natural resources, 
including water and native vegetation.
The area of strength and resilience, which should be maintained and built upon, is the region’s production capability. 
Specific exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity maps and assessments are presented in the Mid West DVA.
The final drought vulnerability maps (Figures 11 and 12) are a composite of adaptive capacity and drought impact, and 
show that the Mid West region is highly to very highly vulnerable to drought, with highest vulnerability in the north and east. 
The drought vulnerability maps can be used as a decision-support tool to link priority areas to implementation activities 
developed through stakeholder engagement.

36
Figure 11: Final drought vulnerability map for South West Land Division of Western Australia showing areas most vulnerable to drought 
are in the north and east of the region.
Figure 12: Final drought vulnerability map at Mid West region scale. The map highlights drought risk priority areas based on temperature, 
rainfall and production data, access to infrastructure, population demographics and environmental characteristics. Data for pastoral areas 
in the far north and east are not reliable and should be ignored.

37
Table 2. Indicators used as proxies for exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity to calculate an index of vulnerability for 
the Mid West region. 
Component
Indicator
Score
Exposure
Projected change in growing season rainfall and maturing season 
temperature
4
Change in timing of the autumn break to date
3
Change in drought frequency to date
5
Sensitivity
Production risk (crop and livestock combined)
2
Trend in NDVI (lowest 10%)
4
Percentage employment in agriculture
4
Adaptive capacity
Percentage unemployment
3
Access to infrastructure
3
Groundwater quality
3
Soil capability 
2
INDEX
3.3
It proved difficult to correlate and predict the severity of social and economic impacts to driving conditions of drought (such 
as low rainfall, high temperature and low soil moisture). Further work is required to understand these relationships, and the 
links between social and economic impacts and environmental and economic predictors in the context of drought.

38
Impacts of drought
The impacts of drought in the Mid West regions are cross-cutting. Stakeholder engagement revealed drought impacts can 
be significant and wide ranging affecting the economic, social and environmental functioning of the region’s communities, 
landscapes and businesses. Almost the entire agricultural portion of the Mid West study region has high and very high 
likelihood of being impacted adversely by drought (Figure 13). A summary of the main impacts of drought in the Mid West 
region, identified through the stakeholder engagement and technical review process, are outlined below.  
Figure 13: Drought impact in the Mid West region.

39
Economic Impacts
Rural communities in the Mid West region have a low level of economic diversity. Aside from the regional centre of Geraldton, 
they are dependent on the agriculture sector for their economic well-being. The reliance on agriculture means that droughts 
impact negatively on the economic and social well-being of these communities. During the consultation process, the most 
frequently mentioned impact of drought identified by Mid West stakeholders was serious financial stress.
The most obvious economic impact of drought is on the volume of agricultural production. Compromised production has 
large effects on household income, which can lead to long-term financial hardship, deterioration in household financial 
positions and knock-on effects on regional employment. Farmers and growers may have to use equity, increase debt or 
seek off-farm income. Negative impacts can linger for many years due to the depletion of farm capital during drought 
years. While there is an overall increasing trend in operating surplus for agricultural businesses in WA, low operating 
surpluses are evident during drought years, with surpluses tending to drop below $50 per hectare in low rainfall areas. 
Farms in the Mid West region are in the near-lowest farm business profit percentile range.
Although droughts cause financial pain, farmers have, on average, been able to manage their businesses such that their 
wealth improves. This has been achieved by increasing farm size, altering farming systems towards greater cropping and 
increasing production efficiency to create additional profit. Additional factors that make farmers and communities more 
resilient to drought include access to water and good infrastructure, low debt levels, low interest rates, high commodity 
prices, efficient production, diversification, populated communities and a fast, reliable internet connection.
The impacts of drought are often highly farm specific. Financial ramifications can be different in different years and different 
businesses can be differently affected. Identifying the real impact of drought conditions can be difficult using aggregated 
data. An analysis of the current performance of 36 farm businesses in the Mid West region compared their performance in 
2006/07 and a more recent poor season in 2019.  
The analysis found that most farming businesses in the cohort are moderately to strongly resilient, with all still trading 
after both drought events. The most resilient and likely to survive consecutive future droughts are generational businesses 
with accrued wealth and a demonstrated ability to generate profit, and reinvest into the business. These businesses are 
large scale, in terms of both gross income and effective hectares, and have a low representation of livestock as part of the 
business.
The least resilient, particularly in the event of consecutive future droughts, are start-up business with no generational 
wealth and or located in the low rainfall zone. Many have experienced financial shocks in recent years, such as succession 
issues. Almost all are smaller than average in terms of gross income and/or effective hectares, and have lower than 
average investment in plant and equipment. Their survival in the event of successive drought years will depend on their 
ability to minimise losses, source finance to continue trading and improve profits in subsequent years.
Given recent increases in the costs of operating, the risks due to a poor season are greater today than in the past. While 
recent increases in land values provide increased equity for those that already own their land, high prices can stifle growth 
aspirations or increase risk related to servicing debt for newer or smaller enterprises.
For more information on the economic impacts of drought in the Mid West region refer to the Mid West DVA and 
accompanying appendices.

40
Environmental Impacts
Regional communities are dependent on natural resources for their livelihoods, with ecosystems providing important 
services to agricultural production, biodiversity and public amenity. Environmental impacts can be widespread and long-
lasting, contributing to land degradation processes, and are among the most noticeable effects of drought. During the 
consultation process, Mid West stakeholders stated that drought negatively affected soil health, water resources (natural 
and scheme) and biodiversity. Several noted the terrible soil erosion which occurred in the 2006/07 drought as well as 
the bare and brown landscapes, and increased fire risk. Aboriginal community members in the Mid West were extremely 
concerned about the impacts of drought on biodiversity and bushfire regimes. During the 2006-07 drought, Aboriginal 
landholders also experienced land degradation, and water supply and quality problems.
Drought conditions have significant impacts on natural resources, including irreversible damage to water quality, soil and 
vegetation, leading in turn to dust storms and a loss of topsoil, soil nutrients, organic matter and soil carbon. Annual 
environmental condition scores for the Mid West region from 2000 to 2021 utilising inundation, streamflow, vegetation 
growth, leaf area, exposed soil, tree cover, and number of hot days were lowest in 2007, 2013 and 2019, reflecting drought 
and poor season conditions. The effects of drought on the environment persist and are detectable in environmental 
condition scores for several years after the event. 
The Mid West region relies predominantly on groundwater aquifers for its water resources. As aquifers are recharged by 
rainfall, they are highly susceptible to drought and declining rainfall. When annual rainfall totals less than 300mm, little to 
no groundwater recharge occurs. Average annual rainfall for the Mid West region between 1980 and 2020 was 254mm. 
Over this period, rainfall above 300mm occurred in only nine of the 41 years. As such, aquifer water levels are falling and 
water quality declining. Requests for large volumes of water for new developments cannot be accommodated. A rising 
trend in salinity indicates changing aquifer conditions. Scheme water is considered too poor in quality for horticultural 
production. The region’s horticultural producers blend scheme water with rainwater or treated waste water which is fresher 
than groundwater.
Healthy ecosystems build resilience to drought, and nature-based solutions can offer cost-effective protections while 
delivering co-benefits such as carbon capture and storage, and improved food and water security. Sustainable natural 
resource management, including of soil, water and biodiversity, must be prioritised.
For more information on the environmental impacts of drought in the Mid West region refer to the Mid West DVA and 
accompanying appendices.

41
Social Impacts
The immediate and medium-term, direct and indirect social impacts of drought are diverse, related to employment, 
education, migration, family relationships, mistrust of government, uncertainty over the future and over community 
resources and support systems. All these factors have the potential to directly or indirectly impact on physical, mental, 
social and emotional health and wellbeing.
During the consultation process, Mid West stakeholders stated that drought negatively affected their mental health. It 
contributed to failed businesses, to people moving away, and to a reduction of skills and services in the region. Drought 
strained community services and support networks. While communities came together to support each other, the burden 
of organising events and coordinating groups falls to the same people, also struggling through drought. Off-farm work was 
viewed as important for mental health but not as financially worthwhile. 
Aboriginal communities are likely to be disproportionately affected by drought based on pre-existing health and social 
disadvantage. Prolonged drought impacts on rural and regional employment opportunities and degrades the environment. 
This can affect Aboriginal peoples’ ability to carry out cultural roles that support cultural identity. Barriers to Caring for 
Country impact on mental, emotional and physical wellbeing. During prolonged drought, Aboriginal people can experience 
solastalgia, a feeling of psychological desolation caused by the recognition that one’s home is under physical threat and 
eroding one’s sense of belonging. 
Building resilience to the impacts of drought involves taking action at both the individual and community level, with many 
non-farming people and businesses also impacted by the loss of income and regional outmigration associated with 
drought. Mid West stakeholders highlighted the need for stronger support to community groups and networks during 
drought.
For more information on the social impacts of drought in the Mid West region refer to the Mid West DVA and accompanying 
appendices.
Future Scenarios
As the climate changes, the Mid West region will continue to see increasing temperatures and reduced growing season 
rainfall (Figure 14). The time spent in meteorological drought will increase over the course of the century. The recent 
increasing prevalence of hot drought (combined high temperatures and low rainfall) (Figure 15) is alarming. The impacts 
of hot drought will be devastating, and likely to occur more frequently and over larger areas.

42
Figure 14: Maps showing the projected rainfall during the growing season of April to October by 2030 (left) and by 2050 (right).

43
Figure 15. Area (km2) of hot 
drought 
across 
Western 
Australia 1980 to 2020 (solid 
red line), and a five-year running 
average (dashed orange line).
Broadacre crop and pasture production are more likely to decline in drier, warmer northern and eastern areas of the South 
West Land Division such as the Mid West region. Average potential yield has already declined dramatically across the Mid 
West as a result of increasing temperature and increased evapotranspiration. 
Livestock welfare risks may increase as higher temperatures reduce the availability of feed and increase heat stress. Higher 
temperatures may also affect livestock productivity by reducing reproductive rates, growth rates and milk production. 
The amount and quality of water available for horticulture and other agricultural activities will continue to be affected by 
reduced recharge to aquifers. Water resources potentially may not be able to meet residential and commercial demand, 
nor environmental needs.
While dryland salinity is likely to reduce due to declining rainfall, wind erosion may increase due to decreasing groundcover 
and water erosion due to increasing summer rainfall. Erosion is one of the greatest risks to soil health during drought, as it 
strips away the fertile top layers of soil and organic matter. Further, reduced rainfall and higher temperatures dry out soil, 
creating cracks that reduce the moisture and volume of the soil, affect the activity of soil microbes, reduce soil particle 
cohesion, change soil texture, decrease soil water holding capacity and limiting plant growth. 
As the climate becomes more inhospitable for both native vegetation and crops, insects, feral animals, and weeds may 
increase in prevalence, creating further damage to native vegetation and biodiversity more broadly, as well as crops. 
Projected increases in other extreme events such as cyclones and floods could exacerbate the social, economic and 
environmental impacts of future drought.
Farmers are achieving returns from seasons that would have been loss-makers a decade ago, and achieve returns on both 
good and marginal land. However, continued dependence on the export market, increases in the costs of doing business 
and rising rural debt may leave farming households more vulnerable to economic impacts of future drought, particularly if 
droughts span multiple consecutive years. 
The Mid West DVA and associated appendices describe future drought scenarios and vulnerability of the region to future 
climate impacts in more detail. 
As part of the transformative review process (Appendix 1) mega-trends were identified which have and will continue to have 
impacts on agricultural businesses, communities and environments, and which will drive future changes and adaptations 
in the three WA RDRP regions (Table 3). These mega trends and drivers must also be used to inform future drought 
resilience actions in the Mid West region.

44
Table 3. Mega trends in the agricultural systems and communities of the three WA RDRP regions and their resultant 
impacts and drivers of change.
Mega Trend
Impact
Driver
Supply and 
Demand Shocks
High input costs, substitution inputs, tight supply commodities, 
confidence in agricultural industry, land value increases
Supply chain 
disruptions
Food Trends
Vegetable oil and plant protein demand, aquaculture product 
demand, onshoring meat production
Demand for vegetable 
oil, plant protein and 
seafood
Climate Crisis
Need for adaptive responses, ecosystem services, natural capital 
market, carbon market opportunities
Net zero transition, 
decarbonising economy
Resource Scarcity
Oil, gas, water, labour underpinning inputs for regions’ economies
Water, energy, labour 
key drivers
Digital 
Transformation
Connectivity is the new highway, and data is currency
Connectivity and 
digitisation of industries 
and communities
Neo-ecology
Sustainability becoming major economic driver
Sustainability 
credentials for trade 
and markets
Globalisation and 
Pandemics
Less safe world, which is very connected, ongoing impact from 
major events + tensions
Biosecurity
Wellbeing
Wellbeing of communities impacted by drought
Building community 
cohesion

45
A key strategy for Steve has been spreading the geographic risk of drought. After the major 
drought of 2006/2007, he purchased two properties which are approximately 25km from his 
other three adjoining properties. Steve also believes in being in as good a financial position as 
possible, including managing debt and having off-farm investments and assets as back-ups 
to withstand drought.
Business Planning
Steve Rowe, Wongoondy, City of Greater Geraldton
Current responses to drought and dry seasons
Mid West community consultation emphasised a preference for hand-ups over hand-outs to mitigate drought impacts. 
Local growers are proactive in taking existing knowledge, opportunities and technologies to make their businesses and 
themselves more resilient to drought. Community consultation also highlighted the desire of growers to learn from each 
other, and for knowledge and experiences to be shared between groups and regions. 
As such, several growers agreed to participate in extended interviews, conducted as part of the stakeholder consultation 
process, outlining their current drought mitigation actions, and for these to be shared. Excerpts from the interview write ups 
highlighting different areas of drought mitigation are presented below. Links to each full write up are provided.
Bao Duy was awarded the prestigious Nuffield scholarship in 2016, allowing him to learn more 
about new horticultural practices to improve and expand the business. He travelled to over 10 
countries between 2017-2019, gaining valuable knowledge in low technology greenhouses, 
and horticultural practices.
Education and Training
Bao Duy Nguyen, Deepdale and Walkaway, City of Greater Geraldton
Ben and Ange’s land management practices include liming, controlled traffic, stubble retention, 
fallowing paddocks and summer weed control. Fallowing and controlling summer weeds 
increase soil moisture, and liming ensures crops have access to that stored moisture. Without 
liming crop roots would hit a shallow acidic barrier.
Soil Health
Ben and Ange Cripps, Ogilvie, Shire of Northampton
The Cripps’ started sowing perennial grasses after the major 2006/2007 drought. They have 
established 350ha on which they have intense grazing periods followed by long rest breaks. As 
a result, they have reduced wind erosion and have a reliable feed source in summer and autumn.
Perennial Pasture
Lloyd Cripps, West Binnu, Shire of Northampton

46
Daniel has a drought plan for his sheep too. By pregnancy scanning his ewes, Daniel can divide 
the dry, single-pregnancy and multiple-pregnancy ewes into separate mobs. He puts more 
energy into the ewes carrying multiple lambs and can easily sell off the dry ewes if there is no 
rain by June.
Stock Management
Daniel Gill, Sandy Gully, Shire of Northampton
Being efficient also involves being prepared to seed and control summer weeds as soon as 
conditions are favourable. The Tropiano family have always dry-sown but are more aggressive 
with it now, focusing on definitive end dates for sowing, not start dates. These approaches 
make the most of and preserve soil moisture.
Climatic Triggers
David Tropiano, Mullewa, City of Greater Geraldton

47
THE PLAN
While the Mid West RDRP and DVA identify 
reinforce the high level of proactivity of growers and 
communities to drought preparedness, they also 
highlight that further preparedness is required to 
continue to address current and future impacts of 
drought, and associated climate change trends. 
The Mid West community and 
technical stakeholders, and the 
transformative review (Appendix 1) 
identified actions for the Mid West 
which are required to meet key Mid 
West priorities (Figure 5) as well 
as drought and climate change 
resilience more broadly. 
The Mid West actions encompass aspects of maintenance, 
modification, or transformation of parts, sectors or whole 
systems at the local, regional and state level.

48
PLAN IMPLEMENTATION AND ENDURING GOVERNANCE
The Mid West RDRP’s proposed priorities and actions have been developed with the 
community and technical experts, and independent transformative review. Delivery and impact 
is targeted at the local and regional level, with some interventions having significance beyond 
the Mid West region. We acknowledge there are many relevant programs already underway 
or being planned that will support the delivery of the Mid West RDRP, and to the best of our 
knowledge, we have engaged with those programs.
The implementation of the Mid West RDRP, including identification of priority program areas and the plan’s enduring 
governance and ongoing resourcing, will be subject to further discussion in coming months with participating LGAs and 
potential program delivery partners, including the South West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub. While 
locally-led delivery of the Mid West RDRP is preferred to ensure maximum community buy in and impact, resourcing to 
implement the plan requires resolution. 
This work will also consider the principles of the feasibility and practicality of proposed actions and the quantitative and 
qualitative public-good benefits to the region as described in Component 8 of the Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
Independent Review Guide.
The Mid West actions are presented in this Plan. They are grouped under each of the FDF strategic priorities of social 
resilience, environmental resilience, and economic resilience, and their supporting FDF objectives. They are presented 
against the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020-2024 actions to show the high level of concord with these, as well as the 
Mid West community priorities where actions came from community consultation. The order in which the Mid West actions 
are listed does not imply any sort of ranking of importance. 
Many programs relevant to the implementation of the Mid West actions already exist. Some are identified below and many 
in the transformative review (Appendix 1) but there will be more which have not as yet been identified. This identification 
process will form part of the implementation plan.

49
FDF STRATEGIC PRIORITY: SOCIAL RESILIENCE
FDF Objective: Enhance the public good by building drought resilience through 
programs that maintain and improve the wellbeing and social fabric of rural and 
regional communities.
Current Situation
People of the Mid West region feel stressed in times of drought. While groups, networks and communities draw together in 
solidarity, volunteers and leaders feel overworked and overwhelmed. This is compounded by people and services leaving 
communities during drought, and a lack of support or lack of knowledge of available support. 
The top ranked priorities for social resilience identified from public consultation were: 
Technical consultation also identified the need to capture suitable data on the social effects of drought as well as the 
effectiveness of social and mental health interventions during drought.

50
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Information and planning
•	
Develop a socially-focused drought resilience framework to assess the impacts of drought and 
ground-truth its applicability
•	
Evaluate current support programs and review demands for mental health services to help ensure 
adequate support for rural and regional communities in drought
•	
Assess learnings from the Cyclone Seroja recovery model and use these to develop a program to 
service communities affected by drought
•	
Increase the visibility and knowledge of available support mechanisms (on-line platform / 
information packages / publicity campaign)
X
X
X
X
Health
X
X
Towns
X
X
Health
Collaboration and building capability
•	
Funded administrative support positions hosted by local agencies shared between local volunteer/
grower/biosecurity groups to reduce burnout, particularly during adverse events such as drought
•	
Funding for community events and clubs to improve well-being and mental health resilience to cope 
with drought events and declining rainfall trends (including arts, culture, exercise programs, sports 
clubs, social events)
•	
Support the capture and peer-to-peer sharing of drought resilience success stories by growers and 
community leaders which demonstrate the adoption of effective on-ground works and appropriate 
innovation options which increase drought resilience
•	
Expand the Rural Leadership Program to increase local leadership and mentoring opportunities in 
drought affected communities, including the connections between generations to share drought 
solutions/support and improve youth participation in drought preparedness
•	
Expand existing community infrastructure and resources to act as mini innovation hubs where 
people can develop and test drought resilience ideas
•	
Implement a marketing campaign focused on the positives of rural and regional living and lifestyle, 
career opportunities aiming to increase rural populations
•	
Develop incentives to attract and retain skilled professionals into rural and regional areas to stem 
decreasing rural services during drought
•	
Identify barriers to utilising local, vacant housing stock to improve housing affordability, provide 
temporary worker accommodation, assist homelessness problems and retain rural populations, 
particularly during drought
•	
Identify opportunities and incentives for local rural farms and businesses to retain staff during times 
of drought (Drought Job Keeper)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Groups
Health
Health
Groups
Groups
Groups
Towns
Towns
Towns
Action source

51
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Community facilities and infrastructure
•	
Develop and or maintain drought tolerant/resilient green spaces to support well-being during 
drought (community gardens, town ovals, water parks)
•	
Support for the implementation of town planning strategies to make towns more attractive 
•	
Examine opportunities and current barriers to increasing water reuse in Geraldton and examine 
opportunities in smaller towns with reticulated sewerage, e.g. Horrocks
•	
Conduct a cost/ benefit analysis of stormwater harvesting opportunities throughout major towns in 
the Mid West region
•	
Identify options to upgrade or establish new on-farm or community water supplies and seek funding 
at individual or collective scale
•	
Examine and trial technological solutions to provide a cost effective and sustainable options for 
small-scale desalination of water including waste disposal (supplies at farm or community scale)
X
X 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Health
Towns 
Towns
Towns
Towns
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 actions
Information and planning
•	
Support data and information collection, coordination and supply to improve community and regional planning to build drought resilience 
•	
Empower communities to identify the impacts of drought and develop regional drought resilience and management plans  
•	
Assist communities to develop and implement innovative activities that build drought resilience  
Collaboration and building capability
•	
Facilitate increased community understanding of their drought resilience, including through training and information sharing—for example, case studies, inventory or support 
packages and making information readily accessible 
•	
Encourage communities with a high level of drought resilience to share learnings with other communities 
•	
Support community activities and initiatives that foster ongoing social networking, support, engagement and wellbeing 
•	
Encourage the development of local leaders, including youth, to enhance wellbeing and drive initiatives that build drought resilience 
•	
Support initiatives that strengthen and build leadership in communities to help build drought resilience, including exploring entrepreneurial opportunities 
Community facilities and infrastructure
•	
Support communities to implement small-scale enduring infrastructure projects to build drought resilience and enhance wellbeing—such as water efficient or recycling 
infrastructure for sporting and recreational facilities, upgrades to public gardens, tourist attractions and other community facilities
Action source

52
FDF STRATEGIC PRIORITY: ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
FDF Objective: Enhance the public good by building drought resilience through 
programs that improve the natural resource management of agricultural 
landscapes.
Current Situation
The Mid West region comprises of highly modified environments, many on the vulnerable northeast margins of the 
agricultural zone. It has been subject to several serious droughts, such as that of 2006-2007. Growers and local communities 
have, and continue to, adapt to changes in climatic conditions and prioritise the protection of environmental resources both 
agricultural and natural to mitigate the impacts of drought.
The top ranked priorities for environmental resilience identified from community consultation were: 
Technical consultation also highlighted the need for regional biodiversity inventories, the identification of marginally 
productive or unproductive land and soils, and data on the value of ecosystem services.

53
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Knowledge, innovation and extension
•	
Quantify the economic and social value of regional ecosystem services to allow for better farm 
resource and business planning
•	
Support landholders to adopt and implement ecosystem services standards and measurement tools 
as they evolve
•	
Conduct local inventories of biodiversity on both private and public lands, including the current state 
across a range of parameters such as species present, native vegetation condition, weed and feral 
animal incursions etc.
•	
Monitor and record the short- and long-term impacts of drought on natural resources in the Mid West
•	
Monitor and evaluate current NRM interventions in the Mid West and provide feedback on the 
effectiveness of these
•	
Conduct soil mapping at the regional and farm scale, and distribute to growers to better inform on-
farm improvement of soil health and land use planning
•	
Conduct hydrological mapping at the regional and farm scale, and distribute to growers to better 
inform on-farm planning for efficient use of soil moisture and water resources
•	
Coordinate and manage soil sensor data across multiple farms, including the delivery of information 
back to growers, to better manage soil resources and land planning
•	
Expand the UWA flux tower network and associated recharge monitoring sites to the Mid West 
to better understand landscape dynamics, and use the data to further inform water resource 
management, NRM strategies and adaptive farming practices, and future carbon market projects
•	
Identify marginal land at the regional and local scale unsuitable for agriculture to assist with 
identifying alternative uses and or planned retreat
•	
Undertake hydrogeological investigations in the Tumblagooda aquifer to support growth and 
drought resilience for the Northampton area
•	
Implement ‘water farming’ trials in geologically appropriate areas whereby land use is 
managed to facilitate maximum recharge of groundwater at a local scale
•	
Increase funding to local biosecurity groups for pest, weed and feral animal control, incentivising the 
use of new technologies (e.g. drones)
•	
Promote the continued uptake of precision agriculture practices and technologies (e.g. VRT, seed 
and spray, ‘green or green’) through education, case studies and demonstration programs, and 
financial incentives
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Farming
Vegetation
Farming
Water
Farming
Vegetation
Water
Farming
Farming
Action source

54
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Knowledge, innovation and extension (continued)
•	
Promote the continued uptake of soil erosion control measures such as perennial pastures and 
native windrow plantings (e.g. expand the Growing Great Ground program) through demonstrations 
and increased financial incentives
•	
Promote the continued uptake of practices which improve soil health (e.g. amelioration, liming, 
strip and disc, chemical fallow) through education, case studies and demonstration programs, and 
financial incentives
•	
Support and contribute to continued research and demonstration projects into regenerative 
agricultural practices to promote the uptake of practices beneficial to environmental resilience
•	
Support collaborations between grower groups and research institutions for the continued 
development of drought resistant breeds and crop varieties, as well as alternative crops
•	
Continue research and development into alternative stock feeds (e.g. Asparagopsis) to improve 
stock management 
•	
Continue research and development with local horticulturalists into the production, application and 
benefits of biochar 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Farming
Farming
Farming
Farming
Farming
Farming
Collaboration and building capability
•	
Identify marginal agricultural land and subsequent options to incorporate carbon farming across 
multiple farming properties for regional scale carbon projects
•	
Coordinate and improve water catchment planning to better support landscape scale actions which 
protect waterways
•	
Expand the Chapman Catchment project demonstration sites for earthworks for rehydrating 
landscapes and build related extension and training programs 
•	
Expand Aboriginal participation (e.g. ranger programs) on both public and private land to manage 
natural resources (e.g. fire management)
•	
Collaborate with Aboriginal groups to preserve and expand remnant native vegetation, as well as 
manage threats to biodiversity
•	
Support improved technologies for the Geraldton horticultural sector to reduce inputs and water use, 
including irrigation options linked to domestic water reuse 
•	
Provide financial support to accelerate feasibility and planning for a new desalination water source 
to support growth and drought resilience in the Mid West region. This will inform decision making 
and provide greater clarity for the future of the region
•	
Understand barriers to increasing water efficiency (in new and retrofit builds), implement better 
urban water management principles and advocate for stronger mechanisms for decision making 
authorities to require greater water efficiency
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Farming
Water
Farming
Vegetation
Vegetation
Water
Water
Action source

55
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Natural capital and commercial opportunities
•	
Promote and facilitate collaboration between local private industry and land holders to revegetate 
marginal land for new carbon market opportunities or offsets
•	
Develop and promote businesses (e.g. nurseries, native seed supplies, bush foods) which support 
NRM activities as well as provide income diversification for land holders and Aboriginal groups
•	
Support land managers to use available industry approved tools to calculate the carbon ‘footprint’ 
of their businesses, and to make subsequent management decisions to mitigate the impacts of 
drought on environmental and economic assets
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Vegetation
Vegetation
Farming
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 actions
Knowledge, innovation and extension
•	
Improve information and management capacity for farming practices and systems that support improved functioning of agricultural landscapes
•	
Facilitate primary producers’ increased knowledge of market and private sector services to improve natural resource management and enable access to emerging markets 
•	
•	
Support the development of systems and collaborations that enable better analysis and practical application of data, including for farm natural resource management 
practices
•	
Involve end users to co-design local natural resource management research development, extension and adoption. This will help to develop tailored outcomes and the 
adoption of the research 
•	
Support incentives for practice change that will build or redesign landscapes for improved functioning. Support primary producers to adopt strategies for improving soil 
health, land cover, water and biodiversity 
Collaboration and building capability
•	
Encourage improved natural resource management capability through planning and training on financial, drought and risk management 
•	
Support on-ground projects that enhance the resilience of natural capital in agricultural landscapes—including adoption of new or existing technology and practices 
•	
Incentivise local and regional organisation’s capabilities by trialling and adopting new natural resource management practices and technology through collaboration 
•	
Support landholders to undertake voluntary environmental resilience assessments or other measures to better understand their environmental resilience level 
Natural capital and commercial opportunities
•	
Promote the development and adoption of new or existing commercial opportunities and technologies that support improvement of natural resource condition and resilience 
•	
Support the creation and uptake of commercial opportunities for investment into sustainable landscapes, and encourage increased private sector’s involvement in 
environmental management
Action source

56
FDF STRATEGIC PRIORITY: ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
FDF Objective: Enhance the public good by building drought resilience through 
programs that will grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity and 
profitability) of the agricultural sector.
Current Situation
Many Mid West farm businesses have improved their economic preparedness and performance through planning and 
adapting but financial stress for farmers and rural communities during drought remains high. Dependence on export 
markets, changing climatic conditions, rising rural debt and costs, and the pilot region’s high dependence on the agricultural 
sector, make farm businesses vulnerable.
The top ranked priorities for economic resilience identified from community consultation were: 
Technical consultation also highlighted the need to develop appropriate measures of farm economic resilience, and to 
gather this data consistently and broadly.

57
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Knowledge, innovation and extension
•	
Using effective and modern communication tools such as short videos, animated infographics and 
podcasts, build community understanding of new weather, climate and water science information 
that is coordinated, easily accessible and engaging
•	
Develop an appropriate drought criterion for Western Australia, taking into consideration use of 
seasonal rainfall versus the current meteorological definition using annual rainfall
•	
Undertake further research into the emerging trend of ‘hot droughts’ including modelling on current 
and predicted future impacts on agricultural assets and production
•	
Develop, refine and ground truth regional drought indices to assist with drought responses, planning 
and decision making in the region
•	
Refine and ground truth the drought vulnerability assessment framework for the Mid West to better 
identify the most at risk areas
•	
Support initiatives to build regional climate monitoring capacity, networks and data sharing
•	
Develop a long-term monitoring program of the economic performance of several WA farms, 
encompassing a range of sizes and production types, to assist with informed drought policy 
decisions at a regional and state level
•	
Review and collect suitable data through recognised sources to track farm business, and rural and 
regional business performance and response to drought to inform drought policy and response
•	
Develop and promote an easy-to-use online platform which provides drought definitions, forecasts, 
monitoring initiatives and decision making tools for land holders (e.g. The Long Paddock website, QLD)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Triggers
Triggers
Triggers
Triggers
Triggers
Triggers
Triggers
Collaboration and building capability 
•	
Develop and deliver capability-building programs to improve farm business skills and decision 
making, including financial literacy and planning, risk assessment and management, succession 
planning and exit strategies (e.g. Farm Business Resilience Program)
•	
Continue to improve and make accessible capability building programs to support growers to develop 
their own drought resilience business plans using environmental and economic assessment tools. 
•	
Support growers to utilise already available farm-level decision-making tools (e.g. Dr Sat)
•	
Continue incentives to support farming businesses’ risk management, including taxation 
concessions, the Farm Management Deposit Scheme and concessional loans but review the 
suitability of these
•	
Provide tax incentives to land holders to invest in equipment and major works which promote 
environmental resilience (e.g. earth works for landscape rehydration, expanded rain water capture)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Planning
Planning
Planing
Mechanisms
Mechanisms
Action source

58
Mid West RDRP actions
Public 
consultation
Technical 
consultation
Transformative 
review 
Community 
priority
Collaboration and building capability (continued)
•	
Improve or develop appropriate agricultural weather/multi-peril insurance products 
•	
Supporting landholders to adopt new technologies which reduce carbon footprints and improve 
efficiencies i.e. drones, autonomous electric vehicles 
•	
Working with relevant state agencies and the local private sector, encourage the use of alternative 
energy sources on farm including developing income from renewables 
•	
Working with relevant state agencies and the local private sector, improve on farm and community 
mobile networks and data infrastructure
•	
Support growers in improving digital and technical literacy, skills and capability, including through 
the development of local knowledge hubs
•	
Facilitate the strategic sharing of key rural and regional infrastructure between sectors (e.g. with mining)
•	
Develop and promote additional tourism opportunities (e.g. Aboriginal, cultural, heritage, wildlife, 
wildflowers, fishing, food) to promote rural and regional off-farm income, and economic diversification
•	
Allow tenure adjustments for primary producers to enable diversification and increased revenue 
from novel income streams (e.g. tourism)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Mechanisms
Planning
Planning
Planning
Planning
Mechanisms
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 actions
Knowledge, innovation and extension
•	
management.  
•	
Support the development of systems and collaborations that enable better analysis and practical application of data and information, including thresholds, trends and 
projected changes to agri-climatic zones. 
•	
Support the development and availability of an innovative drought resilience research, development, extension and adoption strategy—including a stocktake and evaluation of 
drought resilience research and extension—in a process that will involve end users to maximise the relevance and adoption of outcomes. 
•	
Encourage the leveraging of investment, including through public and private partnerships and other potential investors, to address gaps and investment opportunities in 
research, innovation and extension. 
•	
Identify and review innovative solutions developed overseas for drought resilience, with a view to adapting them to suit Australia’s agricultural sector. 
•	
Encourage the generation of ideas, information sharing and the adoption of regionally and industry relevant research, development and extension through collaborations with 
public and private sector extension organisations and networks. 
•	
Support improved weather information over a range of timeframes and levels regarding drought risk, such as early warning systems, seasonal forecasts, future climate 
projections and impacts for agriculture. 
•	
Support demand driven research including cross-sectoral, development, extension and adoption to expand technologies available to primary producers and agribusiness to 
respond to risks such as drought—both within their current industries and activities and to enable switches to new enterprises. 
Action source

59
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 actions (continued)
Collaboration and building capability
•	
Increase primary producers’ understanding of their farm business drought resilience level
•	
Including through sharing information—for example, on climate data, soil health, water use efficiency, maintenance of groundcover, capturing carbon and the 
efficient use of inputs—and/or  
•	
By encouraging voluntary farm resilience assessments where appropriate. 
•	
Support improved strategic management capacity of farm business managers through the use of innovative tools, improved drought risk business planning, education and 
training, and improved knowledge of—and access to—market and private sector services. 
•	
Encourage primary producers to adopt innovative approaches and technology, including on and off-farm diversification options or new farming practices, farming systems 
and markets (e.g. emerging carbon markets).
•	
Promote approaches that overcome barriers to developing innovative infrastructure or creating new lines of business.

60
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING
Program objectives along with longer-term outcomes, linking to the Funding Plan 
and FDF Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Framework, are detailed in the program 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Plan (MEL Plan). The outcomes will continue to 
be refined collaboratively with the states and territories through the MEL Plan and 
associated reporting.
State and territory governments will provide robust performance monitoring and reporting to ensure the program meets 
the program’s outcomes, outputs and strategic priorities as documented in the program MEL Plan.
The program’s objective included the development and publication of three Regional Drought Resilience (RDR) Plans for 
priority agricultural areas that have current and predicted future impacts of a drying climate. The RDR plans developed 
through three regional partnerships, being a Northern Agricultural, a Southern Wheatbelt and a Great Southern Inland 
consortium respectively.
Quantitative indicator data collected during the monthly dashboard reporting in for consultation events and activities and 
stakeholders and the MERP at conclusion of the pilot year includes a client survey to collect qualitative data in terms of 
satisfaction and effectiveness which is used to report against program outputs and outcomes.
The development of the Drought Vulnerability Assessment (DVA) is a key component in the delivery of the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program for the, Midwest, Southern Wheatbelt and Inland Great Southern regions. The goal of a drought 
vulnerability assessment is to identify key areas of vulnerability to inform priorities and actions to reduce susceptibility to 
the impacts of drought. It also provides a suite of valuable information that could be used to monitor and evaluate the 
impact of drought, and success of interventions. 
A key tool produced from the DVA is the development of a multi-criteria mapping methodology that synthesises many 
datasets into a single decision-support tool highlighting priority areas for investment in resilience building activities. It 
includes a spatial multi-criterion analysis of economic, environmental, and social data relevant to drought to create a 
drought risk priority areas map. 
It is recommended that the DVA is reviewed on a regular basis to integrate updated or new datasets of relevance. This 
would not only inform future planning and investment but enable longitudinal monitoring of drought resilience. 
Future applications of the Vulnerability Assessment methodology should consider resilience to the broader impacts of 
climate change, not just drought impact, and the vulnerability and adaptive capacity of the broader regional economy, not 
just the agricultural and allied sectors. The rationale for this is in part because drought cannot be considered in isolation 
of climate change, and regional communities, while at the surface are dependent on agriculture, are made up of a complex 
mix of businesses and services, some highly dependent on agriculture, though many increasingly diversifying their own 
markets. These businesses and services are likely to be the drivers of population and economic growth, building community, 
and playing an important role in supporting the retention of people, the region’s most important resource.
A Vulnerability Index captured for the three pilot regions, has been specifically designed to track change over time, and could 
be adapted for any region across WA. The index can be seen as a repeatable exercise providing a snapshot of vulnerability 
to drought. The analysis utilizes the overarching DVA conceptual framework understanding overall vulnerability as the 
outcome of interacting exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity parameters. 
Emerging evidence about short-term, intermediate, and long-term outcomes of drought will be communicated and shared, 
in addition to outcome reports, on a biannual or annual basis and by media releases or specific project outcomes or 
successes.

61
Reporting for the pilot year MERP will focus on the short-term outcomes identified in the table below. These will be relatively 
straight forward will coincide with data collection monthly, bi-annual, final report and client survey data. Where outcomes 
lie outside these timeframes such as sharing with other regions this can be considered in future DRPs.
Feedback from the pilot MERP and the assessment of the DRPs by CSIRO through the independent review process will be 
used to adapt the program in response to learnings for future rounds.
Figure 16. The composite drought vulnerability map highlights drought risk priority areas in the region based on temperature, rainfall 
and production data, access to infrastructure, population demographics and environmental characteristics. Red and orange areas are 
considered most vulnerable to drought and should be treated as the highest priority for drought resilience interventions..
Figure 17. Radar Chart of Vulnerability Index Scores

62
State tailored program outcomes
WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning program outcomes are consistent with those nationally and will include:  
•	
An evidence-based plan that provides LGAs, Regional Development Commissions, Non-Government Organisations, 
and industry with a roadmap to guide the transitional and transformational actions needed to strengthen drought 
resilience and encourage innovative initiatives.  
•	
Increased community and industry understanding of their current level of drought resilience, and the opportunity 
share learnings with others which could include:  
•	
The identification of locally applied solutions and existing practices proven to work.
•	
Assessment of the environmental and economic outcomes of systems utilised by early adopters of on-farm 
adaptions and new technologies.  
•	
 Outcome of trials and other research extension activities such as groundwater identification and optimisation, 
assessment of available and emerging technology, use of systems for desalination and disposal of brine - as 
examples.  
•	
The gathering of region-specific drought resilience knowledge, data, and agreed actions to inform private sector 
investment and future government funding initiatives.
State program logic
The State is committed to developing and implementing strong strategic arrangements and partnerships through DPIRDs 
facilities spread across regional Western Australia, which provide a range of facilities, research, and extension activities to 
support primary production development, growth and expansion of the sector. This promotes and provides for a shared 
responsibility for shaping and driving the regional development agenda with the Regional Development Commissions 
(RDC’s).
WA’s nine RDCs are statutory authorities established under the Regional Development Commissions Act 1993 to provide 
advice to the Minister for Regional Development and to coordinate and promote economic development in the regions. 
DPIRD works closely with each commission to help them meet their statutory obligations in a manner that contributes to 
the department’s strategic priorities regarding regional opportunities and enabling environments. 
DPIRD is also committed to work closely with the SW WA Drought Resilience and Innovation Hub to ensure alignment with 
the Hubs focus on farmer-centred drought innovation and adoption practices in South-West Western Australia, many of 
which will overlap with resilience activities identified by communities in the RDRP.
The Plan’s proposed themes and interventions have been developed with the community and technical experts, with 
delivery and impact targeted at the local and regional level, with some interventions having significance beyond the 
Consortia region.  We acknowledge there are many relevant programs already underway or being planned that will support 
the delivery of this Plan, and to the best of our knowledge, this has been captured in the Investment Framework.
The implementation of the Plan, including identification of priority program areas and the Plan’s enduring governance and 
ongoing resourcing, will be subject to further discussion in coming months with Consortia local governments and potential 
program delivery partners.
This work will also consider the principles of the feasibility and practicality of proposed actions and the quantitative and 
qualitative public-good benefits to the region.

63
Key evaluation questions 
The Key Evaluation Questions for the Regional Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan) are: 
1.	
To what extent has the Plan been implemented and has impacted on the regional stakeholders’ capacity and resources 
to better plan, manage and recover from climate challenges? 
2.	
What changes/support are/is needed to ensure that the Plan best provides an effective framework for action and 
stakeholders can effectively work together towards implementing those actions? 
Assumptions underpinning the implementation of the Plan 
The FDF MEL plan identified the following assumptions for the plan to be effectively implemented: 
Key assumptions affecting outputs to 1–2-year outcomes. 
•	
Regional stakeholders have the capacity and capability to participate in strategic planning. 
•	
Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate with each other on regional planning. 
•	
Program design is sufficient to give regional stakeholders opportunities to identify and communicate regional drought 
resilience needs. 
•	
Relevant planning at other scales can be aligned. 
•	
Regional communities are motivated to take ownership of completed plans and actively seek to implement them. 
•	
Communities are willing to share learnings with other regions. 
•	
There are sufficient learnings to inform future program design. 
Key assumptions affecting outcomes from 2+ years. 
•	
Supporting consortia of local governments/stakeholders representing a region will result in changes in practice 
through those regions. 
•	
There are sufficient opportunities for regions to implement elements of plans. 
•	
Plans contain implementable activities to build drought resilience across Australia. 
•	
Regions continue to review, update and implement their plans. 
These assumptions will need to be monitored during the implementation phase to provide feedback and highlight areas 
that require further intervention.

64
FDF Standard Indicators
Specific Regional Indicators
Evaluation approach
Outcome level: Impacts 4+ years
1.	
Agricultural landscapes 
are functional and 
sustainable, with 
healthy natural capital 
(environmental resilience)
2.	
Agricultural businesses 
are self-reliant, productive, 
and profitable (economic 
resilience)
3.	
Agricultural communities 
are resourceful, adaptable, 
and thriving (social 
resilience).
Strong and healthy people living with the land and 
resilient to drought.
•	
People, culture and communities: 
Communities’ drought resilience has 
improved.
•	
Economy: Business owners are pursuing 
opportunities to increase financial security 
of their business before, during and after 
drought.
•	
Landscape and natural environment: 
Land managers are implementing land 
management practice change to improve the 
resilience of the landscape and the natural 
environment to drought.
•	
Infrastructure and built environment: Investing 
in building, maintaining and improving 
infrastructure has contributed to increasing 
the communities’ drought resilience.
These longer-term impacts are best captured at a national level by the federal 
Government through ABARES surveys and other national statistics based on a 
benchmark and taking into account climate, market and other influences impacting on 
this outcome. Dr Sat provides a valuable climate tool that also could be used to assess 
resilience against climate change including drought and other climate risks.
The Drought Vulnerability Assessment (DVA) undertaken in the pilot regions to be 
repeated. The DVA mapped the historical incidence, severity and impacts of drought in 
the regions, and the physical, economic and social impacts of drought in the future. The 
socio-economic and environmental data could be tracked and monitored over time to 
review drought impact, vulnerability and resilience of each region.
A Vulnerability Index was developed for the Northern Agricultural region with ten 
indicators chosen to reflect exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. 
It provides a snapshot of vulnerability to drought which can be repeated and tracked 
over time and aims to assist local decision makers and managers in the rapid 
evaluation of drought risk in the region.
Emerging evidence about short-term, intermediate, and long-term outcomes of drought 
will be communicated and shared, in addition to outcome reports, on a biannual or 
annual basis and by media releases or specific project outcomes or successes.

65
FDF Standard Indicators
Specific Regional Indicators
Evaluation approach
Outcome level: Impacts 4+ years (continued)
4.	
Stronger connectedness 
and greater social capital 
within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing 
and security.
5.	
Communities implement 
transformative activities 
that improve their 
resilience to drought.
6.	
More primary producers 
preserve natural capital 
while also improving 
productivity and 
profitability.
•	
A regional drought surveillance program 
is in place that monitors and analyses 
key indicators of current and emerging 
environmental (meteorological and 
landscape), social and economic conditions, 
which are markers of drought.
•	
There is widely shared and well-informed 
regional engagement with managing drought 
risk for long-term community resilience.
•	
The region comes together to build drought 
resilience.
•	
Widespread enterprise level drought risk is 
established across the region.
•	
Measures are implemented to limit impacts of 
drought and better respond to drought.
•	
Adequate and appropriate drought risk 
management essential infrastructure in place 
and stress tested for times of drought. 
Critical to the regional-level monitoring of, and  improvement to, the Plan will be an 
on-going regional oversight provided by the Development Commissions in cooperation 
with DPIRD and key stakeholders within the region during the Implementation Phase. 
The Development Commissions have the role of initiating actions in line with the plan, 
reviewing progress against the plan objectives and making changes to the Plan as 
needed to maintain its relevance and usefulness. A FDF Steering Committee formed 
within DPIRD will provide a higher level avenue for strategic overarching monitoring and 
evaluation of the program. 
While some of these indicators will be captured in national surveys and statistics as 
above, monitoring actions that should be taken at regional level by the Development 
Commissions in cooperation with DPIRD would include:
•	
Monitoring and reporting of regional level indicators that are captured as part of 
Local Government surveillance, surveys and annual reporting.
•	
Liaising with the regional Drought and Innovation Hub to ensure that key 
indicators for the region are captured and provided over time.
•	
Linking actions/projects identified by the RDRP Planning Program into strategic 
priorities of DPIRD, the Hub and the Wester Australian Agricultural Research 
Consortium (WAARC). 
•	
Tracking actions/projects deliverables during the Implementation Phase.
•	
Recording case studies of changes made and benefits evident as a result of 
actions taken from the implementation of the Plan.

66
FDF Standard Indicators
Specific Regional Indicators
Evaluation approach
Outcome level: Success measures and intermediate outcomes 2–4 years
Actions have been taken based on the plans
•	
The majority of plans have had elements 
implemented.
•	
Primary producers and businesses 
supported to improve their sustainability 
and resilience.
Decisions have been made to implement
•	
Regional representatives have considered 
and planned incremental, transitional 
and transformational opportunities to 
strengthen resilience.
•	
Identified actions, pathways and 
opportunities (including innovative and 
transformative) to improve regional 
drought resilience, mitigate risks and 
adapt to change.
•	
Communities use relevant data and 
information to better understand their 
resilience to plan for drought.
The achievement of Key Pillars 
to underpin the achievement of 
objectives are:
 a)    Drought monitoring, early warning 
systems and plans for responses are 
being developed and refined.
 b)    Those most vulnerable and at 
risk of droughts have been identified 
and steps taken to address their 
vulnerability.
 c)    Measures have been initiated 
to limit the impacts of and respond 
better to drought.
Action steps have been taken in line 
with the Action Plan tables around 
the key outcome areas of:
•	
People, culture and community
•	
Economy
•	
Landscape and natural 
environment
•	
Infrastructure and built 
environment
Monitoring actions that should be taken at a regional level by the Development 
Commission in cooperation with DPIRD include:
•	
Recording of steps taken, actions initiated, and resources gained that have 
been triggered by the Plan framework, strategies and planned actions.
•	
Annual reporting and review of plan implementation, engagement, participation, 
actions, barriers and opportunities to regional stakeholder organisations and 
government – and changes to the Plan made as needed to best meet regional 
needs.
Survey data will be used as a comparison point from the commencement of the RDRP 
pilot, and the implementation of projects identified in the RDRP can be measured 
through their delivery and dollar spend.
Should external evaluation be undertaken, as well as taking the national data, above 
information and annual review into account (against planned actions), a range of 
regional stakeholders should be interviewed / surveyed to gauge their understanding, 
engagement and actions they have taken as a result of Plan guidance and initiatives.

67
FDF Standard Indicators
Specific Regional Indicators
Evaluation approach
Outcome level: Success measures and intermediate outcomes 2–4 years (continued)
Capacity has been developed
•	
Regional leaders are in a stronger 
position to implement strategic actions, 
adapt to change and take advantage of 
opportunities to build economic resilience 
as they arise.
•	
Partnerships, networks and engagement 
are built between stakeholders managing 
natural resources.
•	
Increased community understanding of 
the region’s current and future drought 
resilience, considering the region’s unique 
economic, 
environmental 
and 
social 
characteristics.
•	
Natural resource management capability 
is improved across region. 
Regional stakeholders are involved
•	
Plans have buy-in from key stakeholders 
in the region.
•	
The number of, and participation in, local 
networks and programs to enhance 
drought resilience increases.
•	
Communities 
share 
knowledge, 
collaborate and partner with government 
more often to build drought resilience.
•	
Greater sharing of learnings related to 
drought resilience between communities.
Types of questions should include: 
•	
Their level of awareness and understanding of the Plan – and how aware they 
think others are.
•	
How invested they are in engaging with other stakeholders around the Plan 
implementation.
•	
How confident they are that they have the skills and resources to make changes 
highlighted.
•	
What decisions and/actions they have taken – or aware of – that have been 
initiated as a result of the Plan.
•	
How the Plan has impacted on extra resourcing or support to the region to 
improve drought resilience.
•	
How they think the Plan has added value and made a difference in increasing 
drought resilience in the region.
•	
What is working and what needs to change with respect to the Plan and its 
effecte on-going implementation.
•	
Organisations nominated for actions in the Plan including for the communication 
engagement activities, should also be interviewed to review what was 
undertaken, how it was done, what response was gained and, if not, why not.
•	
Case studies should be further captured/developed to understand/demonstrate 
the program logic / the theory of change and inform recommendations for 
changes / support needed to maximise the Plan effectiveness.
A critical part of an external review would be find an on-going Development 
Commission who were invested in using the Plan as a framework towards improved 
resilience, outputs and actions arising and how well this was working towards the 
Plan’s objective.
Such external reviewing should be taken annually for the first three years (pilot 
regions) to provide lessons for plan development and implementation in other 
regions, then every three years.

REGIONAL 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN