The 
Murraylands 
and Riverland 
Plan
This project is part of the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning Program and is funded through 
and the Government of South Australia.
www.mrplan.com.au

Contents
1		
Introduction
2		
Our Approach to Building Resilience
3		
An Evidence Based Approach to Resilience Planning
5		
Our Region
6		
Climate Change and Drought
8		
Embedding the Principles of Resilience - What Matters Most
10	 Interpreting This Plan
12	 Priorities for Resilience Intervention and Action:
13	 Cohesive, Organised and Empowered to 
Take Responsibility
17	 Building our Social Capital
23	 Learning for Change
29	 Planned and Prepared
37	 Diverse and Flexible
41 Collaboration, Connection and Inclusion
44 Implementation of the Plan: What Next, What Now?
45	 Attachment A
64	 Attachment B
65	 Attachment C
67	 Attachment D

Introduction
Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge and pay respect to the past, present and future Traditional 
Custodians and Elders of this nation. 
We value their knowledge, wisdom, leadership and connection to Country and 
appreciate the continuation of cultural, spiritual and educational practices of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples within, and outside of our region. 
1
The process of developing the 
Murraylands and Riverland 
Plan (MR Plan) commenced 
through the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning process, 
starting with a focus on 
building the resilience of the 
agriculture sector to the 
impacts of drought.
As community interviews and discussions 
grew, the scope grew, encompassing all 
elements of the regional ecosystem as we 
currently understand it – including the 
supporting and service industries to 
agriculture and its many communities, and 
considering the impacts of climate change 
from floods and storms to droughts, 
pandemic and other biosecurity risks, and 
changes in global financial and trade settings. 
We now see that the system is connected. It is 
complex. We understand the system now 
better than when we started but the hero of 
this process remains agriculture, and the villain, 
drought. The impacts of drought on agriculture 
may well have been the ‘problem’ on which 
this process focused at the start, but we can 
now see that building resilience in and around 
our agricultural sector is at the heart of the 
‘solution’ for our entire regional ecosystem.

For our region the issue of resilience is bigger than drought.  
1 Pawson R, Wong G & Owen L (2011) ‘Known Knowns, Known Unknowns, Unknown Unknowns: The Predicament of 
Evidence-Based Policy’ American Journal of Evaluation, 32(4): 518-546
2 Dr Mittul Vahanvati, “Unpacking the meaning of resilience”, Australian Journal of Emergency Management, 
https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/resources/ajem-january-2020-unpacking-the-meaning-of-resilience-the-tarnagulla-
community-definition-comparing-to-the-literature/ 
Our approach to 
building resilience
Our region has always suffered from drought, 
and climate change means that we are going to 
experience the impact of drought more often 
and the occurrences of drought will last longer 
and be more intense. In general terms our 
climate and soils will be hotter and drier.
Drought has been part of our lives for generations 
- we have had to be adaptable to the dry, we
haven’t been able to rely on regular or significant
rainfall. Over time agriculture has become
highly efficient at using water and other inputs.
The industries our region was built on are now
as efficient as they can be.
If the last two years of a pandemic have taught 
us anything, it is that in addition to drought, we 
are likely to experience many challenges over 
the next 10-20 years, some of which will be 
predictable and many of which won’t. 
We expect that we will experience:
• Impacts from climate change including -
o Less rainfall - increased drought
o Floods/ more unusual rainfall events
o Harsher conditions for fire
• COVID19 and future pandemics currently
unknown
• Sudden changes to supply chains
• Sudden and unexpected widespread loss of
export opportunities - like what has
happened with China in the last two years
• Disease - that threatens the agricultural
industry, impacts, or destroys crops
As a region we need to ensure that our 
communities, our industries, and our 
landscapes are resilient to cope with whatever 
comes at us. We need to choose a pathway 
that is resilient.  
Therefore, we have approached our drought 
resilience planning differently. 
We have taken a holistic approach to our 
analysis, focusing on our region’s systems - 
how their constituent parts interrelate and 
how our system works over time within the 
context of larger systems.  We have quite 
deliberately explored the systems that make 
our region ‘from the ground up’, with a view to 
converting the ‘unknowns’ to ‘knowns’.1
To do this we have been guided by the 
community, activating a ground up approach 
which has sought to understand what the 
diversity of individuals and communities in the 
region believe their strengths and 
weaknesses are; what they need to make 
them as resilient as they can be. 
“...communities are best 
placed to frame their 
resilience, collectively and 
from a ‘systems’ 
perspective…”
~ from the Tarnagulla Resilience Study2
2

An Evidence 
Based Approach to 
Resilience Planning 
3
An extensive process of engagement with community and regional 
stakeholders has underpinned the development of this Plan. 
The engagement process was BIG involving approximately 550 people from the region and it was 
deep with a grand total of more than 4,080 hours of work dedicated by the community to 
developing this Plan! 
The key elements of the engagement methodology used to develop this Plan were as follows:
1. Deep involvement from community using collective impact efforts3
2. Being conscious of the need to nurture trust in the Project Sponsor
3. Building on networks and working with communities where they are
4. Deliberative engagement - which emphasises the importance of spending time, reflection and.
being evidence based
5. Appreciative inquiry - that uses a positive/strengths-based approach4
6. Building enduring relationships between individuals and institutions that will contribute to
ongoing regional resilience.5
In addition, the Project Team (MR Plan 
Steering Committee, Project Consultant, 
Project Lead and support staff) have been 
guided by systems thinking6, localism7 and 
presencing8. 
To support the continuation of this planning 
process through to implementation, ongoing 
review and creative adaptation (an enduring 
process), the Project Team have engaged a 
team of experts in the fields of systems 
mapping, neuroscience and community 
engagement. 
At its essence, the project approach seeks to 
understand the system well enough to be able 
to intelligently influence lasting change. This 
requires approaching regional drought 
resilience planning differently, noting Einstein’s 
parable, “insanity is doing the same thing over 
and over and expecting different results”.9
A detailed account of the engagement process 
undertaken to develop this Plan can be found 
at Attachment A and a breakdown on the 
number of participants at Attachment B.
3 Commonwealth of Australia (2017) ‘Collective impact: Evidence and implications for practice’ CFCA Paper No. 45. 
4 Sasse T et al. (2021) ‘Public engagement and net zero. How government should involve citizens in climate policy making’ 
5 MacKay H (2021) ‘The Kindness Revolution’
6 Meadows D (2018) ‘Thinking in Systems’
7 Cleary J & Hogan A (2016) ‘Localism and decision-making in regional Australia: The power of people like us’, 
Journal of Rural Studies, 48: 33-40 
8 Scharmer C O (2018) ‘The Essentials of Theory U: Core Principles and Applications’
9 Wilczek F (2015) ‘Einstein’s Parable of Quantum Insanity’ Quanta Magazine, ScientificAmerican.com

4
OUR ENGAGEMENT STATISTICS
550 People Involved
28 Regional Interviews
52 Community Conversations
Involving more than 300 people
134 Regional Summit Participants
670 hours of work
240+ hours of Steering Committee Meetings
11 meetings  x 11 people
2,700+ hours Regional Leaders and Interest Panels
58 participants
4,080+ hours (170 days) Work by the Community

Our Region
We are, always have been and always will be strong and adaptable. 
We know that we gain strength and flexibility through diversity and collaboration. 
The Region considered in the MR Plan is the Murraylands and Riverland of South 
Australia. The Mallee is an integral part of this region, along with the Murray River, Lower 
Lakes and Coorong.
riverland/employment-by-industry
We have a population of 73,000 residents. 
Whether it is diversity in our communities - 
diversity of age, diversity in lived experience, 
knowledge or cultural background, or even 
how long people have lived in the region - 
embracing this diversity will give us strength. 
Equally, diversity in our industrial base is also 
vital. We have and always will be a centre for 
agriculture.  In 2021, agriculture accounted 
for around 43% of regional businesses and 
16.2%10 of the region’s employment. We also 
know that agriculture in the region has a 
disproportionate impact on other sectors, with 
many of them (e.g., construction, health and 
education services, manufacturing, retail, 
transport) driven by supporting those in the 
agriculture sector. But we know this sector 
will be increasingly challenged as the ongoing 
effects of climate change continue to impact 
the conditions of our landscapes. To survive 
and prosper, we need to diversify, both within 
the agricultural sector and into other sectors. 
Our strength and adaptability also comes 
from working together - sharing knowledge, 
building partnerships, and supporting other 
local businesses. 
10  https://economy.id.com.au/rda-murraylands-
Most importantly our resilience is built by 
people in our community working together 
through positive collaboration. We want all 
members of the community to work in unison 
for our collective benefit.
We will gain strength through our connectivity 
to this place, lessons from the past and through 
being open to new opportunities in the future. 
We know that diversity and connectivity will 
enable us to stand strong and adapt to 
whatever comes at us! 
5
Berri
Lameroo
Murray Bridge
Murraylands 
Riverland 
Regions
Mid Murray 
Council
Berri Barmera 
Council
Renmark Paringa 
Council
District Council of 
Loxton Waikerie
Southern Mallee 
District Council
Coorong District 
Council
Rural City of 
Murray Bridge
District Council of 
Karoonda East Murray

Climate Change 
and Drought 
The science is clear. 
Climate change is impacting 
our world, our country, our 
region and our communities. 
While drought has always been 
part of our regional existence, 
our challenges are 
compounding. 
We can see it in our landscapes and other 
systems, such as food production, conditions for 
disease, frequency and severity of extreme events, 
risk mitigation and cost of insurance and 
increased health risks through heat exposure. 
We know we will see continued decreases in 
rainfall and increases in temperature, 
increasing evapotranspiration and decreasing 
soil moisture, and runoff and streamflow will 
significantly decrease. We will experience high 
levels of natural variability, with extreme wet 
periods also possible. We know we will 
experience longer and more severe droughts.11
The CSIRO reports that the Murraylands and 
Riverland region will experience 12: 
• Increasing average temperatures in all
seasons - there will be more hot days and
fewer frosts.
• Less and more variable rainfall - when it
comes, it is likely to be heavy and intense.
• Less rainfall in the Murray-Darling Basin will
reduce water flow in the river, change the river
ecology and impact on water prices. ABARES
analysis suggests a 3% change in average
rainfall results in a 17% increase in temporary
water market prices in the southern Basin.13
This will also bring about ecological changes
and challenges.
• Harsher conditions for fire - longer and more
intense fire seasons.
• Increasing storms and destructive wind events.
We expect that climate change will place 
increased pressure on regional health services, 
many of which are already stretched. Our 
infrastructure may not be able to withstand 
extreme events or the long-term additional 
stresses from higher temperatures and climate 
variability. Such infrastructure may include road 
and bridge infrastructure in the face of greater 
levels of flooding; electricity supply and the 
communications infrastructure that relies on it 
because of more frequent and extreme heat 
waves and extreme weather events; or 
emergency services (predominantly volunteer-
run services) responding to growing numbers 
and ranges of events.
6

11 Commonwealth of Australia, 2020. Trends and historical conditions in the Murray-Darling Basin: A report prepared 
for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority by the Bureau of Meteorology
12 CSIRO, “Climate Change in Australia”- https://climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/regional-
climate-change-explorer/clusters/?current=MBC&tooltip=true&popup=true
13 Independent Assessment of Social and Economic Conditions in the Murray Darling Basin, “Final Report: 
Independent assessment of social and economic conditions in the Murray–Darling Basin”, pg 79, https://www.
mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/seftons-report-september-2020_0.pdf
14 Beer, A. et al., 2013. Australia’s country towns 2050: What will a climate adapted settlement pattern look like?, Gold 
Coast: National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility.
Reduced rainfall and reduced river flows will affect all 
communities, and especially primary producers. 
Tourism may be vulnerable to climate change if quality of life and natural amenity are 
compromised. These cumulative impacts, along with changes in labour markets, are likely to 
place additional stresses on communities and individuals’ wellbeing. Evidence suggests that 
Basin communities including the Riverland towns of Waikerie, Renmark, Barmera, Berri, and 
Loxton are amongst the most vulnerable towns in Australia to climate change14.
“Covid has impacted 
our culture, we can’t 
touch each other. It 
is human, we need to 
hug each other. We 
need to touch and 
connect with each 
other - we need human 
touch.”
~ Interviewee, Loxton
“We have one good year in ten. Farmers plan for the 
future - they plan financially for disaster. They don’t 
expect good years.”
~ Interviewee, Loxton
“Droughts - not getting 
enough rain - this will have 
a huge impact on the 
farmers and the town. This 
will be the biggest issue 
they will face in the next 
10-15 years.”
~ Interviewee, Karoonda
7

Embedding the 
principles of 
resilience - what 
matters most
The Participants who developed 
this Plan recognised the need 
to embed resilience planning 
in the work and plans of 
institutions across the region - 
local government, government 
agencies, community services 
sector and industry. 
Put simply, they wanted everyone to be working 
for the same common purpose. 
They recognised that is best achieved by having a 
clear and common understanding of what needs 
to be focused on (the things that matter most), 
while allowing each agency, organisation or 
individual the ultimate flexibility to self-determine 
their own journey to these goals.
To this end - the Interest Panels recommended 
that four areas of focus (which were developed 
from the responses to Community Conversations) 
become the principles that organisations across 
the region use to help ensure that their work 
focuses on the regional priorities for building 
resilience. 
8

THE PRIORITY PRINCIPLES FOR 
REGIONAL RESILIENCE 
Leadership in Action
Develop a system of 
leadership and nurture both 
formal and informal leaders 
in the region
• Leadership engages deeply with the
community in shaping their futures
• Communities are respected and
listened to
• Support leaders to grow, develop and
connect to their communities
• Our leaders are empowered
Prepared & Proactive
Create a proactive, adaptive, 
and innovative system of 
planning for and leveraging 
disruption. 
• Take a long-term strategic view to planning
• Planning focuses on both the reactive and
the preventative.
• Planning is collaborative across sectors, is
community driven, and evidence based
Productive & Collaborative Futures
Create the conditions for 
industry and business to thrive 
now and into the future by:
• Enabling improved collaboration,
communication, and information availability
• Encouraging diversification of industry both
across the region and within sectors
• Investing in business - to encourage
innovation, inclusivity, and a future focus
• Promoting the region
Together Community
Enable and support the 
development of a connected 
and inclusive community.
• Don’t leave anyone behind
• Provide easy access to services
and supports
• Apply place-based models to enable
communities to develop and grow
9

Interpreting 
this Plan
A partnership of Regional Development Australia Murraylands 
and Riverland (RDAMR), Murraylands and Riverland Landscape 
Board (MRLB) and Murraylands and Riverland Local Government 
Association (MRLGA) has led the development of this Plan 
through a process of collaboration and empowerment of the 
community and local stakeholders. 
The Priorities for Resilience Intervention 
and Action were developed by community 
members and local stakeholders working 
together on Interest Panels using the 
feedback received through the Community 
Conversations. Hence, the recommendations 
are the work of the four Interest Panels. 
The process for this is explained in 
Attachment A. 
The section on Priorities for Resilience 
Intervention and Action, details the Interest 
Panel’s recommendations under outcome-
based themes. At the end of each outcome 
section the individual recommendations are 
summarised according to their complexity 
and their relative simplicity to action. 
The six outcome themes were developed by 
democracyCo after the Interest Panels had 
completed their work. Strong themes and 
connections emerged across the Interest 
Panels as their work progressed.
It then made sense to bring together 
recommendations that were working towards 
similar outcomes and that functionally related 
to each other (even if they were from different 
Interest Panels). The six outcome themes 
were checked by Interest Panel participants as 
part of a draft review. 
As truly improving our resilience relies on us 
addressing the systemic issues that challenge 
us (as in the diagram on the following page),  
the Interest Panels focused primarily on 
addressing systemic issues. However, 
addressing systems is harder and takes time. 
As a consequence, the groups also identified 
quick wins, which will support and lead to long 
term systemic change but enable the region to 
action important initiatives quickly and see 
some early successes. 
As a consequence of the holistic and systems 
approach taken by the community and the 
Interest Panels, the actions in this Plan are not 
always within scope for the Project Partners, 
however they represent what the region needs 
to build resilience, irrespective of who should 
drive it. 
This Plan includes recommendations to bring 
other stakeholders on board to enable 
implementation. 
10

The iceberg model demonstrates that it is most effective to intervene more deeply within our 
system. Working above the water will not address the underlying patterns, processes and 
systematic structures that enable us to adapt and transform. It may take time and be harder 
to implement, but deep adaptation and transformation provides stronger potential to respond 
positively in the face of change.
TYPES OF INTERVENTIONS THAT SUPPORT RESILIENCE15 
Persist
Transform
Assets, Shocks 
& Events
Patterns and Processes
Implement
Harder
Easier
Speed of 
change
Slower
Faster
System 
change 
potential
Stronger
Weaker
Systemic Structure
World View / Paradigm
Adapt
Persist
Transform
Assets, Shocks 
& Events
Patterns and Processes
Implement
Harder
Easier
Speed of 
change
Slower
Faster
System 
change 
potential
Stronger
Weaker
Systemic Structure
World View / Paradigm
Adapt
11
15 Iceberg model adapted from Australian Resilience Centre, 2019.
Ease to

Priorities for 
Resilience 
Intervention 
and Action
The Interviews, Community Conversations, Regional Summit and the 
Interest Panels identified a suite of priority recommendations that we 
need to focus on to ensure that our communities and economy 
are as resilient as they can be in the face of drought and climate 
change. 
These priority recommendations are organised under six key resilience outcomes as follows:
1. Cohesive, Organised and Empowered to
Take Responsibility
2. Building our Social Capital
3.Learning for Change
4.Planned and Prepared
5.Diverse and Flexible
6. Collaborative, Connected and Inclusive
12

13

RECOMMENDATIONS
Embed this Resilience Plan 
Being a resilient region requires 
having a flexible plan for 
achieving that resilience and 
driving it. 
This Plan is our region’s starting place - a 
living Plan that we want to keep working on and 
developing.
Whilst the MRLGA, MRLB and RDAMR 
partnership has led the process for the 
development of this Plan we now need to build a 
coalition of local organisations and individuals to 
lead together. 
The further development of this Plan and its 
implementation requires the efforts of 
individuals, leaders, business, local government, 
government agencies and non-government 
sector – working together with a shared purpose.
This was recognised by our Interest Panels, who 
recommended two actions for embedding this 
Plan and driving it going forward:
1. The Resilience Principles outlined in this
Plan provide the focus for action - to enable
everyone in the region to act to improve our
resilience flexibly and collectively.
2. A Coalition of the Willing is established - to
advocate for the plan and drive its
implementation now and into the future.
Improved collaboration
Action driven by the community
Improved coordination across sectors 
and community
Strategic direction for the region 
determined by the region
14
Priority 1:
 Cohesive, 
Organised and 
Empowered to 
Take Responsibility
GOAL
Because no one group has control 
of a complex system, no one can 
build resilience on 
their own. Resilience building 
must be a system wide, collective 
process. 
Self-organisation, local decision making, and 
cohesion are important for addressing local 
problems. 
There is very clear evidence that communities with 
strong social capital and capacity to 
self-organise suffer less during shocks and 
disasters and recover faster.
OUTCOMES

Resilience Principles 
This Plan identifies a set of principles (pg 9) that have been 
developed by approximately 550 people throughout this process. 
It is recommended that the community continue to evolve the 
principles and activate them by using them to guide the 
interventions that support resilience.
These principles describe the way we choose 
to be as a region. They are signposts which 
enable us to work together towards being 
more resilient and also indicate to others 
outside of the region (ie Federal and State 
Governments) how they can support our 
regional resilience vision.  
The principles should be used and activated by 
the communities of our region and must have 
meaning for the community - they need to be 
defined and tailored by communities who 
choose to use them. The action of tailoring and 
activating these principles will bring us 
together to have the conversations we need to 
have about our resilience, connect and weave 
our stories and experiences and share ideas.
These principles will enable us to be more 
prepared and proactive, respond and recover 
from disruption and shock. 
The Interest Panels have recommended that 
these principles be used by Local, State and 
Federal Government, individuals, private 
organisations, industry organisations and NGO 
as when they are developing their own plans, 
designing programs or implementing services 
to help the region to be more resilient. 
Activating these principles will need to involve: 
1. Bringing institutions on a journey
as this work develops so that they can also
contribute and apply the principles to their
work. To do this we are proposing the
establishment of a Coalition of the Willing
- as outlined on the following page.
2. Engaging with the community -
put the community at the centre of activating
and tailoring the principles as this Plan is
updated. It is vital that the Plan is inclusive
of everyone Ь our First Nations People,
multicultural communities, those with a
disability / vulnerability and young people.
3. Build awareness and ownership across the
region by celebrating and sharing projects
that model the principles in action.
This will involve understanding where best
practice exists already in the region and
building on those strengths. Projects like
Berri Our Town and Imagine Murray Bridge
are good local examples.
15

Coalition of the Willing 
The Interest Panels have 
recommended that we develop a 
Coalition of the Willing to evolve 
and implement this Plan  
over time.
There is no existing body whose remit is to 
ensure the resilience of our region, so we 
need to choose to do it together. We need to 
generate energy and momentum together. 
Those in the Coalition of the Willing will be 
any individual or organisation in the region 
who/which wants to sign up to formally and 
publicly work towards this Plan to build 
regional resilience. They will see the value 
in this Plan and want to be part of making it 
happen. Those early coalition members are 
probably already involved!
Initially, the Coalition will start with driving 
implementation of this Plan - but it is intended 
to go beyond that. In the longer term it is 
proposed that the Coalition turn this Plan into 
a strategic plan for the region. A plan that 
takes a longer-term view - mapping a 30-year 
vision and strategic goals. 
Our region’s leaders, citizens and 
organisations need to do this together. The 
Interest Panels hoped that our regional media 
would be an active part of this Coalition. 
Building a Coalition of the Willing will help 
ensure that the strategic needs of the region 
endure beyond the political cycle - our 
long-term needs will always stay in focus. 
1. Start the process of building the Coalition of
the Willing.
2. Start sharing case studies/best practice
examples of the MR Plan in action.
16

Priority 2:
Building Our Social Capital
17

We recognise that community happens not at a 
regional level, but where there is commonality 
in passions/interests or locations. 
Communities exist in many varied ways - put 
simply they are a group of people with a 
common purpose. Our region is made up of 
many thriving communities. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Having looked at the region’s 
strengths and vulnerabilities (as 
articulated by the community 
through the Community 
Conversations) our Interest 
Panels recommended that the 
Plan focus on the following key 
elements to build our capability:
1. Support the development of strong leaders
(both informal and formal).
2. Growing reciprocal accountability.
3. Foster entrepreneurship - to support
industry development, collaboration,
and diversification.
Resilient individuals
Industry Innovation
Effective and engaging leaders
18

16 /17 Australian Social Inclusion Board, “Building inclusive and resilient communities”,  http://www.
emergencyvolunteering.com.au/docs/Building_Inclusive_and_Resilient_Communities.pdf
“We want to develop an adaptive, 
networked, leadership development 
system in the region, that brings 
diverse people together to generate 
place-based solutions”
~ Interest Panel Participant
Community leadership  
Leadership may be formal (elected or appointed leaders through 
all levels of Local, State and Federal Government) or informal 
(leaders who are recognised in the community for their strength, 
judgement or expertise but may not hold a position or official title) 
– both forms of leadership are important to recognise and foster to
ensure a resilient region.17
The substance and style of decision-making 
by leaders is very important. 
The Interest Panels recommended developing 
and building strong and engaging leaders who 
work with the region’s communities to 
prepare for and respond to possible 
disruptions. They proposed that the region 
seek to build a system of leadership that 
fosters resilience in our region. 
To this end, they recommended that a 
process be resourced to:
1. Identify what we want and need in our
leaders to build resilience in the region
through a process of engagement and
conversation with the community. It is
intended that this process be inspiring, (not
a critique), aiming to energise existing
leaders and give them a better understanding
of community expectations and also to
excite new community members to step up
and lead. (Refer Recommendation -
“Measuring leadership success” - pg 20 for
details)
19
2. Provide local opportunities to develop,
support and nurture passionate people, to
mobilise leadership action, through the
following mechanisms:
a. Establish a leaders’ network/s - where
current or potential leaders can come
together to help and support each other
- a community of practice.
b. Find and celebrate examples of local
leadership that epitomises the type of
leadership we need to grow.
c. Identify and support leadership skills in
‘voices’ or groups that aren’t currently
represented amongst our leaders (i.e.
those from diverse multicultural
communities and those with a disability).
We need to empower individuals to
realise they can be leaders (growth
mindset not deficit of leadership) -giving
them the opportunity to be involved.
The Interest Panels also highlighted the need 
to retain and expand on existing programs 
that are successfully supporting the 
development of leaders in the region - such 
as the Drought Rural Leadership Program.

Measuring leadership success
The Community Conversations 
clearly identified that a central 
issue for the resilience of the 
region is the level of distrust in 
the region’s leaders. 
The Community Conversations identified the 
importance of community having confidence that 
their leaders are listening to them. Equally it was 
identified that there is a responsibility on the 
community to get involved, to activate and 
participate in their democracy. Growing mutual 
respect and mutual accountability was central. 
The Interest Panel participants reflected that this 
isn’t just a local issue and that it is part of a 
national (even global) trend - but that nevertheless 
it is important and that it needs to be addressed.
The Interest Panels highlighted the importance of 
creating the conditions that enable the growth and 
development of leaders. 
They recommended creating a mechanism for the 
community to define what is expected of leaders – a 
new system of active democracy for the region. This 
is equally about ‘holding them to account’ and also 
showing them what we expect.
To this end the Interest Panels recommended that 
the community work to outline collaboratively 
and clearly what they expect of their leaders; 
what representation means to them.  
This articulation of the communities 
‘expectations’ would then be used to measure 
how the region is progressing in achieving its 
“Community Leadership” recommendation 
(previous page).
About the Measure 
It is proposed that community develop criteria 
which they will use to monitor/measure how 
closely leaders are meeting community 
expectations. In doing so community will need to 
be clear what they mean when they say that 
their ‘leaders don’t listen to them’ or they don’t 
feel like their leaders respect them. 
The measure would need to be evidence based/
have strong validity. 
The measure could be a localised version of the 
Edelman Trust barometer1 8  - providing leaders 
with regular feedback on how well they are 
going in the minds of the community and clarity 
about how they can improve. 
How the measure would be developed, 
monitored, and updated 
The Interest Panels recommended that the 
measure be developed and monitored through a 
Regional Summit involving the Coalition of the 
Willing and a diverse sample of the community. 
A process of Community Conversations could 
also be held in the lead up to the event and feed 
in the thoughts of hundreds (if not thousands) of 
residents across the region.  It is proposed that 
the summit be held annually. The first summit 
would develop the ‘expectations’ (the measures) 
and future summits would reflect on progress 
and refine. 
Leaders would be asked to ‘opt in’ to using the 
measure/committing to work in line with  the 
measure.
18  https://www.edelman.com/trust/trust-barometer
20

Fostering entrepreneurship
Innovation helps us address all 
the challenges we might face, 
in a creative and flexible way. If 
industry can innovate quickly, 
the region will be able to 
respond more quickly when 
unexpected things happen. 
Fostering innovation and creativity helps us to 
think outside the box to combat crises (e.g., 
the housing crisis, put in transportable 
accommodation for staff or provide satellite 
internet for communication). All great leaders 
are innovators. 
Collaboration leads to innovation. Bringing 
together people with different ideas, generates 
new thinking. Bringing people together enables 
people to learn from each other. It provides 
people with the opportunity to test their ideas 
with those who have different perspectives and 
experiences which in turn can assist in alleviating 
risk and maximising benefits/value. 
In addition, we need to invest in people who 
bring new ideas, new approaches and rich ideas 
to our region. Their diversity and energy create 
positive waves that infect and inspire others.
It is recommended that ways to foster 
entrepreneurship are explored and encouraged to 
promote innovation, collaboration, and diversity 
in our economy. 
This is critical to fostering entrepreneurship. 
We want to foster a culture of entrepreneurship in 
the region by:
1. Rewarding and recognising
entrepreneurialism.
2. Play match maker - bring funders and
innovators together, using a finance factory/
shark tank approach.
3. Enable and promote collaboration between,
within and across industry groups - as a
means of changing mindsets about
collaboration over competition.
• This could be achieved by building an
understanding of best practice collaboration
practice, including sharing how to do it
effectively and the benefits.
• Identify examples/initiatives where
collaboration is happening already - and
what facilitated/enabled these
collaborations.
This provides an opportunity to change the system 
while also pursuing some small visible successes. 
This initiative should link to other existing programs 
such as the New Venture Institute by Flinders 
University and those run by Business SA. 19
19  https://www.nviflinders.com.au/about/
21

Recommendation Summary
Persist - Immediate actions	
1. Establish a process to Identify what is wanted/needed from leaders to build resilience
in the region through a process of engagement and conversation with community and
establish a mechanism for monitoring and review.
2. Establish a Leaders Network.
3. Develop a program/plan for supporting entrepreneurialism in the region (which builds.
on existing programs), which includes:
a) System of recognition
b) Match making
c) Mechanisms for collaboration
d) Bringing new voices to inspire
Adapt - Medium term	
1. Establish a process/mechanism for identifying potential leaders, particularly amongst
groups not typically represented amongst the regions leaders.
22

Priority 3:
Learning for Change
23

GOAL
To support regional resilience 
through improved understanding 
of what the risks and opportunities 
are and build the strength, 
flexibility, and resourcefulness 
of people.  
OUTCOMES
Adaptive Learning
Learning for change has 
started with the work on this 
Plan - as a process of adaptive 
learning has been central to its 
development. 
As part of the Interest Panel process 
participants identified existing or recent 
initiatives in the region which they assessed as 
being important for achieving the principles. 
These initiatives are a first pass on relevant 
regional initiatives and the list at Attachment D 
is not exhaustive - it needs to evolve and we 
need to convert many more ‘unknown’ 
initiatives to ‘known’ initiatives. We need adaptive 
learning to understand the value of, and how 
best to, enhance these and other initiatives. 
Where relevant, Interest Panel participants 
were asked to review the identified initiatives 
and indicate what initiatives the region should 
pursue, and which initiatives were no longer of 
assistance. This assisted the group’s 
consideration of what new initiatives should be 
pursued in this Plan and what existing 
initiatives could be built upon or supported. 
Improved access to information about 
disruptive events and the implications 
of these events
Improved business planning 
for disruption
Improved resilience of the 
region's youth
24
Priority 3:
Learning 
for Change

Improved access to information
The people and businesses of 
the region need to understand 
the change that is coming. 
People need to understand why 
change is needed. 
But people expressed a fear of disruption. 
There is work to be done on how 'change' and 
'disruption' are understood and to do that, 
people firstly need access to information.
There is a real issue with the extent of and 
Localised information is needed - not just at a 
regional scale but to a local government scale. 
There is a need to build awareness and 
knowledge in everyone who lives, works, and 
visits the region about disruption Ь how to 
understand it, prepare for it and, when it 
comes, how to respond. This will enable 
businesses to make evidence-based decisions 
about where to invest and identify 
opportunities for innovation.
The key to planning effectively for disruption is 
clear, simple, coherent, and easy to access 
information about what future disruptions may 
look like and the implications of them. 
To foster lasting capability and ownership by 
everyone in our region to respond with 
resilience to disruption in positive ways, the 
region needs accurate, clear and accessible 
information. 
25
By doing this, we can continue to ensure that our 
community solutions and responses are ground 
up, whilst being informed by the most up to date 
data available and best practice approaches.
To this end, it is recommended that:
•
The community, industry and government 
are fully informed of the threats that will 
disrupt the region - from drought/climate 
change/natural disasters, to risks such as 
water security, incursions of new pests and 
diseases or export disruption. This may require 
technology which utilises sophisticated 
mapping techniques to enable communities 
to drill down into local areas to see the types 
of risks likely to affect their area and how 
likely the risk is - as well as linking to 
information about the implications of those 
risks.
•
Map the region’s systems - The region can 
be viewed as a complex and adaptive system. 
This system has many social, economic and 
institutional elements, or moving parts, which 
interact. Understanding how these system 
elements are interwoven and the impact each 
system element has in relation to each other 
will be vital in the development of a living 
plan. This deep level of regional knowledge 
can prepare all regional actors to shape a 
positive and prosperous future.

Enabling the better assessment of risk by local industry 
A resilient region needs businesses that are prepared for 
disruption and can bounce back quickly. 
Whilst farming is at the centre of the economy - they rely on an 
ecosystem of other businesses and services to survive. The success 
of the agricultural sector relies on other industry sectors in the 
region also surviving.  
Whilst farming businesses across the region 
prepare for drought in a ‘business as usual 
way’, not all the region’s businesses are 
prepared for or thinking about disruption.  
Information is aid.
All businesses in the region need access to a 
self-assessment tool that helps them to 
understand the risks that face their 
businesses and what they can do to better 
plan for how they mitigate those risks. 
The self-assessment tool will help businesses 
to test their readiness, building: 
• What disruptions might their business be
likely to experience/should they plan for?
• Understanding of their options
• Understanding their current business
financial capacity
• Understanding what diversity could do for
their business level of risk
• Understanding trends in their industry
or business
Every business in the region is unique, 
meaning that a one-size fits all approach 
simply won’t work. Businesses need a tool 
that enables them to better understand what 
risks they are facing and the implications of 
these risks.  
The tool needs to link to different training 
modules which can assist businesses to 
improve their knowledge and build skills that 
help them to adapt. This needs to be simple 
initially - allowing people to understand what 
they need and as their needs change/evolve 
they can access more advanced modules.  
To assist in the development and design of 
the tool and training modules, as a first step, 
it is recommended that an analysis is 
undertaken across the region to identify 
knowledge gaps and understand what tools 
already exist to support industry. We 
understand that there is currently a self 
assessment tool in development for farmers 
under the Future Drought Fund - the proposed 
initiative here could represent an extension to 
this work. 
It is noted that as important as developing the 
tool is communicating about its existence and 
supporting the industry to use it. 
26

Investing in developing resilient youth 
A resilient region relies centrally on the strength, flexibility, and 
resourcefulness of its people. The youth of the region - are its future. 
It is vital that our youth are as strong and as adaptable as they can be 
to respond to disruptive events into the future. 
Helping children engage at school can create 
a strong sense of social capital in both 
children and adults. Parents who become 
involved with school events and activities are 
able to form social networks and feel they are 
part of the wider community. Children who 
learn to form social networks and understand 
how to recognise and talk about their 
problems grow up with a strong sense of 
resilience, ensuring the community stays 
strong as they grow up.20
The Interest Panels have recommended that 
a region-wide program is developed to build 
and strengthen resilience in our young 
people which actively supports their 
participation in the future of the region.
This program would educate and raise 
awareness in our community of the 
importance of resilience, while also promoting 
and supporting connections. 
The program could be run through the existing 
Year 10 subject “Personal Learning Program 
(PLP)” which is compulsory for all students in 
all schools in South Australia to complete. 
20  “The Resilience Project”, https://www.australianunity.com.au/about-us/partnerships/resilience/building-
community-resilience-in-times-of-adversity
The Interest Panels proposed that the PLP 
become a series of opportunities for young 
people to experience spending time with 
mentors, short term vocational experiences, 
skill building, expansive experiences, 
leadership opportunities and work – all in our 
vast and diverse region. 
The revised program would aim to promote 
equity of opportunity for all young people; to 
help them learn about themselves and give 
them the skills and connections they need 
locally to be more resilient and to be 
productive community members. 
The program would build pride in the region 
and enable young people to make the region 
their region of choice by connecting them with 
opportunities that enable them to stay or 
return.
The program would focus on lifting those 
students that are not as engaged with school, 
in a way that is adaptable to their own 
community/culture. This supports the concept 
of ‘No child gets left behind’. 
The concept also supports connecting the 
generations - as young people learn skills 
from older people and vice versa. 
27

Recommendation Summary
Persist - Immediate actions	
1. Analysis of data about threats to the region (climate change data mainly) - what
information is available and where are the gaps in information at a local level.
2. Creation of an interactive map - to enable communities and businesses to easily
consider the threats facing their area and the implications of those threats.
3. Review what exists in the region for different industries to help industry understand the
risks they face and how they might manage/address those risks.
4. Exploration of how the PLP could be adapted in the region to assist in building resilience in
youth.
Adapt - Medium term	
1. The data analysis above may lead to the need for further research.
2. Develop a program including a self-assessment tool that helps improve business
understanding of the implications of the risks to their businesses and how they might
address them.
28

Priority 4:
Planned and Prepared 
29

GOAL
The region wants to be 
prepared for drought or any 
other disruptive event. 
OUTCOMES
Improved response by government 
and communities to disruption
Reduced disruptions to 
communications 
Provision of basic services that 
meet ongoing community needs
30
Priority 4:
Planned 
and Prepared
Preparing for Drought 
The region knows drought - 
from generations of experience. 
The region's communities 
know that they need to be 
better prepared for it.
Many communities and businesses (mainly 
agricultural related businesses) are preparing 
for drought as part of a ‘business-as-usual 
approach’ – it is embedded in how they work. 
For others it’s not considered until it’s happening.  
While the impacts of drought are understood 
by the community, there is a concern by the 
community that governments don’t understand 
it sufficiently. The Interest Panels recommended 
that there be a focus in this Plan on working 
to ensure that governments, as well as the 
region are preparing for drought well in 
advance and together as standard practice. 
While drought support is always well intended, 
it is often only accessible by businesses very 
late in the crisis. Declarations of drought can 
also result in polarising communities – pitting 
farmers against farmers. 
A new system is needed to ensure equity in 
the application of drought relief funding. The 
region needs to be better organised and the 
approach to drought funding needs to mature; 
recognising that drought impacts our entire 
community (and not just our farmers).

Future drought funding needs to achieve two 
specific objectives:
• Prevention of harm/early intervention,
rather than waiting until farmers and or
communities get to breaking point
• Bringing community together, rather than
dividing the community, noting that our
strengths as communities are in our
connection to people and place
Exactly how this is achieved - the Interest 
Panels couldn’t define precisely - yet. 
However, to help find a way forward they 
recommended the following actions:
1. Reflection and learning - that a study is
undertaken to better inform governments
about how current approaches to drought
emergency relief affect communities,
farmers, and local industry.
i. Irrigation droughts as well as dryland
droughts and how they need to be
addressed differently.
ii. What drought does to a region, and how
interventions either support or polarise
communities. How to prevent
polarisation of communities through
drought relief.
iii. Possible opportunities to give communities
more agency in how drought funding is
determined and allocated.
“We need to be thinking 
about how we reduce harm 
in our community from 
drought … diversification 
is part of this picture … 
so is how we use and 
manage our water 
resources”
~ Interest Panel Participant
31
iv. How a community typically mobilises (i.e.
hay runs), how it supports its own (i.e.
social activities) and how government
support can supplement/amplify these
local efforts
v. Best practice in drought and/or
emergency relief - which explores and
analyses local (ie Resilience NSW) and
international case studies.
This study should align to and link with the 
work of the Drought Hub and other initiatives 
under the Future Drought Fund. 
2. Drought needs to be recognised as an
emergency event - with a clear chain of
command and governance system which
promotes the voices of the local community.
This is explored throughout this Plan. Community 
needs to be empowered to help make decisions 
about the action taken during a drought. It is vital 
that the region informs what the government 
does during a drought - not vice versa. 
The study needs to build on studies that have 
occurred in the past, but need to be more holistic 
and focused on systemic change. In particular 
the study needs to raise awareness about:

Planning for disruptive events and emergencies
The Region needs to be better prepared for responding to and 
recovering from disruption.  
When the region experiences disruptive events, 
such as bushfires and storms, the community 
and government agencies respond immediately, 
completely, and generally well as part of the 
emergency response. The collective work of fire 
fighters (CFS and farm fire fighting units) is 
something to behold. The CWA, community 
support groups and individuals jump into action. 
When it comes to recovery however, (once the 
threat has passed), the roles and the process is 
less clear- impacting the overall quality and 
speed of community recovery. 
The region can be better prepared for bushfires, 
floods, and other natural emergencies. The 
region needs to be as adept in the recovery 
phase as it is in the emergency response. There 
is a need to improve how coordination and 
support occurs – at both government and 
community level. 
We recommended that improvements are 
made to coordinate plans, clarify roles and 
responsibilities (especially for recovery), and 
do this collaboratively. 
Specifically, it has been recommended that 
there is work to:
1. Clarify transitions - what would need to be
How should the community be engaged
in this, so they understand what happens
and are clear on their own
responsibilities?
32
2. Clarify roles and responsibilities during
recovery – these are clear during the
emergency, but the roles get blurred the
further away we get from an event - we need
to be clear about roles and responsibilities
during the recovery phase. This will include
making sure the region has the right
structures and processes in place to involve
and connect the key groups involved in the
recovery phase. Each Local Council has its
own recovery approach. There is a need to
achieve consistency across all Local
Councils in the region – so that no matter
where you are in the region, the recovery
system is the same.
3. Review the emergency services planning
framework (used during the emergency
response) to make sure it is connecting
with the community and other key
stakeholders sufficiently.
i. How can this planning process be more
collaborative?
ii.
in place to move from ‘emergency response’
to recovery - and that there is a clear
decision or definition of when the region
would move from emergency response to
recovery for different types of events and
emergencies.

Adequate communications
Communication is central to resilience - for business/industry and 
individuals. It is vital that the region has adequate technology to 
enable effective communication. 
The region’s ability to communicate and power 
homes and businesses during a disruption or 
emergency can determine the size of an 
emergency's impact.
The draft Murraylands and Riverland 
Telecommunications Review by Local 
Government Area (RDAMR 2022 draft for 
comment) identifies that the region received 
more than 20% of all sites allocated to South 
Australia through the State and Federal Mobile 
Black Spots program funding. As a result, 
more than 99% of dwellings and the population 
across the region are covered by at least one 
Mobile Network Operator, placing the region at 
the top of regional Australia in terms of mobile 
coverage.
There remain areas that need improving, 
largely due to the pending decommissioning of 
3G mobile networks in 2024 and the roll out of 
the NBN leaving several towns underserviced 
with broadband access. Five population centres 
were identified as continuing to experience 
limited or no mobile coverage, both indoor and 
outdoors, being Karte, Colebatch, Ngarkat, 
Deepwater and Bunbury (noting that base 
station funding has been agreed for Colebatch).
The region needs adequate communications 
and power infrastructure – and the community 
needs to be supported to ensure that they have 
adequate plans and approaches in place to 
support themselves when their phones and 
power are down. 
A combination of local business and community 
engagement, supported by more detailed 
economic and social profiling to build a 
supportive business case, is likely required to 
convince either NBNCo Limited or a third-party 
alternative network provider to improve 
broadband connectivity in towns underserviced 
with broadband access. Greater emphasis 
should now be placed on supporting the 
adoption and deployment of emerging 
alternative technologies and connectivity 
networks, especially to support the Internet of 
Things type activities and developments, 
especially where the roll out of the NBN has 
proved substandard.
It is recommended that a study is undertaken 
to establish the vulnerabilities in power backup 
for the region’s communication hubs, to create 
a system that has adequate/enhanced 
renewable backup to enable continuity in times 
of emergency events.
33

“The best form of aid in 
an emergency is communication.”
~ Interest Panel Participant
34
The study should explore: 
1. Where the communications vulnerabilities 
are - incorporate mapping of where the 
infrastructure is and where it isn't.
2. The opportunities to address power/
energy vulnerabilities in the region 
including (but not necessarily limited to):
i. A spur off the interconnector:  With the 
interconnector going into the Riverland, 
is there an opportunity for it to have a 
spur going into the Murraylands.
ii.
 Alternative / renewable power: Can 
we connect with existing solar farms and/
or use batteries? Is there a push to 
upgrade single-wire earth return (SWER) 
power in these areas?
3. Vulnerabilities of mobile phone towers: All 
mobile phone tower operators should have 
capability for external power.
4. Vulnerabilities in community knowledge/
understanding. The study should propose 
mechanisms to raise community awareness 
about how they can plan for disruptions in 
communications and what they can put in 
place to address these issues.
5. How collaboration can be improved 
between key organisations - to prevent 
communication issues.
6. How imminent changes to our 
communications systems could provide an 
opportunity to effectively and efficiently 
address these issues (e.g. the move to 5G).
The study should also be informed by 
recommendations from previous studies that 
have considered what has happened on fire 
grounds and the suggested reforms 
recommended in these studies.
All communications carriers should 
participate in the study as well as the 
relevant state, local and federal 
organisations.  It should be undertaken 
collectively, as an industry. This study should 
also be informed by lived experience - of 
communities and businesses who can provide 
input.
It is important to note that whilst this 
recommendation is aimed at addressing 
issues we face during emergencies, reforms 
and infrastructure improvements in this area 
will have substantial benefits for all 
businesses in the region in conducting their 
work on a day-to-day basis.

“People rely on communication almost more than water 
nowadays in times of crisis.”
~ Interest Panel Participant
Audit of services and resources 
Participants in the Community Conversations told us that 
schools, a local doctor, houses for workers and a grocery store 
help to make their towns and communities sustainable.    
The region’s communities want their children to attend school locally, they want to play sport for 
their local sporting team, and they need childcare locally. They need these services to support 
their basic human needs. 
When these basic services are in place, our region’s towns thrive; providing job opportunities, 
supporting other businesses to thrive (providing services their workforce needs) and providing 
places for communities to come together to connect and mobilise.
The resilience of many communities across the region are at increased risk due to the significant 
loss of crucial services and resources.
Consequently, it is recommended that an 
audit is conducted of the community 
services/resources that the region needs 
and use that to inform business cases for 
future investment in services.
It was recommended that the audit should 
look at: 
• Healthcare (including mental health services),
• Aged care
• Aboriginal support services
• Emergency services
• Housing
• Schools and educational facilities
• Childcare and youth services
• Shopping, banking, and postage services
• Multicultural services (CALD services)
• Places for community to connect –
community centres, groups etc.
The audit should ask:
1. What are the community challenges? What 
services or resources are needed to 
address these challenges?
2. What services already exist? Are there 
issues with knowledge/information about 
the services?
3. How easy is it for people to connect or 
access the services? What is an appropriate 
distance to travel? What does ‘accessible’ 
mean in the context of different services. 
How far is too far? This links to 
Recommendation - “Employ Community 
Connectors” pg 42.
4. Where are the gaps? Where are there 
duplications?
5. The opportunities for addressing identified 
gaps in services.
Whilst the Interest Panel was not aware of a 
commensurate audit, it was noted that this 
initiative should build on any previous work 
undertaken on this issue. 
35

Recommendation Summary
Persist - Immediate actions	
1. Conduct a study of drought relief and its impact on communities (including a literature
review of what exists already and where the gaps are).
2. Review the emergency services planning framework - to improve how it connects with community.
3. Study into communications in the region and how to ensure adequate power supply for
communications during an emergency.
Adapt - Medium term	
1. Improvements to planning for the transition from emergency response to recovery.
2. Conduct an audit of community services.
36

Priority 5:
Diversity and Flexibility
37

GOAL
The region wants to diversify its 
economic base so that community 
wellbeing does not stand or fall 
according to the market fortunes of 
any single industry.
Business innovation will help to build local economic 
diversity and autonomy whilst helping the local 
economy to adapt to changing conditions.21
The region values and respects the natural capital 
(land and waters) upon which it is built.
OUTCOMES
Economic diversification 
Diversification into new industries 
will help ensure that when one 
industry is impacted by an event or 
a disruption, the whole region isn’t 
negatively impacted.
The region needs to diversify within the existing 
industrial base and diversify the region’s economic base 
to attract and develop new industries. Diversification 
will include developing new market opportunities and 
value adding to existing products. 
This will require progressive adaptation over time. 
The Interest Panels recommended that 
businesses are supported to explore, identify, and 
implement opportunities for economic diversity.
To enable this to happen they proposed that the 
region needs the following:
1. Industry/Sectoral Research - also assist by
looking at case studies of what has happened
elsewhere and commission some research/
investigations that identify information that is
tailored to that sector’s needs.
2. Celebrate successes - identify and communicate
the small visible successes. Communications is
critical to drive diversification as this is what helps
people be comfortable with change, excited, and
also see the relevance to their lives.
An economy that is less exposed to drought
Job opportunities and people to fill them
38
Priority 5:
Diversity 
and Flexibility
21 http://www.emergencyvolunteering.com.au/docs/Building_
Inclusive_and_Resilient_Communities.pdf

“It is the sum of all 
parts that makes up the 
economy - individual 
businesses being strong 
and diverse adds up to 
resilience for the region.”
~ Interest Panel Participant
39
3. Explore new land production systems and
management that can be used in a changing
marginal environment. The region has
significant natural capital, and a heavy reliance
on dry land crops. The region uses improved
scientific understanding of soil health, biomass
and new/emerging farming systems to improve
agricultural practices and take advantage of new
market opportunities.
4. Information from government (and research
institutions) - People need to understand the
change that is coming and potential
opportunities. This is explored further in
Recommendation - “Improved Access to
Information” pg 25.
5. Build a Self-assessment tool that helps us to
understand where our businesses are at and
how we can diversify - as discussed in
Recommendation - “Enabling the better
assessment of risk by local industry” pg 21.
This work will give us flexibility and options to build 
resilience - it may even give us a  market 
advantage.
Region of Choice 
The region will have strength 
in numbers! 
The region wants to attract and retain a diversity of 
people to contribute to and sustain its economy.
To do this the region needs to become a destination 
of choice. The region needs to be known for its 
liveability. 
Businesses are trying to promote the region and 
encourage people to move for jobs, but it’s bigger 
than them… it needs a regional holistic view. 
The region needs to create clusters of 
businesses of choice – having one great 
business of choice is not enough. It needs a 
regional view and vision that we all aspire to. 
Addressing this issue is of vital importance 
because industry is having substantial issues 
attracting people to the region to work. The 
region needs people with skill sets including, 
but not limited to health professionals and 
people that can support farm production. 
To do this, the region needs to show prospective 
skilled workers that they can have everything 
they need here, for their whole family.
This recommendation links closely to 
Recommendation - “Audit of services and 
resources” pg 35.

1. Develop and promote the regions value 
and commence coordinated promotion.
2. Businesses are supported to explore,
identify, and implement opportunities
for economic diversity.
Transform - Long term
3. Explore new land production systems
and management based on new
scientific understanding of soil health
and biomass.
It is of fundamental importance to attracting people to the region 
that we have the services and resources that people need in our region.
Schools, medical services, shopping centres, 
housing and childcare services are central to 
attracting people to the area. 
This recommendation also links to 
Recommendation - "Economic 
diversification" pg 40. 
We need to understand our future economy 
and ensure that we are bringing people that we 
need for the future, for our future industries. 
Think about who the future community is! Be 
deliberate in who we attract, and what they 
need to bring and do here. Whilst we will be 
clear about what skills we need to meet the 
challenges and opportunities of the future - 
we want to be diverse in who we attract - young 
people, mature people, blue collar / white 
collar. 
It is recommended that :
1. The Region commits to diversity and
articulates this commitment.
2. Industry comes together with
government to understand, explore and
articulate the future workforce needs.
What skills will be needed and roughly
when it is expected that these skills will
be required.
3. Promotion of our region then needs to occur
- not as a one-off campaign - but through a 
series of permanent communications and 
awareness raising efforts. To do this the 
region will need to be clear on its value.
a. Its strengths, and its unique offerings
b. The rewards/opportunities and 
what's on offer in our region -
including promoting existing 
business offerings
c. Success stories (i.e. Study Adelaide)
We need to be looking at the region wide 
direction/plan for this - which enables us to 
have a line of sight to the long term as well as 
the short term.
Recommendation Summary
Adapt - Medium term 
40

41

GOAL
Community connections make 
our communities resilient.
One of the strengths of the region is 
community cohesion and connectedness. 
The region has places and opportunities to 
enable connection. Whether it is at the weekly 
footy match, in the local hairdresser, at the 
local café, through the local school, at work or 
at a community event or social function - 
community members need to connect and see 
each other regularly and they do! This gives 
strength. It is through having the opportunity 
to share journeys and experiences that people 
can learn from each other and offer each 
other support. 
This is what creates a ‘community’. 
The region is lucky as there are many 
opportunities and ways to connect. The 
community viewed this as a real strength 
across the region. Many of these 
opportunities have been identified in 
Attachment C.
Community needs to nourish these 
opportunities and governments need to 
continue to support them. 
Communities know that they have more work 
to do to be more inclusive and connect with 
new residents or those who feel disconnected. 
Industry and community alike have also 
identified the need to be more collaborative in 
how they work and initiatives to support this 
are detailed in this Plan. 
OUTCOMES
People can access the services 
they need  
People are emotionally supported 
42
Priority 6:
Collaboration, 
Connection and 
Inclusion
Inclusion 
Inclusion is the practice or 
policy of providing equal access 
to opportunities and resources 
for people who might otherwise 
be excluded or marginalized, 
such as those who have 
physical or mental disabilities 
and recent migrants. 
However, the Community Conversations and 
Interest Panels highlighted that ‘equal access 
and opportunity’ may not always be enough. 
That there is a need for the ‘included’ to 
‘reach out’ and encourage participation by 
groups that are currently not participating as 
part of the community in the region.

Interest Panels and the Community 
Conversations identified the need 
for communities to:
• Be connected enough to know who is missing
and who they need to reach out to ‘include’.
• Help people understand what opportunities 
they might be missing.
• Make sure that opportunities to connect and 
engage are safe and accessible.
Participants realised the complexities in actioning 
this approach to inclusion but wanted to 
challenge individual communities to consider how 
to better include and connect with those in their 
communities that are currently disconnected and 
possibly disengaged.  
In addition, the Interest Panels wanted to 
challenge organisations to use an inclusivity lens 
in all their work. This is why they have 
emphasised the importance of not leaving anyone 
behind - within the Together Community 
principle. 
It is important that inclusion is a focus of all 
actions to improve resilience in the region. 
Employ “Community 
Connectors” 
It is recommended that Community Connectors 
are funded and supported to connect people to 
each other and existing services and resources 
in each community across the region. 
43
1. Establish a ‘community connector’ role
in local government.
Transform - Long term
1. As a community work to engage with
and connect with those who are
disconnected.

Implementation 
of the Plan:
What next, what now?
44
The MR Plan process and purpose focuses on innovative ways to 
bring together community, industry and government, to develop a 
vision and an enduring regional voice.
Undertaking this process of engagement has 
demonstrated value in the act of listening, 
authentically and actively listening to 
community people in region to construct a 
narrative in their own words about resilience.
The planning process engaged deeply with the 
community to produce a written plan which 
has shifted the outcome of a traditional plan; 
the MR Plan has not focused on providing 
answers to the question of drought 
preparedness or resilience, it has instead 
posited a series of important questions as 
recommendations to progress the process 
toward a living plan; one that is inclusive  
and endures.
The process looked beyond but was inclusive 
of drought to understand what disruption 
means in the context of regional resilience. 
What was learnt is that regional people from 
all walks of life whether their role is formal or 
informal want to live and work in a 
community setting that is strong and 
adaptable.
With this understanding the next phase of the 
MR Plan process seeks to focus on 
implementation of the MR Plan 
recommendations. These recommendations 
have short-term and long-term time frames 
and require ongoing resourcing and action 
to provide outcomes.
During this process there was a strong 
acceptance that a positive way forward is to 
move beyond a traditional planning paradigm 
(i.e. a written plan that is not actionable and a 
plan that does not easily transition to 
implementation) to an enduring and dynamic 
process of regional engagement. This process 
should be guided by agreed resilience 
principles that can provide a continuing 
regional voice; a system or mechanism that 
can accept inputs from top-down and bottom-
up system elements and bring these, at times 
competing elements, closer together to 
deliver regional outcomes that are effective 
and transformative into the future.
The agreed principles identified to commence 
this work are:
• Together Community
• Productive and Collaborative Futures
• Prepared and Proactive
• Leadership in Action.
The MR Plan Project Partners, MRLGA, MRLB 
and RDAMR and regional community 
stakeholders, including the voice of local 
people, recommend that resourcing and funding 
is identified to build upon the first stage of the 
MR Plan process and continue this method of 
engagement, guided by the agreed principles, 
as the process that builds a “Coalition of the 
Willing” to continue the valued act of listening 
to the region.

45
Attachment A:

OVERVIEW
October 2021
Individual Interviews
28 diverse participants shared their individual views about 
what is needed to be resilient
November 2021 ongoing...
Community Conversations (Conversation Guide)
300 people and counting... 
What can you do yourselves? 
Where do you need help?
February 2022
Regional Summit
What does this Plan need to do for you? 
Who are you as a region? 
How can you control your own destiny? 
What does great leadership look like?
March - May 2022
Interest Panels
From what you said that communities need, we will identify 
region-scale needs to work on to build our resilience
June 2022
Draft the MR Plan
Beyond June 2022
Enduring and evolving resilience system
Engagement Methodology

PROJECT OVERSIGHT AND LEADERSHIP
46
Key regional stakeholders, the 
Murraylands and Riverland Local 
Government Association (MRLGA), 
Murraylands and Riverland Landscape 
Board (MRLB) and Regional 
Development Australia Murraylands and 
Riverland (RDAMR), identified the need 
for a regional plan and formed a 
regional consortium represented as the 
MR Plan Steering Committee.  
A call for submissions was published 
online along with direct invitations to 
form the Steering Committee. This 
Steering Committee was comprised of 
Chief Executive Officers (or equivalent) 
from RDAMR, MRLGA, MRLB, one 
Riverland and one Murraylands Council, 
one Riverland and one Murraylands 
Aboriginal representative, one MR 
community representative, and one MR 
industry representative, plus the PIRSA 
Regional Coordinator and an 
independent Chair.  
The Steering Committee, led by an 
independent Chair, provided agreement 
for RDAMR to lead the development of 
the MR Plan through a staged process 
with the assistance of an independent 
consultant.  
Following a Terms of Reference, the 
Steering Committee met monthly from 
August 2021 – June 2022 across the 
region (where possible in light of 
Covid-19 impacts) and online to advise 
the project lead, RDAMR, on 
consultation, engagement and process 
to develop the MR Plan.  
Independent consultant, democracyCo 
were appointed by the Steering 
Committee (following a tender 
submission process) to undertake 
detailed project engagement activities 
aligning with the MR Plan project 
purpose.  
The development of the MR Plan has 
been guided by the community, 
activating a ground up approach. 
Engagement Methodology
Attachment A:

47
REGIONAL INTERVIEWS
In October 2021 we undertook 28 interviews of diverse residents of the region. We 
sought out people who weren’t loud voices, that weren’t necessarily prominent 
community members. We sought people of different ages, from across the region, 
with different backgrounds, cultures and experiences. 
Process: 
1. Nominations
Steering Committee members and project 
partner organisations along with some 
democracyCo staff – identified people in their 
personal networks (not professional networks) 
with an emphasis on identifying everyday 
people in community who would be less likely 
to participate in a traditional planning or 
consultation engagement process. For 
example, the lady who owns the newsagent, or 
the coach of their son’s football team, their 
next-door neighbour, someone from their 
church etc.  
Importantly we wanted to interview the ‘faces’ 
of the region – a diversity of people from all 
walks of life. 
Approximately 120 people were nominated 
through this process.
2. Ensuring Diversity
DemocracyCo staff looked across the list and 
chose 30 that represented a diversity in terms of
• Age
• Gender
• Location (very important – need a regional
coverage)
• Sector/type of employment
• Background
Engagement Process
Attachment A:

48
Location of Interviewees
Taylorville
Swan Reach
Nildottie
Berri
Loxton
Pinnaroo
Lameroo
Geranium/Jabuk
Karoonda
Murray Bridge
Tailem Bend
Coonalpyn
Lake Alexandrina
Jervois
Mannum
Sanderston
Murraylands 
Riverland 
Regions
Mid Murray 
Council
Berri Barmera 
Council
Renmark Paringa 
Council
District Council of 
Loxton Waikerie
Southern Mallee 
District Council
Coorong District 
Council
Rural City of 
Murray Bridge
District Council of 
Karoonda East Murray
Engagement Process
Attachment A:

49
DemocracyCo interviewed 28 of those chosen 
(2 interviews fell through). DemocracyCo 
asked questions in the following areas:
• Where people call home - their landscape
• About their community - how they connect 
with their community
• About their work or the work of their family
• What events have caused adversity in the 
past. How they have dealt with that adversity 
and what adversity/ disruptive events they 
expect to experience in the future
• What is in place to assist them during times of 
adversity and where there are gaps in supports
• What are the strengths and weaknesses of 
their communities
• What resilience means to them
• What helps them to be resilient?
Interviewees by industry
Industry
Number of 
Interviewees
Agricultural Services
3
Farming/Growing
6
Agricultural Mechanics
1
Arts/Design
2
Education
3
Health
2
Local Government
1
Retail
1
Service Industry
1
Student
2
Tourism
3
Volunteer
1
Other/Not reported
2
18-24
10%
20%
Interviewee Age Group
30%
25-34
35-44 
3. Interview
55-64
65-74
74+
Engagement Process
Attachment A:
45-54

1. Ensure that the process started from a framing of the ‘problem’ consistent with what the 
community was thinking and feeling - this helped ensure that language was appropriate and 
supported.
2. Enable deep reflection on the region, its resilience and how its resilience could be improved.
3. Enable us to collect ‘stories’ to create a very human framing for the Community 
Conversation Guide.
4. Support equitable participation.
5. Enable us to delve deeply into the issues – much deeper than in a workshop.
6. Build trust in the process – by building a group of ambassadors for it.
PURPOSE
The interviews were intended to help to prepare and frame the 
resilience challenge authentically before we embarked on 
broadscale engagement on this issue. 
We needed to know how to frame the issues – so that we could ensure that the initiative strongly 
resonated with the community – building interest in participation. 
We wanted to:
50
Engagement Process
Attachment A:

The interviews provided the information required to help us 
develop a discussion paper “Strong and Adaptable - a Community 
Conversation Guide for the Murraylands, Mallee and Riverland” 22
22  The Community Conversation Guide can be found here -  https://www.mrplan.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/MRP-Conversation-
Guide-WebVersion.pdf
23 The Host Guide can be found here -   https://www.mrplan.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/MRP-Host-Guide.pdf
This Guide, the Community Conversation 
Guide,  was framed by the feedback we 
received from interviewees both in terms of the 
language used in the document and the 
content. 
In summary the Guide:
• Explained the project and process
• Outlined the key challenges that might
create adversity or disruption across the
region - as identified by the interviewees
• Provided an overview of what makes the
region strong and adaptable - as identified
by the interviewees
• Explored the issues that weren’t helping
resilience in the region as identified by the
interviewees
• Stories from two interviewees which
highlighted some of the challenges and
opportunities to create stronger
communities through participation/
volunteering/leadership and the benefits
this brings communities and to the
individuals involved
The Guide then identified key questions 
enabling and encouraging the broader 
community to reflect on the most important 
things that need to be put in place in the region 
to improve resilience; the gaps in building 
resilience in the community and the strengths 
that communities currently have that help 
them to be more resilient. 
The Guide was designed to enable small 
community groups to come together and 
discuss their strengths and what they needed 
to support their resilience. 
Any community member could host a 
Community Conversation and they were 
supported in doing this by the Host Guide.23 
The Host’s role was to organise a group in 
their community (the groups could be as small 
or as big as the host felt comfortable with). 
51
Community Conversations 
Attachment A:

At the time of data analysis 52 groups had participated in a Community 
Conversation involving over 300 people across the region. 
Community Conversations were held with the following groups:
Eleven groups indicated that they were made 
up of a mix of different types of groups and 
three opted not to identify their group. 
Unfortunately, we only have data on the 
location of the groups for 18 of the 52 groups 
(as answering this question was optional). 
These 18 groups came from the following 
areas:
• Murray Bridge
• Jabuk/Geranium
• Mannum
• Karoonda
• Renmark
• Tailem Bend
• Monash (near Berri)
52
Group
Number
Community Organising 
Committees
4
Sporting Groups
2
Government Dept or Local 
Government workplace
7
Industry/Business 
Groups
8
Schools
5
Service Group (Rotary, 
CWA or similar)
2
NGOs
Church Groups
Family Groups
4
Boards
2
Aboriginal Elders
1
Community Conversations 
Attachment A:
1
Friendship Groups
1
1

1. Encouraged interviewees to be ambassadors for 
the project and lead community conversations in 
their communities.
a. 20 interviewees indicated that they would lead 
Community Conversations.
2. Soft Launch events across the region involving over 
150 individuals demonstrated how to lead a 
community conversation and empowered individuals 
to undertake this activity.
3. Steering Committee members hosted their own 
Community Conversations and assisted others 
within their networks to facilitate.
4. Organised groups were supported by the Project 
Team to facilitate community conversations.
5. Regional Summit – 134 registered participants 
encouraged to lead community conversations.
a. 38 attendees said they were willing to be 
involved in a Community Conversation.
b. 49 had already taken part or hosted their own.
6. Various social media activity and electronic direct 
mail via RDAMR channels.
7. Official Media Release distributed across region.
a. Onboarding of local media (print and radio) to 
share and promote the activity.
COMMUNICATIONS
Obviously, promotions and networking was critical to 
the success of this stage. 
It was vital that we reach out to a diversity of groups 
across the region and to involve as many people as 
possible. 
To this end the MR Plan Project Team undertook the 
following promotional activities:
PURPOSE
This stage aimed to understand how the 
community and stakeholders viewed the 
strengths and the weaknesses of the region’s 
communities - providing us with data that 
provides a sense of where the opportunities to 
act are or where the priority areas to act are. 
This data is the backbone of this strategy and 
was used by the Leaders Panel and the 
Interest Groups to develop the Key Objectives, 
Goals, Priority Areas and Actions for this 
Resilience Plan. 
Three Soft Launch Events were facilitated 
across the region in Berri, Murray Bridge and 
Lameroo to actively demonstrate how a 
Community Conversation could be conducted. 
These events were well attended by 
community, stakeholders and leaders from 
across the region. 
53
Community Conversations 
Attachment A:

The MR Plan Regional Summit was conducted on 18 February 2022 
online due to the threat of COVID 19 in the community at that time. 
134 individuals from diverse industries and ranging in age from 
16-65+ registered for the Regional Summit - from across the region.
THE DESIGN
The MR Plan Regional Summit was designed to 
be a large scale, whole of region, inclusive 
event – which highlighted the MR Plan and 
continued the conversations which had been 
started in the community about the future and 
resilience of the region. 
Specifically the Regional Summit was 
designed to enable: 
• The community to discuss and set their vision 
for the future of the region
• Conversations with elected members and 
aspiring elected members about how that 
future might be realised
• The community to discuss leadership – both 
formal and informal – and what it needs to 
look like – therefore generating data and 
content which can be used to inform the 
Interest Panels. It was decided to focus in on 
this topic due to the significant amount of 
feedback and discussion in the Community 
Conversations about leadership, governance, 
and community engagement/empowerment. 
Facilitators and the MR Plan project team 
wanted to unpack the issues in this space 
further - to gain further insights into the 
issues and opportunities
DESIGN DRIVERS
The following design drivers were important 
to the design of the Regional Summit:
• Strong commitment by the Project Partners 
and the Steering Committee that the 
community voice would be central to 
setting the structure and content of the MR 
Plan. Allowing the community to determine 
the region's priorities for building resilience
• Building a coalition. Provide a place/
opportunity to bring stakeholders, 
community, and formal leaders (Federal, 
State and Local) together in one place to talk 
about the Plan and how it is best implemented
– as the MR Plan intention is to continue 
regional scale dialogues across organisations 
and communities, into the long term
• Provide a catalyst for innovation – be 
disruptive, inventive and indicate a new way 
of working together
• Maximise community involvement – and 
recognise seasonal pressures (seeding, fruit 
picking etc.) – hence the selected date
• Provide an opportunity for community voice 
and regional priorities to be amplified
54
Regional Summit  
Attachment A:

MR Plan Regional Summit 
Feedback
In answer to the question “How well did 
our online format help you connect with 
others across your region?”
• 31% felt like they were able to connect well
with others online
• 61% reported that connecting online was
much better than expected
• 6% indicated that is was great to catch up
online
• 2% indicated that they felt they couldn’t
really connect (with others) online
55
PROCESS
The Regional Summit involved 4 ‘parts’:
1. Entry and Welcome
Participants were provided with a high-level 
introduction to the MR Plan process, and to 
help build understanding of how the 
Community Conversation Process and 
Regional Summit was being used to inform 
the development of the Plan. 
2. Community Vision Setting
We bought in two inspiring speakers to prompt 
reflection, analysis, and future thinking. Jen 
Cleary from Centacare and Nathan Woodrow, 
local entrepreneur, and owner of Ryde 
Clothing in Renmark.
Jen Cleary’s presentation enabled the group to 
reflect on ‘who they are’ or rather - who the 
region is. What really drives the region and 
how that might be different from people’s 
preconceived notions.  
This led into a workshop where small groups 
brainstormed their vision for the region - 
starting from the premise of creating a future 
headline about the region. 
Nathan Woodrow followed, inspiring 
participants with his own story - a journey of 
innovation, entrepreneurship, and regional 
collaboration. This supported the workshop 
session that followed where participants 
talked in small groups about what great 
community leadership is, when it’s at its best 
and what is needed to support it? 
Regional Summit  
2. Community Vision Setting
3. Aspiring Leader Dialogues
4. Enabling the Future We Want
1. Entry and Welcome
The process was universally enjoyed with 
- 46% of participants giving the Regional
Summit a rating of 5/5. The remaining
participants gave the Regional Summit a
rating of 4/5.
4 Part Process
Attachment A:

3. Aspiring Leader Dialogues
All existing and all known aspiring 
candidates at State and Federal levels, and 
the mayors of the eight Councils within the 
region, were invited to attend and pitch their 
vision for the future of the region and what 
they would/ could do to achieve this vision.  
Eight participated in the process, as follows:
1. Mayor Dave Burgess
2. Mayor Paul Simmons
3. Mayor Peter Hunt
4. The Hon Tony Pasin MP
5. Candidate for Hammond Airlie Keen
6. The Hon Nick McBride MP
7. The Hon Adrian Pederick MP
8. The Hon Tim Whetstone MP
We split the Summit into groups of approximately 
10 people with each group having a conversation 
with a leader about their vision for approximately 
10 minutes.  The leaders initially pitched their 
vision for the region and participants were 
invited to ask questions before moving the 
leader onto a new group. 
It was a high energy and active session – 
where community had an unprecedented 
opportunity to hear direct from their existing 
and aspiring leaders about their visions and 
intentions. Leaders rotated through a number 
of groups giving them access to a range of 
community members. 
Leaders’ attendance and presentation was 
supported via a speaker brief that was sent to 
them in advance and via a leader briefing held 
online on the day. 
Following the dialogue, we asked participants 
to spend a couple of minutes reflecting on 
what they heard that excited them and what 
they heard that concerned them.
4. Enabling the future, we
want
Following the leader dialogues, we facilitated 
an Ideas Bounce - a deep dive discussion into 
the key issues on governance and leadership 
that were raised through the Community 
Conversations. 
Participants were broken into five groups and 
with the support of a facilitator were 
encouraged to explore the following issues: 
• Trusted leaders
• Accessible/embedded leadership
• Decisions making
• Our strongest advocates
• Enabling a vision
Participants were able to move between the 
online groups to talk about different issues 
- as they wished.
Content from this session was used to inform 
the Interest Panels as it developed its section 
of the MR Plan.
56
Regional Leadership Panel 
Attachment A:

The Regional Leadership Panel, comprised of 12 diverse participants,  looked across “prioritised 
areas” developed by democracyCo through our analysis of the Community Conversations, 
Regional Summit, and Interviews to see if they agreed with the prioritised area and develop rough 
wording for the Goal and Objectives to define and focus the prioritised area. 
Each prioritised area then became the focus of an Interest Panel.
Preparation for the Regional 
Leadership Panel
DemocracyCo undertook the initial analysis 
of the Community Conversations feedback 
and the Interview and Regional Summit data. 
Data was prioritised based on the number of 
responses coming through Community 
Conversation - seeking to identify the highest 
rating data based on the number of 
conversations. Low ranking data was not 
provided to the Regional Leadership Panel to 
ensure that low prioritised issues were not 
included in the next stage of prioritisation.24
We documented and demonstrated how we 
arrived at the prioritised list to the Regional 
Leadership Panel.
We used a thematic analysis process for 
analysing the data from the Community 
Conversations. We used a semantic approach 
where we analysed the explicit content of the 
data (people’s stated opinions/ideas).  A data 
analytical tool called NVivo assisted with this 
analysis, allowing us to easily read, code, 
organise and rearrange our data as required. 
It also allowed us to quickly call out specific 
inquiries from the data and to represent the 
data in various visual formats.
The process of analysis involved several stages: 
• Familiarisation with the data – reading
across what is there to gain an overview
• Coding – grouping together common ideas/
opinions into codes
• Theming– grouping together codes that
contain similar ideas that formed several
areas
• Reviewing – do the areas make sense? Is
there anything that is missing or in the
wrong place?
• Recoding/shifting – anything that made
more sense in another area or theme
At this stage we did not name the four areas 
that emerged from this analysis. 
24   Note - to ensure that the Plan is focused on what the priority issues are for the region - we don’t want very 
low-ranking issues to be prioritised highly or in effect ‘water down’ the focus on areas of importance. 
57
Regional Leadership Panel 
Attachment A:

Participation and Recruitment
The Regional Leadership Panel was made up of 12 participants including:
• MR Plan Steering Committee members
• Tanya Lehman, Aurora Meliora Pty Ltd, Leadership and Culture Change
Consultant
• Regional leaders from the Drought Resilience Leaders Program,
• RDAMR staff members
The Drought Resilience Leaders Program is a national Federal Government program delivered by 
The Australian Rural Leadership Foundation,  designed to equip people working in or with rural, 
regional, and remote communities with skills to lead their communities into the future.
58
Regional Leadership Panel 
Attachment A:

PROCESS AND PRODUCT
The group met for 3.5 hours to analyse the data from the Community Conversations and develop 
the scope and brief for four Interest Panels. 
The session started with the group being introduced to the data and a data familiarisation 
workshop. The group then worked to develop a draft Goal Statement and Objectives for each of the 
draft prioritised areas. 
To do this the group started by checking the organisation of the data from the Community 
Conversations, to make sure that they were happy with where we had grouped codes and how we 
had arranged the themes. They decided to leave the data as we had arranged it and proceeded to 
name the four areas that we had created.
The final four areas and their themes as outlined in their brief to the Interest Panels was as follows: 
1. Productive and Collaborative Futures
a. Business supports
b. Industry collaboration
c. Diverse industries
d. Labour and employment
e. Innovation and research
f. Skills and training
g. Water security
2. Leadership in Action
a. Bottom-up, informed community
governance
b. Connected and strong governance
c. Leadership support and
development
d. Supporting community initiatives
e. Young people in government
3. Together Community
a. Connected and collaborative communities
b. Community groups
c. Community qualities
d. Community resources
e. Health and wellbeing
f. Knowledge sharing
4. Prepared and Proactive
a. Crisis prevention and management
b. Plan and action
These groupings and the draft goal and objectives 
were then provided to each of the respective 
Interest Panels to start their deliberations.
59
Regional Leadership Panel 
Attachment A:

Four Interest Panels were convened to deeply explore the four 
prioritised areas as developed by the Regional Leadership Panel 
upon consideration and reflection of democracyCo’s analysis of 
the Community Conversation feedback.
The four Interest Panels were as follows: 
1. Productive and Collaborative Futures
2. Leadership in Action
3. Together Community
4. Prepared and Proactive
ROLE
The role of each Interest Panel was to:
• Define the interest area by finalising the goal (as started by the Regional Leaders Panel as 
outlined above) and the outcomes
• Explain how the priority area will contribute to resilience for the region (why it is a priority area)
• Explore what is happening already in relation to the goal to ensure that recommended actions fill 
gaps/are important areas of need
• Detail what needs to stop happening to achieve the goal
• Recommend a limited number of actions under the goal for their respective Interest Panel
• Consider and explore impacts on various groups within each goal for example Aboriginal, youth, 
and vulnerable
60
Interest Panels 
Attachment A:

56 people participated on the 
four Interest Panels. Each 
Interest Panel met three times 
and came together once to 
review the completed draft Plan.
An open invitation to register to participate in the 
Interest Panels was extended to the public and 
all participants involved in the process to date 
were invited to register their interest to participate. 
This was promoted by:
• Personal invitation to the interviewees and 
we encouraged them to share with their 
networks/contacts
• Personal invitation to identified Key 
Stakeholders and identified community 
leaders
• Directly at the conclusion of the Regional 
Summit
• Email invitations to register extended to all 
who had attended the initial Soft Launch 
Events and Regional Summit
• Email invitations to those who has registered 
to stay informed about the process
• Online links hosted on the dedicated MR Plan 
website (www.mrplan.com.au)
• Social media activity
• RDAMR monthly eNews
PARTICIPATION AND RECRUITMENT 
The Launch process - discussed earlier was 
also central to building relationships with key 
stakeholders and influencers in the 
community that we wanted to engage with the 
process and participate in it. 
In addition, the RDAMR Project Team, Project 
Partners, Steering Committee and 
democracyCo met to identify key stakeholders 
that needed to be involved in each of the 
Interest Panels. 
Key to the consideration of key stakeholders 
to directly approach and encourage their 
participation:
• Level of interest of stakeholders
• Critical and creative thinkers
• Emerging leaders
• Experience/knowledge held by the 
stakeholder that was central to successful 
development of recommendations
• Ability to influence
• Desire to implement/lead implementation 
of the recommendations
61
Interest Panels 
Attachment A:

PROCESS OVERVIEW
The Interest Panel process was conducted online over Zoom 
across three sessions, and facilitated by democracyCo. Whilst 
each Interest Panel was unique, the generic facilitation approach 
for each is described in the diagram below.
62
Session 1
2hrs 30 mins
Session 2
3hrs
Session 3
3hrs
Introductions 
Re-entry and reflections
Recap of the draft 
recommendations
Understanding the task
Gaze raising workshop – with 
either Professor Jim Cavaye 
or Professor Fiona Kerr – a 
session to think system-wide 
View across all Interest 
Panels – to see alignment 
and identify any gaps 
Introduction to the 
Community Conversations 
data and reflections on 
what the data is telling us 
Identifying game changing 
system level recommendations 
for the Plan
Feedback provided from 
the Project Partners on the 
draft recommendations
Brainstorming potential 
ideas for the MR Plan
Recommendation development 
(who it would benefit, why it 
matters, what needs to be 
unlocked to make their 
support resilience 
Improvements – making 
improvements to the draft 
recommendations
Confirmation of goals and 
objectives of our Interest 
Panel
Consensus on 
recommendation suite 
Considering what’s already 
in place to support 
recommendations 
Consensus work to finalise 
recommendations to go 
forward into the Plan
Interest Panels 
Attachment A:

63
Murraylands and Riverland Plan written and developed by:
Background 
DemocracyCo. 
Process 
DemocracyCo. 
Vision for the Region 
Interviews, Community Conversations, Regional Summit and Interest Panels.
Regional Identity 
(Who we are) 
Community Conversations, Regional Summit and Interest Panels.
Climate change and drought
RDAMR - taken from MRLB, PIRSA and Federal Government 
research/data.
Principles of resilience
Community Conversations, Regional Leaders and Interest Panels.
Priorities for Resilience 
Intervention and Action
Some early framing of the goal and outcomes were drafted by a group of 
Regional Leaders - these were then finalised by the relevant Interest Panels 
with support from democracyCo developed - using data from Community 
Conversations and the Regional Summit.
Implementation of the Plan: 
What next, what now?  
Coalition of the Willing.
Where did the content for the Plan come from?
Attachment A:

More than 550 diverse individuals have actively contributed to the 
development of the MR Plan through direct involvement and the 
ongoing engagement process.
This includes: 
• 3 Partnering Regional Organisations
• 11 Steering Committee Members
• 28 Regional Interviewees
• 157 Attendees across three separate Soft Launch Events
• 134 Regional Summit Participants
• 8 Aspiring Leaders
• 12 Regional Leadership Program Participants
• 5 Resilience Experts
• 58 Contributors across four Regional Interest Panels
• 52 Community Conversation Hosts
• 300+ Community Conversation Participants
64
Attachment B:
Number of Participants

The Interest Panels identified the following programs as 
successfully supporting the Resilience of the Region. 
The following initiatives were identified as supporting the region in diversifying its economic base: 
• Regional Development Strategy, PIRSA
• State Growth Agenda, DPC
• MRLGA Water Position Paper
• Regional Plan - PDI Act
• Waste and Resource Recovery Strategy
• ThincLab Loxton
• International Services, Business SA
• Industry Advocate
• Industry Leaders Fund
• FFW CRC - Circular Economy education 
pilot, FFW CRC/RDAMR
• Benefits of Circular Economy to Regional 
South Australia, GISA/RDAMR/RDALC
• AGRI Food Tourism Program, Federal 
Government/RDAMR
• Riverland Ag Workforce Program, DIIS/
RDAMR/mteSA
The following initiatives were identified as 
supporting the region in becoming a 
“region of choice”:
• Regional Development Strategy
• State Growth Agenda
• MRLGA Water Position Paper
• Regional Plan - PDI Act
• Local Jobs Program - Murray and South 
East
• Women in Business and Regional 
Development Group
• Jobs 4 Murraylands and Riverland
• AGRI Food Tourism Program
• Flinders University Rural and Remote 
Health
• Aboriginal Learning On Country 
Program
65
Attachment C:
What programs are working? 
What do we want to keep?

Connecting our communities 
The following initiatives were identified as playing a vital role in supporting our community to 
be connected and inclusive:
• Technology - elderly can teach the old ways 
and young can teach technology. Example of 
gaming community - local version. Bridging 
generation gap. Learning from each other. 
Technology is an ‘in’ for youth
• Sport - provides a significant opportunity for 
communities to connect
• Our Town - initiative of the Fay Fuller 
Foundation to empower rural and regional 
communities to build new capabilities to 
meet the mental health challenges they 
face, both now and into the future
• Local government Youth Action Committees 
to ensure youth inclusion and promote 
constructive youth empowerment
• Riverland Youth Theatre - the stretch and 
reach of this organisation is impressive with 
little funding. Young aboriginal people with 
dance and art
• Parts of things - arts organisation
• SAASTA - South Australian Aboriginal 
Secondary Training Academy. Used to be 
sports academy using sports as the hook for 
education. Now they focus on culture. PLP 
is there, research project is there. Sport is 
still there. Hugely successful with 
Aboriginal youth and staff. Great model
• Mimini’s group
• Men’s group
• Elders Group
• Ski for life - a group focused within the 
Murraylands and Riverland committed to 
raising awareness and promoting mental 
health, wellbeing and suicide prevention
66
What programs are working?
What do we want to keep? 
Attachment C:

http://www.mrplan.com.au/MRPattachmentD
67
Attachment D:
Stocktake of current initiatives 
that support the principles
As part of the Interest Panel process participants identified current 
initiatives in the region which they assessed as being important for 
supporting the principles. 
You can view/download a full list of these initiatives using the link below.

The 
Murraylands 
and Riverland 
Plan
This project is part of the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning Program and is funded through 
and the Government of South Australia.
M U R R A Y L A N D S & R I V E R L A N D I N C . 
S O U T H A U S T R A L I A

Regional Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning Guide 
Regional Drought Resilience (RDR) Plans 
South Australia

Regional Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Guide 
Information current as of 9 November 2023 
© Government of South Australia 2023 
Department of Primary Industries and Regions and its employees do not warrant or make any 
representation regarding the use, or results of the use, of the information contained herein as regards to 
its correctness, accuracy, reliability and currency or otherwise. Department of Primary Industries and 
Regions and its employees expressly disclaim all liability or responsibility to any person using the 
information or advice. 
All Enquiries 
Department of Primary Industries and Regions 
Rachael Kelly, Drought and Resilience Manager 
Level 16, 25 Grenfell Street 
GPO Box 1671, Adelaide SA 5001 
T 08 8429 0368 
E rachael.kelly@sa.gov.au

Objective ID: A6051516  
3 
Contents 
Background .................................................................................................................................. 4 
Evaluation Purpose ...................................................................................................................... 4 
Evaluation Scope ......................................................................................................................... 5 
Program Logic .............................................................................................................................. 6 
How does the program logic work? ...................................................................................................... 7 
Program Measurement Framework ............................................................................................. 7 
Evaluation and learning strategy ................................................................................................ 10 
Key Evaluation Questions .................................................................................................................. 10

Objective ID: A6051516  
4 
Background  
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (the program) is one of eight foundational programs 
under the Future Drought Fund (FDF). The program provides funding for consortia of regional partners to 
develop Regional Drought Resilience Plans (RDR Plans) that identify and guide actions to build a region’s 
resilience to future droughts. The RDR Plans explore and focus on innovative and diverse pathways to 
build drought resilience in agriculture, primary production, and agriculture supply chain industries.  
As part of the Program Implementation Plan of the RDR Planning Program, the state has drafted a 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting Plan (MERP). The purpose of this document is to serve as a 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) guide that aligns to that MERP and describe how regional 
stakeholders in South Australia can monitor, evaluate, and report on the actions identified in their RDR 
Plans.  
This MEL guide will also align regional-level outcomes with the program-level outcomes described in the 
RDR Planning Program MERP and outline how learnings will drive continuous improvement. 
The short-term, medium-term, and long-term outcomes of the actions described in the RDR Plans are 
expected to align with the RDR Planning Program outcomes; these have been highlighted in the program 
logic (Table 2) as actions supporting regional resilience. 
This MEL guide aims to outline monitoring and evaluation activities that will:  
• 
Assess the outcomes or impacts of the programs or activities initiated as a result of RDR Plans (i.e., a 
result-focused evaluation).  
• 
Evaluate the implementation of the activities against each of the thematic areas described in the RDR 
Plans (i.e., a process evaluation).  
• 
Evaluate the design of the RDR Plans and its impact on achieving expected outcomes (i.e., a design 
evaluation).  
A program evaluation can encompass one or more of these types of evaluations.  
In developing this MEL guide, the following basic principles have been considered: 
• 
A focus on user-friendly – simple language, easy to understand, and efficient to implement 
• 
‘Need-to-know’ information – ensuring time and resources are not used to capture unnecessary 
data 
• 
Allowance for variance in data collection.   
Evaluation purpose  
The evaluation of the RDR Plans will aim to: 
• 
Outline steps to guide evaluation of the thematic areas and actions based on the RDR Plans and the 
expected M&E activities for each. 
• 
Specify the expected roles and responsibilities of different regional stakeholders in monitoring and 
evaluating the action plans in the RDR Plans.  
• 
Demonstrate how the national-level FDF outcomes are aligned with the expected short-term, medium-
term, and long-term outcomes of the actions described in the RDR Plans. It also describes how the 
outcomes will be achieved over time.

Objective ID: A6051516  
5 
• 
Support continuous improvement and inform future priorities around drought resilience in the regions.  
• 
Ensure that the consortia and regional stakeholders have a shared understanding of how outcomes will 
be monitored. 
• 
Provide a level of transparency for stakeholders in implementing actions and the expected outcomes. 
Evaluation scope  
Table 1, Evaluation scope, describes what parts of the program are being evaluated. As regions 
design their own MEL plans, stakeholders may elect to keep the evaluation scope broad or refine it to 
have a narrower focus; however, each regional evaluation will cover the medium-term and long-term 
outcomes against the actions listed in the RDR Plans. To support this, regions will identify 
implementation, monitoring, and evaluation timeframes against each of the actions in their RDR Plans. 
Regions will be supported by planning resources provided by the RDR Program and PIRSA in setting 
up their monitoring and evaluation timeframes and approaches.   
Regional stakeholders will be expected to assess the actions listed in their RDR Plans through a series of 
indicators based on the outcomes described in the measurement framework (Table 3) and evaluation 
framework (Table 4). These indicators will serve as metrics by which the regions will monitor and evaluate 
progress and performance against each action described in their RDR Plans, including medium and long-
term outcomes. However, it’s important to note that this activity will be dependent on the resources 
available to regional stakeholders over time.  
The collection of data against the measures or indicators will start at the beginning of the implementation of 
the actions described in the RDR Plans; however, regional stakeholders may decide on the time frame for 
the evaluation framework. The evaluation also depends on the duration of the implementation of the actions 
in the RDR Plans. The state has provided some monitoring and evaluation approaches in Tables 3 and 4 
for the regional stakeholders to consider measuring the short-term and medium-term outcomes.  
Also, as most of the long-term outcomes align with the long-term outcomes of the RDR Planning Program, 
these may be better evaluated at the national level via national-level statistics. Therefore, the long-term 
outcome may not be evaluated by the regional stakeholders. 
Table 1. Evaluation scope 
In scope 
Out of scope 
Activities/programs related to any of the actions plans 
or thematic areas described in the RDR Plans and 
implemented by any of the regional stakeholders. 
Activities/action plans not listed in the RDR 
Plans 
Mid-term review 
The collective impact of [theme] initiatives, 
policies, and programs 
Opportunities and challenges for improvement and 
learning, including informing future priorities 
Activities/outputs the state reports on under 
the MERP

Objective ID: A6051516  
6 
Program Logic  
The program logic is a hierarchy of expected outcomes at different time periods. As seen in the example in Table 2, a program logic outlines cause-and-effect 
relationships between the actions/activities, outputs, short-term outcomes, medium-term outcomes and longer-term desired outcomes.  
It is expected that regional stakeholders will develop a program logic that includes actions in their plans and identify how they contribute to short/medium and 
long-term outcomes. Table 2 is an example of the prescribed format. 
Table 2. Program logic – Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
Socially connected and resilient regional communities 
Funding 
Staffing 
Partners and 
stakeholders 
(national/state 
governments, SA 
Health, governance 
committee 
agencies related to 
mental health and 
wellbeing) 
Coordinate and expand 
community-led mental health and 
wellbeing support initiatives. 
Advocate for visiting and outreach 
mental health services.  
Improvement in the capacity of the regional 
communities to deal with mental health 
challenges. 
Availability of mental health and wellbeing 
support within the regions. 
Improved access to health care services 
within the regions. 
Increase in the number of community 
member receiving the required mental 
health support.  
Improved resilience and wellbeing of regional 
communities and primary producers. 
A better connected and integrated community. 
Sustainable community led initiatives to deal 
with mental health issues and a permanent 
infrastructure available for the community in 
the time of drought/stress.  
Improved community connections/linkage 
with the available support.  
Socially resilience communities 
who have the right connections, 
infrastructure and ways to 
remain resilient before, during 
or after any kind of natural or 
climate change incidents 
(drought, floods etc.)  
Stronger connectedness and 
greater social capital within 
communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security . 
Economically resilience and vibrant primary enterprises 
Funding 
Staffing 
Partners and 
stakeholders 
(national/state 
governments,  
governance committee 
agencies related to 
primary production) 
Assist primary producers to transit 
from farm operations to carbon 
neutral (e.g., electrify machinery, 
carbon farming etc.) 
Prioritise and promote Natural 
Sequence Farming principles to 
slow water movement and store 
water better where it falls.  
Further education of primary 
producers and improving their 
access to regionally located 
education and training services. 
Improved business knowledge, focused 
business direction and business planning 
skills. 
Increase awareness of primary producers 
around carbon neutral/farming techniques 
and other innovative farming techniques.  
Improved awareness and knowledge of 
primary producers around business 
acumen, strategic planning and farm risk 
management. 
Communities use relevant data and 
information to better understand their 
resilience to drought and plan for 
resilience to drought.  
Improved strategic business planning capacity 
of primary producers.  
Improved risk management capacity of primary 
producers to take farm related decisions in the 
face of adverse climate event. 
Regional representatives have considered 
and planned incremental, transitional, and 
transformational opportunities to 
strengthen resilience.   
Regional leaders are in a stronger position 
to implement strategic actions, adapt to 
change and take advantage of 
opportunities to build economic resilience 
as they arise.   
Communities implement 
transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to 
drought.   
(Note: The outcomes in BOLD ITALIC are derived from the MERP of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program. Remaining short/medium and long-term outcomes are suggested by 
the state/PIRSA.)  
INPUTS 
ACTIONS 
SHORT-TERM OUTCOMES 
MEDIUM-TERM OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM OUTCOMES

Objective ID: A6051516  
7 
How does the program logic work? 
As an example, in Table 2, regional stakeholders may intend to implement two actions around mental 
health and well-being from the program logic (Inputs). The implementation of the Actions will improve 
regional communities’ access to mental health care services within their regions (Short-Term Outcomes).  
As a result, the regional communities will start accessing those services, which will then result in improving 
their wellbeing and resilience (Medium-Term Outcomes). The Long-Term Outcome will then be socially 
resilient communities that have the right connections, infrastructure, and ways to remain resilient before, 
during, or after any kind of natural or climate change incident.  
It is noted that there will be other actions that will support the same outcomes at each level. 
Program Measurement Framework 
The Program Measurement Framework is directly aligned with the program logic. Measurement or 
monitoring is described as the ongoing process of collecting routine data (numbers and stories) that is 
usually done, or at least managed, by the people implementing the program. Measurement occurs at 
different levels and can include measuring high-level measures as well as medium- and short-term-level 
measures. The purpose of measurement is to generate insights, define progress, and support evaluation. 
Table 3 includes the outcomes from program logic at different levels. However, the measures and 
indicators are suggestions from the state program and regional stakeholders may tailor them to suit their 
regional plans.   
The monitoring and evaluation approaches are described and suggested to the regional stakeholders; 
however, the regions are open to choosing any approach that suits their actions as well as their time and 
resources.

Objective ID: A6051516  
8 
Table 3. Program Measurement Framework 
Level of 
change 
Outcomes from the program logic 
Indicators/measures 
Monitoring and evaluation approaches 
Level 1: Short-
Term 
Outcomes 
Improvement in the capacity of regional 
communities to deal with mental health 
challenges. 
Availability of mental health and wellbeing 
support within the regions. 
Improved access to health care services within 
the regions. 
Increase in the number of community 
members receiving the required mental health 
support.  
Number of events (session, workshop, training etc.) organised and 
the number of participants who participated in those events. 
Feedback of the participants about the usefulness and value of the 
events/agencies. 
Type of mental health support provided to the community members. 
Number of wellbeing support providers (agencies and health and 
wellbeing personals). 
Number of people accessing the mental health and well-being 
service. 
Approaches to be adopted by regions: 
The participants who participated in the 
initiatives can be surveyed to get their 
responses and the extent to which the 
activities enabled them to increase their 
awareness, knowledge and skill levels as a 
result of their participation in the initiatives or 
interventions. In order to see the change in 
their awareness, knowledge or skill level it is 
recommended to conduct a pre-/ post-activity 
survey.  
The number of activities (sessions/ events/ 
training programs) implemented can be 
recorded by the implementing regional 
stakeholder.  
The number of participants who accessed the 
mental health support and the type of support 
provided can be taken from the implementing 
regional stakeholder.  
Improved business knowledge, focused 
business direction and business planning 
skills. 
Increase awareness by primary producers 
around carbon neutral/farming techniques and 
other innovative farming techniques.  
Improved awareness and knowledge of 
primary producers around business acumen, 
strategic planning and farm risk management. 
Communities use relevant data and 
information to better understand their 
resilience to drought and plan for 
resilience to drought.  
Number of primary producers who participated in the business 
planning and financial literacy sessions or any other event. 
Number of primary producers who participated in the session/ 
events around carbon neutral/ farming techniques and other 
innovative farming methods.  
Awareness and knowledge level of the primary around carbon 
neutral/ farming techniques and other innovative farming methods. 
Type of relevant data and information provided the communities. 
Number of projects/ programs started in collaboration with 
government and other non-government agencies.  
Feedback of the participants around the programs and the impact of 
the programs. 
Level 2: 
Medium-Term 
Outcomes 
Improved resilience and wellbeing of regional 
communities and primary producers. 
A better-connected and integrated community. 
Sustainable community led initiatives to deal 
with mental health issues and a permanent 
infrastructure available for the community in 
the time of drought/ stress.  
Improved community connections/ linkage 
with the available support. 
Number and type of stakeholders engaged per region. 
The proportion of participants who self-reported an improvement in 
their health and wellbeing and community resilience. 
Proportion of community members accessed relevant information 
and linked with the available services/service providers. 
Feedback by participants. 
Approaches to be adopted by regions: 
As regions implement initiatives against the 
action plans they will be responsible for 
collecting information against the outcomes.  
Option 1:  
Information about the outcomes may be best 
captured through consultative sessions or 
focus group discussions with the 
implementation partners to capture the results 
or impact of the interventions.

Objective ID: A6051516  
9 
Improved strategic business planning capacity 
of primary producers.  
Improved risk management capacity of 
primary producers to make farm-related 
decisions in the face of adverse climate 
events. 
Regional representatives have considered 
and planned incremental, transitional, and 
transformational opportunities to 
strengthen resilience.   
Regional leaders are in a stronger position 
to implement strategic actions, adapt to 
change and take advantage of 
opportunities to build economic resilience 
as they arise.   
Proportion of participants who self-reported an improvement in their 
business acumen and decision-making skill (against a rubric) and 
evidenced by: 
• 
Participants perception about an improvement in their 
confidence level, decision-making skills, financial 
understanding, people/self-management skills, risk 
management skill and improved future direction. 
• 
Proportion of participants who intend to review and upgrade 
their farm business plans. 
• 
Proportion of participants who intend to bring change in the 
farm as a result of their participation in the program. 
• 
Proportion of primary producers who reported an improvement 
in their mental, financial and technical skills to management 
adverse events. 
The evaluation approach and criteria would 
include components from the results 
evaluation and process evaluation. 
The data collected (participants' surveys, 
registrations, and feedback data) against the 
short-term outcomes can also be used to 
respond to and support the medium-term 
outcomes. 
Option 2:  
Another way of capturing the result is the case 
study approach, or the Most Significant 
Change (MSC) approach, where the program 
participants are asked to provide their 
responses to what they would regard as the 
most significant change in their social or 
economic situation as a result of their 
participation in the programs or activities. 
Level 3: Long-
Term 
Outcomes (4+ 
years) 
Socially resilient communities who have the 
right connections, infrastructure and ways to 
remain resilient before, during or after any kind 
of natural or climate change incidents 
(drought, floods etc.)  
Stronger connectedness and greater social 
capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
Communities implement transformative 
activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.  
Regions/ states to identify any lead/ early evidence of or precursors 
to long-term outcomes that are suitable to their program and include 
data in outcome reporting.  
These long-term outcomes are best captured 
at national level by the federal government 
through separate evaluation studies and other 
national statistics.  
(Note: The outcomes in BOLD and ITALIC are derived from the MEL Plan of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program. Remaining short/medium and long-term outcomes are 
suggested by the state/PIRSA.)

Objective ID: A6051516  
10 
Evaluation and learning strategy 
The purpose and scope of the evaluation have been described above. The Evaluation Framework in 
Table 4 describes the evaluation questions, measures, and proposed methods that regions may adopt to 
get information about the measures. It’s important to note that the information in Table 4 is an example 
based on the first two actions or interventions from the program logic, which are related to mental health 
and wellbeing. Also, the broader evaluation questions cover effectiveness, impact and contribution 
criteria whereas the results-based evaluation approach has been considered. The consortia or regions 
can select their own approach and criteria based on their needs and requirements however it must align 
to this MEL guide. Further, the regions may elect to include more evaluation questions and measures 
according to their needs, interests, and reporting requirements to other funders.  
Based on the criteria and evaluation approach, the regional stakeholders may learn from the 
measurement and evaluation data. The measurement data can be used to improve the programs or 
actions being implemented and to implement such programs in the future.  
The MEL data can also be used to demonstrate progress and results for accountability purposes, 
indicating whether the set targets were achieved or not and whether the implementation approach 
worked or not. Further data will enable assessment of achievements of the program outcomes or results. 
The measurement and evaluation data may also be used to establish a knowledge base for future 
programming and investment. The information may be used as a guide to collect information about other 
interventions. 
Further, it’s expected that the consortia will start the collection of information from the start of the 
implementation of the actions and programs, which will add to the value of the evaluation and support 
the qualitative information gathered via facilitated discussions or case studies. Some key evaluation 
questions are given below for the regions or consortia to consider. 
Key Evaluation Questions 
Key Evaluation Questions (KEQs) to demonstrate the impact and outcomes of the actions in the 
program logic (Table 2) are provided below. The regions are expected to include the first three KEQs in 
their MEL plans and can include more KEQs based on their needs or other requirements. 
• 
How appropriate were the program governance arrangements? 
• 
To what extent did the [program/intervention] result in [long term outcome]? 
• 
To what extent did the [program/intervention] meet industry needs? 
• 
To what extent did the [program] achieve the right balance between centralization of some 
activities and achieve economies of scale whilst also being responsive to industry needs and 
conditions? (where applicable) 
• 
How effective was the [program] in preventing [as examples price escalation/intervention of 
market forces/access to resources]? (where applicable)

Objective ID: A6051516  
11 
Table 4. Evaluation Framework 
Key evaluation 
questions 
Sub-questions 
Measures 
Proposed 
measurement methods 
Who/what and 
when 
How effective was the 
program in achieving its 
intended outputs and 
outcomes? 
To what extent have the programs or 
actions improved the resilience and 
wellbeing of regional communities? 
Is there any improvement in the number of 
communities receiving wellbeing and mental 
health support?  
Is there any change in the available support 
system for the community to deal with 
mental stress? 
Is there any improvement in the social 
connections within the communities or 
linkage between farm businesses?  
Did the program improve the connections 
between the regional communities? 
Feedback from the regional communities/ program 
participants around the improvement in their resilience 
levels as a result of their participation in the 
program/activities.  
Number and type of programs/ support implemented 
around mental health and wellbeing.  
Number of available wellbeing support services 
available before the program and after the program.  
Type of wellbeing support services available to the 
community and number of community members who 
availed those opportunities. 
Any formal or information linkages developed between 
various groups in regions (i.e., linkages between farm 
businesses or any local group) 
The monitoring/ measurement 
data can be used to respond 
to these measures – it is 
pertinent to collect data from 
the start of any intervention or 
program. 
Alternatively, facilitated 
discussions can be organised 
and ask questions related to 
the measures from the 
regional communities or the 
participants who participated 
in programs/ activities.   
Case studies can be used to 
demonstrate results against 
some of the evaluation 
questions.  
The regions/ 
consortia members 
will be responsible 
for conducting this 
evaluation and most 
probably by the end 
of the program/ 
intervention. It would 
also depend on the 
duration of the 
programs.  
The information 
against some of the 
measures will be 
collected as part of 
the measurement 
framework or via the 
ongoing monitoring 
process. 
How appropriate was the 
implementation 
process? 
Was the implementation process clear and 
well received by the targeted stakeholders? 
Satisfaction level of the program participants regarding 
the overall implementation process of the rebate. 
Feedback of the program participant regarding the 
overall implementation process of the program. 
To what extend did the 
program contribute to 
the high-level impacts, 
and what other things 
helped or hindered? 
To what extent the regional communities 
including the farm producers consider 
themselves and their farm business resilient 
to any kind of climate change incidents (i.e., 
droughts, bushfire etc.) 
To what extent did the program improve the 
social and economic conditions of the 
regional communities including the farm 
producers? 
Proportion of program participants including the farm 
producers who considers themselves resilient. (i.e., 
social resilience, environmental and financial resilient) 
Examples of economic social or environmental benefits 
experienced by the regional communities including the 
farm producers. 
Improve resilience and preparedness.