NORTHERN AND YORKE 
REGIONAL DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN.
Report for Northern and Yorke (South Australia) 
Regional Alliance.
DRAFT PLAN V2 - 2023
WE’RE
RESILIENT.

3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
The Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
(NYRDRP) (this document) is designed as a strategic document 
to inform, plan and prioritise future investment that will help farm 
businesses, agricultural supply chains and the broader community 
to build resilience to drought. The document is living and is used to 
identify, prioritise and coordinate resilience building priorities and 
actions. 
The Northern and Yorke region is one of three South Australian 
pilot regions developing regional drought resilience plans. The 
regional drought resilience plans are funded through one of eight 
funding programs under the Future Drought Fund, an Australian 
Government initiative designed to increase both farmers and 
communities’ resilience and preparedness to drought and adapt to 
changing climatic conditions.
The Northern and Yorke region and its diverse communities 
and agricultural industries regularly demonstrate personal and 
organisational adaptive capacity. The region has demonstrated 
increasing resilience to natural hazards and global drivers of 
change over the past decades. However, planning for and 
identifying future opportunities for improvement to build resilience 
capacity are essential, given projected future drought impacts, 
such as (Department for Environment and Water, 2020):
• Increasingly severe drought, highlighted by increased
evaporation and decreased precipitation.
• More frequent droughts, typified by a projection of 65%
time spent in drought by 2030.
• Continued declines in projected availability of root zone
soil moisture for crop and pasture growth during the growing
season is a chronic driver of drought
• Further projected significant reductions of root zone soil
moisture during drought years accentuating acute drought
impacts.
As the primary employer and economic activity in the region, 
agriculture including farm enterprises and the agricultural supply 
chain are highly exposed to a reduction in rainfall and increase 
in evaporation resulting from drought and long-term changes to 
the climate. The impacts of drought also extend to non-agricultural 
businesses, individuals, communities and organisations. 
Accordingly, the key role of the NYRDRP is to capture the risks 
and opportunities arising from drought resilience planning and to 
set out a series of priority actions in response to these risks and 
opportunities.
The NYRDRP has been developed through a co-design process 
and informed through over 90 unique stakeholder engagement 
experiences and extensive desktop research to accurately report 
current and future drought related risks.The objectives of the 
NYRDRP are as follows:
1. Empower the community to identify and understand the impacts
of drought.
2. Consultatively develop a regional drought resilience plan to:
a. Support system scale approaches to agriculture, ecosystems
services and social support services.
b. Encourage increased coordination in planning and the
ability to identify and take advantage of opportunities to
build economic resilience.
3. Strengthen partnerships and networks between stakeholders to
inform drought resilience planning.
4. Support the use of best practice information management to
better understand critical factors for resilience to drought, to
make robust decisions and to monitor status.
The NYRDRP utilises the CSIRO developed Resilience, Adaptation 
Pathways and Transformation Approach. This includes accurately 
capturing the following change categories:
• Incremental change – change that requires an alteration to
current methods and practices in order to adapt to future
changes to farming systems, primarily driven by the reduction
of available soil moisture and changes in climate and rainfall.
• Planned transitional change – change that is not currently adopted
but is currently planned for in the future, as conditions change.
• Transformational change – Alteration of a system, driven by
the need to overhaul current practices. Transformational change
is required when planned and incremental change will not
result in the required change to maintain viability of the farming
operation. For example, transformational change may require
some farm businesses to move from cropping of wheat, barley
and other break crops to animal farming systems in order to
continue farming.
Through the identification of key drought risk factors and the 
prioritisation of actions, five key resilience enabling themes and 
associated key enablers have been identified.
OVER 40 PRIORITIES AND 120 ACTIONS TO 
INCREASE DROUGHT RESILIENCE ARISING FROM 
THE THEMES AND ENABLERS HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED 
FOR CONSIDERATION AND IMPLEMENTATION. 
WE’RE
PREPARED.
These are as follows:
THEME 1 
RESILIENT FARMING 
ENTERPRISES
THEME 2 
RESILIENT INDUSTRY
THEME 3 
RESILIENT 
COMMUNITIES
THEME 4 
KNOWLEDGE 
AND EDUCATION
THEME 5 
RESEARCH 
AND INNOVATION
Risk management
Efficiency
Foresight capabilities
Regional economic 
diversification
Liveability and 
employment opportunities 
Technology, automation 
and genetics
Health and well-being
Towns and infrastructure
Community innovation 
and cultural partnerships
Climate science and 
climate projections
Education access and 
diversity of learning
Adaptation and 
transformation adoption
Value-add research
Trans-disciplinary 
and integrated research
Figure 1. The five resilience themes and groupings of enablers

5
THEME 1: 
RESILIENT FARM ENTERPRISES
Farmers within the Northern and Yorke region have a strong 
history of adapting to the impact of dry times, drought and 
other climate stressors. Theme1: Resilient Farm Enterprises 
focuses on implementing incremental, planned transitional and 
transformational change required to build resilient within farming 
enterprises to drought and other inter-related stressors. To do so 
requires better risk management, increased efficiency and foresight 
capabilities including understanding, accepting and acting to 
increase resilience to future climate projections. Priorities for 
resilient farm enterprises include planning, increased diversification 
and reduced reliance on rainfall dependent systems and better 
capture and storage of water on-farm through soils and other 
means. It is important to note that transitional and transformational 
change is required, however, achieving this in many circumstances 
will require a series of incremental changes over time. 
THEME 2: 
RESILIENT INDUSTRY
To increase the resilience of industries within the Northern and 
Yorke region there is a ned to reduce the reliance on agriculture 
for economic prosperity whilst simultaneously promoting and 
growing other industries. The priorities and actions focus on the 
established industries (tourism, manufacturing and renewable 
energy) whilst examining the opportunities for growth linked to 
strategic Government of South Australia priorities. There is a need 
to increase the liveability of the region, through providing greater 
employment prospects but also key assets and services such as 
child care, aged care and access to housing, whilst reducing 
reliance on volunteerism. The use of technology, automation and 
genetics (crops and livestock) and the opportunities that exist to 
value-add to regionally produced goods and services provide a 
patway to increase regional economic resilience.
THEME 3: 
RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
Health and well-being represent both challenges and opportunities 
for the region. An aging population demographic and inequitable 
access to healthcare services requires change, including better 
integration of services. Greenery and resilient built and living 
infrastructure within regional towns and centres are important for 
well-being, amenity and drivers of tourism and economic activity. 
There are significant opportunities for water capture, storage and 
reuse options to build resilience across regional urban assets. 
Improved communty and cultural partnerships are required to 
ensure Aboriginal knowledge is better utilised and incorporated 
into resilience systems.
THEME 4:
KNOWLEDGE AND EDUCATION
Key to building resilient communities and systems is the education 
of individuals across the community. Climate science is complex, 
as are the projections outlined for the future. Creating easily 
digestible chunks of information and educating the community 
about the the impacts of drought and wider changes in rainfall 
and evaporation patterns is important in order for adaptation to 
occur. Additionally there is a need to focus on behaviour change 
programs that extend beyond information dissemination to working 
with communities to actively transition. Providing programs that 
attract and meets farmers’ (and supply chain partners’) needs and 
a diversity of learning styles is essential. There is also a need to 
seek out subject matter experts and examine how others have 
already or currently are adapting to reduced rainfall. Investigating 
and working with the whole community to better plan for and 
implement adaptation proven to work in drought prone areas of 
the world. 
THEME 5: 
RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
Research and innovation within the agricultural industry has 
historicaly been a focus across Australia, South Australia and 
within the Northern and Yorke region. Extending research and 
innovation across other key industries will benefit the region 
through allowing for cross-industry collaboration (value-adding). 
Trans-disciplinary and integrated research to better understand 
market access and the needs of the customer will assist farmers, 
the agricultural supply chain and other industries to enter new 
markets and expand others. Locally, a focus on building certain 
types of tourism (food, wine, caravan, ecotourism, adventure) 
is a priority. 
KEY TO BUILDING 
RESILIENT 
COMMUNITIES & 
SYSTEMS IS THE
EDUCATION OF 
INDIVIDUALS ACROSS 
THE COMMUNITY. 
WE’RE 
INFORMED.

7
CONTENTS.
TOGETHER 
WE ARE 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENT.
WE’VE GOT 
A PLAN.
Project Delivered for: Northern and Yorke (South Australia) Regional Alliance as part of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
3
1 ABOUT THIS PLAN
8
1.1 A Drought Resilience Strategy for the Northern and Yorke Region	
8
1.2 The Future Drought Fund – Investing in a Drought Resilient Future	
8
1.3 The Need for Drought Resilience Capacity in the Region	
9
1.4 The Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan	
10
1.5 Why Change? The benefits to becoming drought resilient	
12
2 APPROACH TO PLAN DEVELOPMENT
14
2.1.1 Plan co-design process	
15
2.2 Prioritising resilience building actions, adaptation pathways 
and transformation activities	
16
3 THE CONCEPT OF RESILIENCE
18
4 THE PLAN REGION
22
4.1.1 Economic profile	
23
4.2 Regional Profile	
28
4.2.1 Social profile	
28
4.2.2 Environmental profile	
30
5 DROUGHT RISK AND VULNERABILITY
31
5.1 Sub-regional zones	
32
5.2 Soil Moisture Projections across the Region to 2030	
36
5.3 Key interrelated drought factors	
 38
6 HISTORY OF DROUGHT IN THE REGION
41
7 FUTURE OUTLOOK FOR DROUGHT IN THE REGION
43
7.1.1 Drought and anthropogenic climate change	
45
7.1.2 Flash Drought	
45
7.1.3 The impact of climate change on the margin of the grain 
belt in South Australia	
46
7.1.4 The impact of drought on communities and supply chains	
47
7.1.5 Climate Analogues – Where to see the future climate of the 
Northern and Yorke region, right now.	
48
8 PRIORITIES FOR IMPROVING RESILIENCE
50
8.1 Theme 1: Resilient Farming Enterprises	
51
8.1.2 Regional partners	
52
8.1.3 Progress in Region	
53
8.1.4 Resilient farm enterprises key enabler categories	
53
8.2 Theme 2: Resilient Industry	
56
8.2.1 Overview	
56
8.2.2 Regional partners	
57
8.2.3 Progress in the Region	
58
8.2.4 Resilient industry key enablers categories	
58
8.3 Theme 3: Resilient Communities	
61
8.3.1 Overview	
61
8.3.2 Regional Partners	
62
8.3.4 Resilient community’s enabler categories	
63
Case studies	
65
8.4	
65
8.5 Theme 4: Knowledge and Education	
68
8.5.1 Regional Partners	
69
8.5.2 Progress in Region	
70
8.5.3 Key enabler categories	
70
8.6 Resilience Theme 5: Research and Innovation	
73
8.6.1 Overview	
73
8.6.2 Progress in the region	
73
8.6.3 Regional partners	
74
8.6.4 Progress in the region	
75
8.6.5 Key enabler categories	
75
9. PLAN IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
76
GOVERNANCE
77
NYRDRP MEL TEMPLATE	
78
REFERENCES
80
APPENDIX A: CLIMATE ANALOGUES
82
APPENDIX B: SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SOIL GROUPS
100
APPENDIX C: CONSULTATION SUMMARY
102
APPENDIX D: SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FARM 
MANAGEMENT DEPOSITS
106

9
8
1 ABOUT THIS PLAN.
The Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
(NYRDRP) (this document) has been developed through a 
co-design process to capture risks and opportunities to build 
drought resilience in the Northern and Yorke Peninsula region 
of South Australia. 
The Plan outlines strategies to build economic, social and 
environmental resilience, with a focus on farm enterprises, 
agricultural supply chains and communities. 
Informed through extensive stakeholder consultation and an 
assessment of the risk factors to the economic, social and 
environmental resilience of the Northern and Yorke region, 
the NYRDRP details the key enablers and actions for drought 
resilience against five themes and 14 enabler groupings:
In 2018, following the emergence of widespread drought across 
Environment, 2021) which is designed to build drought resilience 
across Australian farm enterprises and regions through the 
establishment of six themes and eight distinct funding programs. 
For each theme enablers of resilience are identified that create 
both small and great change across different time scales. Enablers 
have been listed as either incremental, planned transitional or 
transformational and actions for key organisations within the region 
are identified to ensure the recommendations contained within the 
plan are operationalised. 
1.1A Drought Resilience Strategy for the Northern and Yorke Region
1.2 The Future Drought Fund – Investing in a Drought Resilient Future
14 enabler groupings:
THEME 1 
RESILIENT FARMING 
ENTERPRISES
THEME 2 
RESILIENT INDUSTRY
THEME 3 
RESILIENT 
COMMUNITIES
THEME 4 
KNOWLEDGE 
AND EDUCATION
THEME 5 
RESEARCH 
AND INNOVATION
Risk management
Efficiency
Foresight capabilities
Regional economic 
diversification
Liveability and 
employment opportunities 
Technology, automation 
and genetics
Health and well-being
Towns and infrastructure
Community innovation 
and cultural partnerships
Climate science and 
climate projections
Education access and 
diversity of learning
Adaptation and 
transformation adoption
Value-add research
Trans-disciplinary 
and integrated research
Figure 2. The five resilience themes and groupings of enablers
The development of the Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan has been 
BUILDING 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE.
MORE RESILIENT 
COMMUNITIES
BUILDING SOCIAL CAPITAL TO DRIVE CHANGE 
AND SUPPORT RESILIENT COMMUNITIES.
BETTER LAND MANAGEMENT
TRIAL AND ADOPTION OF LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
THAT SUPPORT LANDSCAPE RESILIENCE.
HARNESSING INNOVATION
DRIVING ADOPTION OF NEW DROUGHT 
RESILIENENT TECHNOLOGIES AND PRACTICES
BETTER RISK 
MANAGEMENT
HELPING FARMERS AND REGIONS 
PLAN FOR DROUGHT.
BETTER CLIMATE INFORMATION
MAKING CLIMATE INFORMATION ACCESSIBLE AND USEFUL
The purpose of the FDF is to increase both farmers’ and communities’ 
resilience and preparedness for drought and to adapt to changing 
climatic conditions (Future Drought Fund, 2019). 
The FDF has been established as an endowment fund to be preserved 
in perpetuity, with the aim of providing secure and permanent revenue 
sources to enhance drought resilience for Australia’s farm businesses 
and communities (Future Drought Fund, 2019). 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program is one of the 
eight drought resilience programs, designed to assist regions 
to prepare for future drought risks by developing regional 
Environment, 2021). The program aims to support regional 
organisations, local government, communities and industries 
to partner together to plan for drought resilience measures 
The Northern and Yorke region is one of three regions delivering 
pilots in South Australia under the Future Drought Fund’s regional 
drought resilience plan program. The Plan development (in year 
one of the pilot) provides a foundation strategy for guiding future 
investment in drought resilience in the region. 
The Plan builds upon historic climate adaptation planning and 
drought resilience research in the region and recognises the 
establishment of the Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hub and Hub node within Orrorroo (to the North East of the 
planning region) (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Sequence of major events and initiatives leading to the development of the Future Drought Fund and the 
1.3 The Need for Drought Resilience Capacity in the Region
2017–
2020
OCT
2018
2020 –
2021
2021 – 
2022
Drought affected large areas of 
South-eastern Australia including the 
Northern and Yorke Region, reducing 
agricultural productivity.
The Future Drought Fund was announced 
drought resilience across Australia
The fund commenced, providing funding 
for drought resilience programs.
The South Australian Drought Resilience 
Adoption and Innovation Hub is established 
in Roseworthy, South Australia with 
5 nodes located across regional SA.
Funding is provided for the 
development of Regional Drought 
Resilience Plans. The Northern and 
Yorke Region is one of three pilot 
regions developing Regional Drought 
Resilience Plans in South Australia.
Drought presents an increasing threat to many 
regional communities across Australia due to a 
projected reduction in precipitation, increased 
evaporation rates and increased mean, maximum 
and minimum temperatures resulting from climate 
change (Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2018).
Australian regional communities and agricultural businesses are now 
experiencing an ongoing trend of more frequent and severe droughts 
in most parts of Australia, including South Australia’s Northern and 
Yorke region (Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2018). 
Rainfall has been declining across Southern Australia over the 
last few decades and is projected to decline further in the future 
(Hope, 2015). The southward shift of the subtropical desert 
climate has increased the aridity of the climate of Southern 
Australia, particularly the northern and eastern areas of the 
Northern and Yorke region (Hope, 2015). By 2030, the time 
spent in drought in the Northern and Yorke Region is projected to 
nearly double meaning up to 65% of time could be spend 
in drought (Department for Environment and Water, 2020). 
Critically important to cropping and livestock farming, average 
annual rainfall and growing season rainfall (April to October) 
is projected to decline over time (Department for Environment 
and Water, 2020). The reduced availability of growing 
season soil moisture is expected to reduce Australian dryland 
agricultural production by 9-10% by the year 2030 (compared 
Environment, 2020). 
WHY DOES THE NORTHERN AND YORKE 
REGION NEED A DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN?
Projections indicate that by 
2030 65% of time in the 
Northern and Yorke region 
could be spent in drought 
(DEW, 2020). 
Drought will become a 
more common occurrence, 
with more severe and 
frequent events. 
We must act now to 
plan and implement 
incremental, transitional 
and transformational 
change.
Projections indicate that 
an increase in drought 
duration and severity will 
reduce farm yields, regional 
productivity and affect 
farm incomes.

11
10
that modelled farm profits across all Australian cropping and 
animal farming agricultural industries is likely to decline by more 
than 20% by 2050 as a result of drier conditions (when compared 
Environment, 2021). 
The National Farmers Federation vision is to exceed $100 billion 
in farm gate output by 2030 (National Farmers Federation, 
2022). Separately, other peak agricultural bodies in the grain, 
legumes, meat and livestock, wine and horticulture industries have 
established revenue and economic growth targets, contributing to 
state and federal GDP figures. Drought poses a significant threat 
to achieving such targets, due to challenges in maintaining and 
growing yields, increasing input costs, quality and farm income 
when in drought and post drought. 
Given the context of a warming and drying climate and the 
projected increase in extreme droughts arising from reduced 
rainfall and increased evaporation, it is important that regions, 
communities, businesses and individuals not only plan for and 
adapt to drier conditions, but also build resilience capacity.
Many farming districts within the Northern and Yorke region 
have considerable experience of droughts and have already 
demonstrated the ability to adapt to the impacts of drought. 
A focus on continuing to build resilience capacity is important 
given future regional and global drivers of change. 
1.4 The Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The Region has a plan to build resilience 
to drought, with a focus on:
• Farm enterprises
• Industry, including:
• Agricultural supply chains
• Non-agricultural businesses
> Communities, including
> Towns and regional centres
> Health and well-being
> Community innovation and cultural partnerships.
• Knowledge and education
• Research and innovation
OBJECTIVES OF THE PLAN
Regional stakeholders have come together through the Northern 
and Yorke Alliance to develop the Plan to guide future planning 
and implementation of drought resilience initiatives within the 
Northern and Yorke region of South Australia. The Plan aims to 
support those undertaking activities to build resilience and inform 
the future investment of drought resilience funding in the region. 
that modelled farm profits across all Australian cropping and 
animal farming agricultural industries is likely to decline by more 
than 20% by 2050 as a result of drier conditions (when compared 
Environment, 2021).
FOOD SECURITY
Human driven climate warming is a global issue, but we are 
experiencing localised impacts on agriculture which does threaten 
the productivity of our food systems that we all rely on. In South 
Australia, the Northern and Yorke region produces 46% of cereal 
crops, 27% of livestock and 63% of other broadacre crops (e.g., 
pulses and canola) that had a GRP of $1.7B in 2020/21. The 
priorities and actions recommended in this report provides a 
pathway for industry, business and individuals to embed drought 
resilience into their lives and communities to ensure the region’s 
agricultural productivity into the future.
KEY MESSAGES
The NYRDRP recognises that the region has resilient industries and 
communities and a strong history of responding to drought and 
climate variability. The Plan has been developed upon gaining 
a ‘shared understanding’ of drought with regional stakeholders, 
recognising that:
• Drought is an enduring, regular feature of the Australian
landscape. It is not a natural disaster.
• While droughts are normal for Australia, drought conditions
are likely to become more frequent, severe and longer
due to climate change.
• Farming is a business and drought is one of many business
risks that should be managed.
• Drought preparations must continue during times of non-drought,
including by those not directly affected by drought but who are
affected by farming businesses (i.e., the agricultural supply chain
and regionally located non-agricutlural businesses).
A CO-DESIGN PROCESS LED BY REGIONAL 
STAKEHOLDERS
The facilitation of the plan has been conducted by the Northern 
and Yorke Alliance, led by Regional Development Australian Yorke 
and Mid North, with input from a steering committee consisting of:
• Central Local Government Region (trading as Legatus Group),
representing the local government authorities covered by the
Plan region.
• Department of Primary Industries and Regions (PIRSA).
• Northern and Yorke Landscape Board
• Regional Development Australia Barossa Gawler Light
Adelaide Plains.
• Regional Development Australia Far North.
• South Australian Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hub.
• National Recovery and Resilience Agency, as observer
to the Steering Committee. 
BUILDING ON RESEARCH AND FOUNDATIONS 
FOR DROUGHT RESILIENCE IN THE REGION 
The Plan interrelates and builds on existing research, planning 
and actions taken by organisations within the region, such as:
• The South Australian Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation
Hub Node co-design Workshops report.
• Northern and Yorke Landscape South Australia Goyder’s Line:
Building Drought Resilience into Transitional Country project.
• Relevant Council planning
> Economic Development Plans.
> Public Health Plans.
> Adverse Event Plans
• 	The Legatus Wellbeing Gap Analysis: In 2021, a Wellbeing
Analysis, including where the gaps in knowledge lie, was
undertaken across the Legatus Group Northern Councils to
better understand what the future and current wellbeing needs
and issues are.
• The Emerging themes for drought response and climate
change resilience report developed for the Northern and
Yorke Regional Alliance.
• 	The Future Drought Fund – Opportunities for the Northern
and Yorke region report developed for the Northern and
Yorke Regional Alliance.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DROUGHT RESILIENCE 
ADOPTION AND INNOVATION HUB
The region has benefitted from the establishment of the South 
Australian Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub 
(SA Drought Hub), with the hub located in the regional centre 
of Roseworthy and one of the SA Drought Nodes located in 
the north-eastern sub-region, in the town of Orroroo and the SA 
Drought Hub located in the town of Roseworthy (South Australian 
Drought and Innovation Adoption Hub, 2021). The role of the 
SA Drought Hub is to increase resilience through farming systems 
and communities across South Australia and is not confined to the 
Northern and Yorke region, however, the location of the hub and 
node within the region represents an opportunity for action.
The SA Drought Hub team conducted stakeholder consultation 
across key agricultural regions in South Australia. In-person and 
online workshops were conducted across seven regional towns 
in South Australia, with 279 people attending the workshops 
in person or online (South Australian Drought and Innovation 
Adoption Hub, 2021). A total of 915 ideas related to 
drought resilience were received from all workshop attendees 
(South Australian Drought and Innovation Adoption Hub, 2021). 
Key emerging themes from this series of workshops in 
response to the question 
“What are the top things you would like to see the Drought 
Hub deliver to support your community in the region?” 
are listed in order of preference below:
1.	Community resilience and wellbeing.
2.	Access to drought information and technical support.
3.	Farm planning and decision making.
4.	Farm business management.
5.	Water security and management.
6.	Livestock and fodder management.
7.	Upskilling advisors, researchers and key influencers.
8.	Crop and pasture management.
9.	Soil and land management.
Of note, workshop participants reported the need for financial 
resilience across farm businesses in order to support broader 
drought resilience goals. Participants discussed the need for 
implementation of a range of programs and activities across 
different time scales to increase resilience to drought in the 
region. Information and data collected through this stakeholder 
engagement has been considered and incorporated into 
the findings of this paper and further utilised in stakeholder 
engagement conducted as part of the development of the 
draft plan. 
LEGATUS GROUP GAP ANALYSIS AND 
EMERGING THEMES REPORT
In February 2020, the Legatus Group engaged Edge Environment 
to conduct a gap analysis and emerging themes report, which 
undertook a stocktake of existing drought resilience and drought 
related information. The report reviewed existing and past plans, 
strategies, reports and funding allocated towards increasing 
drought resilience across the Northern and Yorke Region. 
The NYRDRP has considered and built upon the themes and gaps 
identified through this report, where supported by findings from 
stakeholder engagement and desktop research. 
The key themes emerging from this stocktake are provided below:
• 	There has been a historic focus on supporting agriculture in
the region (and more broadly at a state and national scale)
through research, development and extension projects in
the region. These projects have focused on planned and
incremental changes, rather than transformational change.
• 	Despite ongoing research, development and extension,
there are still gaps in research, particularly for projects that
will increase the resilience of farming systems to projected
changes in climate conditions and drought. For example,
the management of frost in cropping systems and pasture
breeds that have a higher tolerance of elevated temperatures
and reduced rainfall.
• 	Natural resources management including water monitoring
and management has been well supported in the past,
however, programs have been largely reliant on external
funding and as such projects have been largely delivered
on an ad-hoc basis.
• 	Wellbeing programs focused on mental and physical health
have been conducted in the region in the past, however,
programs have not been well distributed across the region
and have also been on an ad-hoc basis, limited by ongoing
state and/or federal government funding.
• 	Water capture and reuse is well utilised in some towns and
Council areas, however, there are opportunities to increase
the use of water sensitive urban design and recycled water
for irrigation of greenspaces, street trees and other public
amenities.
• 	The region has an opportunity to better capture and share
stories of planned transitional, incremental and
transformational change.
IT IS IMPORTANT THAT REGIONS, 
COMMUNITIES, BUSINESSES 
AND INDIVIDUALS NOT ONLY 
PLAN FOR AND ADAPT TO DRIER 
CONDITIONS, BUT ALSO BUILD 
RESILIENCE CAPACITY.
DROUGHT CONDITIONS ARE LIKELY TO 
BECOME MORE FREQUENT, SEVERE AND 
LONGER DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE.

13
12
Table 1. Benefits of becoming drought resilient
STAKEHOLDER GROUP
BENEFITS OF BECOMING DROUGHT RESILIENT
Farmers
• The collection of a body of evidence outlining demonstrated economic,
social and environmental benefits to be trialled, refined and improved
over time.
• The ability to attract and target funding to the region to address key
resilience knowledge and skills gaps.
• Increased knowledge of drought resilience planning and implementation.
• Improved sharing of knowledge and learnings from resilience strategies
and actions between farmers and across agricultural sectors.
• Improved knowledge of establishing rainfall independent revenue streams.
Agricultural supply chains
• Increased ability to project and manage alterations to demand for
goods and services.
• Improved knowledge of establishing rainfall independent revenue streams.
• Increased business resilience as a result of factoring in increased drought
frequency and severity into business planning.
• Increased business resilience resulting from a higher percentage of
farms managing drought better and bouncing back from the impacts
of drought quicker.
Communities
• Increased awareness of the links between drought and individual and
collective community well-being, allowing for greater discussions and
funding for targeted mental health support.
• Communities are better prepared for the impacts of drought and have
spent time planning for drought during times of non-drought.
• Communities will benefit from increased greening of assets, such as street
trees, irrigated lawn and passive irrigation in regional towns and centres.
The environment
• Increased focus on recycling and targeted use of fit for purpose water for
the irrigation of town vegetation will provide a range of ecosystem services.
• Farmers adopting land management techniques that increase on-farm
soil cover, maintenance of good soil structure and plant varieties more
tolerant to drought conditions produce biodiversity, conservation and
farming co-benefits.
1.5 Why Change? The benefits to becoming drought resilient
The plan will be achieved through the deliberate and planned 
implementation of actions outlined within this document, 
considering the need to monitor, evaluate and learn from 
implemented resilience measures.
A community-driven regional plan allows for tailored solutions, 
specific to the region, considering the environment, communities, 
culture and assets located within the region. The vision for 
the region includes a future where, despite the enduring and 
increasing risks associated with drought, climate change and 
associated shifts in rainfall and moisture availability, communities 
in the Northern and Yorke region are able to withstand the 
economic, social and environmental impacts of drought in order to 
flourish and prosper.  The benefits to stakeholder groups and the 
environment are outlined in Table 1.
The successful implementation of the plan will allow for organisations, individuals, 
communities and the environment to endure longer and more severe droughts and 
increase the speed of post drougtht recovery.

15
14
2 APPROACH TO PLAN 
DEVELOPMENT.
In order to engage broadly and deeply with identified stakeholders and to accurately capture 
the primary themes related to the impact of drought and drought resilience, the approach 
outlined in Figure 3 was conducted.
Figure 3. The key development phases of the Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan
1.
 Inception 
meeting
4.
Stakeholder 
engagement - 
ROUND 1
7.
Delivery of the 
exposure draft
2.
Development of 
the Stakeholder 
Engagement 
Plan
5.
Delivery of the 
Key Insights 
Paper
8.
Draft Plan
3.
Lierature review 
and desktop 
research
6.
Stakeholder 
engagement - 
ROUND 2
10.
Plan and 
implementation
9.
CSIRO review 
process
Steering Committee consultation
• 59 x unique engagement experiences through online 
and phone interviews and one online workshop
• 5 x In person meetings and interviews
Steering committee consultation 
and feedback
81 x key stakeholder engagement 
organisations identified for engagement
Steering Committee consultation and feedback
Goverment of South Australia feedback and consultation
• Steering committee consultation and feedback
Independently reviewed 
by CSIRO
• Four in-person regional workshops engaging 21 x stakeholders
• Social media campaign developed and promoted - 
8 x responses captured, 500 x views.
Review of relevant peer-reviewed, government 
and industry data and information
The plan has been developed utilising 
a co-design approach based on the 
Resilience Adaptation Pathways 
and Transformation Approach 
(RAPTA) developed by the CSIRO 
(O’Connell, et al., 2019).
This includes the following processes:
1. Scoping and goalsetting.
2. Stakeholder mapping and engagement.
3. Imagining change.
4. Describing the system.
5. Exploring scenarios.
6. Analysing the system.
7. Generating options.
8. Sequencing pathways.
9. Implementing pathways.
2.1.1	Plan co-design process
81 stakeholder groups were identified by the Northern and 
Yorke Regional Alliance. Stakeholders were classified according 
to the level of stakeholder impact as outlined by the International 
Association for Public Participation (IAP2) spectrum (Figure 4). 
Stakeholder engagement occurred through a variety of medium 
with in-person engagement limited and where possible 
postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Co-design 
occurred through the following engagement practices:
• In-person meetings.
• Online workshops.
• Online interviews.
• Online meetings.
• Phone interviews.
• In-person workshops.
• Social media campaign.
A key principle of the plan development was to utilise a co-design approach through 
stakeholder engagement. The co-design process utilised the principles presented in Figure 5:
Figure 4. The IAP2 Participation Spectrum
INFORM.
Provide stakeholders with 
information in a timely manner 
to help them understand 
alternatives and opportunities.
CONSULT.
To obtain feedback on 
analysis, alternatives 
and/or decisions.
INVOLVE.
To work directly with 
stakeholders throughout 
the process to ensure 
that stakeholder concerns 
and aspirations are 
consistently understood 
and considered.
COLLABORATE.
To partner with stakeholders 
in each aspect of the 
decision including 
developing alternatives 
and the identification of the 
preferred solution.
EMPOWER.
To place final decision 
making in the hands of 
stakeholders
Stakeholder 
participation goal
Increasing level of stakeholder impact
Figure 5. Principles of the co-design process
LEARN.
Gain a comprehensive 
understanding of the current 
context, needs of  stakeholders, 
planning processed already in 
underway and progress to date.
DEFINE.
Define insights on the 
opportunities that exist 
drawing upon previous 
research, existing planning and 
local (sub-regional) contexts.
IDEATE.
Identify ideas for future 
improvements (using a 
participatory and outcomes 
focussed approach).
CREATE.
Develop a RDR Plan based on 
advice and recommendations 
from engagement processes and 
the examination of quantitative 
and qualitative data.
Identified stakeholders were from the following groupings of organisations:
• Farming groups
• Farming businesses
• Regional Development Australia
Committees
• Regional Natural Resources
Management
organisations
• Local Government
• Aboriginal nations
1
• Research organisations
• Farm advisors / consultants
• Drought Resilience Adoption and
Innovation Hubs
• Water authorities
• State Government agencies
• Federal Government agencies
• Non-government organisations
• Finance organisations
2
Incorporate learnings from the Monitoring, 
Evaluation and Learning Framework

17
16
2.2 Prioritising resilience building actions, adaptation pathways and 
transformation activities
In order to ensure the actions recommended in the NYRDRP 
reflect the needs and priorities of the community, there is a need 
to capture the key current and future risks that interrelate with 
drought and are likely to be exacerbated by drought. This is part 
of the process of better understanding drought as it relates to the 
Northern and Yorke region, generating options and sequencing 
and implementing pathways for resilience (O’Connell, et al., 
2019). 
Determining the appropriate resilience actions, adaptation 
pathways and transformation activities has occurred through the 
following methods:
1. Stakeholder engagement and desktop research led key risk
identification.
2. Prioritisation of key resilience enablers and transformative
activities through a Multiple Criteria Analysis.
3. Determining the required type of change, i.e., either
incremental, transitional or transformational change.
4. Grouping the key resilience pillars, cross-cutting themes
and enablers based on themes emerging from stakeholder
engagement and desktop research.
5. Generating priorities and actions to support and increase
resilience to drought.
Risks identified through stakeholder engagement and desktop 
research have been captured in a risk matrix, described in further 
detail below. Following the categorisation of risk, key enablers 
to overcome risks were assessed according to a multiple criteria 
assessment, also detailed below. 
KEY RISK IDENTIFICATION
This section provides a high-level risk and resilience initiative 
analysis of the key risks and resilience initiatives identified through 
the stakeholder engagement process and literature research. 
The purpose of the analysis is not to further discuss risk but to 
establish a framework for identifying the key risks to building and 
maintaining resilience, identifying the current methods utilised to 
create resilience and the future required methods for maintaining or 
increasing resilience to a particular type of risk. 
The risk analysis also assists decision makers to determine whether 
the current resilience initiatives are effectively in controlling risk, 
based on a Relative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 8.5 scenario, 
i.e., a high greenhouse gas emissions scenario for the year 2030.
The Multiple criteria analysis then provides a structure for 
determining whether the newly required resilience initiatives will 
effectively reduce each risk.
MULTIPLE CRITERIA ANALYSIS (MCA)
The MCA allows for the capture and prioritisation of newly 
required initiatives for improving drought resilience, alongside 
planned initiatives. Each initiative is assessed through an analysis 
and assigned an average weighted score. The average weighted 
score utilised a traffic light colouring system as a quick reference 
method to determine the required initiatives that have been 
identified as of the greatest value from an economic, environmental 
and social perspective. Newly required initiatives have been 
assigned a score of 1-5 (1 being low, 5 being high), to determine 
both the cost and benefit of the initiative. 
The change required (incremental/ planned transitional/
transformational) is listed against each newly required control as 
well as the timeframe of the required change, noting that many 
newly required controls are ongoing (described further below). 
REQUIRED CHANGE CATEGORIES
Change has been categorised across three key categories – 
incremental/planned/transformational change. Each of the 
change categories are listed in relation to economic, social and 
environmental resilience. The enablers of resilience, strategic 
priorities and actions to facilitate and deliver resilience relate to 
each of the categories of change. These are represented below in 
Figure 6. 
Enablers, priorities and actions taken to increase drought are 
separated into three distinct categories:
•Incremental change – Requires an alteration to current methods
and practices in order to adapt to future changes to farming
systems, primarily driven by the reduction of available soil
moisture.
•Planned transitional – Not currently adopted but is currently
planned for in the future, as conditions change.
• Transformational change – Alteration of a system, driven by the
need to overhaul current practices. Transformational change
is required when planned and incremental change will not
result in the required change to maintain viability of the farming
operation. For example, transformational change may require
some farm businesses to move from cropping of wheat, barley
and other break crops to animal farming systems in order to
continue farming.
Incremental, planned and transformational change can occur at 
different scales and across different time periods. The Adaptations 
Pathways approach to resilience allows for the identification of 
incremental, planned and transformational change across different 
time scales. This is discussed further in Sections 7, 8 and 9.
GROUPING OF KEY RESILIENCE PILLARS, 
CROSS-CUTTING THEMES, ENABLERS
Key resilience pillars, cross-cutting themes and enablers have 
been grouped according to the primary resilience building 
and transformative change themes emerging from stakeholder 
engagement and desktop research. The key pillars and cross-
cutting themes and enablers are listed below in Figure 24. 
GENERATING PRIORITIES AND ACTIONS
Priorities and actions arising from the key enablers have been 
designed to increase economic, social and environmental 
resilience to the impacts of drought. More importantly, the actions 
aim to generate options for farm enterprises, agricultural supply 
chains and the Northern and Yorke community through building 
capacity to preparing for and responding to future drought 
scenarios. 
USING THE PLAN
The NYRDRP is a live document that is available for anyone to 
use to guide planning for drought resilience in the region. The 
NYRDRP used several companion documents to assist generating 
the priorities and actions in the plan. These are:
• NYRDRP Key Insights Paper
• Department of Environment and Water Climate Projections 2020
• Legatus Wellbeing Report
ECONOMIC/SOCIAL/ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
PLANNED
INCREMENTAL
TRANSFORMATIONAL
Enablers, Priorities,  
Actions
Enablers, Priorities, 
Actions
Enablers, Priorities, 
Actions
Figure 6. An example of the three categories of change and related enablers, priorities and actions as they relate to economic resilience.

19
18
3 THE CONCEPT OF RESILIENCE.
RESILIENCE IS THE ABILITY TO WITHSTAND BAD TIMES OR DISASTERS 
– NOT TO JUST GET BACK UP, BUT FIGURE OUT HOW TO MOVE
FORWARD, PROGRESS AND GROW IN CAPACITY TO PREVENT IT FROM 
HAPPENING AGAIN. MUST BE ABLE TO ADAPT TO PREVENT.
ANITA KUSS, UNIHUB SPENCER GULF
The experience of living through hardship or change in normal life 
can be challenging and disruptive to the wellbeing and cohesion 
of a community. How challenging or disruptive this is depends 
on the resilience of the community. For the purpose of this Plan in 
relation to community resilience, a “community” refers to the groups 
of people who share a common location such as a town, local 
council or region.
Resilience has multiple definitions; common traits of resilience 
include the ability of a system, organisation or individual to 
withstand adversity and bounce back. For the purpose of the 
NYRDRP, the definition of resilience has been taken from the 
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 and is described 
as:
“the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to 
changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of 
rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved 
economic, environmental and social wellbeing”. (Australian 
Government, 2019). 
As all communities are different, even within the region, it is difficult 
to develop a standard approach to build resilience. However, 
there are key components within a community that can be built 
upon that help build resilience. These are known as enablers 
and include physical, social and procedural elements (McAslan, 
2011).
• Physical enablers include such things as access to food, water,
shelter, health and wellbeing services as well as protection
against accidents, illness and injury, personal security, utilities,
communication and banking services, transportation and
communications.
• Social enablers are those that develop community cohesion such
as social inclusion, effective local leadership and social capital.
• Procedural enablers are systems and strategies that allow a
community to prepare and recover from hardships such as
drought. These include plans and policies, awareness and
education campaigns and sharing of information.
“One size doesn’t fit all. Each community is different and any 
future plan needs to enable the individual community to build the 
resilience and well being tools that suit them”. (Financial Services 
SA).
A resilient community is one that works together to understand and 
manage the risks it is exposed to. The resilience of the community 
is the responsibility of all sectors of the community, including all 
levels of government, business, the non-government sector and 
individuals.
Developing resilience involves communities and individual actors 
understanding risks posed by unplanned or adverse events, taking 
action to avoid or mitigate these risks, and learning from these 
experiences to enhance future capacity through an adaptive 
learning process. This requires resilience to be considered using 
an approach such as the Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and 
Transformation Approach. This will allow identification of what 
changes are needed to be made – incremental, planned or 
transformational (as discussed in section 1.6) and what adaptive 
capacity already exists, that will increase the chances of the 
community’s resilience through unplanned events.
The impacts on the economy, community and environment are 
varied and can be direct or indirect. Informed through consultation 
with stakeholders and literature reviews conducted as development 
of the Key Insights Paper, the following impacts were identified:
• Economic
> Drought has historically reduced revenue and income for farm
enterprises whilst in drought and post drought.
> Farms may experience reduced ability to service loans,
resulting in compounding economic stress.
> Farms may seek access to further financing and funding
options in order to remain financiallly viable.
> Farms may have to spend more on farm inputs, such as
machinery, water supply and irrigation and feed for their
animals.
> Farm enterprises have reduced available finance for the
agricultural supply chain, i.e., the ability to purchase farm
inputs, access farm consultants etc.
> Non-farm businesses may experience reduced incomes
and confidence, resulting from reduced spending by farm
enterprises and later the businesses in the agricultural supply
chain.
> A reduction in the work force as a result of redundancies and
employment termination.
> Reduced employment opportunities in the regional community
resulting regional depopulation and a further reduction in
regional economic activity.
• Social
> Poorer mental health and wellbeing outcomes.
> Health problems related and poor water quality.
> Loss of cultural connectivity to land, water and country as a
result of altered landscape conditions.
> Impact on the landscape, flora and fauna of the region which
is intimately linked culturally to the local Aboriginal people.
> Health problems related to dust.
> Increased risk of suicide, threat to public safety from an
increased number of fires.
> Reduced incomes.
> People leaving the region.
> Fewer recreational activities.
> Heat related health.
> Urban environments – liveability.
• Environmental
> Loss of biodiversity.
> Loss of habitat for wildlife.
> Loss of endemic animal species, especially
freshwater species.
> Increase in disease in wild animals.
> Migration of wildlife.
> Reduced availability of surface water and
groundwater, resulting in widespread movement of
animals to areas with access to water, i.e., farm dams,
reservoirs, permanent water holes.
> Reduced quality of surface and groundwater,
resulting from increased competition for finite resources.
> Increase risk of bushfire.
> Wind and water erosion of soils.
> Soil loss and degradation.
The social, economic and environmental impacts of drought are 
not held in isolation of each other. For example, when drought 
occurs, there are environmental impacts such as reduced water 
availability which in turn impacts crop quality or production. 
When this happens, especially over multiple seasons, there are 
economic impacts including loss of income for farmers which can 
impact social and mental wellbeing. 
It is important to define the concept of resilience for this Plan in 
a way that is relevant to the region, and which reflects community 
feedback. Consultation with a wide range of stakeholders in 
the Northern and Yorke region enabled an exploration of 
‘what resilience means to them’ (Figure 8), the following 
concept was defined:
Resilience represents the community’s capacity to deal with 
change, move forward and adapt to minimise the impact of 
adverse events. A resilient community is innovative, diverse and 
has the tools to learn from the past to progress in the future.
THE ABILITY TO ADAPT, REORGANISE OR 
TRANSFORM IN RESPONSE TO CHANGING 
TEMPERATURE, INCREASING VARIABILITY 
AND SCARCITY OF RAINFALL AND CHANGED 
SEASONALITY OF RAINFALL, FOR IMPROVED 
ECONOMIC, ENVIRONMENTAL AND 
SOCIAL WELLBEING
ONE SIZE DOESN’T FIT ALL. EACH 
COMMUNITY IS DIFFERENT AND ANY FUTURE 
PLAN NEEDS TO ENABLE THE INDIVIDUAL 
COMMUNITY TO BUILD THE RESILIENCE 
AND WELL BEING TOOLS THAT 
SUIT THEM. 
(FINANCIAL SERVICES SA)
Figure 7. Simplified diagram of interconnectedness of Social, Environmental and Economic levels in Community Resilience
ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACTS.
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS.
SOCIAL
IMPACTS.
Water quality & quantity
Habitat loss
Conservation impacts
Soil quality
Reduced agricultural output
Reduced income
Reduced regional economic 
activity
Health & wellbeing
Regional migration
Community networks
DROUGHT

21
20
Figure 8 Word cloud representing the most common words used by stakeholders during the engagement process when asked to define resilience
Figure 9. Characteristics and key implications of drought on of resilient farm enterprises, industries and communities
Through stakeholder workshops and interviews as well as desktop 
research (refer to Section 1.5 – 1.5.1), the concept of resilience 
for the region was explored taking into account the characteristics 
and implications of drought for sub-regions with varying rainfall (as 
defined in Section 3).
The ability to create and build a resilient farming enterprise is a 
result of decisions planned for and enacted during times of non-
drought, whilst in drought and through drought recovery. Resilient 
farm enterprises are built upon strong, resilient and sustainable 
production systems that effectively manage the risk of drought and 
minimise economic and production loss.
The impacts of drought often extend well beyond the farm, with 
drought-induced losses in production at the farm level typically 
spreading along the supply chain. Industry and their supply chains 
are the physical and information systems and processes used to 
deliver a product or service from one location or entity to another 
and consist of many connected stakeholders e.g. producers, 
processors, packagers, distributors, transportation companies, 
wholesalers, supermarket retailers and consumers. Just like farm 
enterprises and supply chains, a resilient community will have 
the capacity to deal with hardship and the ability to get back up 
and return to normal after an adverse event. As agriculture is the 
primary industry of the region, the community’s economic and 
social wellbeing is linked to the viability of the sector. Furthermore, 
the community’s resilience is interdependently linked to the 
community’s health and wellbeing in that when one is reduced 
or strengthened, so is the other (Ziglio, 2018). Resilient farms, 
industries and communities have certain characteristics that enable 
this resilience. While resilience of one key pillar is reliant on the 
resilience of another, there are other elements that link all three 
together. These are knowledge and education; and research and 
innovation (Figure 9).
Knowledge and education play a vital role in making the right 
decisions for building resilience (Oktari et al. 2021). For example, 
farms, businesses and communities that have access to knowledge 
hubs or education services, whether formal or informal, are able 
to make business management, land management or agronomy 
decisions that may reduce the impact of future drought.
Knowledge and education are linked to research and innovation. 
Research and innovation are key drivers of diversification of 
systems, which play a key role in mitigating risks of drought and 
allows adaptation to occur and to continue functioning through 
times of change.
RESILIENCE
Resilience can relate to the ability of a system, organisation of individual to withstand adversity 
and to bounce back from such adversity. 
As a concept, resilience represents the community’s capacity to deal with change, move 
forward and adapt to minimise the impact of adverse events. 
A resilient community is innovative, diverse and has the tools to learn from the past to 
progress in the future.
RESILIENT FARM ENTERPRISES
RESILIENT INDUSTRIES
RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
Resilient farm enterprises are built upon 
strong, resilient and diverse production 
systems operated in accordance with 
effective risk management frameworks 
that enable income production during 
challenging times. 
Key characteristics or attributes include:
• A diverse farming income stream 
• Sustainable land management 
• Support systems in place for farmer and 
family health and wellbeing
• Sound production systems 
• Appropriate business planning which 
incorporates risk planning
• Knowledge sharing and education
Key implications or challenges posed by 
future drought include:
• Reduced and loss of crop and livestock 
production
• An aging workforce
• Successional change on farms and 
depopulation
• Reduction in water availability
• Increased water prices and or decrease 
water quality
• Reduced profit and income
• Increasing input costs e.g. fuel and 
fertilisers.
• Poorer mental health and wellbeing 
outcomes
A resilient industry is one that recovers 
quickly and adapts from an unexpected 
event, is able to identify process changes 
that allow it to recover in a better 
position than prior to the disruption. 
Key characteristics or attributes include: 
• Flexibility in sourcing, manufacturing or 
otherwise procuring supply
• Market and product diversity 
supporting multiple income streams
• Utilises business and disaster planning 
to anticipate adverse events 
• Active preventative maintenance on 
machinery/equipment
• Active coordination and knowledge 
sharing between supply chain 
stakeholders 
Key implications or challenges posed by 
future drought include:
• Increase in product and commodity 
costs
• Issues with transport infrastructure (e.g. 
road) causing delays or inability to 
transport supply
• Loss of markets via demand or credit-
worthiness of clients
• Supply delays
• Crop or harvest failure
Communities resilience is 
interdependently linked to the 
community’s health and wellbeing 
in that when one is reduced or 
strengthened, so is the other. A resilient 
community has the capacity to deal 
with hardship, can get back up and 
return to normal after an adverse event. 
Key characteristics or attributes 
include:
• Effective leadership
• Diverse economic activities
• Access to services and infrastructure
• Involved in decision making
• Socially cohesive
• Strong cultural links
• Knowledgeable
• Healthy
• Engaged 
Key implications posed by future 
drought include:
• Poorer mental health and wellbeing 
outcomes
• Poorer physical health outcomes 
• Reduced incomes
• People leaving the region
• Poorer social connections
• Poorer engagement (volunteerism)
KNOWLEDGE & EDUCATION
RESEARCH & INNOVATION
KNOWLEDGE & 
EDUCATION PLAY A 
VITAL ROLE IN MAKING 
THE RIGHT DECISIONS 
FOR BUILDING 
RESILIENCE...

23
22
4 THE PLAN REGION.
The Northern and Yorke region (the region) 
extends from the Northern Adelaide Plains in the 
south to the Southern Flinders Ranges in the north, 
bounded by Yorke Peninsula to the west and the 
Barossa, Regional Council of Goyder, District 
Council of Peterborough and District Council of 
Orroroo Carrieton in the east. 
The region covers almost 5 million hectares, of which 
approximately 91% is under agricultural production (CSIRO; 
Bureau of Meteorology; Farm Link, 2019). 
The region is of great importance to the South Australian and 
Australian agricultural economy, producing almost half (46.8%) 
of the state’s grain production in 2020/21 (Profile ID, 2022). 
The rainfall and topography varies considerably throughout the 
region, with the south consisting of a mix of horticulture, viticulture, 
livestock farming and cropping, whilst the northern and eastern 
farming districts are predominantly mixed farming enterprises 
consisting of both livestock and cropping agriculture. The Yorke 
Peninsual region is dominated by cropping enterprises. 
The region contains distinct wine and vegetable production 
regions. Significant water capture, storage and reuse schemes 
operate throughout the Northern Adelaide Plains, Barossa and 
Light Regional Council areas. 
The regional population is approximately 150,000 people. 
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries followed by manufacturing are 
the major employment sectors and sources of economic activity 
(Northern and Yorke Landscapes Board, 2020) (Profile ID, 2022). 
Much of the manufacturing occurring in the region is either directly 
or indirectly supported by agriculture, either contributing to farm or 
business practices or in certain locations, value-adding to existing 
regionally produced agricultural commodities, i.e, wine and fine 
food production. 
The region contains several areas of high ecological value, 
including the samphire communities and inter-tidal zone of 
the Adelaide International Bird Sanctuary, pockets of remnant 
Peppermint Box Grassy Woodland, Grey Box Grassy Woodlands 
occurring through the Southern Flinders Ranges and Iron-grass 
and the Environment, 2021). 
The Adelaide International Bird Sanctuary alone is home to 263 
species of fauna and flora (National Parks and Wildlife Service 
South Australia, 2022). 
Data provided in this section has been sourced from a variety 
of government and non-government sources and represents the 
RDA Yorke and Mid North and RDA BGLAP regions. The region 
outlined in this plan (including the southern section of Flinders 
Ranges Council) does not align with the RDA Yorke and Mid North 
and RDA BGLAP regions. As such, data for the Flinders Ranges 
Council area has not been included in the data outlined below.
4.1	 Economic profile
THE REGION COVERS 
ALMOST 5 MILLION 
HECTARES, OF WHICH 
APPROXIMATELY 91% 
IS UNDER AGRICULTURAL 
PRODUCTION
Figure 10. Key Northern and Yorke region economic statistics (Profile ID, 2022) (Infrastructure Australia, 2022)
$8.08 BILLION
• The 2020/21 Gross Regional Product
• In 2020/21 the region contributed 6.9% of SA’s 
employment and 6.5% of its value added
13,306 LOCAL BUSINESSES
4,193 agriculture, forestry and fishing businesses. 32% 
of all business in the region (2021 data)
$1.7 BILLION 
THE GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCE VALUE 
OF AGRICULTURE IN 2020/21
• 46.8% of South Australia’s grain production.
• 63.6% of South Australia’s break crop production
• 34.6% of the state’s hay production
34.8% RENTAL STRESS
THE HIGHEST IN REGIONAL SA. Based on 2016 data.
• 29.7% of the population live alone (2016 data)
IN 2018, THE REGION RANKED 54 OUT OF 60 
FOR TECHNOLOGICAL READINESS
• 61% of respondents have missed business deadlines due to 
telecommunications issues (2020 data)
• Local Australian Digital Inclusion Index Score – 61.2 ranging from 
59 to 63, below the SA average of 69 (2021 data)
The region produces 28% of all economic outputs within South Australia. Agriculture 
provided $1,746,479,433 of Gross Regional Product value to the Australian economy 
in 2020/21 (Profile ID, 2022)(see Table 1).

25
24
Table 2. Employment percentage per industry across the Northern and York region (sub-regions: Barossa, 
Gawler, & Light Adelaide Plains, and Yorke & Mid North Region) compared to South Australia (Profile ID, 2022).
COMMODITY
MILLION $
%
REGION AS A % OF SOUTH 
AUSTRALIA
Cereal crops
624.8
35.7
46.8
Livestock slaughtering
535.9
30.7
27.4
Other broadacre crops
239.3
13.7
63.3
Wool
100.4
5.7
22.5
Crops for hay
93.0
5.3
34.6
Grapes (wine and table)
28.2
3.3
15.7
Vegetables
31.4
1.8
7.6
Eggs
13.3
0.8
58
Milk
12.4
0.7
3.8
Nurseries and cut flowers
7.1
0.4
13.2
Nuts
1.6
0.0
1.0
Other fruit
0.4
0.0
0.3
EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY 
The Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing (AFF) industry is the largest 
employer in the Yorke & Mid North Region, employing roughly 18% 
of the local population (Profile ID, 2022). Comparatively, in the 
Barossa, Gawler, and Light Adelaide Plains region, the AFF industry 
only employs roughly 10% of the population (Profile ID, 2022). 
The largest employer in the Barossa, Gawler, and Light Adelaide 
Plains region is the Manufacturing industry, employing 3,871 
people, or roughly 17% of the region (Profile ID, 2022). Much of 
the manufacturing industry contributes to the food and agricultural 
industry with more than 50 artisan food producers operating 
throughout the RDA BGLAP region (Regional Development Australia 
Barossa Gawler Light Adelaide Plains, 2022).
Table 1. The GRP value of the key agricultural commodities produced in the Northern and Yorke 
region listed in order of economic value (million $) (Profile ID, 2022).
INDUSTRY
BAROSSA, GAWLER, AND LIGHT 
ADELAIDE PLAINS (2016)
YORKE AND MID NORTH REGION 
(2016)
SOUTH 
AUSTRALIA
NUMBER
%.
NUMBER
%
%
Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fishing
2,374
10%
4,861
18%
4%
Mining
129
1%
169
1%
1%
Manufacturing
3,871
17%
2,521
9%
8%
Electricity, Gas, 
Water and Waste 
Services
137
1%
325
1%
1%
Construction
1,291
6%
1,543
6%
8%
Wholesale Trade
442
2%
738
3%
3%
Retail Trade
2,570
11%
2,965
11%
11%
Accommodation and 
Food Services
1,866
8%
1,929
7%
7%
Transport, Postal 
and Warehousing
825
4%
901
3%
4%
Information 
Media and 
Telecommunications
170
1%
134
1%
1%
Financial and 
Insurance Services
291
1%
344
1%
3%
Rental, Hiring and 
Real Estate Services
240
1%
209
1%
1%
Professional, 
Scientific and 
Technical Services
760
3%
584
2%
6%
Administrative and 
Support Services
1,010
4%
569
2%
4%
Public 
Administration and 
Safety
720
3%
1,168
4%
7%
Education and 
Training
2,151
9%
2,294
9%
9%
Health Care and 
Social Assistance
2,609
11%
3,723
14%
15%
Arts and Recreation 
Services
291
1%
142
1%
1%
Other Services
862
4%
947
4%
4%
Industry not 
classified
816
4%
819
3%
3%
Total persons
23,425
100%
26,960
100%
100%
MUCH OF THE 
MANUFACTURING 
INDUSTRY RELIES ON 
INPUTS FROM THE 
AGRICULTURAL 
INDUSTRY

27
26
WATER USE AND REUSE
Three treated water pipelines, transporting treated water from 
the Murray River span across the region. These are as follows 
(SA Water, 2022):
• The Swan Reach to Paskeville pipeline: A 189 kilometre 
pipeline constructed to deliver water to the Barossa Valley, 
Lower North and Yorke Peninsula areas. Water is treated at 
Swan Reach and is pumped into the pipeline.
• The Morgan to Whyalla pipeline: A 641 kilometre pipeline 
supplying treated water to regional towns, such as Jamestown 
and Peterborough. The pipeline travels through the region and 
extends to the Eyre Peninsula.
• Yorke Peninsula: A new wpipeline reaching from Morgan and 
Swan Reach provides water to the southern Yorke Peninsula 
region, including Warooka and Point Turton. 
Water storages in the region range from small scale farm dams 
to large scale reservoirs. Reservoirs in the region are strategically 
located to capture stormwater run-off and rainfall and some of 
these can be filled with Murray River water (SA Water, 2022). 
Six reservoirs are located within the region, these are as follows:
• Barossa: A 4.4 gigalitre (GL) reservoir, located close to the 
southern boundary of the region in the Barossa Council area.
• Warren: A 4.7 GL reservoir, providing water for the Barossa 
Infrastructure Limited scheme, located in the Barossa Council 
area.
• South Para - The second largest reservoir in South Australia, 
with a capacity of 44.8 GL, located in the Barossa Council 
area.
• Baroota - A 6.14 GL offline reservoir located on Baroota 
Creek in the Mount Remarkable Council area.
• Bundaleer - A 6.3 GL offline reservoir located in the Nortern 
Areas Council area. 
• Beetaloo - A 3.1 GL offline Reservoir located in the Northern 
Areas Council area.
The expanded use of recycled water has been identified as 
offering significant potential in improving irrigation capacity and 
economic output (Infrastructure Australia, 2022).
Existing recycled water supply infrastructure include:
• the Bunyip Scheme (formerly the Gawler Water Reuse 
Scheme (GWRS))
• Barossa Infrastructure Limited (BIL) 
• The Northern Adelaide Irrigation Scheme (NAIS) 
All scheme provide significant economic value to the region 
through providing alternative sources of water for irrigation 
(Infrastructure Australia, 2022). 
Small scale community wastewater reuse schemes also operate 
throughout regional towns and centres.
Currently, the Barossa and Clare Valley are investigating 
recycled water and reuse projects. 
ELECTRICITY
The region has been identified by the Australian Electricity Market 
Operator (AEMO) as a key renewable energy zone (Infrastructure 
Australia, 2022). The region and in particular the Eastern and 
Northern sub-regional zone and Mid-North sub-regional zone are 
key producers of both solar and wind energy. 
INTERNET AND MOBILE PHONE RECEPTION
In 2021 the region recorded a Local Australian Digital Inclusion 
Index (ADII) Score – 61.2 ranging from 59 to 63, below the 
SA average of 69 and the national average of 70 (Infrastructure 
Australia, 2022). The ADII score represents the level of digital 
inclusion for a particular region. 
Access, affordability and digital ability are equally weighted and 
considered in the ADII score. Year on year percentage change 
data indicates that people over 75 years of age, people who did 
not finish high school and people who fall into the lowest income 
quintile are being further disadvantaged by lack of access to 
digital technology (Ausrtalian Dgital Inclusion Index, 2021).
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
The average household income of the residents of the Northern 
and Yorke region is less than the South Australian state average, 
with over two-thirds of residents earning less than $1,499 per 
week (Profile ID, 2022)(Table 3).
Table 3. Northern and Yorke household incomes compared to South Australian household incomes (Profile ID, 2022)
Table 4. Northern and Yorke resident worker incomes per quartile compared to South Australian quartiles (Profile ID, 2022)
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
NUMBER
%
SOUTH AUSTRALIA %
Nil to $649
13,837
27.0
21.6
$650 to $1,499
20,226
39.5
32.9
$1500 to $2,449
11,018
21.5
20.8
$2,500 or more
6,547
12.6
15.2
2016
2011
QUARTILE 
GROUP
NUMBER
%.
SOUTH 
AUSTRALIA
NUMBER
%.
SOUTH 
AUSTRALIA
2011 - 
2016
Lowest group
16,122 
25%
25%
15,574 
26%
25%
548 
Medium lowest
16,262 
25%
25%
15,680 
26%
25%
582 
Medium 
highest
16,908 
26%
25%
15,956 
26%
25%
952 
Highest group
14,660 
23%
25%
13,580 
22%
25%
1,080 
Total Persons
63,952 
100
100%
60,790 
100%
100%
3,162 
RESIDENT WORKER HOUSEHOLD 
INCOME PER QUARTILE
Resident worker individual incomes across the Northern and Yorke region were fairly stable in the period from 2011 to 2016. 
There was a minor shift in individuals moving up out of the lowest quartile group, and from the medium highest group into the 
highest group (Profile ID, 2022).
WATER STORAGES IN THE REGION RANGE FROM SMALL 
SCALE FARM DAMS TO LARGE SCALE RESERVOIRS. 
RESERVOIRS IN THE REGION ARE STRATEGICALLY LOCATED 
TO CAPTURE STORMWATER RUN-OFF AND RAINFALL AND 
SOME OF THESE CAN BE FILLED WITH WATER FROM THE 
MURAY RIVER.

29
28
4.2	 Regional Profile
4.2.1 Social profile
Key social statistics for the Northern and Yorke region are presented below in Figure 11
Figure 11. Key Northern and Yorke region social statistics (Profile ID, 2022).
151,933
The population of Barossa, Yorke and Mid North Region in 2020
• 59.9% are of working age (15-64 years)
• 6.8% are retirees (65-69 years)
• 13.2% are seniors (70-84 years)
• 2.7% are elderly (85+ years)
3,396
The number of Aboriginal people living within the region. 
This makes up 2.9% of the population (2016) representing five 
Aboriginal groups
EMPLOYMENT 
• 56% of residents are employed full time
• 42% employed part-time
• 10.5% of the 15-64 age population access job seeker 
and youth allowance
OUR COMMUNITY
• 6.6% of the community need assistance of core activities
• 12.6% of the community provided unpaid assistance to 
a person with a disability
HEALTH & STRESS
• 12% of population aged 18 years and older reported 
high or very high psychological distress
• 20.3% of the population aged 15 years and older 
self-assessed their health as fair or poor 
The population of the Yorke and Mid North region had a light 
increase in population between 2015 and 2020 with an increase 
of 3.6% (5,260 persons) (Table 5). This was less than population 
growth of Metropolitan Adelaide with 4.8%. The projected 
population increase from 2021 to 2036 is 7.9% (9,299 
persons), with all regions projected to increase in population, 
with the exception of the Peterborough, Orroroo Carrieton, Mount 
Remarkable Council areas (Data SA, 2020)
Table 5. Population growth of the Northern and Yorke region compared to Metropolitan Adelaide from 2015-2020 (Profile ID, 2022).
Table 6. The age profile comparison between the Yorke and Mid North region and Metropolitan Adelaide (Profile ID, 2022)
Table 7. The number of unemployed persons in the Northern and Yorke region compared to the number of unemployed persons across 
South Australia (Profile ID, 2022).
Table 8. Aboriginal nations within the Northern and Yorke region and the Prescribed Bodies Corporate.
2015
CHANGE 2015-2020
2020
Northern & 
Yorke
Metropolitan 
Adelaide
Northern & 
Yorke
Metropolitan 
Adelaide
Northern & 
Yorke
Metropolitan 
Adelaide
146,693
1,313,419
5,240
63,182
151,933
1,376,601
Table 6 summarises the age profile comparison between the Yorke and Mid North region and 
Metropolitan Adelaide.
UNEMPLOYMENT
The absolute number of unemployed people from 2011 to 2016 has increased by 1,256 across the 
Northern and Yorke region (Profile ID, 2022).
ABORIGINAL NATIONS
There are five Aboriginal Nations within the Northern and Yorke region (Table 8). 
Prescribed Bodies Corporate are integral to dealings with Native Title as it the first point of contact for 
government and other parties wishing to undertake activities on native title land. It acts as a bridge for 
traditional owners to deal with the non-Indigenous legal system and provides a legal entity to conduct 
business.
AGE GROUP (YEARS)
YORKE & MID NORTH REGION %
METROPOLITAN ADELAIDE %
0-4
5.1
5.6
5-14
12.3
11.9
15-24
11.6
12.6
25-34
9.9
14.1
35-44
10.6
13.0
45-54
12.8
12.7
55-64
15.0
12.1
65-74
12.9
9.8
75-84
7.1
5.6
85+0
2.7
2.6
2016
2011
CHANGE
Number
%.
% South 
Australia
Number
%
% South 
Australia
2011 
to 2016
Total persons 
(unemployed)
4,447
100%
100%
3,191
100%
100%
1,256
Males
2,483
56%
57%
1,748
55%
53%
735
Females
1,972
44%
44%
1,453
46%
47%
519
Aboriginal Nations – refer map
Prescribed Bodies Corporate
Kaurna
Kaurna Yerta Aboriginal Corporation
Narungga
Narungga Nation Aboriginal Corporation
Ngadjuri
Ngadjuri Nation Aboriginal Corporation
Peramangk 
Not applicable
Nukunu 
Nukunu Wapma Thura Aboriginal Corporation

31
30
The Socio-Economic Index for Yorke and Mid North region varies 
significantly. Light, Barossa, Clare and Gilbert Valleys, Orroroo/
Carrieton and Northern Areas councils are ranked the highest in 
terms of their Socioeconomic Index for Areas (SEIFA) scoring 125, 
1012, 1001, 991 and 981 respectively.
The remaining areas ranked below the state average of 979.
The Yorke and Mid North region as a whole scored 934 with 
Wakefield (933), Copper Coast (919), Port Pirie (886) and 
Peterborough (792) scoring below the region’s average. The 
District Council of Peterborough scored the lowest value.
A low Socio-Economic score represents the highest levels of 
disadvantage.
The Northern and Yorke region extends over 38,500 square 
kilometres, possessing considerable diversity in the environmental 
assets that it contains with varying levels of biodiversity and 
remnant and revegetated native vegetation (Landscapes SA - 
Northern and Yorke , 2022). Surface water and groundwater 
assets in the region have altered over time, affected by water take, 
alteration of hydrological systems and removal of vegetation. Soils 
are of varying quality for agricultural production, with many areas 
producing high quality, high yield commodities. Water-dependent 
Ecosystems are key indicators of the health and condition of 
our creeks and rivers, ongoing reduced rainfall will continue the 
declines already being observed in these ecosystems.
South Australia, including the Northern and Yorke region are 
highly reliant on the Murray River for water use for residential and 
industrial uses. Access to potable water is noted as a key barrier 
to population growth in the region (SA Environmental Protection 
Authority, 2018). As part of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, 450 
GL of water is to be delivered to the River Murray through on-farm 
water efficiency measures (SA Environmental Protection Authority, 
2018). The implications of this for the Northern and Yorke region 
are that there is a requirement to demonstrate water efficiency 
increases and to source alternative non-potable water supplies 
(fit for purpose water) for agricultural production. 
The imported water dependent agricultural industries (viticulture, 
horticulture and livestock farming) are currently exposed to the 
impacts of drought from both within and outside of the region, i.e., 
drought occurring outside of the region will impact the quantity 
and quality of River Murray water available for extraction and use 
in the region. 
4.2.2	Environmental profile
Figure 12. Key Northern and Yorke environment statistics (SA Environmental Protection Authority, 2018) 
(Landscapes South Australia Northern and Yorke, 2020)
304 NATIVE BIRD SPECIES
• Contains valuable breeding and feeding habitat for coastal wader birds, 
including the threatened Eastern Curlew.
1,299 NATIVE SPECIES OF 
VASCULAR TERRESTRIAL PLANTS
58% OF WATER DEMAND IS 
FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES• 
• Current water resources in Yorke and Mid North are nearing 
or are at the limits of what has been identified as sustainable 
and limiting population growth for the region in the absence 
of alternative sources. 
33 NATIVE TERRESTRIAL MAMMAL SPECIES
• Several species of threatened native terrestrial mammal species, 
including the Yellow-footed Rock Wallaby.
5 DROUGHT RISK 
AND VULNERABILITY.
The Northern and Yorke region is projected to be 
impacted by more severe and frequent droughts, 
characterised by reduced rainfall and increased 
evaporation, reducing the availability of water for 
pasture and crop production. 
It is important to note that the nature, timing and extent of these 
general changes occur will differ between different areas within the 
Northern and Yorke region. To account for these differences, the Plan 
adopts four sub-regions to better encapsulate the types of changes 
expected to occur. 
The following information provides the justification for the 
boundaries of four distinct sub-regional zones. 
• Temperature, evapotranspiration and growing season rainfall 
declines (indicators of chronic drought) are projected to 
generally increase in the north and spread south. There is also 
an increased temperature, evapotranspiration and a decline in 
growing season rainfall from inland regions to the coast.
• The zones are culturally and economically cohesive, i.e., the zones 
are considered similar in nature, when compared to other zones, 
noting that there is still considerable intra-zone variance, especially 
in the Upper North and East Zone. The sub-regional zones are 
projected to experience similar climatic challenges in the near future 
(2030) and to a lesser extent the far future (2050).
• The emphasis on the Mid-North Zone as a smaller discrete entity 
with a rapidly increasing chronic drought risk profile, resulting 
from increased evaporation and decreased precipitation, 
resulting in reduced availability of soil moisture. This is true 
of all zones, however, the Mid-North zone is highlighted as 
the area most likely to experience an enhanced drying trend. 
This combined with reduced experience of managing drought 
conditions within the sub-region, represents a significant risk to 
farmers in the region who may be less prepared for the rapidly 
changing climatic conditions. 
• The sub-regional zones capture differences in autumn and 
spring rainfall and therefore growing season length and risk. 
This is relevant to all agricultural enterprises, but particularly 
so to cropping enterprises that are solely reliant on soil 
moisture availability for crop production and to livestock 
farming enterprises that are somewhat reliant on pasture and 
groundcover. 
It is important to note that the sub-regional zone drought profiles 
represented in Figure 15 are representative of conditions projected 
under a high emissions 2030 future scenario and that the risk 
ratings are relative to each other. All regions are projected to 
experience more challenging farming conditions as a result of 
increased severity, duration and frequency of drought. However, 
when examining the region as a whole, some sub-regions are 
more exposed to drought than others. The risk profiles reflect this. 
Under a longer-term (2050) future drought scenario all of the 
Northern and Yorke region is considered exceedingly high risk.
The purpose of the map presented in Figure 15 is to demonstrate 
the different risk profiles and types of risks, adaptive capacity and 
experience in preparing for and responding to chronic drought. 
The Northern and Yorke region is a diverse region, containing a 
broad range of agricultural systems that have been successfully 
built upon based on historic climatic conditions, rather than current 
and projected climate conditions.  
The exposure and vulnerability of each of the sub-regional 
zones is distinct. The reasons for this are primarily related to 
the following themes:
• The impact of drought will not be uniformly spread across the 
region. Certain sub-regional zones, agricultural systems and 
individual farm enterprises will be more affected by the impacts 
of future drought than others. Furthermore, drought may impact 
different locations at different times.
• The projected severity, duration and frequency of drought is 
unprecedented in recent history. This is typified by (Department 
for Environment and Water, 2020) (Hope, 2015):
> Increasing severity, duration and frequency of drought.
> Increased average, minimum and maximum temperatures, 
resulting in more heat wave conditions.
> Increased evaporation resulting in reduced availability of 
surface water and a reduction in available soil moisture.
> Increased evapotranspiration, i.e., the movement of moisture 
from land to the atmosphere by evaporation from the soils 
and through plant transpiration, indicating that plants will 
require access to greater quantities of water to survive and 
flourish (Webb, 2010). This will impact all rainfall dependent 
systems, including crops, pasture, native vegetation, weeds 
and irrigated crops.
• Understanding and acceptance of climate science and future 
projected climatic conditions. 
• Experience and knowledge of preparing for drought from 
an economic, social and environmental perspective.
• The ability of farm enterprises to manage risk, including 
on-farm rainfall dependent and independent systems and 
off-farm rainfall independent income sources.
• The financial, operational and technical capability of a farming 
enterprise to alter agronomic and land management decisions 
based on seasonal conditions. 
• The reliance of certain agricultural systems on high-cost input 
systems and the ability of an individual farm enterprise to afford 
to alter practices, that have historically provided return on 
investment, but may not consistently do so in the future.
• Market drivers and barriers limiting or discouraging change 
to more climate resilient farming systems, i.e., the use of high-
input systems provides significant financial returns to those 
organisations supplying the inputs to farmers. A move away 
from these systems may result in loss of income and revenue 
for these organisations. 
The maps do not account for the counteracting positive effects of farm 
adaptation or technological improvement (or macroeconomic forces, 
such as global commodity prices), the results are not projections of 
absolute outcomes in 2030, but rather projections of ‘adaptation 
pressure’: identifying which sub-regions are likely to be under more 
pressure to adapt due to increases in chronic drought impacts.
ALL REGIONS ARE PROJECTED TO 
EXPERIENCE MORE CHALLENGING 
FARMING CONDITIONS AS A RESULT 
OF INCREASED SEVERITY, DURATION 
AND FREQUENCY OF DROUGHT.

33
32
5.1 Sub-regional zones
There are four distinct sub-regions or zones within the Northern and Yorke region. 
These are as follows:
UPPER NORTH 
AND EAST ZONE. 
MID-NORTH 
ZONE.
PLAINS AND 
RANGES ZONE
PENINSULA 
ZONE.
1
2
3
4
UPPER NORTH AND EAST ZONE
The Upper North and East Zone is an area that has experienced 
and continues to experience reduced rainfall conditions. 
Stakeholder groups operating within this region have already 
demonstrated a high adaptive capacity to alter land and business 
management decisions based on climatic and associated 
environmental conditions. 
The zone contains a high number of mixed farming enterprises 
(i.e., broadacre farming operations including cropping and 
livestock grazing). 
The zone is categorised as an exceedingly high drought risk 
profile. However, the risk profile for this area, does not consider 
the success of previous adaptation and resilience measures that 
have allowed farm enterprises and agricultural supply chains 
to continue to be financially viable through the 2018 drought 
and previous droughts, due to knowledge and experience of 
operating in drought conditions over long periods of time. This 
is not necessarily the case for other sub-regional zones in the 
Northern and Yorke region, that despite being labelled as either 
very high or high drought risk profiles are considered as more 
vulnerable and exposed to the effects of drought as a result of 
poor experience of handling drought. 
Key factors associated with this zone are as follows:
• Greater experience of recent drought conditions resulting in 
increased knowledge and skills to manage drought and dry 
times (refer to Consultation Summary Appendix). 
• Many towns (Peterborough, Quorn, Melrose) have benefitted 
from increased tourism, which has somewhat offset the 
economic impacts of drought (Regional Development Australia 
Yorke and Mid North, 2022) ( (Brown, 2022).
• The growth of the tourism sector is a key priority for the entire 
region. The Northern and Eastern sub-regional zone Councils 
are targeting caravan, camping and the outdoor based activity 
tourism sector (Stevenson, 2022) (Brown, 2022) (Regional 
Development Australia Yorke and Mid North, 2022). 
• Reduced access to internet and mobile phone reception compared 
to the Plains and Ranges zone and large sections of the Peninsula 
zone (Infrastructure Australia, 2022) (Stevenson, 2022).
• Reduced access to health care services, child care services 
(particularly through the more northern districts) and reduced 
employment opportunities (Ting, et al., 2022) (Health Map, 2022). 
• Inequitable and poor access to mental health care and financial 
advisory services. This may exacerbate rapid changes to rainfall 
expected in the region (Health Map, 2022). 
• A higher percentage of farms with a reduced financial 
capability to alter current practices as a result of long-term 
drought exposure and tighter profit margins arising from the 
recent drought conditions (refer to Consultation Summary 
Report). 
• The economic and mental health impacts, particularly related 
to the sale and destruction of livestock as a result of drought 
and farm management decisions has impacted farmers, farm 
advisors and particular sectors of the agricultural supply chain 
(Kellock, 2022).
• Varying understanding and acceptance of projected drought 
conditions and associated future climate projections across the 
zone (refer to Consultation Summary Report). 
• Limited willingness, knowledge or ability to alter current systems 
(refer to Consultation Summary Report).
• Overconfidence in existing systems that have provided 
incremental increases in resilience, may mean that planned 
transitional and transformational adaptation measures are not 
trialled or adopted.
MID NORTH ZONE
The Mid North Zone can be distinguished from other zones by the 
projected future exposure to drought and the regions experience 
managing drought conditions. This zone is highly exposed to near-
future (2030) conditions, meaning that farmers in this area have 
a reduced time period to adapt to expected changes to climatic 
conditions, including drought and little knowledge or experience 
of how to withstand and bounce back from these conditions. 
The Mid North Zone has not experienced the severity or 
frequency of drought of the Upper North and East Zone. As 
such, farmers in this region have not developed the equivalent 
skills and knowledge of the Upper North and East Zone to 
adequately adapt to the projected changes to precipitation and 
evaporation and alter farming systems to withstand the projected 
future conditions. The Mid North Zone is projected to experience 
drought conditions that will challenge farmers and land managers 
due to the near future climate projections, of which the severity 
and frequency of drought conditions have not been previously 
experienced. 
Key factors associated with this zone are:
• Varying understanding and acceptance of projected drought 
conditions and associated future climate projections across the zone. 
• Limited time to plan and prepare for a more severe, frequent 
and longer lasting drought scenario.
• Reduced access to internet and mobile phone reception 
compared to the Plains and Ranges zone and large sections 
of the Peninsula zone (Infrastructure Australia, 2022) 
(Stevenson, 2022).
• Reduced access to health care services and childcare services 
(Ting, et al., 2022) (Health Map, 2022). 
• Non-agricultural businesses and organisation that are somewhat 
reliant on a prosperous agriculture industry and profitable farm 
enterprises, are not prepared for the projected rapid alteration 
to precipitation and evaporation. This may result in widespread 
economic, environmental and social shocks. 
• Inequitable and poor access to mental health care and financial 
advisory services. This may exacerbate rapid changes to rainfall 
expected in the region (Health Map, 2022). 
• Over-reliance on the Murray River, Adelaide Hills Reservoirs and 
the Lonsdale based desalination plant as sources of high-quality 
water. The reliance on irrigation across horticulture and viticulture 
regions is notable. Any reductions in access to the required 
quality and priced water will have significant farm business 
implications, including reduced yields, reduced quality produce, 
increased financial stress and reductions in farm income
• A possible reduction in tourism resulting from rapid climatic shifts 
and resulting reduced environmental conditions of the zone. 
PLAINS AND RANGES ZONE
The Plains and Ranges Zone represents the greatest diversity of 
farming and agricultural systems of the Northern and Yorke region. 
This zone includes distinct wine production regions, indoor and 
outdoor horticultural systems, mixed farming systems, egg and 
chicken production, livestock farming and cropping systems. 
However, the overwhelming percentage of land is dedicated 
to cropping and mixed farming systems. Although the Plain and 
Ranges Zone attracts a lower risk classification (high) than the Mid 
North and Upper North and East zones, it is important to note 
that operators of farming systems typically exhibit lower levels of 
familiarity with the types of knowledge and experience needed to 
effectively plan for future drought risks.This includes a knowledge 
of how to actively prepare for and increase the capacity of 
individuals, businesses and systems to withstand a reduction in 
rainfall and increase in evaporation. 
Key factors associated with this zone are as follows:
• In general, a closer proximity to Adelaide (than other zones) 
provides significant economic opportunities, such as tourism, 
access to labour, freight and logistics advantages etc.
• Greater access to health care services and childcare services, 
particularly through towns such as Nuriootpa, Clare, Snowtown 
(Ting, et al., 2022) (Health Map, 2022).
• High competition for aged care facilities and services 
(Infrastructure Australia, 2022).
• Reduced ability to alter existing agronomic systems, due to 
a high reliance on current high-cost practices and inputs that 
encourage economies of scale efficiencies to provide a return 
on investment. 
• Low appetite for adoption of transitional and transformational 
adaptation pathways, due to historically successful incremental 
changes providing productivity gains. 
• Over the past 30 years, grain growers have experienced a 
limited run of dry years, buffered by either high grain prices or 
high yields and reduced grain prices either during, preceding or 
proceeding reduced rainfall years (Faulkner, 2022). This 
has provided an economic buffer to previous experiences of 
reduced rainfall conditions (Faulkner, 2022). Dry times have been 
experienced although not over an extended period. As such, 
there is limited knowledge and experience of how to prepare for 
increased severity and duration of drought. 
• Many younger farmers in the zone would not have experienced 
extended dry periods (Faulkner, 2022).
• Increased options for irrigation resulting from the development of 
multiple alternative water supply schemes, primarily targeted at 
viticulture but also stock watering and horticulture (Infrastructure 
Australia, 2022).
• Over-reliance on the Murray River, Adelaide Hills Reservoirs and 
the Lonsdale based desalination plant as sources of high-quality 
water for viticulture irrigation and stock watering (Infrastructure 
Australia, 2022) (SA Environmental Protection Authority, 2018).
• Horticultural enterprises in the southern area of the zone are 
exposed to changes in regulatory settings under water allocation 
plans related to the take of groundwater and surface water 
(Koch, 2022). 
• Decreasing availability of surface water and groundwater 
resulting from reduced average annual rainfall, experienced 
over the past 30 years leading to (SA Environmental Protection 
Authority, 2018):
	 > A reduction in access to fit for purpose water for horticultural 
and viticultural systems.
	 > Declining water quality across groundwater and surface 	
water systems resulting in reduced water available for 
irrigation dependent systems, livestock and chicken 
production.
PENINSULA ZONE
The Peninsula Zone covers the Yorke Peninsula, including the 
local government areas of Barunga West, Copper Coast and 
Yorke Peninsula. The area is synonymous with cropping, with the 
central areas of the zone, considered to be highly productive 
and profitable as a result of favourable and historically consistent 
rainfall conditions and productive soils. Much of the zone is 
bounded on both sides by large water bodies that help to 
mitigate heat, especially overnight temperatures during warmer 
months. As such, the impact of increased average, minimum and 
maximum temperatures is typically not as pronounced as in the 
other sub-regional zones. Due to the productive nature of the soils 
and historic reliability of in-season rainfall, the perceived risk of 
drought amongst many farmers, particularly those in the central 
and southern parts of the zone is low. The northern parts of the 
zone contain areas of sandy soils and have experienced dry times 
in recent years. 
Key factors associated with this zone are as follows:
• Cropping of wheat, barley and break crops is the primary 
agricultural industry (Young, 2022). Animal agriculture has 
reduced in areas of the zone, due to the historical high return 
of grain and break crop production in favour of animal 
agriculture (Dahl-helm, 2022). 
• Across South Australia, grain yields have increased by almost 
2% year on year over the past 30 years (Primary Indutries and 
Regions South Australia, 2020). The Yorke Peninsula, as a key 
grain producing region has benefitted from this year-on-year 
increase (Australian Export Grains Innovation Centre, 2018) 
(Figure 17). The continuing increases in yields, have led to an 
expectation that high yielding years will continue into the future. 
Many farmers in this sub-region do not consider drought a key 
risk, particularly through the central and southern areas where 
rainfall has historically been relatively reliable (See Consultation 
Summary Appendix). As such, the need to adapt, transform and 
increase resilience to drought has not been recognised and 
implemented historically. 
WATER IS THE NUMBER ONE ISSUE 
FOR THE BAROSSA
M. MCCARTHY, CEO, BAROSSA COUNCIL.

35
34
Flinders Ranges
Orroroo/Carrieton
Northern Areas
Port Pirie
Barunga West
Goyder
Wakefield
Clare And
Adelaide
Yorke
Peninsula
Plains
Light
Barossa
Gilbert Valleys
Copper
Coast
Mount Remarkable
Peterborough
Port Augusta
Whyalla
Port Pirie
Cowell
Wallaroo
Clare
Eudunda
Gawler
Murray Bridg
Adelaide
Upper North and East Zone
Mid North Zone
Plains and
Ranges Zone
Zone
Peninsula
S P E N C E R
G U L F
G U L F
S T V I N C E N T
Peterborough
P
ga W
Co
Remarkable
ud
pper North and
p
d
Figure 15. The Northern and Yorke Region includes four distinct zones, representing three distinct 2030 drought risk profiles.
THE NORTHERN 
& YORKE REGION.
EXCEEDINGLY HIGH
VERY HIGH
HIGH
GOYDER LINE
COUNCIL 
(BAROSSA)
Figure 16. Change in cropping from 2001-2011 in key Australian cropping districts (Australian Export Grains Innovation Centre, 2018).
• Agronomic research and development advances have allowed 
the use of break crops, such as lentils to extend into areas 
previously thought unsuitable for production. Advances such 
as this have provided increased options to farmers for risk 
management and improving soil nutrition through nitrogen 
fixing (Schmidt, 2022).
• Drought is not perceived as a high risk to farming profitability, 
despite other observed changes to climate, such as an increase 
in the prevalence of in-crop frost (resulting from more cloudless 
night skies and cold conditions) and dry finishes associated with 
poor spring rains during the grain fill period (See Consultation 
Summary Appendix).
• Reduced ability to alter existing agronomic systems, due to 
a high reliance on current high-cost practices and inputs that 
encourage economies of scale efficiencies to provide a return 
on investment (Leonard, 2022) (Kellock, 2022). 
• Limited willingness, knowledge or ability to alter current systems 
(See Consultation Summary Apendix).
• Predominantly consisting of Calcareous soils, Deep sands 
and smaller pockets of sand over clay soils and hard red-brown 
texture contrast soils with neutral to alkaline subsoil. Other 
sub-regional zones soils contain greater areas of hard 
red-brown texture contrast soils with neutral to alkaline subsoil, 
calcareous soil and shallow soils on rock (Department for 
Environment and Water, 2018) (see Appendix B).

37
36
5.2 Soil Moisture Projections across the Region to 2030
Root zone soil moisture is critical for agricultural production across 
the region. It is also a key indicator and measure of agricultural 
drought. It is important to explore the variations in root zone soil 
moisture projections for Winter and Spring across the region 
for 2030 under a continuing high global emissions scenario 
(RCP8.5). The following seasonal projections are sourced 
from the Bureau of Meteorology, with the projections being a 
key component of the Australian Water Outlook. They show a 
projected decline in average root zone soil moisture in the northern 
half of the region over winter and over the south and east in the 
spring. Noting that particular soil management practices at the 
farm scale will either increase or decrease the capacity of soils 
to absorb moisture, Figure 13 and Figure 14 below indicate 
seasonal root change moisture changes over time. The central 
areas of the Peninsula and Plains and Ranges are projected to 
have slightly higher average root zone soil moisture in Winter 
(Figure 13).
It should be noted that these maps represent the change in 
average seasonal root zone soil moisture between the 1976-
2005 reference period and the average conditions projected to 
occur across the future period from 2020 to 2039, centred on 
2030.  As this Plan is focussed on resilience to the phenomena 
experienced during drought years it very important to look at the 
projected changes in root zone soil moisture during the driest 
10 per cent of years, and not at the changes in the median or 
average conditions as shown in the maps above. As shown in the 
caption within the figures, the root zone soil moisture in the driest 
10% of years (10th percentile) is expected to decline by a further 
18% in Winter and 24% in Spring by 2030 across the south and 
west of Australia from that already experienced across the driest 
10% of years in the 1976-2005 reference period. 
These are broadscale changes that will affect the whole region 
as they are driven by increases in temperature, evaporation and 
evapotranspiration during the driest of years. 
Agronomic actions at the farm scale can assist in reducing soil 
temperatures and in doing so can reduce evaporation and 
increase the water holding capacity and storage capability 
of soils. The effects of decreased precipitation and increased 
evaporation at the farm scale can be influenced by management 
practices and actions, however, there is a limit to which these 
incremental adaptation initiatives can buffer the impact of both 
long-term and severe drought. 
WINTER
SPRING
Figure 13. Southern South Australia winter root 
zone moisture (%) changes from 1976 – 2005 
(Bureau of Meteorology, 2005).
Figure 14. Southern South Australia spring root 
zone moisture (%) changes from 1976 – 2005 
(Bureau of Meteorology, 2005).
THE ECONOMIC AND MENTAL HEALTH IMPACTS, PARTICULARLY 
RELATED TO THE SALE AND DESTRUCTION OF LIVESTOCK AS A 
RESULT OF DROUGHT AND FARM MANAGEMENT DECISIONS 
HAS IMPACTED FARMERS, FARM ADVISORS AND PARTICULAR 
SECTORS OF THE AGRICULTURAL SUPPLY CHAIN.

39
38
5.3 Key interrelated drought factors
Drought does not occur in isolation of other economic, social 
and environmental risk factors. For example, for many farmers in 
the region, the 2018 drought did not have as greater economic 
impact on farmers as previous droughts, due to improved adaptive 
capacity and learnings of previous experiences of drought, better 
risk and economic management practices, reduced spread of 
drought conditions and favourable macroeconomic conditions, 
and the Environment, 2018-2022) (Ashton, 2022) (Kellock, 
2022). Figure 17 showcases farmer stressors and sub-stressors 
resulting from drought. Stressors extend across economic, social 
and environmental sectors and inter-relate with one another, often 
creating a compounding effect on farmers health, well-being and 
the financial solvency of the business. In turn the environment (soils, 
water, vegetation) which supports farming can suffer. 
The stressors outlined in Figure 17 are not comprehensive and 
do not consider the far reaching impacts beyond the farm gate 
or the nuances of compounding chronic drought compared to 
acute drought. Additionally, it is known that the impacts of drought 
will be largely determined by socio-economic factors, individual 
circumstances and the preparedness of a farm enterprise to buffer 
the impacts of drought. Drought exacerbates existing economic, 
social and environmental stressors that were present prior to the 
onset of drought. 
It is important to capture the primary ways in which drought 
interrelates with other economic, social and environmental 
factors, these have been categorised as follows:
ECONOMIC FORCES
Key economic forces, such as prices for farm inputs and prices 
received for commodities produced on farm heavily influence 
decision making and the resilience capacity of farmers. For 
example, the current high prices for fertilisers are causing some 
farmers to reduce fertiliser use through reducing per hectare 
application rates. This has flow on impacts for the agricultural 
supply chain producing, distributing and on-selling fertilisers to 
farmers. A reduction in money received by farm enterprises, 
results in reduced local employment opportunities through the 
supply chain and a reduction of localised spending in supply 
2004). When profit margins are squeezed, the onset of drought 
compounds existing financial issues for farm enterprises and those 
in the agricultural supply chain. Furthermore, in times of drought, 
reduced agricultural outputs and yields can result in increased costs 
for consumers and the agricultural supply chain as accessing the 
same commodities from overseas and interstate markets is often 
(Ding, et al., 2010). 
Farmers also report difficulty in accessing off-farm income during 
times of drought, especially where the off-farm income source is 
directly derived from industries reliant on rainfall (Schmidt, 2022).
Figure 17. Key stressors, sub-stressors, contextual stressors and specific drought-related stressors adapted from (Fennell, et al., 2016)
SOCIAL FORCES
As previously described drought has varying well-being impacts 
on farmers and those living in drought affected communities. The 
impact varies depending on a range of factors. The impact of 
drought can exacerbate existing mental health issues, especially as 
a result of reduced farm income. Drought affects the well-being of 
an individual or collective community in different ways. It has been 
shown to affect certain groups of people more than others, i.e., 
younger farmers, farmers working in more remote areas etc (Alston, 
M. & Kent, J., 2004). Furthermore, drought can increase family 
stress affecting children. Educational outcomes are reduced for 
some children who are affected by drought (Alston & Kent, 2006). 
Rental stress within the region is the highest in South Australia 
(38%) (Infrastructure Australia, 2022). Access to housing is limited 
through many towns in the region and this appears to be a major 
barrier in attracting and retaining inter-regional workers. The onset 
of drought may allow for an increase in availability of housing if 
the area experiences depopulation. 
The region is heavily reliant on volunteerism. This is evident through 
the use of volunteers for ambulance, fire fighting and agricultural 
research and development operations. 
The region has an aging population. This creates demand for 
aged care facilities and services. 
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
Ecosystem services required to support agricultural production, 
such as healthy and productive soils, pollination and water suitable 
for animal watering are under threat. Threats from land clearance, 
pests, disease and habitat loss have been exacerbated by climate 
change and will continue to be increasingly impacted by climate 
change and in particular drought. 
Farmer behaviour can change during drought as a result of 
increased financial and social stress. This has flow-on effects for 
the ability of land to bounce back from drought when drought 
ceases. Evidence suggests that maintaining natural capital (plants, 
soils, fungi, beneficial bacteria, animal and plant relationships etc) 
allows farms to recover quicker post drought (Price Waterhouse 
Cooper, 2020). Farmers who are already financially stressed 
pre-drought may degrade land and reduce the productivity of 
land for short term gains and the need to stay financially solvent. 
When rains return, the productivity losses can take many years to 
recover and this can further exacerbate financial issues, ultimately 
producing a less productive and profitable farm. 
CURRENT DROUGHT RESILIENCE MEASURES
Categorised below are the primary themes related to drought 
resilience in the region. It is evident that those who have 
experienced the effects of drought are better prepared and 
have already demonstrated adaptive capacity. However, the 
overwhelming majority of change has been across the planned 
transitional and incremental change categories, with little evidence 
that farming systems are prepared for the projected future impact 
of drought or the identification of the parts of the system that 
require transformational change. 
This appears to be common, not just amongst farming groups 
located in the Northern and Yorke region but from across the 
state (South Australian Drought and Innovation Adoption Hub, 
2021). The stakeholder engagement process conducted by the SA 
Drought Hub demonstrates that stakeholders are willing to engage 
in a process to identify gaps in current resilience frameworks 
that will assist with planned and incremental change. Ideas from 
the SA Drought Hub stakeholder engagement were categorised 
across ten themes related to water security, knowledge, education 
and communication, agronomy, natural resources management, 
community well-being and business management.
Whilst the themes and ideas expressed through the SA Drought 
Hub engagement process are beneficial, there is a need to 
upskill and collaborate with the community to identify and plan for 
transformational change, where it is required. 
The primary drought resilience themes emerging from stakeholder 
interviews are as follows:
• Many parts of the community have already demonstrated 
adaptive capacity and resilience and have thus far, successfully 
managed the effects of drought. This has been demonstrated by 
changes to:
 > Drought and business planning and management.
 > Utilising experience and knowledge of weather and 
environmental conditions to guide decision making, even at the 
expense of the business, including loss of revenue. 
 > Sourcing of mental health professionals at agricultural 
organisation events, such as crop walks, information days etc. 
 > Sharing of stories of difficulties with mental health from both 
local community members and from those from outside the 
community. 
 > The establishment of local community groups to support farmer 
health and wellbeing.
 > The establishment of community groups to connect locals and 
act as a means of social connectivity and stress relief. 
 > Building advocacy strength through regional organisations.
 > Accessing education services, both formal and informal to 
build knowledge and skills across business management, 
agronomy and land management.
• It is predominantly livestock and mixed farming operations in 
areas that are exposed to and have experienced drought and 
dry conditions that have already demonstrated considerable 
adaptive capacity. These businesses are already demonstrating 
resilience on an individual and business scale and through 
practices, such as:
 > Diversification of on-farm income streams, in particular 
adopting rainfall independent income streams.
 > Diversification of off-farm income streams.
 > Forward and proactive business planning, including 
succession planning.
 > Understanding trigger points related to the climate, weather and 
environment and the need to adapt the approach to farming, 
based on environmental conditions. 
 > The ability to act quickly and to alter agronomy decisions, 
based on real time information and experience. 
 > The use of both off-farm and on-farm advisory services, i.e., 
including staff and consultants in decision making.
 > Taking responsibility for the health and well-being of themselves 
and others in the community.
• Agricultural groups provide an essential service to the 
community, not only through the selection and dissemination of 
pivotal information related to farm management and agronomy, 
but also through bringing people together. This role aids in 
developing resilience across the community. 
• The depopulation of regional centres and towns poses a significant 
risk to community resilience. A reduction in population leads to the 
loss of services and threatens the availability of a locally skilled 
workforce which is a risk to the viability health and social sectors. 
The towns that are thriving, tend to be well supported by agriculture 
and other industries, such as the wind farm operations surrounding 
Jamestown, or the tourism supporting the towns of the Clare and 
Gilbert Valleys. Resilience within a local town or regional centre 
requires the town to have a diversified economy, and workforce not 
solely reliant on agriculture. 
PRICES HAVE BEEN SKY HIGH (MORE RECENTLY) 
IN DRY YEARS... I’M NOT SURE WHAT HAPPENS 
WHEN DROUGHT & LOW PRICES COMBINE.

41
40
• Access to suitable quality water at a suitable price point is 
essential for viticulture and horticulture in the region. This is 
the primary issue for the Barossa Valley, Eden Valley and Clare 
Valley wine regions. However, it is not just the vignerons and 
wine businesses that require a suitable water quality product at 
a suitable price point, livestock farmers are also in need to a 
suitable water product. 
• Access to reliable phone and internet services is essential for 
farmers and agricultural supply chains.  
STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Assessing the state of the environment is complex, due to the 
constant state of flux and the interrelated and multiple threats to 
the environment. Furthermore, environmental monitoring is 
inconsistent and the resources are not available to regularly 
conduct monitoring of large scale areas. As such, information 
related to the state of the environment within the Northern and 
Yorke region as an entire region is dated or only available for 
pockets of the region. Ecological surveys, including bushland 
condition monitoring, flora and fauna surveys are conducted on 
a semi-regular basis, however the extent of such surveys are not 
necessarily representative of the broader sub-region or region. 
The major threats to ecosystems, conservation of threatened 
species and biodiversity in the Northern and Yorke region are 
similar to other parts of Australia and include the following 
(Landscapes SA - Northern and Yorke , 2022) 
(Jackson, et al., 2017):
> Habitat fragmentation.
> Clearance of native vegetation through land use change.
> Overuse of limited resources.
> Competition between native and invasive species for 
limited resources.
> Predatory invasive species.
> Soil acidification
> Inappropriate fire regimes
> Climate change
WATER
Due to the limited supply of surface and potable groundwater, 
the region is mostly reliant on water sources imported from outside 
of the region, including water sourced from the River Murray, 
Adelaide Hills reservoirs and the Lonsdale based desalination 
plant. Approximately 75% of the water taken from the River 
Murray is used for primary production, and major pipelines 
supply metropolitan Adelaide and regional communities (SA 
Environmental Protection Authority, 2018).
Climate change will increase the demand for irrigation, as 
rainfall declines and evaporation increases across the region. 
This will increase the pressure on the River Murray. Part of 
the Murray Darling Basin Plan is the need for a long-term 
annual average surface water volume of 2,750 GL to be 
recovered from consumptive uses to meet the agreed basin-wide 
sustainable diversion limit of 10,873 GL (SA Environmental 
Protection Authority, 2018). A further 450 GL of water is to be 
delivered through investment in on farm efficiency measures (SA 
Environmental Protection Authority, 2018). It can be seen that 
without an alternative source of water, the Northern and Yorke 
region and other South Australian regions are exposed to reduced 
access of suitable water through the Murray Darling River system. 
Investment in recycled water reuse and alternative water schemes 
is common and widespread through certain council areas, such 
as Barossa Council (McCarthy, 2022). In these areas, both 
stormwater and wastewater are captured, recycled and utilised 
for agricultural production and irrigation of greenspace. Despite 
the success of schemes, such as Barossa Infrastructure Limited, 
the Bunyip Scheme (formerly the Gawler Water Reuse Scheme) 
and the Northern Adelaide Irrigation Scheme (NAIS), population 
growth, climate change and rising demand for water places 
pressure on these systems (Infrastructure Australia, 2022). 
Recycled water use is not contained to the Barossa, with many 
other council areas reusing wastewater for irrigation purposes. 
Further opportunities exist and will be required to make better 
use of stormwater and wastewater in a drying climate. 
Little cost benefit analyses has been conducted to quantify and 
better understand the highest and best use of recycled water. 
The capture of non-market benefits of localised greening, such 
as health, urban cooling, amenity of spaces, aesthetics, carbon 
capture and storage, water filtration and oxygen production 
would assist councils to make decisions related to water reuse 
for agriculture compared to urban greening. 
TOWNS AND REGIONAL CENTRES
Small towns are scattered throughout the region, with many 
towns facing similar key social issues related to:
> Poor access to housing
> Poor access to aged care facilities
> An inequitable distribution of health care facilities often 
accompanied with limited availability.
> Poor employment prospects through many regions.
> Increasing land prices
> Below average household incomes 
(when compared to the state average).
Regional centres (larger towns) are important health care, 
education, community services and business hubs. 
The Regional centres provide many of the goods and 
services now no longer available in smaller towns. 
6	 HISTORY OF DROUGHT 
IN THE REGION.
DAMS AREN’T FILLING…
ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS 
AREN’T GETTING OVERFLOW…
GROUNDWATER QUALITY 
IS DIMINISHING…THE 
WHOLE KIT & CABOODLE.
COMMUNITIES 
ARE SHRINKING, SOME 
TOWNS CAN’T FIELD 
A FOOTY TEAM.
Drought is generally defined as the persistent 
deficiency of water for a prolonged period 
compared to the climatological mean over 
a region (Rashid & Beecham 2019). 
This definition is then further specified to elements of the 
hydrological cycle and the socio-economic measures of drought 
which are to be measured and monitored for drought stress, 
namely: 	
1. Meteorological drought, as measured by rainfall deficiency
2. Agricultural drought, as measured by soil moisture deficiency
3. Hydrological drought, as measured by surface and 
groundwater deficiency
4. Socio-economic drought, as measured by people’s perception 
of whether they were currently or had been in drought in recent 
periods, determined by experience and observations.
Severe droughts are an expression of one of the extreme phases of 
natural climate variability across the Australian continent. 
These events are primarily the result of complex interactions 
between different oscillations of oceanic sea surface temperatures 
and atmospheric pressures across the vast oceans surrounding the 
continent. The key drivers of severe and prolonged drought are the 
El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) 
and the Southern Annular Mode (SAM). These oscillating climate 
drivers regularly act in unison, usually around twice every decade, 
to compund their effects on the Australian climate and produce 
prolonged periods of widespread very wet or very dry conditions. 
A combined La Niña and Negative IOD event will likely result in 
heavy rainfall and cooler than average conditions across large 
parts of the continent, particularly the north and east. Historically, 
these wet phases have contributed to decisions involving and 
agricultural expansion into more drought prone areas across much 
of Eastern Australia. In opposite states, a combined El Niño and 
Positive IOD event will likely result in extended periods of drier and 
hotter than average conditions, leading to widespread drought 
and heatwaves 
(Table 9). Multi-year prolonged drought events continue to test the 
adaptive capacities of even the most resilient agricultural, social, 
environmental, and economic systems.
Table 9. Historical severe multi-year meteorological droughts impacting the Northern and Yorke region 
(Sources: ABS 1988, 1301.0 – Yearbook Australia & BoM)
Figure 18. The position of Goyder’s Line relative to the 0.26 
P:E ratio isopleth and the 220mm growing season isohyet 
(Source: GRDC 2016)
HISTORICAL SEVERE MULTI-YEAR DROUGHT EVENTS
1863 to 1866
1965 to 1968
1880 to 1888
1982 to 1983
1895 to 1902 (Federation Drought)
2002 to 2009 (Millennium Drought)
*1914 to 1915 (World War 1 Drought)
Includes most severe 12-month meteorological drought on 
record in the region
*2018 to 2019
The most severe 24-month meteorological drought on record 
in the region
1937 to 1945 (The World War II Drought)
The history of European settlement of South Australia is an example 
of optimistic bias resulting in waves of agricultural expansion 
into drier regions during temporary high rainfall phases. The 
colony was established in 1836 and rapidly expanded inland in 
response to a series of unusually wet growing seasons. Major land 
degradation and socioeconomic disruption subsequently impacted 
the region following a reversion to significantly lower rainfall 
patterns (Nidumolu et al. 2012). After the severe drought of 1863 
to 1866, the then Surveyor-General of South Australia George 
Goyder established a line which demarcated the areas of reliable 
rainfall which were able to support mixed agriculture, to the south, 
from the areas of erratic and unreliable rainfall to the north. The 
now famous line was used to determine where mixed cropping 
and grazing systems should transition to more drought resilient 
pastoral grazing.
The history of the Northern and Yorke region is likewise one of 
continued agricultural expansion during wet climatic phases into 
the more drought prone areas to the north of Goyder’s Line. In 
recent years no-till farming practices have resulted in reliable 
cropping, even in difficult seasons, extending as far as 100 
kilometres north of the line (GRDC 2016). The extension of grain 
growing to regions considerably north of Goyder’s line has 
increased community exposure to drought risk in areas with more 
erratic and unreliable growing season rainfall (Figure 18).

43
42
Through the 20th century many studies sought to redefine the limit 
of ‘safe’ cropping districts in South Australia using both rainfall 
and evaporation records. Multiple studies found a precipitation to 
evapotranspiration (P:E) ratio of 0.26 for April to October rainfall 
to be the ‘safe’ limit for cropping zones across the southern areas 
of the country (French, 1988). Nidumolu et al. 2012 found that 
it represented the boundary of not only the South Australian grain 
belt but also much of the Australian grain belt. Despite significant 
differences in soil type, summer rainfall, cereal varietal research 
and levels of drought support available, the close relationship 
between the 0.26 P:E isopleth and the margin of the grain belt 
indicates that the boundary is primarily determined by climate 
(Figure 18). The 0.26 P:E ratio therefore represents a climatic 
‘hard edge’ for the Australian grain belt (Nidumolu 2012). 
Observed decadal decreases in growing season rainfall combined 
with increases in temperature and evapotranspiration across the 
region have increased chronic drought stress and have pushed this 
‘hard edge’ for traditional mixed agriculture systems to the south 
and towards the coast. 
Chronic drought stress, particularly in the Upper North and East 
sub-regional zone now combines with the acute impacts of severe 
droughts, especially prolonged multi-year events which tests the 
resilience of the communities of the region (Table 10). Interventions 
which hydrate the landscape by retaining rainfall while reducing 
temperatures and evaporative losses will assist in addressing the 
migration of the chronic drought stress zone south and towards 
the coast. 
Recent studies indicate that across the south of South Australia 
long-term (prolonged) droughts tend to be more intensified than 
short-term droughts over the historical period. Droughts have 
intensified over the winter rainfall dominant region of SA, where 
most of the population resides, therefore posing a threat to society 
and the environment (Rashid & Beecham 2019). Additionally, 
a significantly negative trend in the 24-month Standardised 
Precipitation Index (SPI) series indicates a strengthening of 
long duration droughts over the period 1960–2010 (Rashid & 
Beecham 2019). The most recent 24-month drought, 2018-2019, 
was the hottest and most severe meteorological drought on record 
across the Northern and Yorke Region. 
Table 10. Total number and average frequency of drought events based on the Standardized 
Precipitation Index (SPI) at time scales of 3, 6, 12 and 24 months between 1960 and 2010 
across the Northern and Yorke Region (Source: Rashid & Beecham 2019)
DROUGHT DURATION (MONTHS)
NUMBER OF DROUGHT EVENTS 
50-YEAR PERIOD 1960-2010
AVERAGE RECURRENCE INTERVAL 
BETWEEN DROUGHT EVENTS 
(IN YEARS) 1960-2010
3
34 to 40
1.3 to 1.5
6
23 to 26
1.9 to 2.2
12
12 to 17
2.9 to 4.2
24
6 to 13
3.8 to 8.3
7	 FUTURE OUTLOOK FOR 
DROUGHT IN THE REGION.
Globally, greenhouse gas emissions intensified 
drought risk over the second half of the 20th 
Century (Dai, 2013). Global climate models 
project a continued increase in drought frequency 
and intensity across many parts of the world, 
including southern Australia, during the 21st 
century (Touma et al., 2015). 
Greenhouse gas emissions produce changes in atmospheric 
circulation patterns, and this manifests in the poleward expansion 
of the subtropical ridge of high pressure resulting in the poleward 
expansion of subtropical dry regions (Chiang et al. 2021). The 
southward shift of the subtropical desert climate has increased 
the aridity of the climate of southern Australia.
The ‘Guide to climate projections for risk assessment and planning’ 
published by the South Australian Department of Environment and 
Water in November 2020 stated critically for the Northern and 
Yorke Region, the frequency of drought is set to rapidly increase 
to 2 in every 3 years by 2030. The time spent in drought is 
projected to increase to 65% across the region (DEW 2020). 
This is outside of the range of observed natural variability and 
will represent the emergence of a new more arid climatic regime 
across the area through the 21st Century.
This has and will continue to influence the viability of some 
agricultural systems in the region. 
Table 11 and Table 12 describe weather and climatic related 
conditions, the potential impacts of the climate conditions and 
projected climate for the Northern and Yorke region under a 
high greenhouse gas emissions (RCP8.5) scenario (Bureau of 
Meteorology and CSIRO, 2018). It is important to recognise that 
including a projected increase in the severity and frequency of 
droughts, there are other climatic factors that are likely to influence 
soil moisture availability, such as an overall drying trend across 
southern mainland Australia and an increase in summer rainfall 
including a change to rainfall intensity (Hope, 2015). 
Drought is likely to increase the prevalence and severity of 
bushfire, especially when combined with heatwave conditions. 
A reduction in both average spring and autumnal rainfall 
combined with increased evaporation rates will result in the 
drying of vegetation earlier in the season and the increasing 
likelihood of an extension of the fire “season” beyond the 
traditional November to April period (Hope, 2015). 
Dust storms are not a climatic event, rather they are the 
combination of weather, climate and environmental conditions, 
often exacerbated by human induced changes and management 
approaches, such as tilling fields, excessive soil disturbance, 
and over grazing of livestock. The exposure of soils to water and 
especially wind erosion may increase as a result of increasingly 
challenging growing conditions for non-arid plant species 
associated with drought. Prolonged exposure to dust storms can 
lead to chronic respiratory and possibly heart problems (NSW 
Health, 2022). 
The loss of farming topsoils as a result of exposure to wind is seen 
to cause a ripple effect whereby, soils continue to erode over 
time. This results in a reduction in the ability of soils to capture and 
store moisture, in turn, reducing yields and increasing input costs 
as farmers seek to compensate for loss of soil productivity through 
increasing fertiliser use (Department of Environment, Water and 
Natural Resources, 2013). 
DROUGHTS HAVE INTENSIFIED OVER 
THE WINTER RAINFALL DOMINANT 
REGION OF SA, WHERE MOST OF THE 
POPULATION RESIDES, THEREFORE 
POSING A THREAT TO SOCIETY AND 
THE ENVIRONMENT.

45
44
7.1.1	Drought and anthropogenic climate change
7.1.2	Flash Drought
The four key natural drivers of drought cycles 
in Australia described in 2.1.1 are now joined 
by an additional critical global climate driver, 
anthropogenic climate change. 
Rainfall in southwest and southeast Australia has been declining in 
recent decades and is projected to likely decline further, especially 
during the growing season (April to October). The observed 20-
year running average annual rainfall has been tracking the dry 
end of the projections (even though year-to-year values may fall 
outside the range), showing that the observed trends are consistent 
with these projected changes in rainfall. Importantly there is 
no evidence that the climate projections are overestimating the 
ongoing drying trend to date (BoM & CSIRO, 2020). In addition 
to the observed rainfall declines there have been increases in 
evaporative demand which has increased drought frequency, 
duration and intensity across Southern Australia as measured by 
the standardised precipitation-evapotranspiration index, the SPEI 
(Chiang et al. 2021).
As Table 1 shows, the historical average recurrence interval of 
12-month duration drought in the region was approximately once 
in every 3 to 4 years during the period 1960 to 2010 (Rashid & 
Beecham 2019). The potential time spent in drought is projected 
to increase to 65% across the region (DEW 2020). This is outside 
of the range of observed natural variability and will represent 
the emergence of a new more arid climatic regime across the 
area through the 21st Century.
Enhanced warming caused by greenhouse gas emissions now 
acts to amplify the effects of the interactions between the natural 
climate drivers and, importantly, also acts on the prevalence and 
intensity of the key natural climate drivers themselves. 
The amplitude and frequency of strong El Niño events is projected 
to increase under greenhouse warming. Likewise, the frequency 
of extreme positive IOD events is also projected to increase under 
more prevalent greenhouse effects, leading to more occurrences 
of severe drought, heatwaves and bushfire over Australia (NESP, 
2019). Concerningly, it has been determined that the increased 
risk of extreme El Niño events continues for up to a century after 
global mean temperature stabilises. In contrast, the frequency of 
extreme positive IOD events stabilises with stabilised global mean 
temperature (NESP, 2019). This means the increased frequency 
of extreme El Niño events is set to impact eastern and northern 
Australia for many decades even if global greenhouse gas 
emissions are stabilised. However, limiting global temperature 
increases would have an immediate impact on halting the 
increasing frequency of extreme positive IOD events (NESP, 
2019).
In a warming world, when these natural climate drivers are active, 
particularly if in unison, the impacts are now further amplified. 
Higher sea surface temperatures surrounding the continent results 
in greater moisture availability and higher rainfall intensities 
during the flood phases. Higher land temperatures result in higher 
evapotranspiration and additional heat and water stress during 
drought phases. 
Net water availability will continue to decline as evaporative 
demand increases, consequentially increasing the likelihood of 
meteorological droughts from a supply and demand perspective 
(Chiang et al. 2021). 
Global warming is leading to higher temperatures 
and lower rainfall across the Northern and Yorke 
region, particularly in spring during strong El 
Niño and positive IOD events. 
During such periods drought conditions can emerge very rapidly 
in the form of ‘flash droughts’. The term ‘flash drought’ is used to 
describe the sudden onset of drought conditions across a region 
formerly experiencing relatively benign conditions. Droughts 
only occur when there is insufficient rainfall, but flash droughts 
intensify rapidly over timescales of weeks to months because of 
other factors such as the sudden onset of high temperatures, low 
humidity, strong winds and clear skies. These conditions increase 
the evaporative demand. This means more water evaporates 
from the surface and transpires from plants, rapidly depleting soil 
moisture. Under these conditions, evaporation and transpiration 
increase for as long as moisture is available at the surface. When 
this moisture is depleted and there is no rain to replenish it, the 
lack of water the limits evaporation and transpiration from the 
plants and the soil surface.Crop and vegetation stress spreads 
quickly as the ‘flash drought’ suddenly emerges (Parker & Gallant, 
2021). Flash droughts have no restriction on their duration but 
the term is most often used to solely describe the rapid onset and 
intensification phase rather than the ongoing persistence of dry 
conditions once established (Nguyen, 2019).
As anthropogenic climate change increases spring temperatures 
and decreases spring rainfall it acts to amplify the likelihood 
of flash droughts across the Northern and Yorke region. The 
likelihood and severity of flash droughts in the region are also 
set to rise due to the influence of anthropogenic climate change 
on increasing the frequency of extreme El Niño and positive IOD 
events, two key natural drivers of spring drought and heatwave 
conditions across South Australia.  
The rapid intensification of flash droughts usually results in 
impacts arising too quickly to deploy traditional drought-coping 
mechanisms for agricultural systems. Selling stock, obtaining 
hay, securing water supplies or deciding to reduce the areas 
sowed for cropping all require significant lead times for cost 
effective deployment. 
Flash droughts therefore present critical challenges to the successful 
management and adaptation of agricultural enterprise and water 
resources to a rapidly drying and warming climate. 
Table 11. A description of the potential impacts of drought
HAZARD 
DESCRIPTION AND POTENTIAL IMPACTS
Heatwaves
Heatwaves are defined as three or more consecutive days of hot weather (greater than 35ºC) and 
are of key concern due to their potential impacts upon human and farm animal health, built infrastructure 
and building occupant comfort. Increased electricity demand for cooling is a key risk to grid reliability 
while also (likely) impacting energy costs.
Droughts
Droughts are defined as prolonged periods that are abnormally dry when available water is not 
sufficient to meet the needs of society (BOM 2017). An adequate water supply is crucial for many 
processes within property construction and operation, and chronically low regional water supplies 
can increase water costs and drive the introduction of water use restrictions.
Floods
Floods occur during periods of increased rainfall and/or storm surge and can lead to significant 
damage to property. Floods can result in complex economic and environmental impacts upon the built 
environment and are thus a key consideration for this assessment. 
Storms
Storms are periods of severe weather, resulting in any combination of increased rainfall, high winds, 
lightning, and ocean storm surges. Storms are of concern for the built environment due to structural 
and access-related impacts, as well as indirect impacts associated with disruption to the power supply. 
Hailstorms
Hailstorms refer to storms that produce hailstones with a diameter larger than 0.5 mm. Hail can 
cause serious damage to the built environment, including building façades, windows, and roofing. 
Extreme cases can lead to potential roof collapse. 
Bushfires
Bushfires pose significant fire risk to property near to bushland areas. Indirect impacts include smoke and 
particulate matter release into the atmosphere, which can have significant environmental health implications in 
buildings through fresh air intakes. Direct bushfire risks are relevant to property assets located close to bushfire 
prone areas. 
Dust storms
Dust storms are prevalent throughout arid and semi-arid regions and can cause adverse health implications, 
electricity and infrastructure disruptions and economic implications. Dust storms are highly correlated with 
drought frequency and intensity. 
Table 11. A description of the potential impacts of drought
EVENT
TENDENCY
CONFIDENCE
Temperature and heatwaves
Average temperature will 
increase as well as number 
of hot days and heat waves
Very high confidence
Mean maximum and 
minimum temperatures
Continued substantial 
increases in maximum and 
minimum temperatures
Very high confidence
Extreme rainfall
Increase in the intensity 
of extreme rainfall 
High confidence
Winter rainfall
Decreasing winter rainfall
High confidence
Spring rainfall
Decreasing spring rainfall
High confidence
Drought
Time spent in drought will 
increase
Very high confidence
Bushfire
A harsher fire weather 
regime is projected
High confidence
HIGHER SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURES 
SURROUNDING THE CONTINENT RESULTS 
IN GREATER MOISTURE AVAILABILITY AND 
HIGHER RAINFALL INTENSITIES DURING 
THE FLOOD PHASES.

47
46
7.1.3	The impact of climate change on the margin of the grain belt in South Australia
7.1.4	The impact of drought on communities and supply chains
While current cropping systems have supported 
cropping north of Goyder’s line, climate change 
could return the cropping margin back to this 
historic boundary (GRDC 2016). 
Temperatures, evapotranspiration and aridity are all projected to 
significantly increase across the region by 2030 and continue 
to increase throughout the 21st Century (DEW 2020). Growing 
season precipitation is projected to decline while evaporative 
demand increases. This will lead to significant changes in the 
critical precipitation:evaporation (P:E) ratio which, as discussed in 
2.1.3, has been found to represent the margin of the grain belt 
across Australia. Nidumolu et al. 2012 found that the warming 
and drying trend will likely shift the 0.26 P:E isopleth and hence 
the margin of the grain belt towards the coast. The study found that 
if the drying projection of CSIRO’s Mk3.5 model eventuates, by 
2050 the margin of cropping on Eyre Peninsula and parts of the 
Murray Mallee will be about 50 to 100km further south than the 
long-term mean P:E ratio boundary. In most parts of SA that would 
take the margin back much closer to Goyder’s Line (Figure 19). 
As this study was conducted in 2012, using the now supplanted 
older CMIP3 models, it is recommended that the findings be 
revised using the latest CMIP6 models. An assessment using the 
CMIP6 model output may present a significant change in the 
projected position of the 0.26 P:E ratio isopleth and therefore the 
margin of the reliable cropping zone across the Northern and 
Yorke region. 
Areas in the Upper North and Eastern zone (coastal and eastern 
basin) have strong gradients of topography, climate, soils and 
vegetation, crop production and hence land values. In these 
sites, there will likely be smaller changes in the location of the P:E 
isopleth. However, as can be seen in the transect of the current 
P:E in Figure 19, most of the grain belt on the Eyre Peninsula and 
the Murray Mallee is on an extensive plain with widely spaced 
isopleths of P:E. When climate change is measured in a southerly 
shift (km per decade) of the 0.26 P:E ratio isopleth, the fastest 
rate of change will be across these relatively flat plains of the 
region. This rate of change may be a challenge for individual farm 
enterprises, communities and governments (Nidumolu et al. 2012).
A warming and drying climate will not have uniform effects across 
the region. Natural variability in rainfall and the ability of soils to 
absorb and store moisture will allow some farmers greater natural 
resilience to drought more than others. As such, some farms and 
districts will be more vulnerable to the impacts of drought. The 
International Panel on Climate Change describe vulnerability as: 
“The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to 
cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate 
variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character, 
magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is 
exposed, its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity.” 
(McCarthy, et al., 2001).
The Mid-North sub-regional zone is considered the most vulnerable 
to the impacts of drought. Despite the Upper North and Eastern 
sub-regional zone being considered a higher risk of drought, the 
farmers in this zone have experienced drought conditions on a 
semi regular basis and have already created incremental and 
some planned transitional actions to buffer the impacts of drought. 
The farmers through the Mid-North zone, particularly those 
close to Goyder’s line are more exposed to increased drought 
conditions and have comparably reduced experience of drought 
and as a result of this are less prepared to respond to drought 
conditions. This is also true of the Plains and Ranges and Peninsula 
sub-regional zones, however, farmers through these zones are 
projected to have more time to plan and prepare for long-term 
reduced rainfall conditions. 
Low rainfall farming communities understand the risk profile of 
farming in a low-rainfall district, with most maintain that they 
can cope with the early stages of a warming and drying trend 
with current and future technologies (Doudle et al. 2009). 
The surprising but concerning finding from the Nidumolu et al. 
2012 study is that so many low rainfall farming communities 
around Australia are on a similar climatic edge. They conclude 
the study by stating “This does not mean that there is no future for 
low rainfall farming regions, but it does mean that there are no 
obvious Australian grain farming regions that low rainfall farmers 
in South Australia can visit to get an idea of how their farming 
future may look”. 
In fact, climate analogues provide a means of understanding the 
locations across Australia which currently experience climates 
similar to those projected for the future climate of the Northern 
and Yorke region. 
Whilst the Nidoumolu et al. 2012 study tends to focus on 
cropping districts, the findings of the study can be applied to 
other agricultural industries that are either wholly or partly reliant 
on rainfall for the viability of a commodity. Increasingly, livestock 
grazing in the region has moved towards containment feeding 
regimes, particularly through early season and late season periods. 
This is an example of an adaptive change that has occurred, 
whereby livestock farming can continue without the need for large 
swathes of land. However, the economic sustainability of this 
practice may be questioned if and when prices for feed increase 
and prices for livestock reduce, resulting in a reduced or negative 
return on investment. As such, further resilience measures are likely 
to be required. 
Viticultural practices and horticultural practices tend to be reliant 
on water sources that are declining in either quality or quantity 
(often both), including mains supply water. The increasing 
demand for irrigation, resulting from reduced average annual 
rainfall and increased evaporation will place further demands 
on these resources.
Figure 19. Precipitation:evaporation (P:E) ratio of 0.26, generated for 2030 and 2050 using CSIRO Mk3.5 and CC 
MIROH-H climate models. Transect values = P:E ratios of current climate along Goyder’s Line in South Australia 
(Source: Nidumolu et al. 2012).
The socio-economic impacts of drought examine 
both the economic and associated social impacts 
of drought to farmers, those working in agricultural 
supply chains and the broader community. 
Drought is one of multiple stressors that farmers encounter. 
The socio-economic impact of drought is complex, with drought 
interacting with:
• Economic forces (input and output prices)
• Farm resilience factors (soil type, management decisions, 
location, size etc)
• Individual resilience characteristics of the farmer and farmer 
support network (family, advisors, farm boards, community etc). 
As such, the financial performance of an individual farm whilst 
influenced by drought is not necessarily wholly determined by the 
availability of soil moisture resulting from rainfall. In fact, the ability 
of a farming business to source income from rainfall independent 
sources is a key risk management tool that can increase resilience 
to drought (Grainger, et al., 2021). As discussed further in the 
NYRDRP, resilience to drought can and does assist farmers to 
buffer the impacts of drought and improve processes and practices 
that do not support drought resilience. 
The impact of drought on communities has been studied within 
Australia and other jurisdictions and the findings of these studies 
can be applied to Northern and Yorke region to project the 
expected socio-economic impacts of drought (Edwards, et al., 
2018). The socio-economic impacts of drought vary depending on 
the severity, duration and frequency of drought and the capacity of 
the individual, business and community to respond to, prepare for 
and improve processes and systems as a result of drought. 
The far-reaching and wide-ranging social and economic impacts 
of drought are difficult to capture due to the indirect economic 
costs across various sectors of the supply chain and the ongoing 
social and economic costs of drought that extend beyond the in-
drought period (Ding, et al., 2010). 
Socio-economic impacts of drought are often grouped into the 
following categories:
• Financial well-being – Drought reduces farm household income, both 
whilst in drought and post-drought in the recovery phase. A 2018 
study estimated that drought reduced farmer’s equivalent income by 
$20,483 per year compared to farmers who had not experienced 
drought in the past three years (Edwards, et al., 2018). 
There are further indirect economic losses, such as a reduction in 
available money for spending through agricultural supply chains 
and local businesses and other indirect costs associated with 
drought such as loss of topsoil, a reduction in soil structure and 
quality, loss of vegetation and closure of local services.
drought in the 2002/03 financial year period found that drought 
reduced farm GDP by 24.3 percent, rural exports reduced 
by 26.6 percent and agricultural income fell by 46.2 percent 
only representing 3 percent of Australia’s GDP in 2002/03, the 
drought reduced Australia’s GDP by 1% over this period (Australian 
Government - The Treasury, 2004). This highlights the indirect 
economic impacts that extend beyond agricultural communities. 
• Mental and physical health - Drought has been shown to 
contribute to mental distress, suicide and creating vulnerabilities 
for maintaining good health (Luong, et al., 2021). In general, 
farmers experience significant stress related to drought, 
themselves, their families and their communities. However, the 
impact of drought on mental and physical health differs from 
individual to individual, with many people in drought-affected 
communities displaying mental adjustment to drought over time 
(Luong, et al., 2021). Studies demonstrate a range of mental 
and physical health outcomes for those affected by drought 
(Luong, et al., 2021). One study found that stress and mental 
health outcomes are most pronounced in the first 2.5 to 3 years 
of drought (Luong, et al., 2021). 
THE DEGREE TO WHICH A SYSTEM IS SUSCEPTIBLE TO, OR UNABLE 
TO COPE WITH, ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE, INCLUDING CLIMATE 
VARIABILITY AND EXTREMES. VULNERABILITY IS A FUNCTION OF THE 
CHARACTER, MAGNITUDE, AND RATE OF CLIMATE VARIATION TO WHICH 
A SYSTEM IS EXPOSED, ITS SENSITIVITY, AND ITS ADAPTIVE CAPACITY.
MCCARTHY, ET AL., 2001

49
48
Austin et al (2018) found that personal drought related stress was 
experienced more by those farmers who were under 35 and both 
lived and worked on a farm, were located in remote locations and 
experiencing financial hardship (Austin, et al., 2018). 
Drought has been shown to increase the percentage of farmers 
employed in off-farm work and therefore increasing the work hours 
to both manage their farm and access off-farm income (Edwards, 
et al., 2018). The health impacts of this were not assessed. 
The impact of drought on health, extends beyond the associated 
stress related to economic factors (Stanke, et al., 2013). Drought 
reduces both the quality and quantity of available surface water, 
resulting in shortages of water suitable for stock watering. Drought 
can also increase the range and extent of diseases and impacts 
air quality through the loss of cover vegetation and the associated 
blowing of topsoil by winds. A reduction in air quality creates and 
exacerbates respiratory health issues (Stanke, et al., 2013). 
• Employment – The impact of the 2002/03 drought is estimated 
to have directly reduced agricultural employment by 100,000 
et al (2018) discovered that employment rates in drought 
affected areas were on average 2% lower than in above-
average rainfall areas (Edwards, et al., 2018).
• Access to health services – Those living and working in remote 
locations do not have the same access to health care services, 
as those living in urban environment and rural centres. Despite 
multiple online and telehealth services available to those located 
in both rural and urban environments, those in remote locations, 
such as many parts of the Northern and Yorke region have 
reduced access to both internet and phone reception, resulting 
in reduced access to health and other online services. 
Access to education – In some circumstances, drought has been 
shown to reduce educational outcomes (Alston & Kent, 2006). 
In particular, the closure of schools and the impact on those 
(particularly mothers) who are required to travel great distances to 
drop off and pick up children from school. Furthermore, mothers in 
remote areas have significant pressure placed on them to perform 
educational roles as well as work on and off farm (Alston & Kent, 
2006). 
The Analogues Explorer on the Climate Change in Australia 
website provides an easy to use tool to visualise which parts of 
Australia have a current climate that is representative of the likely 
future climate of the Northern and Yorke Region across the 2030, 
2050 and 2090 time horizons. The tool enables the user to 
explore the climate analogues under a range of future emissions 
scenarios. The scenarios available are among those used in the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment 
Report (2013). 
These are referred to as RCPs 
(Representative Concentration Pathways):
1. RCP 2.6 (Low emissions trajectory, peaking around 2020)
2. RCP 4.5 (Intermediate emissions trajectory, peaking around 2040)
3. RCP 8.5 (High emissions trajectory, a future with little curbing 
of emissions, with a CO2 concentration continuing to rapidly rise, 
reaching 940 ppm by 2100)
The analogues tool looks up the current average maximum 
temperature and rainfall for the selected seasons. The projected 
changes in maximum temperature and rainfall from the climate 
models are then applied to the historic values. The tool then 
searches the database of current climates across Australia to find 
all locations that match the new values within the set tolerances. 
It is important to note that some potentially important aspects 
of local climate are not considered with this approach. These 
include: evapotranspiration, frost days and other local climate 
influences, radiation and soil types (CSIRO & BoM 2021). 
As a representative site for the Northern and Yorke Region the 
climate analogues for Port Pirie under an RCP 8.5 emissions 
scenario are shown for 2030 (Figure 20), 2050 (Figure 21) and 
2090 (Figure 22). Analogues of select Northern and Yorke towns 
are included in Appendix A. The analogues show a general 
tendency for the climate of the region to become more like that of 
the Central to Eastern Wheatbelt of Western Australia through the 
course of the 21st Century. 
This presents a key opportunity to collaborate and learn from the 
successes and failures of adaptation actions already trialled across 
the drying Western Australian wheatbelt. 
The Western Australian wheatbelt commenced a long-term drying 
trend in the mid-1970s, much earlier than south-eastern Australia, 
where it commenced in the mid-1990s. The WA wheatbelt 
therefore provides a key insight into the socioeconomic and 
biophysical dynamics that are likely to produce some similar 
impacts across the Northern and Yorke Region through the coming 
decades. The continued resilience and profitability of agricultural 
enterprise in the WA Wheatbelt also demonstrates the capacity 
of the South Australian grain belt to further adapt to the drying 
climate. 
 Western Australian farm businesses are in good shape despite 
May to October rainfall declining by 10 to 30 per cent over the 
past 15 years compared with the previous 90 years, according 
to Australian Export Grain Innovation Centre Chief Economist 
Professor Ross Kingwell (GRDC 2016). Western Australian 
farm businesses are employing a variety of agronomic, genetic 
and economic strategies to keep abreast of climate and price 
fluctuations. Professor Kingwell stated “Most farm businesses 
in WA operating in the past 15 years have experienced an 
environment in which the growing-season rainfall has been much 
less than for their fathers or grandfathers. Yet in spite of this drying 
trend, farm businesses have been able to improve the efficiency 
with which they use the rainfall they receive. In recent years many 
farms have focused on paying off debt, such that average farm 
equity is now back at about 80 per cent.” 
Professor Kingwell said “With average farm equity at 80 per 
cent it means there are many farms in WA that are close to being 
debt-free. Those businesses are now in a really healthy position 
and able to embrace expansion opportunities,”. The top 25 per 
cent of WA farm businesses have been generating returns as high 
as 15 per cent however, there is a huge range between the top 
performers and the bottom performers and the playing field, in 
terms of rainfall, is not level. He noted the drier eastern wheatbelt 
experiences more seasonal extremes, so playing the season 
in these marginal areas becomes critical for financial success. 
Professor Kingwell said the main messages from his research were 
that most WA farm businesses are coping with climate challenges 
owing to technical advances and management skill: “If you were 
to make the assumption that the drying climate has sent businesses 
backwards in WA, you’d be wrong,” he said (GRDC 2016). This 
bodes well for a strong and resilient Northern and Yorke region 
to accommodate future climate shifts while maintaining profitable 
agriculture enterprise. 
With growing season rainfall across both the South Australian 
and Western Australian grain belts projected to decline further 
through the coming decades there is a clear need to enhance 
collaboration, knowledge transfer, and joint research and 
development between the two regions. 
7.1.5	Climate Analogues – Where to see the future climate of the 
Northern and Yorke region, right now.
Figure 20. 2030 climate analogues for Port Pirie under an RCP 8.5 emissions 
scenario (Source: CSIRO & BoM 2022)
Figure 22. 2090 climate analogues for Port Pirie under an RCP 8.5 emissions 
scenario (Source: CSIRO & BoM 2022)
Figure 21. 2050 climate analogues for Port Pirie under an RCP 8.5 emissions 
scenario (Source: CSIRO & BoM 2022)
WITH AVERAGE FARM EQUITY AT 80%
IT MEANS THERE ARE MANY FARMS IN 
WA THAT ARE CLOSE TO BEING DEBT-FREE. 
THOSE BUSINESSES ARE NOW IN A REALLY 
HEALTHY POSITION AND ABLE TO 
EMBRACE EXPANSION OPPORTUNITIES.

51
50
DESKTOP
RESEARCH
RISK IDENTIFICATION
RESILIENCE 
BUILDING
STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT
STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT
THEMES
ENABLERS
PRIORITIES
ACTIONS
8	 PRIORITIES FOR IMPROVING 
RESILIENCE.
Drought is one of many risks that farm enterprises, communities, 
regional towns and industries need to manage. Drought does not 
occur in isolation of other risks, instead it interrelates with factors 
influencing the economic, social and environmental sustainability 
of farming enterprises. 
Drought can and does exacerbate other risks, particularly related 
to firstly environmental conditions, then social and economic 
influences. The impacts of drought extend beyond farm enterprises 
to agricultural supply chains, regional businesses, communities, 
individuals, health and finance organisations. 
For the purpose of this plan, the key identified resilience themes 
arising from stakeholder engagement, previous research and 
plans are as follows:
• Resilient farm enterprises.
• Resilient industries.
• Resilient communities.
• Knowledge and education.
• Research and innovation.
A schematic of the key resilience themes, enablers, priorities and 
actions of the plan are presented below in Figure 23. 
Figure 23. The process of developing drought resilient themes, enablers, priorities and actions.
Figure 24. Drought resilience and the primary themes and associated 
enabler groupings emerging from research and stakeholder engagement
The enablers of resilience have been grouped into broad categories 
with key groupings of enablers assigned to each theme (Figure 24).
8.1 Theme 1 - Resilient Farming Enterprises
8.1.1	Overview
Farm enterprises represent 32% of all businesses in the region and 
in 2020/2021 contributed over $1.7 billion dollars to the state’s 
economy, contributing over 21% of the Gross Regional Product 
(Profile ID, 2022). 
A resilient farm enterprise is one that can withstand or readily 
bounce back from unforeseen and foreseeable adversity and 
where required, readily alter systems and processes. 
Drought is one of many risks that farmers face. The ability to create 
and build a resilient farming enterprise is a result of decisions 
planned for and enacted during times of non-drought, whilst 
in drought and through drought recovery. Response options to 
drought also depend on local circumstances, such as soil quality, 
agronomic patterns, the flexibility of credit providers and taxation 
systems as well as supply chain partners to support farm enterprises 
(Meuwissen, et al., 2019). Drought must be contextualised to 
better understand how drought as a risk interrelates with other farm 
enterprise risks and can be exacerbated by a combination of risks 
to a farm business. For example, the capability of animal farm 
enterprises to withstand the economic impacts of the 2018 drought 
were mitigated by the high price received for livestock, allowing 
farmers to purchase feed, contain stock to feed lot arrangements 
and rest paddocks. This demonstrates that economic sustainability 
often underpins social and environmental sustainability. This 
example is in stark contrast to the Millennium Drought, where the 
price for livestock did not justify the purchase of off-farm feed, in 
turn causing significant social, environmental and economic stress 
(Kellock, 2022) (Young, 2022) (Sommerville, 2022).

Farmers are currently facing a range of macroeconomic 
factors that are influencing the profitability of their business. 
Key factors identified through stakeholder engagement 
and desktop research are:
• The region is over-reliant and highly exposed to a reduction 
in water take from the Murray River, particularly through the 
viticultural regions of Clare Valley and Barossa Valley. 
• Access to a suitable quality and priced water product is the 
key issue for the horticulture, viticulture and the livestock 
industries in the Plains and Ranges sub-regional zone.
• The winegrape sector have experienced a reduction of 
overseas visitors to key wine regions (mainly the Barossa Valley) 
combined with reduced rainfall, a decrease in demand for wine 
resulting from trade sanctions with China and a decrease in the 
price for winegrapes.
• Increasing input costs, in particular diesel and petrol fuel and 
fertilisers are causing many farmers to either reduce fertiliser 
usage or allocate greater budgets towards finances for fertilisers.
• The main vegetable, nut and fruit producing regions, located 
in the plains and ranges zone are exposed to reduced rainfall 
events, with those growers reliant on mains supply water and 
groundwater exposed to changes to water take, resulting from 
government intervention and long-term drought conditions. 
• There are various community groups and organisations involved 
in contributing to a resilient community. The implementation of 
strategies within this plan will involve the identification of 
relevant partners. Example regional partners for building 
resilient communities are summarised in Table 13.
Resilient farm
enterprises
Resilient 
Communities
Resilient Industry
Knowledge &
education
Value-add
research
Researd 
& innovation
Trans-disciplinary 
& integrated research
Health &
well-being
Risk
Management
Climate Science
& projections
Regional
economic 
diversification
Towns &
infrastructure
Efficiency
Education acces & 
diversity of learning
Liveablility & 
employment 
opportunities
Community
innovation &
cultural partnerships
Foresight
capabilities
Adaptation & 
trasformation 
adoption
Technology, 
automation, 
genetics
Drought
Resilience
SOIL HEALTH, SOIL BIOLOGY, DROUGHT TOLERANT VARIETIES, 
INCORPORATING LIVESTOCK INTO THE SYSTEM, KNOWING 
HOW TO CONFINEMENT FEED...THERE ARE SO MANY.
The benefits of participating in the ongoing development of the 
plans and the actions that are described within the plan include:
• Building knowledge and capacity of individuals, businesses 
and communities to understand the changing nature of future 
drought in the region and to prepare for such changes.
• Improved economic, social and environmental outcomes related 
to the use of water and environmental assets in buffering the 
effects of drought.
• Improved ability to manage risk through the diversification of 
farm enterprises and agricultural supply chains towards rainfall 
independent income streams. 
• Ability to access an increasing body of evidence guiding the 
implementation of drought resilience measures.
The vision to be achieved through the implementation of the plan is 
a region that has the tools, assets, social capital, skills and knowledge 
to better prepare for and respond to the impacts of drought.

53
52
8.1.2	Regional partners
8.1.3	Progress in Region
8.1.4	Resilient farm enterprises key enabler categories
There are various bodies and organisations involved in contributing to resilient farming 
enterprises. The implementation of strategies within this plan will involve the identification 
of relevant partners. Example regional partners for building resilient farm enterprises are 
summarised in Table 13.
Table 13. Regional partners for building resilient farm enterprises in the Yorke and Mid North Region
REGIONAL PARTNERS
KEY PLANS AND GUIDING DOCUMENTS
NATIONAL
Department for Agriculture, Water and Environment
Grains Research and Development Commission
Meat and Livestock Australia
National Farmers’ Federation
Wine Australia
The Australian Wine Research Institute
The Murray Darling Basin
GRDC – Business planning guide for farmers 
recovering from drought
NFF – A National Drought Policy
STATE
Ag Ex Alliance
Business SA
Department for Environment and Water
Department for Primary Industries and Resources SA
Grain Producers SA
Horticulture Coalition of South Australia
Livestock SA
Local Government Association
Primary Producers SA
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
SA No-till Farming Association
SA Water
South Australian Grain Industry Trust
South Australian Cattle Industry Trust
South Australian Sheep Industry Trust
Universities
Policy
SA Government – Water Industry Act 2012
SA Government – Water Security Statement
SA Government – South Australian Guide for 
Drought Assistance
GPSA – South Australian Guide for Drought 
Assistance
PIRSA – Drought management and recovery booklet
PIRSA – Business planning for farmers recovering 
from drought
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 2019-
2024
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub 
– Node Co-design Workshops Report
REGIONAL
Northern and Yorke Landscape Board
Legatus Group
Regional Development Australia Barossa Gawler Light 
Adelaide Plains
Regional Development Australian Far North
Regional Development Australia – Yorke and Mid North
Local Government Emergency Management 
Framework
The Northern and Yorke Regional Climate Adaptation 
Plan
Northern and Yorke Landscapes Board – Annual 
Business Plan 2021/22
LOCAL
Barossa Australia
Barossa Improved Grazing Group
Care Valley Wine and Grape
Hart Field Day Site
Mid North High Rainfall Group
Northern Adelaide Plains Food Cluster
Northern Sustainable Soils
Regional Agricultural Bureaus 
Regional Landcare and Environment Groups 
Upper North Farming Systems
Barossa Water Security Strategy
Barossa Water Allocation Plan
Clare Valley Water Allocation Plan
Clare Valley Water Supply Preliminary Business Case
Barossa Valley Water Supply Business Case
Farm enterprises have been the backbone 
of the economy, dominating land use in the 
region and contributing to state, national 
and global food production. 
Current progress across farm enterprises is as follows:
• A strong history of productivity gains through localised 
agricultural research and development and implementation.
• Minimising risk through business planning, diversification 
of properties across different rainfall areas, planting of 
different crop varieties, accessing alternative water 
supplies and reducing forward planning.
• Improved soil management and agronomy practices, 
i.e, no-til farming, precision agriculuture, controlled traffic, 
use of dung beetles etc. 
• There are select examples of on-farm rainfall independent 
diversification, such as on-farm tourism and renewable 
energy generation.
• The adoption of farm management deposits.
• Business planning, including off-farm counsel.
Three key enablers have been developed for resilient farm enterprises:
Current progress, key enablers, priorities and actions are outlined in Table 14.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Drought will increase the exposure 
of farmers to financial, social and 
environmental risks. As such, it is 
critical that risks related to drought 
are identified and managed.
EFFICIENCY
Increasing efficiencies within any 
business is an important driver 
of cost savings. Efficiency can 
take many forms, in this instance, 
efficiency refers to the ability to do 
more with reduced available soil 
moisture.
FORESIGHT CAPABILITIES
Key to adaptation and transformation 
is understanding the impact of a “do 
nothing” approach compared to the 
costs and benefits of changing practices 
and behaviours. It is important that 
farmers understand and act according to 
global, national and regional drivers of 
change, such as supply chain disruptions, 
increasing global tensions and tribalism, 
climate change, increasing global 
population, increasing number of a global 
Water and Environment, 2020).
1
2
3

55
54
THEME #1 RESILIENT FARM ENTERPRISES
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
KEY ENABLERS: RISK MANAGEMENT
• Strong history of productivity gains through 
localised agricultural research and development.
• On-farm rainfall dependent diversification.
• Select examples of on-farm rainfall independent 
diversification.
• Farm Management Deposits.
• Business Planning, including off-farm counsel. 
• Further off-farm diversification.
• On-farm rainfall independent diversification.
• Forward planning, knowledge of market trends, 
access to markets and future food demand.
• Understanding and acceptance of a new reduced 
rainfall and increased evaporation scenario.
• Reduced reliance on expensive inputs.
• Integrated and coordinated mental health system 
farm families and workers.
• Access to rainfall independent water sources for 
irrigation districts.
• Transition farm operations to carbon nuetral (e.g. electrify machinery, 
carbon farming etc.)
• Increase access to off-farm income sources through further education of the 
need for off-farm income and increasing access to regionally located education 
and training services. 
• Encouraging maximisation of on-farm rainfall independent diversification 
(tourism, renewable energy etc) through showcasing local rainfall independent 
business successes from within an outside of the region.
• Communicate changes to markets, including market access and future food 
demands to farmers (currently a significant gap). 
• Increase access to climate science, meterological information and forecasts, 
and collaborate with communication specialists to ensure that key messaging 
cuts through anti-science narrative whilst maintaining the progress, transition 
and transformation.
• Transition to reduced input systems through adoption of new lower input genetic 
lines, green technology (electric vehicles), on-farm renewable energy, organic 
fertilisers to reduce operational costs and reliance on traditional farm inputs. 
• Adopt a coordinated and integrated health system model, as outlined in 
Table 17. 
• Investigate options for both regional groundwater and marine desalination 
plants, specifically for agriculture (water to be treated to fit for purpose 
standards).
• Investigate further aquifer storage and recharge options within the region 
to capture stormwater during rainfall periods and store for later use.
• Improve local grain storage infrastructure to minimise transport expenditure 
and develop localised seed banks.
• Create a consistent framework for drought declaration to ensure support 
measures can be accessed.
EFFICIENCY
• Information collection and disseminiation by SA 
Drought Innovation and Adoption Hub.
• Continued focus on agricultural research and 
development has allowed 
for productivity gains.
• High adoption of no-till farming.
• Trialling of new precision technologies.
• Trialing of new crop and pasture management 
approaches.
• Allocate further funding for natural resources 
management as a means of capturing and 
storing water on land, in soils, aquifers and 
riparian zones.
• Buffer farm animals from the increasing effects 
of heat through shade cover installation and 
livestock managemet approaches. 
• Ensure sustainable use of water, rain and 
stormwater capture and storage and encourage 
adoption of water reuse. 
• Conduct cost-benefit analysis of water reuse 
schemes.
• Research commercial viability of in-region 
organics processor and distribution centre.
• Increase research and development for key climate-
environment on-farm risks. 
• Increase use of native and hardy plant species as 
grazing fodder in solar farms (solar grazing).
• Increase pasture/ground cover retention in grazing zones.
• Conduct further organic fertiliser trials, research and extension to showcase 
the water storage benefits of short and long-term use of organic fertilisers, 
clay delving and other water infiltration and soil storage solutions. 
• Revegetate and restore riparian habitat along key creeks and rivers to clean 
water, slow water movement and allow for water to soak into soils surrounding 
riparian zones. 
• Increase plantings of low rainfall-tolerant plant fodder species (saltbush, 
bluebush, native grasses)in grazing systems. Showcase benefits of combined 
grazing renewable energy generation systems. 
• Plant native species found in drier climatic zones to act as shelter belts, 
wind breaks and provide shade and shelter for livestock. 
• Utilise technology and new genetic breeding lines to improve animal and crop 
resilience to increased heat and drought.
• Increase funding and research and development of in-crop frost 
management and protection. 
• Investigate options for on-farm stormwater capture and storage in closed 
systems, that aren’t exposed to evaporation, i.e., offer subsidies for on-farm 
large scale water tanks connected to farm sheds, increased use of aquifer 
storage and recharge in preference of dams. 
• Priorities and promote Natural Sequence Farming principles to slow 
water movement and store water better where it falls.
• Partner with existing organics processors and government agencies 
(GISA, PIRSA, DEW) to assess the economic viability of organics processing 
in the region. 
• Target solar grazing for demonstration trials to showcase the benefits of 
combining the two income streams. Explore key barriers to adoption and 
develop enablers to overcome barriers. 
8.1.5	Case study
The case study below tells the story of a farming family in Western Australia who have improved the 
ability of the soils on their land to store and capture moisture and through this have benefitted from 
increased pasture retention, erosion control, biodiversity and on-farm productivity.
RETAINING WATER ON THE LAND AT YANGET 
THROUGH NATURAL SEQUENCE FARMING.
Rod and Bridie O’Bree purchased a property at Yanget, 
25 kilometres east of Geraldton in Western Australia 
in 2008 off the back of two successive drought years. 
The O’Brees planned to run beef cattle, a horse stud 
and lambs on the 800 ha property. 
The property had undergone hard times, devoid of vegetation 
to hold the soil together, significant gully erosion was evident 
across the creek lines and gullies of the property. When the 
first rains fell, the movement of water across the property took 
the topsoil with it. 
Noting that the average annual rainfall has substantially 
dropped over the past 30 years (from a mean of 486mm 
per year to 354mm per year), the O’Bree’s needed a plan 
to transform the property to better utilise the limited rainfall. 
The O’Bree’s engaged Peter Andrews to guide the 
implementation of natural sequence farming principles in 
order to rehydrate the landscape, including :
• constructing earth banks within the creeklines aimed at 
slowing the movement of water through the landscape.
• re-engineering existing contour banks to hold water and to 
allow it to exit at strategic points.
• establishing perennial pasture trials in 2009 establishing 
more perennial pastures on the slopes and flats, including 
onto heavy soils.
• allowing weeds and invasive species to establish to 
increase the overall diversity of pastures.
• using mechanical mulching to slash weeds.
Since implementing the changes from 2010 onwards, 
Rod reflects on what has worked well. Key changes 
are as follows: 
• Grazing capacity has risen and the greatest animal 
production results were achieved in the last 2 years, 
despite limited rainfall.
• Groundcover has increased. The perennial pasture species 
green panic, Bambatsi panic, signal grass, Consol love 
grass, siratro and lucerne have persisted well. 
• Earthworks associated with the NSF approach have slowed 
the movement of water through the property. Water has left 
the farm in only 1 year out of the last 4 and that was after 
185 mm in 2 weeks after a 10-month dry spell when only 
18 mm of rain fell. Now, 25 mm of rain soaks into the 
broader landscape, compared to the 25 mm in February 
2008 that flowed quickly off the property. 
• Erosion has significantly reduced and gully-head erosion 
now doesn’t occur. Drainage lines have naturally 
revegetated and are now stable
• The correct placement of earthworks has resulted in 
waterholes having more water in them for longer, allowing 
more grass to grow in flow lines and helping to prevent 
salinity.
All information contained within this case study has been 
sourced from The Government of Western Australia, 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, 
Regenerative Agricutlure Case studies webpage (Government 
of Western Australia, 2017).
Above images: Three Creek dam on the O’Bree property in 2009 (left) and again in 2017 
(right) (Government of Western Australia, 2017).
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y

57
56
8.2 Theme 2 - Resilient Industry
8.2.1	Overview
It is well understood that the economic and social impact of 
drought extends beyond the farm gate to the businesses that 
directly support farm enterprises and rely on farm business, i.e., 
the agricultural supply chain. However, it is also the non-farming 
and supply chain businesses located in the region that are highly 
reliant on a productive and profitable agriculture industry to 
support non-agricultural business (Alston, M. & Kent, J., 2004). 
A 2018 study found that the loss of services and poor employment 
outcomes in drought affected areas impact the social and 
economic well-being of those employed in agriculture and also, 
albeit to a lesser extent, those not employed in the agriculture 
sector (Edwards, et al., 2018). As such, the impacts of drought 
are far reaching.
Table 15 lists the key agricultural supply chain 
partners for the current and future supply chain 
in the Northern and Yorke region.
TRADITIONAL AGRICULTURAL SUPPLY CHAINS INCLUDE TWO PARTS:
1.
The purchase of goods 
and services by farm 
enterprises, farm workers 
and farmers (upstream)
2.
The production of 
goods and services 
by farm enterprises 
(downstream)
The recently released Regional Strengths and Infrastructure 
Gaps report by Infrastructure Australia highlighted the following 
sectors as growth areas for the Northern and Yorke region 
(Infrastructure Australia, 2022): 
• Agriculture, forestry and fishing. 
• Manufacturing.
• Energy. 
• Tourism.
Based on the Regional Strengths and Infrastructure Gaps report, 
stakeholder engagement and further desktop research, supply 
chain partners from all four above listed categories have been 
included in Table 15. The supply chain represents organisations 
that can provide value-add opportunities for goods and services 
and those who have a vested interest in ensuring the impact of 
drought is buffered and minimised through drought resilience 
capacity building. 
8.2.2	Regional partners
There are various bodies and organisations involved in contributing to resilient farming enterprises. 
The implementation of strategies within this plan will involve the identification of relevant partners. 
Example regional partners for building resilient industry are summarised in Table 15.
Table 15. Key Agricultural supply chain partners
KEY AGRICULTURAL SUPPLY CHAIN PARTNERS
KEY PLANS & GUIDING 
DOCUMENTS
INTERNATIONAL
Accolade Wines
Australian Grain Technology
Bayer
Glencore
Graincorp
Grainflow
Incitec Pivot
JBS Foods Australia
Neoen
Nutrien
Orora
Pernod Ricard
Treasury Wine Estates
Syngenta
Not found
NATIONAL
AGL
Australian Export Grains Innovation 
Centre
Australian Industry Group
Environment
Elders
Landmark
Manufacturing Australia
National Farmers’ Federation
Tilt Renewables
Tourism Australia
Wine Australia
Policy
The Murray Darling Basin
NFF – A National Drought Policy
STATE
Ag Ex Alliance
Business SA
Department for Primary Industries and 
Resources SA
Primary Producers SA
Grain Producers SA
Livestock SA
SA Water
South Australian Grain Industry Trust
Local Government Association
South Australian Cattle Industry Trust
South Australian Sheep Industry Trust
Tourism SA
SA Government – Water Security Statement
SA Government – South Australian Guide for 
Drought Assistance
GPSA – South Australian Guide for Drought 
Assistance
PIRSA – Drought management and recovery 
booklet
PIRSA – Business planning for farmers 
recovering from drought
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hub – Node Co-design Workshops Report
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 
2019-2024
REGIONAL
Northern and Yorke Landscape Board
Legatus Group
Regional Development Australia Barossa 
Gawler Light Adelaide Plains
Regional Development Australian Far 
North
Regional Development Australia Yorke 
and Mid North
Local Government Emergency Management 
Framework
The Northern and Yorke Regional Climate 
Adaptation Plan
Northern and Yorke Landscapes Board – 
Annual Business Plan 2021/22
LOCAL
AW Vater
Barossa Australia
Barossa Improved Grazing Group
Barossa Infrastructure Limited
Bunyip Scheme
Care Valley Wine and Grape
Dublin Sale Yards
E.E. Muir
Farmer Johns
Hart Field Day Site
Kelly Tillage
Kerin Agencies
Mid North High Rainfall Group
Northern Adelaide Plains Food 
Cluster
Northern Sustainable Soils
Nutrien Ag
Pinion Advisory
Pringles Crouch
Rocky River Ag Services
Rural Solutions
Upper North Farming Systems
Vennings
YP Ag
Not found
THEME #1 RESILIENT FARM ENTERPRISES
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
FORESIGHT  CAPABILITIES
• CSIRO, ABARES and BOM have developed a 
suite of resources to better forecast the impact of 
future drought and weather conditions. 
• The IPCC and other global bodies have developed 
a range of tools that demonstrate the impact of 
climate change.
• Climate Change in Australia Climate Analogues 
and Climate Explorer Tools. 
• ABARES has developed a future mega-trends 
analysis for the future of agriculture in Australia.
• DEW, SARDI and other state government 
agencies have a range of resources outlining 
the projected impacts of climate change for 
agriculture and regions. 
• Boost the number and use of agronomists, 
specialist farm advisors and direct training to 
address current and future gaps.
• Increase ability of soils to store moisture through 
directing funding for further research and 
extension. 
• Increase access to localised, timely and accurate 
weather predictions.
• Increase communication of projected climate 
risks and key messages related to adaptation 
and transformation. 
• Buffer heat and evaporation through the 
development of a region-wide greening 
masterplan. 
• Target forms of agriculture proven to work in 
low-rainfall environments.
•  Current and projected future skills gaps exist in the farm advisory industry 
(animal nutrition specialists, pasture research and development, crop frost 
protection). Direct funding towards or provide incentives for education and 
encouraging specialisation, mentorships and master/apprentice relationships 
to build critical skills shortage. 
• Decreased rainfall and increased evaporation will create the need for greater 
water efficiency use and the need to increase water soil infiltration and 
storage. Conduct extensive demonstration trials across the region, including 
(where feasible) on public land to showcase the benefits of water retention.
Combine this with effective communication and messaging regarding
 projected future climate and the urgent need to plan and act now. 
• ABARES projects that the average farm profits will reduce by more than 20% 
Environment, 2020). Develop case studies outlining the benefits of on-farm 
and off-farm rainfall independent income streams. 
• Liaise directly with BOM and CSIRO to ensure more accurate weather predictions 
for locations across the region. 
• Adopt smart irrigation technology within horticulture and viticulture systems.
• Liaise with communications specialists to better communicate the projected 
impacts of near-term climate change and provide avenues of change. 
• Develop a region-wide greening masterplan, utilising mapping of potential 
greening sites, incorporate carbon offsetting and biodiversity offsetting projects. 
• Promote the region as a climate adaptation case study, utilising broad-scale 
revegetation of low rainfall tolerant native plant species to buffer the impacts 
of heat and drought. 
• Target the expansion of reticulated water closed systems and vertical farming 
for horticulture through the Northern Adelaide Plains. Similar to Sundrop Farms, 
near Port Augusta.

58
8.2.3	Progress in the Region
The region has many assets that it can build on and enhance. 
The region has taken advantage of the following:
• Capitalised on the growth in intrastate and interstate tourism, 
as an alternative economic driver to agriculture. 
• Invested in access to freight routes, ports and Adelaide.
• Taken advantage of the availability of both sun and wind to 
build large scale wind and solar projects, with more planned 
over the coming years.
• Continues to adapt agricultural techniques to produce 
high quality and high yielding products.
• Established community collectives encouraging local 
entrepreneurism and place-making.
• In some circumstances, invested in infrastructure to 
increase the aesthetics of towns.
The identified key enabler categories captured through this
plan are as follows:
• Increase regional economic diversification – Increase the 
diversification of the economy in the region, to reduce risks 
of agricultural productivity and profitability loss and to increase 
alternative income sources for all. 
• Increase the liveability and employment opportunities available 
in the region – Create more liveable towns and regional centres 
through providing the services required and wanted by residents 
and harnessing opportunities for growth.
• Technology, automation, genetics – Trial and adopt novel 
and emerging technology that can help to create efficiencies 
in business operations, improve decision making and reduce 
labour costs.
The resilient industry current progress, key enablers, priorities and 
action are presented in Table 16. 
8.2.4	Resilient industry key enablers categories
THEME #2 RESILIENT INDUSTRY
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
KEY ENABLERS: INCREASE REGIONAL ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION
• Sound access to freight routes, ports and 
Adelaide.
• Large scale solar and wind energy projects across 
the region due to high exposure to both sun 
and wind. 
• Historically, a profitable and productive farming 
region, providing a significant proportion of 
South Australia’s agricultural produce and 
exports.
• Increase in tourism resulting from COVID-19 
through many districts and towns has provided 
economic benefits.
• Community collectives encouraging local 
entrepreneurism and place-making.
• Regional diversification in industry form and 
function.
• Value add to existing regionally produced 
agricultural commodities.
• Increasing understanding of market access and 
development.
• Define, measure and report regional industry 
resilience.
• Take advantage of existing South Australian 
future target industries.
• Encourage business investment in the carbon 
offset market for locations where farming 
viability is reduced. 
• Provide non-farming enterprises with a template 
and training for the development of business 
resilience plans (especially related to drought).
• Investigate options for regional diversification linked to the South Australian 
Government future industries. Define the value-add opportunities for the region 
based on current regional economic strengths and growth areas and the 
• Continue to build upon a growing and significant tourism industry across the 
food, wine, outdoor adventure and caravanning sectors. 
• Implement regional tourism strategies to better define target markets and 
opportunities for expansion. 
• Fund an economic diversification study to ascertain value-add opportunities 
for goods and services produced in the region. 
• Create better connections between goods produced and customer demands. 
• Where advantageous, introduce block chain technology to supply chains to 
take advantage of the clean and green image of SA produced produce.
• Develop a communications plan outlining a strategy to provide climate 
information to alter practices and create the transitional and transformational 
change required.
• It is essential that the levers that allow for spending and decision-making track 
and support climate impacts, mitigation, and adaptation measures. Capture and 
integrate costs of climate change and adaptation measures across long-term 
financial planning at the council and regional scale.
• Develop and implement a regional carbon farming plan to assist willing farmers 
to transition parcels of land to the offset market. 
• Non-farming businesses are also affected by drought, supply chain disruptions 
and other interruptions.Develop a business resilience plan template and training 
program for non-farming businesses to access.
• Establish regional partnerships and collaborative groups consisting of 
representatives of farm enterprises and agricultural supply chains to plan 
for greater systems resilience. 
THEME #2 RESILIENT INDUSTRY
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
INCREASE THE LIVEABILITY AND EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES AVAILABLE IN THE REGION
• Relatively more affordable housing and land 
(compared to Adelaide).
• Select councils are actively marketing the 
lifestyle benefits of a regional lifestyle, aiming to 
attract new residents. 
• Increased opportunities for community 
connection.
• Significant projections of increased population 
growth through Northern Adelaide Plains and 
Barossa.
• Increase the housing stock in the region through 
strategic expansion of townships in select 
locations to attract and retain workers from 
rainfall independent industries.
• Maximise proximity to Adelaide for population 
growth, lifestyle opportunities.
• Increase digital access across the region.
• Increase access to health services.
• Ensure sustainable use of water, including water 
reuse.
• Support the development of strategic community 
infrastructure to enhance social and recreational 
wellbeing of local communities.
• Increase living infrastructure in towns.
• Improve critical town infrastructure, i.e., main 
streets aesthetics, access and resources. 
• Define barriers to township growth and collaborate with the state government 
to remove barriers for select townships, i.e., areas where demand outstrips 
housing supply. 
• Demonstrate that a restriction in housing supply is linked with reduced access to 
labour in the region.
• Conduct research related to regional town centres that have grown in South 
Australia, interstate and overseas. Determine the key enablers of population 
growth. 
• Capitalise on the work from home culture to attract high skill-high income 
residents to move to the region. Target select lifestyle destinations capable of 
accommodating residential growth.
• Seek federal and state government funding for main street upgrades for towns 
identified as growth areas. 
• Ensure towns have services available (e.g. childcare, co-working space) that 
enable off-farm employment.
• Collaborate with state government and telcos to provide greater digital access 
across the region. Investigate new and emerging technologies (Starlink) 
for such purposes. 
• Increase access to health services (see Table 17).
• Incorporate Water sensitive urban design (WSUD) into future town main 
street planning.
• Plant street trees that can withstand future climate conditions. 
Support street trees and other living infrastructure with WSUD measures.
• Target growth town main streets for infrastructure upgrades and beautification. 
TECHNOLOGY, AUTOMATION, GENETICS.
• Multiple agri-business tech start-ups operating in 
the region.
• Strong history of technological advancement and 
adoption across the agriculture sector.
• Multiple agricultural research and development 
organisations operating 
in the region, providing locally relevant 
information to farmers. 
• Maximise real time data technology emerging in 
the ag tech and manufacturing sectors.
• Develop a regional economic development 
strategy to deliberately target and attract key 
technology sectors (space, defence, hi-tech, 
digital, energy sectors).
• Develop multiple demonstration sites showcasing 
and trialling use of precision agriculture, new 
crop genetic lines and options for agriculture and 
value-adding processes.
• Adopt needed and innovative transitionary and 
transformation land management methods and 
systems.
create and store localised electricity for town use 
(community owned renewable energy).
• Adopt agriculture and manufacturing digital technology and data capture and 
sharing platforms to maximise efficiencies across logistics and supply chains. 
• Establish partnerships between the region and local and interstate manufacturing 
and agtech communities. 
• Seek to develop an MOU or equivalent partnership with Lot14 and emerging 
industries for opportunities for the region. 
• Develop a technology specific regional development strategy to identify potential 
partnerships and opportunities for improvement. 
• Create multiple demonstration sites showcasing innovative processes, 
technologies, emerging genetics and integrated and modern agricultural systems 
that demonstrate transitional and transformational resilience building techniques. 
Sites should focus on benefits to soils, crops, livestock, native vegetation etc. 
• Transformational change is required across the landscape. Trial emerging 
and untried methods of groundcover retention, mass revegetation and water 
infiltration into soils. Seek and incorporate new processes and Aboriginal 
knowledge and apply to land management. 
• Towns reliant on grid electricity are exposed to price increases and market 
volatility. Given the access to renewable energy sources (sun, wind), there is a 
significant opportunity to utilise combined battery and renewable energy sources 
to capture and store energy on site in local towns, reducing costs for local 
residents associated with electricity consumption. 
• Investigate options for embedded networks of electricity. i.e., Target specific 
areas of land for commercial renewable energy export. Export power to inner 
city councils. 
COMMUNITIES NEED TO BE PREPARED FOR DROUGHT, WE NEED EDUCATION,
 SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE… AS WELL AS COLLABORATION, STAYING POSITIVE

61
60
8.1.5	Case study
Presented below is a case study of Sundrop Farms, a vertical farming operation, located near Port 
Augusta, South Australia, that has successfully utilised technology and natural resources to create a 
rainfall independent agricultural operation in desert conditions. 
SUNDROP FARMS.
Located less than 10 kilometres to the east 
of the Northern and Yorke region, Sundrop 
Farms are pioneers in the sustainable 
agriculture and fresh produce sector. 
The farm operations harness solar energy to desalinate sea 
water for the irrigation of tomatoes for Coles Supermarkets 
nationwide. 
Despite operating in an environment of 218mm of rainfall per 
year, Sundrop Farms has successfully established a vertical 
greenhouse farming operation (Bueau of Meteorology, 
2022). The site close to Port Augusta was deliberately 
chosen due to the abundance of solar energy and the ability 
to extract water from Spencer Gulf. 
Sundrop Farms note that they are 
“breaking farming dependency 
on finite resources using nature” 
(Sundrop Farms, 2020).
Utilising a range of technology, the company has reduced the 
need for expensive ongoing input and output costs through 
the implementation of the following technologies (KBSS 
Engineering, 2020):
POWER ISLAND
15 Hectares of mirrors (23,000 individual mirrors) focused 
on a 126 metre tall solar concentrator tower.
The tower feeds super-heated steam to 3 places – multi effect 
desalination plant (MED), bypass condenser which maintains 
the 95 degree water stored in the two thermal storage units, 
and finally to the 1.5MW steam turbine to develop power for 
the site.
FARM
20 Hectares of greenhouses (4 even sized houses) where hot 
water passes through approximately 50km of heating pipes 
for the winter and evaporative cooling in hotter months via 
cardboard paneling with sea water passing over them.
3 ponds – fresh, sea and brine. Fresh water 100% sealed 
with floating roof to maintain cleanliness of water and prevent 
evaporation. 
Above image: A model showcasing the use of sun and seawater to create electricity, 
heating and where necessary cooling and fit for purpose water for production of 
tomatoes (Sundrop Farms, 2020).
8.3 Theme 3 - Resilient Communities
8.3.1	Overview
A resilient community has capacity to deal with 
change, move forward and adapt to minimise the 
impact of adverse events. Events such as drought 
will affect a community on a social, economic and 
environmental level and its impacts will extend 
to all areas of a community including farms, 
businesses and individual community members. 
A resilient community is one that can learn from the experience 
and adapt or better yet, prevent it from happening again.
The community’s resilience is linked to their health and wellbeing 
meaning that when one is reduced, so is the other and vice versa. 
The determinants that contribute to poor health status are similar 
to those associated with vulnerability, so a community with large 
concentrations of vulnerable populations will be less resilient 
(Institute of Medicine, 2015). Aiming to improve the underlying 
population health status of a community is a means of achieving 
community resilience. 
Farmers, agribusinesses and surrounding communities are an 
integral part of the Northern and Yorke region’s way of life. 
Agriculture has been important in forming the regions identiy as 
the States key areas for agriculture and wine and has helped 
showcase the region’s diversity. Agricuture is particularly important 
as it creates essential jobs in the region and supports jobs 
in other industries (for example, tourism and hospitality), and 
supporting thriving regional towns. The region’s communities 
rely on agriculture for their economic prosperity and drought will 
directly affect people working in the agricultural sector. There are 
substantial flow on effects on other groups as economic stress 
spreads across the local economy (P. Dibben, per. comm 2022) 
which have both direct and indirect impacts on the health and 
wellbeing of the people in the region. These impacts can then 
potentially lead to depopulation of townships creating workforce 
retention stress on essential health and social services.
Drought will also have cultural resilience implications for the 
region. Consultation with Aboriginal stakeholders revealed the 
cultural impact on Aboriginal communities can cause a loss of 
cultural connectivity to land, water and country as a result of 
altered landscape conditions. The link between aspects of the 
environment - the indigenous grasses, insects, reptiles, birds and 
animals, and the importance of each aspect to cultural markers 
and stories is broken when any one of these is missing (as 
happens in times of drought). An opportunity exists to engage with 
Traditional Owners and Aborignal Communities to learn about 
what can be achieved through long-term planning and educating 
people as to better ways to manage the landscape through 
integrating knowledge of the relationships between climate, 
people and natural resources.
Overall, drought is tough for those in the agricultural sector 
(financially and mentally), but regional communities are resilient, 
at least in terms of social cohesion. This is partly due to a high 
level of community and social cohesion which allows residents 
to pull together in times of crisis. 
Key factors influencing community resilience identified through 
stakeholder engagement and desktop research are:
• The impact of drought on health and wellbeing. Regional 
and rural communities tend to suffer from higher incidence 
of mental illness which is exacerbated by effects of drought.
• Maintaining social networks and connections. 
These connections allow residents to cope better with 
adversities.
• Access to quality natural spaces and sustainable resource use.
• Increases in cost of living including fuel, housing and services.
• Cultural impacts such as interruption of ancient trading routes 
and water courses by open road networks.
• Small towns are highly economically reliant on farming 
enterprises. The region would benefit from economic 
diversification especially to industries that are not dependant 
on rainfall. 
Studies indicate that water sensitive urban design measures 
increase the greening and cooling of urban areas (Broadbent, 
et al., 2018). Water shortages are a significant stressor on the 
lives and wellbeing of drought affected people and communities 
(Schwartz & McRae-Williams, 2009). As such, the capture, 
storage and reuse of water should be a key focus for the Northern 
and Yorke region. The benefits of the capture, storage and reuse 
of water can apply to both agriculture, urban greening, street tree 
development and contribute to the cooling, aesthetics and longer-
term viability of living assets. The benefits of green spaces extend 
beyond amenity and aesthetics and are linked to both social 
well-being and economic prosperity (Schwartz & McRae-Williams, 
2009). Through the course of stakeholder engagement multiple 
farmers and agricultural body representatives listed high quality 
greenspace as an important asset to the community.
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
GREEN IS IMPORTANT TO PEOPLE – 
NEED TO GO INTO TOWN AND SEE 
GREEN LAWN FOR MORALE
 J. TILLEY, CHAIR MID NORTH HIGH RAINFALL GROUP
COMMUNITIES NEED TO BE PREPARED 
FOR DROUGHT, WE NEED EDUCATION, 
SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE… 
AS WELL AS COLLABORATION, 
STAYING POSITIVE

63
62
8.3.2	Regional Partners
8.3.4	Resilient community’s enabler categories
8.3.3	Progress in the region
There are various community groups and organisations involved in contributing to a resilient 
community. The implementation of strategies within this plan will involve the identification of relevant 
partners. Example regional partners for building resilient communities are summarised in Table 11.
Table 17 Regional partners for building resilient communities in the Yorke and Mid North Region
REGIONAL PARTNERS
KEY PLANS & GUIDING DOCUMENTS
STATE
Department for Primary Industries and Resources SA
Department for Premier and Cabinet
Wellbeing SA
Department of Human Services
Local Government Association
SA Government – Water Industry Act 2012
SA Government – Water Security Statement
SA Government – South Australian Guide for Drought 
Assistance
PIRSA – Drought management and recovery booklet
PIRSA – Business planning for farmers recovering 
from drought
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 2019-2024
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub – 
Node Co-design Workshops Report
South Australia’s Health and Well-being Strategy 
2020-2025
REGIONAL
Regional Development Australia Barossa Gawler, Light 
and Adelaide Plains; 
Regional Development Australia Far North 
Regional Development Australia Yorke and Mid North, 
Legatus Group
Northern and Yorke Landscape Board
SA Health – Local Health Networks
Social Service and Not for Profit Organisations 
including Red Cross, Lifeline Country to Coast, Primary 
Health Networks.
Northern Areas Council Public Health Plan
Regional Public Health & Wellbeing Plan for the 
Northern Group of Council
Regional Public Health Plan Yorke Peninsula Alliance
LOCAL
Local Government
Community Incorporated Associations
Indigenous Business Enterprises and Incorporations
Business Associations
The Barossa Council Public Health and Wellbeing Plan
Various Local Health Networks
Progress or enablers of resilience can be broadly categorised across the following categories:
HEALTH AND WELLBEING
• Various community initiatives, training and programs to support 
farmer health and wellbeing. Examples include PIRSA’s FAB 
Mentor Program, Wellbeing SA’s Healthy Workers programs and 
the work of various community organisations such as Fat Farmers, 
I Farm Well, Lifeline, Rural and Remote Mental Health and many 
others (note: SC feedback welcome here)
• Grass roots community grants initiatives delivered through 
State and regional bodies such as Wellbeing SA, Landscapes 
SA, the RDA and Rural Aid.
• Council’s have developed Community Health and Wellbeing 
Plans for their regions either through planning together at a 
regional level or for their own Council area. There are seven 
Regional Public Health Plans across the region.
• Legatus is exploring regional partnerships for mental health 
and wellbeing on a centralised model and has established 
an MoU with Lifeline Country to Coast to replicate to other 
parts of the region their Community Connect program which 
has commenced out of Clare. 
TOWNS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
• Some councils are embracing water sensitive urban design 
principles to promote urban amenity and reduce water 
consumption. There is a regional forum in place for Community 
Wastewater Management through the Legatus Group.
• Some Councils have commenced projects such as the SA Water 
Smart Irrigation and Space Down Unders Storm Water 
harvesting Projects.
• The recently release Legatus Group Waste Resource and 
Recovery Strategy and Action Plan is investigating regional 
compost sites for the use of food and green orgnaics to assist 
with soil quality and water retention. 
COMMUNITY INNOVATION AND CULTURAL 
PARTNERSHIPS AND INVESTMENTS
• There are examples of place-based approaches to building 
community. The Orrorroo 5431 Community Collective is an 
example of a not-for-profit enterprise providing rural creators 
with links to a platform to grow & showcase locally made 
quality products and services.
• The trialling of native bush foods on select properties 
(Sommerville, 2022)
Assisting the Northern and Yorke community 
to build resilience capacity are the following 
enabler categories:
• Health and well-being – a healthy community has greater 
capacity of resilience and can more easily build resilience. 
• Towns and infrastructure – Evidence shows that investment in 
towns and infrastructure can assist with improving resilience of 
a community through the creation of employment opportunities, 
economic activity and sense of place Invalid source specified. 
• Community innovation and cultural partnerships - Involving the 
community in decision making processes can improve the feeling 
of empowerment and provide new layers of knowledge to 
solve problems. There are significant opportunities to increase 
community voice, in particular through greater empowerment of 
Aboriginal communities.
The resilient communities current progress, key enablers, priorities 
and actions are outlined in Table 18. 
A HEALTHY COMMUNITY HAS GREATER 
CAPACITY OF RESILIENCE AND CAN 
MORE EASILY BUILD RESILIENCE.

65
64
8.4 Case studies
Presented below are two case studies of a community-led health initiative and urban infrastructure 
projects delivered by the City of Mitcham, a leader in council water sensitive urban design
FAT FARMERS: 
COMMUNITY-DRIVEN HEALTH INITIATIVE.
The “Fat Farmers” Regional Health Initiative 
was founded in 2010 by a group of grain 
producers who, recognising their growing 
waistlines and declining health, gathered 
in their local gym in Yorke Peninsula, South 
Australia to become fitter and to train for the 
annual Adelaide to Glenelg City-Bay Fun Run. 
Industrialised farming has led to many farmers experiencing 
high levels of sedentary work, just as urbanised populations 
do. The Country South Australia Primary Health Network 
has been identified as the most overweight and obese in 
the nation, with 73% of residents now identified as either 
obese or overweight (AIHW, 2016). With leadership 
from several new Team Coordinators and support from the 
Healthy Farmers Adviser based at Primary Producers SA, 
Fat Farmers teams have now spread to seven locations and 
approximately 120 farmers across SA. It’s politically incorrect 
name and bottom-up approach “cuts through” in a nation 
which has become blasé about obesity and its impact on 
health and wellbeing.
The outcomes of the “Fat Farmers” initiative 
thus far has been: 
• Building leadership and capacity. Both male and female 
farmers (Team Coordinators) have been good advocates 
for the importance of health for business productivity and 
are talking about this with other farmers proactively via 
traditional media, social media and their own farming and 
community networks.
• Many farmers who had previously been doing little exercise 
and/or never attempted a fun run before have started 
exercising with the “Fat Farmers” groups. Some groups 
which have been established for several years report that 
the gym training sessions they participate in have become 
a strong community social event and is becoming more 
popular than going to the pub
• Establishing the strong partnership with AIMHS which 
will provide opportunity for “Fat Farmers” to continue in 
the future (beyond government funded support) and to 
ensure that the linkages between physical and mental 
health are promoted. 
The support of a Health Promotion professional with 
knowledge of the farming community and effective health 
promotion and community development principles has 
added value to the efforts of the Team Coordinators to make 
a model which is sustainable and which has the potential to 
grow in the future. 
For further information, see www.fatfarmers.com
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
THEME #3 RESILIENT COMMUNITY
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
KEY ENABLERS: HEALTH AND WELLBEING
• Initiatives and programs for farmer health and 
wellbeing: Fat Farmers, I Farm Well and PIRSA’s 
FAB Mentor Program.
• Community Grants programs.
• 7 Regional Public Health Plans across the region.
• Community Connect model .
• Improve capacity for mental health support.
• A better connected and integrated community.
• Better access to health and wellbeing services.
• Maintain access to healthy natural environments.
• Coordinated approach to mental health services.
• Community involved in decision making.
• Coordinate and expand Community-Led Mental Health and Wellbeing Support 
Initiatives (e.g. Lifeline Country to Coast initiative).
• Establish an Online Hub/Community for promotion and awareness of mental 
health supports and case studies.
• Advocate for visiting and outreach mental health services.
• Prepare for acute mental health resources under drought conditions.
• Support suicide prevention programs favouring a self-determination
/community-led approach.
• Ongoing support and access to health and community services for at risk 
sectors with priority being mental health services.
• Support community leaders and community resilience coordinators to help 
promote drought resilience programs.
• Education programs to fight stigma around mental health issues.
TOWNS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
• Water sensitive urban design.
• Water recycling.
• Smart irrigation technology.
• Manage natural environments in urban areas for 
drought resilience.
• Ensure sustainable use of water.
• Support the development of strategic community 
infrastructure to enhance social and recreational 
wellbeing of local communities.
• Integrate planing for risk of drought within regional health service and 
infrastructure planning.
• Assess current reliance of health, aged care, housing, industry and social 
infrastructure on rainwater.
• Investigate and exapnd recycled water use for irrigation region wide.
• Assist with development and/or funding of community projects,
 programs and infrastructure.
• Integrate WSUDs in asset planning.
• Investigate opportunities for urban cooling as part of all major Council 
place-making, urban development and infrastructure upgrade projects.
• Develop regional compost sites for use of waste. 
• Incorporate drought management/resilience as part of Council 
environmental management plans.
• Encourage use of indigenous/drought tolerant plants in public and private spaces.
• Support and encourage walkable neighbourhood design, physical activity 
and community use in town planning.
COMMUNITY INNOVATION AND CULTURAL PARTNERSHIPS
• Community collectives encouraging local 
entrepreneurism and place-making.
• Existing cultural partnerships through Landscapes 
SA and the five Aboriginal nations of the Northern 
and Yorke region. 
• Incorporation of Aboriginal knowledge and 
perspectives into planning and decision-making 
processes to increase drought resilience.
• Build the capacity of Aboriginal controlled 
and operated organisations to be involved in 
sustainable project delivery across the long-term.
• Build more sustainable and realistic relationships 
with farmers and other stakeholders to enhance 
and optimise land management.
• Boost the capacity and project-readiness of 
existing community incorporated associations.
• Ensure appropriate and meaningful engagement with Prescribed Body 
Corporates on funded projects.
• Partner with indigenous groups to develop and deliver training and education 
of the increased use of drought resistant native vegetation, improved water 
management and the importance of wildlife corridors for animals.
• Support the capacity for community groups to apply for grants.
of grants processes for grass-roots community groups.
• Develop ‘place based’ models for promoting economic diversification, 
local entrepreneurship and town vibrancy.

67
66
TREENET INLET
CITY OF MITCHAM.
PERMEABLE PAVEMENT 
CITY OF MITCHAM.
The City of Mitcham is pioneering the use of 
the TREENET Inlet designed by Space Down 
Under, (pictured below) which allows for 
water travelling along the street water table 
(gutter) to enter the soil surrounding a street 
tree via an inlet (Johnson, 2022)
Water from the water table is gravity fed into a plastic tube 
that deposits the water into a slotted vertical pipe that allows 
water to move from the pipe into the street verge soil. Water 
percolates into the gravel medium surrounding the vertical 
pipe and then into the soil of the street verge, providing a 
street tree with captured rainwater (Johnson, 2022). 
This system captures stormwater that would otherwise be 
destined for the sea, and in the process provides street trees 
with much needed water.
Research currently being conducted indicates that trees 
with access to stormwater via a TREENET Inlet system have 
thicker canopy with a higher leaf area index providing 
greater shade, higher rates of sap flow and create a cooler 
microclimate through evapotranspiration (Johnson, 2022).
Adelaide is experiencing the loss of green 
space and the loss of permeable surfaces. 
That is, surfaces that allow water to enter 
the soil. 
With an increase in impermeable surfaces, such as roofs, 
driveways, courtyards, roads and footpaths, the City of 
Mitcham is trialling the use of permeable pavement on some 
footpaths and roads within the council area (Johnson, 2022). 
Permeable pavement allows for the movement of water into 
the soil medium, providing street trees with additional and 
much needed water. 
The rainwater tanks in the image below have been 
photoshopped into the image to demonstrate the incredible 
water storage capacity of soils (Johnson, 2022). The light 
grey coloured paving surrounding each of the immature street 
trees, in the image below, is permeable pavement. Based 
on an average annual rainfall of 500mm, each of these 
street trees can access an additional 4000 litres of water per 
annum. This is based on the 8m2 of permeable pavement 
surrounding the tree (Johnson, 2022). 
Capturing rainwater where it falls and utilising the water 
for street tree growth, diverts water from aging stormwater 
infrastructure networks and allows street trees to access more 
water throughout the year. Recent studies indicate that the use 
of permeable pavement allows water to percolate further into 
the soil medium. This encourages tree roots to grow deeper 
to access water that is deeper in the soil. Tree roots can 
cause uplifting of traditional footpath pavement types and the 
remediation of this is an added cost for councils. 
Above images: A TREENET Inlet (pictured above) designed by Space Down Under delivers water to 
the soil of the street verge (nature strip), providing added water supply for street trees (Johnson, 2022)
Above image: A cross section diagram of a TREENET Inlet. 
Above image: The rainwater tanks represent the annual amount of water (4000 litres) delivered to the 
soil through 8m2 of permeable pavement. Photograph taken 29 October 2010 (Johnson, 2022). 
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y

69
68
At the national and state level, drought preparedness and 
resilience can be strengthened through knowledge and early 
warning systems of climatic conditions and the effective 
communication of this knowledge with communities 
(understanding climate projections and science). 
Community engagement across the Northern and Yorke region 
reflected that knowledge and improved forecasting of weather 
conditions is a priority for drought resilience. Improved climatic 
forecasting would allow farmers to better plan for the expected 
conditions to reduce farming inputs and enable more informed 
farm business decision making. The instability and variability in 
the seasons is increasing the complexity of farm planning.
Consultation in the region highlighted the opportunity to build 
the capacity of the community and farm management boards to 
prepare to prepare for drought resilience at a community service, 
business and farm management level. 
There is strong desire for strengthened education systems at the 
local level from school age through to tertiary training and 
workplace apprenticeships. There is concern that education has 
become more ‘city centric’ leading to gaps in regional knowledge. 
‘Education in place’ to support local knowledge and jobs is 
considered essential for strengthening regional communities 
and hence support resilience (NYRDA Drought Resilience 
Community Workshops, 2022).
8.5 Theme 4 – Knowledge and Education
STOP TRYING TO 
COMMUNICATE SCIENCE 
TO FARMERS, AGROS 
(AGRONOMISTS) ARE THE 
INFLUENCERS. PROVIDE 
THE DATA TO THE 
AGRONOMISTS
AT A BASIC LEVEL, THE MORE EDUCATED A COMMUNITY IS, 
THE MORE RESILIENT THE COMMUNITY IS. AN EDUCATED 
COMMUNITY IS ABLE TO FIND ALTERNATIVE INNOVATION
ANITA KUSS, UNIHUB SPENCER GULF
8.5.1	Regional Partners
There are various community groups and organisations involved in contributing to 
enhanced knowledge in the region. These are presented below in Table 19
Table 19. Knowledge and Education partners 
KNOWLEDGE AND EDUCATION PARTNERS
KEY PLANS AND GUIDING 
DOCUMENTS
NATIONAL
Australian Centre for International 
Agricultural Research
CRC for High Performance Soils
CSIRO
Bureau of Meteorology
Fight Food Waste CRC
Food Agility CRC
Future Food Systems CRC
Grains Research and 
Development Corporation
The University of Adelaide 
The University of South 
Australia
Flinders University
Policy
The Murray Darling Basin
GRDC – Business planning guide for farmers 
recovering from drought
NFF – A National Drought Policy
STATE
Department for Primary Industries 
and Regions SA
Department for Premier and 
Cabinet
Department for Environment and 
Water
Wellbeing SA
Department of Human Services
SA Local Government Association
SA Water
Primary Producers SA 
Conservation Council of SA
First Nations of SA
Ag Excellence Alliance 
Ag Bureau of SA 
SA Nature Alliance
Friends of Parks SA 
Landcare Association of SA 
Premier’s Climate Change 
Council
Drought Policy
SA Government – Water Industry Act 2012
SA Government – Water Security Statement
SA Government – South Australian Guide for 
Drought Assistance
GPSA – South Australian Guide for Drought 
Assistance
PIRSA – Drought management and recovery 
booklet
PIRSA – Business planning for farmers 
recovering from drought
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub – Node Co-design 
Workshops Report
REGIONAL
Regional Development Australia 
Yorke and Mid North
Regional Development Australia 
Barossa Gawler Light Adelaide 
Plains
Regional Development Australia 
Far North
Legatus Group
Northern and Yorke Landscape 
Board
SA Health – Local Health 
Networks
SA Drought Innovation and 
Adoption Hub
Social Service and Not for 
Profit Organisations
Spencer Gulf Uni Hub
TAFE SA 
Local Government Emergency Management 
Framework
The Northern and Yorke Regional Climate 
Adaptation Plan
Northern and Yorke Landscapes Board – 
Annual Business Plan 2021/22
LOCAL
Local Councils
Community Incorporated 
Associations
Indigenous Business Enterprises and 
Incorporations
Business Associations
Barossa Australia
Barossa Improved Grazing Group
Care Valley Wine and Grape
Hart Field Day Site
Mid North High Rainfall Group
Northern Adelaide Plains Food 
Cluster
Northern Sustainable Soils
Regional Agricultural Bureaus 
Upper North Farming Systems
Barossa Water Security Strategy
Barossa Water Allocation Plan
Clare Valley Water Allocation Plan
Clare Valley Water Supply Preliminary 
Business Case
Barossa Valley Water Supply Business Case
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), 
promotes that a proactive approach for enhancing drought resilience and 
to mitigate drought risks is composed of three important pillars: 
1.
2.
3.
Drought monitoring 
and early warning 
systems
Vulnerability 
and risk 
assessment
Drought risk 
mitigation 
measures
IMPROVED CLIMATIC FORECASTING WOULD 
ALLOW FARMERS TO BETTER PLAN FOR THE 
EXPECTED CONDITIONS TO REDUCE FARMING 
INPUTS AND ENABLE MORE INFORMED FARM 
BUSINESS DECISION MAKING.

71
70
8.5.2	Progress in Region
8.5.3	Key enabler categories
• The SA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub 
is one of eight Hubs established across the nation through 
regional node within the region in Orrorroo within the Upper 
North and Eastern sub-regional zone and the hub located at 
Roseworthy within the Plains and Ranges sub-regional zone. 
The Node is a shopfront where farmers and community 
members can connect with drought resilience expertise.
• Northern and Yorke Landscape Board provides industry and 	       
farming system groups with support, advice, capacity building    
and help with funding applications for sustainable agriculture 
and biodiversity improvement initiatives in the region. 
• The Northern and Yorke Lanscape Board Goyder’s Line project 
will deliver a range of extension and on-ground activities aimed 
at increasing farmers’ ability to manage their land, their stock 
and their businesses, through changing times.
• The Ag Excellence Alliance hosts the Regional Agricultural 
Landcare Facilitator (RALF) for the Northern and Yorke region. 
The facilitator works with landholders, farming systems and 
landcare groups, Landscape Board and RDC’s to identify and 
address sustainable agriculture initiatives. 
• The Goyder Institute for Water Research, as part of the SA 
Climate Ready Project, released the most comprehensive set 
of downscaled climate projections data ever available in 
South Australia in 2015. This data complements the national 
scale projections produced by the CSIRO and the Bureau of 
Meteorology. Downscales climate projections utilise complex 
climate information (from the past and the projected future) to 
produce finer resolution climate information to better account 
for regional climatic influences, such as local topography. 
(Climate Change in Australia, 2020). 
• The Future Drought Fund’s Climate Services for Agriculture 
(CSA) tool is also operational and provides users with location 
specific information on seasonal and monthly rainfall outlooks, 
and medium and longer term climate projections for rainfall 
and temperature. 
• RDA Yorke and Mid North has established a central online 
platform for community engagement and information 
delivery on the Northern and Yorke Drought Resilience Plan -              
www.droughtresilientny.com.au..
The following represent the key knowledge and 
education enabler categories:
• Understanding climate projections and science - In order to 
adapt to the future projected impacts of drought, individuals, 
businesses and the community will benefit from understanding 
the future climate projections for the region and acting to 
reduce the impacts through implementing change.
• Greater access to education and diversity and styles of learning 
- increasing access to relevant and timely information to inform 
decision making and behaviour and the tailoring of information 
to accommodate multiple and diverse learning styles.
• Adoption of proven international, national and regional 
drought adaptation and transformation techniques – learning 
from others, across Australia and the world who have greater 
adaptation and drought knowledge
The knowledge and education current progress, key enablers, 
priorities and actions are presented in Table 20.
THEME #4 KNOWLEDGE AND EDUCATION
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
KEY ENABLERS: UNDERSTANDING CLIMATE PROJECTIONS AND SCIENCE
• Recognition of changes to weather patterns over 
time by many 
farmers and farming groups
• Significant work conducted by DEW and SARDI to 
quantify projected impacts 
of climate change on available soil moisture and 
agricultural systems.
• Develop appropriate communication materials to 
suit varied learning 
styles and educational levels. 
• Co-develop materials with and for farmers, supply 
chains and rural communities.
• Effectively communicate the opportunities and 
need for rainfall independent income and revenue 
required for future farming enterprises.
• Connect community leaders who have experience 
of drought to the Drought Leaders Mentoring 
Program
• Engage both communications, researchers and educational specialists to 
work with farmers, argonomists, supply chain stakeholders and the broader 
community to understand barriers to understanding and acceptance of climate 
change.
• Develop communication materials based on findings from the stakeholder 
engagement and co-design process. Ensure the focus is on actions required and 
taken, rather than climate data.
• Engage trusted community leaders within the co-design process and promote 
messaging related to climate change projections.
• Develop case studies of farmers gaining income through rainfall independent 
systems. 
• Take advantage of the Drought Leaders Mentoring Program to ensure 
knowledge and skills transfer from farming districts with experience of drought 
to farming districts where drought management skills and knowledge are low.
• Build a longtitudinal data set (via survey or standing reference group) to obtain 
information required to avoid consultation fatigue.
• Develop a personal climate change checklist to allow farmers to identify if 
climate chnage is affecting their entreprise (e.g. business plan, soil moisture, 
evaporation rates, changes to growing season). 
GREATER ACCESS TO EDUCATION AND DIVERSITY AND STYLES OF LEARNING
• Regional based TAFE tertiary centres based in 
Nurioopta, Port Pirie, Point Pearce and Kadina.
• Uni Hub Spencer Gulf centres located in Port Pirie 
and Kadina.
• University of Adelaide campus located at 
Roseworthy offers agricultural 
science courses.
• Many forms of informal and short-course 
education offered by regionally based and 
extra-regional organisations.
• Education is a key enabler of drought resilience. 
Liaise with primary, secondary and tertiary 
education sectors to increase knowledge of 
climate science, adaptation and transformation.
• Incorporate resilience training models across the 
education sector through a train the trainer model.
• Education extends beyond formal institutions. 
Upskill farmers, agricultural supply chain 
stakeholders and regional business owners 
through increased community engagement, social 
media and targeted workshops. 
• Accommodate for a diverse range of learning 
styles and inequitable digital access 
and literacy.
• Local agricultural R&D networks play a key role in providing relevant and 
trusted information through extension. Utilise these existing networks through 
providing direct funding for drought resilience initiatives, that extend beyond 
agricultural R&D. 
• Where feasible, facilitate partnerships with trusted agricultural organisations 
and education, health and financial organisations to deliver more holistic farm 
management and drought resilience training.
• Develop a skillset approach to training that provides transferable skills for 
off-farm employment.
• Integrate resilience training, knowledge of climate science, adaptation and 
transformation across primary, secondary and tertiary studies.
• Utilise problem-based and inquiry-based experiential learning to better engage 
children and adults in transformative thinking and behaviour.
• Liaise with SA Health and SAHMRI to develop models of resilience training for 
teachers and educators, through a train the trainer model. 
• Roll out pilot training in select trial locations, seek feedback, improve training 
based on feedback and deliver the improved model regionally.
• Liaise and partner with other drought affected regions to create economies of 
scale training programs.
• Increase climate projection information, including evidence and examples of 
past, current and planned future incremental, transitional, and transformational 
change to localised farming organisations through crop walks, demonstration 
trials, drought working groups, field days, workshops, conferences etc. 
• Seek to influence and partner with both state and regional agricultural 
bodies to design programs and information targeted at farmers.
• Deliver information through a range of media, i.e., through direct
engagement and delivery, social media, websites, paper-based information, 
informal conversations and demonstration sites.
• Seek and access funding for drought specific research and development 
and extension. 

NORTHERN AND YORKE LANDSCAPE BOARD PROVIDES INDUSTRY AND FARMING 
SYSTEM GROUPS WITH SUPPORT, ADVICE, CAPACITY BUILDING AND HELP WITH FUNDING 
APPLICATIONS FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE AND BIODIVERSITY IMPROVEMENT 
INITIATIVES IN THE REGION.

73
72
8.6 Resilience Theme #5 – Research and Innovation
8.6.1	Overview
Research and innovation has long been at 
the heart of Australian agriculture. Over time, 
Australian farmers have altered practices, 
management decisions and adopted new 
technologies and genetics to improve productivity 
and profitability. 
The need to invest in and continually improve over time is 
required, especially given the global, national and regional drivers 
of change, one of which is an increase in the severity, duration 
and frequency of drought. 
There are limitations to productivity gains and adaptation in a 
scenario where rainfall is projected to reduce over time and 
evaporation is projected to increase (Hope, 2015). As such, there 
is a need to extend research and development beyond what is 
provided in the agriculture sphere and to integrate other research 
and development into agricultural systems and supply chains.
There is also a need to invest in research and innovation beyond 
farming systems, including increasing the value of a good or 
service produced in the region. 
Research is also required at the regional scale to determine 
methods of increasing regional populations, increasing 
employment opportunities, housing stock and creating a critical 
number of people to support further development of health, 
aged care and child care services. 
8.6.2 Progress in the region
Research and innovation related to drought has primarily been 
through proven improvements in agricultural productivity, return 
on investment and profitability. Further advancements relate to 
efficiencies and making farmers lives easier. 
MORE SERVICES WHICH 
SUPPORT LANDHOLDERS 
TO CONFIDENTLY DIVERSIFY 
FROM RAINFALL DEPENDENT 
SYSTEMS TO OTHER MORE 
DROUGHT RESILIENT 
PRODUCTION SYSTEMS.
Plant and 
animal breeding 
and genetics.
Precision agriculture 
and digital tools.
The internet 
of things.
Improved soil 
management.
Increased 
modernisation of 
farming techniques 
through advances 
in machinery and 
technology.
ALL OF THE AFOREMENTIONED ARE CATEGORISED 
ACROSS THE FOLLOWING AREAS:
8.5.4	Case study
The following case study relates to a disaster risk reduction and resilience program run by UNESCO.
UNESCO DISASTER RISK REDUCTION.
The United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural organisation (UNESCO) 
has developed a series of resources and 
targeted programs to assist children to better 
understand, prepare for and build resilience to 
natural disasters (UNESCO, 2018). 
The key finding of the program is that the more eduction, the 
less risk of post disaster shock (UNESCO, 2018). If children 
are informed about, prepared for and know what to do in the 
event of a disaster and post disaster, resilience can be built 
through skills and knowledge. 
As part of the educational program, UNESCO developed 
a technical guidance document for integrating disaster risk 
reduction in the school curriculum (UNESCO, 2018). 
A separate program has been run through schools in regional 
South America. UNESCO is working with policy-makers, 
universities and young people to increase the resilience 
of educational institutions and local communities in at-risk 
regions (UNESCO, 2018).
The program has three pillars (UNESCO, 2018):
1. Support to regional, national and local authorities to 
lead and implement the Comprehensive School Safety 
Framework.
2. Strengthen the role of universities in risk management, 
reaching local and educational communities.
3. Facilitate activities led by girls, boys and young people 
that aim to reduce vulnerability and increase the resilience 
of educational institutions and local communities, 
underlining rights and protection principles.
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
THEME #4 KNOWLEDGE AND EDUCATION
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
ADOPTION OF PROVEN INTERNATIONAL, NATIONAL AND REGIONAL DROUGHT ADAPTATION 
AND TRANSFORMATION TECHNIQUES
• Agricultural productivity gains across the region 
demonstrate how advances 
in technology, genetics and management practices 
have already increased resilience 
to multiple farming stressors, including drought.
• High adoption of no-till farming.
• High adoption of containment feeding during dry 
times and drought.
• Use of localised aquifer storage and recharge 
through the Clare Valley wine region.
• Development of alternative water and reuse 
schemes, particularly through the Northern 
Adelaide Plains and Barossa. 
• Incorporation of Aboriginal knowledge and 
perspectives into planning and decision-making 
processes to increase drought resilience
• Build the capacity of Aboriginal controlled and 
operated organisations to be involved 
in sustainable project delivery across the long-term
• Build more sustainable and realistic relationships 
with farmers and other stakeholders to change 
perspectives on land management
• Develop partnerships with locations that have 
experienced conditions the Northern 
and Yorke Region will experience by 2030
• Develop information sharing partnerships with 
drought prone regions across the 
world (Israel, Saudi Arabia, Western USA, 
Southern Africa, Chile, Argentina).
• Ensure appropriate and meaningful engagement with Prescribed Body 
Corporates on funded projects.
• Long-term funding in place to support positions.
• Partner with indigenous groups to develop and deliver training and education 
of the increased use of drought resistant native vegetation, improved water 
management and the importance of wildlife corridors for animals.
• Form information sharing partnership agreements with regional locations that 
have experience of drought transition, adaptation, and transformation. Target 
locations with greater experience and knowledge of drought. 
• Utilise these agreements to target funding towards gaps in research and utilise 
the partnerships to ensure data, stories and progress reports are shared between 
regions. For example, the WA Wheat Belt is experiencing conditions that the 
N&Y region are projected to experience in 2030. What can N&Y learn from the 
WA Wheat Belt in terms of adaptation and transformation? 
• Target further research and development of transformational systems and 
changes. Showcase transformational systems through demonstration trials.

75
74
8.6.3	Regional partners
8.6.4	Progress in the region
Research and Innovation partners are identified in Table 21.
Table 21. Research and Innovation partners
Table 22. Research and Innovation current progress, key enablers, priorities and actions
RESEARCH AND INNOVATION PARTNERS
KEY PLANS AND GUIDING 
DOCUMENTS
NATIONAL
Australian Centre for International 
Agricultural Research
CRC for High Performance Soils
CSIRO
Bureau of Meteorology
Fight Food Waste CRC
Food Agility CRC
Future Food Systems CRC
The University of Adelaide 
The University of South Australia
Flinders University
Carnegie Melon University
Future Drought Fun
Drought Policy
The Murray Darling Basin
GRDC – Business planning guide for 
farmers recovering from drought
NFF – A National Drought Policy
STATE
Department for Primary Industries 
and Regions SA
Department for Premier and Cabinet
Department for Environment and 
Water
Wellbeing SA
Department of Human Services
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub
SA Local Government Association
SA Water
Primary Producers SA
Conservation Council of SA
First Nations of SA
Ag Excellence Alliance 
Ag Bureau of SA 
SA Nature Alliance
Friends of Parks SA 
Landcare Association of SA 
Premier’s Climate Change Council 
TAFE SA
Drought Policy
SA Government – Water Industry Act 
2012
SA Government – Water Security 
Statement
SA Government – South Australian 
Guide for Drought Assistance
GPSA – South Australian Guide for 
Drought Assistance
PIRSA – Drought management and 
recovery booklet
PIRSA – Business planning for farmers 
recovering from drought
SA Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub – Node Co-design 
Workshops Report
REGIONAL
Regional Development Australia Yorke 
and Mid North
Regional Development Australia 
Barossa Gawler Light Adelaide Plains
Regional Development Australia Far 
North
Legatus Group
Northern and Yorke Landscape 
Management Board
SA Health – Local Health Networks
SA Drought Innovation and 
Adoption Hub
Social Service and Not for Profit 
Organisations
Spencer Gulf Uni Hub
Local Government Emergency 
Management Framework
The Northern and Yorke Regional 
Climate Adaptation Plan
Northern and Yorke Landscapes Board – 
Annual Business Plan 2021/22
LOCAL
Local Government
Community Incorporated Associations
Indigenous Business Enterprises and 
Incorporations
Business Associations
Barossa Australia
Barossa Improved Grazing Group
Clare Valley Wine and Grape 
Association
Hart Field Day Site
Mid North High Rainfall Group
Northern Adelaide Plains Food 
Cluster
Northern Sustainable Soils
Regional Agricultural Bureaus 
Upper North Farming Systems
Barossa Water Security Strategy
Barossa Water Allocation Plan
Clare Valley Water Allocation Plan
Clare Valley Water Supply Preliminary 
Business Case
Barossa Valley Water Supply Business 
Case
Local, regional and state and nationally funded 
research and development occurs through trial 
and demonstration sites across the region. 
Research and innovation has traditionally 
been focused on:
• Education and skill development offered locally
(workshops, events, field days, crop walks)
• Indirect education provided (web or paper based) -
Fact Sheets, data, videos, podcasts, links to funding,
other resources.
• Collaboration between multiple farming organisations.
Research, innovation and extension has taken the form of:
• Agronomic advances through:
> Improved soils and crop/animal nutrition.
> Improved crop and pasture protection.
> Water quality.
> Pest and disease management.
> Tillage practices and time of sowing
(grain and break crops only).
• Business support/financial planning.
• Weather and/or soil moisture data.
• Farm planning support and training.
• Health, WHS and wellbeing.
• On-farm risk management.
• 	Helps farmers and communities respond to
the impacts of drought
• 	Prepares farmers and communities for the
Impacts of a changing climate
8.6.5	Key enabler categories
The following represent the key research and innovation 
enabler categories:
• Value-add – Research and innovation designed to increase the
value of goods and services produced in the Northern and
Yorke region.
• Inter-disciplinary and integrated research – Research and
innovation that take a systems approach to improving outcomes,
such as research options for an entire supply chain or seeks to
incorporate efficiencies through the value-add process.
The research and innovation current progress, key enablers, 
priorities and actions are presented in Table 22.
THEME #5 RESEARCH AND INNOVATION
CURRENT PROGRESS:
PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD:
ACTIONS:
KEY ENABLERS: VALUE-ADD
• Particular areas, such as the Barossa Valley have 
successfully built on the wine region brand to 
create a range of businesses that value-add to 
agricultural commodities.
• Paddock to plate enterprises. 
• Strong food and wine tourism has allowed for 
value-add processes.
• Maximise the spike in tourism to offer locally 
produced goods through bricks and mortar shops.
• Investigate options for digital marketplaces and 
online sales of locally produced goods.
• Increase variety of paddock to plate, farm 
tourism, stays and events. 
• Identify current assets and strengths and build 
upon these. 
• Develop a longitudinal data set to assess change 
in stakeholder drought resilience perspectives 
over time.
• Research successful industries and regions increasing the value of products 
and services in regional locations, within Australia and globally.
• Fund a value-add opportunities report for the region based on this research
and inter-regional research, establishing the key barriers and enablers to 
increasing economic diversity through value-adding and on-selling products 
both within the region, extra-regionally and online.
• Invest in options for native Australian foods and support Aboriginal enterprises 
to develop this market. 
• Investigate options for solar farms and wind farms. 
• Ensure investment in local infrastructure supports value-add ventures. 
• Determine options for further diversifying tourism in the region. 
• Determine options for utilising the Regional Wellbeing Survey and other 
ABARES surveys to capture changes in perspectives over time. 
TRANS-DISCIPLINARY AND INTEGRATED RESEARCH
• Unknown
• Research options for creating efficiencies across 
supply chains, considering the needs of global 
customers. 
• Investigate options for manufacturing of 
agricultural goods produced locally. 
• Build off the momentum of state government 
space, defence, hi-tech and digital foci.
• Examine the role that education can play in 
creating resilience across key regional industries.
• Determine the in-region educational programs 
that can seek to  further diversify the regional 
economy.
• Determine the global mega-drivers of change. 
• Establish partnerships between the region and local and interstate 
manufacturing and agtech communities. 
• Seek to develop an MOU or equivalent partnership with Lot14 and emerging 
industries for opportunities for the region. 
• Develop a technology specific regional development strategy to identify 
potential partnerships and opportunities for improvement. 
• Engage the education sector in design-thinking programs to assist in
 improving economic diversity through integrating a range of industry sectors.

77
76
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
Case study
TOTALLY RENEWABLE YACKANDANDAH.
Yackandanah is located in Victoria, 27 
kilometres south of the Victorian and New 
South Wales border (Google maps, 2022). 
In 2014, a community group formed with 
the goal of establishing a microgrid 
powered by 100% renewable energy 
(Totally Renewable Yackandandah, 2021). 
Microgrids are small, localised networks that share energy 
from interconnected small-scale technologies like solar and 
batteries with small communities (Australian Renewable 
Energy Agency, 2021).
As well as improving energy independence for isolated 
populations, they offer a way to accelerate the shift to 
locally-deployed renewable energy (Australian Renewable 
Energy Agency, 2021).
While microgrids are not new, the falling cost of solar, 
batteries and energy management technology is making 
them a viable option for more regions that struggle with 
expensive, polluting and unreliable electricity supplies 
(Australian Renewable Energy Agency, 2021).
In Yackandandah a combination of rooftop solar PV panels 
and battery storage systems have been utilised to capture 
and store solar energy. 
All told, Totally Renewable Yackandandah has developed 
three functioning microgrids, a 10-building virtual power 
plant made of solar and behind-the-meter battery storage, 
and driven the uptake of rooftop solar on 60% of buildings 
in the Yack valley.
HOW DOES SOURCING RENEWABLE ENERGY 
ASSIST IN BUILDING DROUGHT RESILIENCE?
• Drought places financial strain on individuals, organisations 
and businesses. Independent energy allows communities 
to reduce the ongoing costs of electricity. This reduces the 
costs of living and allows for money to be spent on other 
goods and services throughout the community.
• The Northern and Yorke region has an abundance of sun 
filled days. Why not take advantage of this? Utilising and 
capturing solar energy, can help businesses, families and 
individuals to reduce the cost of living. 
• Microgrids are dependable, not reliant on centralized 
networks like the National Electricity Market. In the event 
of a state shortfall in electricity, microgrids can provide an 
alternative energy source.
• Microgrids increase resilience to natural disasters, such as 
bushfires. During times when communities may be cut-off 
from the “outside world”, microgrids allow for key services 
to continue. 
• Community owned microgrids, not only reduce power bills 
but can be used to earn income. This income can be used 
for other public good measures. 
In the case of Yackandandah, the community saw many 
reasons to develop a community owned microgrid.
C
A
S
E
S
T
U
D
Y
$160 MILLION 
LEAVES OUR REGION EVERY YEAR IN ELECTRICITY BILLS. IT’S HARD TO KNOW WHAT A 
POST-COVID PHASE WILL LOOK LIKE, BUT IF WE CAN START KEEPING THAT IN OUR COMMUNITY, 
IT GOES TO LOCAL JOBS AND INVESTMENT, AND UPSKILLING. IT’S A CIRCULAR ECONOMY. 
WE’VE CREATED AN ENVIRONMENT NOW WHERE THESE PROJECTS CAN GET UP.
CAM KLOSE, TOTALLY RENEWABLE YACKANDANDAH (PATAGONIA, 2020)
9. PLAN IMPLEMENTATION 
FRAMEWORK.
GOVERNANCE.
The successful implementation of the Plan will be founded on 
continued partnership across the Northern and Yorke Regional 
Alliance stakeholders and building the drought resilience capacity 
of community groups, local businesses, industry groups and farm 
management boards in the region.
This Plan identifies a number of potential stakeholders to deliver 
on the five priority themes of: Resilient Farming Enterprises, 
Resilient Industry, Resilient Communities, Knowledge and Education 
and Research and Innovation. However, there is no limit to 
the community stakeholders who may be involved in resilience 
actions and the Alliance encourages all sectors of the community 
to engage in the Plan implementation. The Regional Alliance is 
committed to both:
• Integrating these plan priorities within relevant stakeholder 
planning frameworks to ensure that drought risk is assessed 
and considered across social, economic and environmental 
planning for the region; and
• Supporting grass-roots capacity of local industry and community 
groups in the region in drought resilience project identification, 
grant proposals and project management.
The NYRDP Steering Committee will steer Plan finalisation 
and awareness raising of the Plan, in accordance with the 
Commonwealth funding agreement, up until December 2022. 
Plan implementation monitoring and longer-term evaluation will 
be undertaken through the Northern and Yorke Alliance partners.
The Plan Implementation Framework is shown in Figure 25.
Ongoing governance of the Plan will be 
administered via the Northern and Yorke 
Alliance (the Alliance) as a standing agenda item 
(alongside Climate Change Sector Agreement). 
Each Alliance member is an incorporated regional based 
organisation that works with local government, businesses, 
community groups and other organisations across the region. 
The Alliance seeks to drive better outcomes for local communities 
through better land management, governance and administration, 
and regional development activities that grow the capacity of the 
region and the quality of life for people living and working in the 
Norther and Yorke region. 
The processes and administrative arrangements for the Alliance 
are set out in the Terms of Reference for the Alliance administered 
by each of the Alliance members in rotation. 
The implementation of the Plan will be managed at a sub-regional level by Alliance 
members as part of their business-as-usual activities (including their strategic and 
business planning activities), working closely with local farm and supply chain 
businesses, communities and stakeholders on the ground to deliver the priority 
actions needed to build drought resilience. 
Implementation
To ensure the Plan achieves its purpose in building drought 
resilience throughout the region, it is critical that regional 
partners continue to own the Plan beyond the co-design phase, 
and work collaboratively in implementing the Plan. 
This requires regional partners (farm businesses, supply chain 
businesses, local communities, local government) and other 
stakeholders to understand the Plan, have a sense of ownership 
of it, and possess the knowledge, skills and resources to 
delivery priority actions and learn from experience as they go. 
Regional partners’ role(s) in implementing the Plan
Regional partners are those actors ‘on the ground’ in the region 
who are undertaking the day-to-day activities impacted by 
drought conditions, as well as those activities that can best 
build drought resilience. 
Key roles to be played by regional stakeholders in 
implementing and maintaining the Plan include:
• Drawing on the Plan as an input to other planning 
activities to ensure priority actions are incorporated into 
their wider activities.
• Delivering projects and initiatives that align with the priority 
actions identified in the Plan- these forming the adoption 
pathways through which material changes to operations, 
practices and decision making occur which then improve 
drought resilience. 
• Engaging with Alliance members to learn about drought 
resilience activities being planned or underway elsewhere, 
and other forms of new knowledge to help refine and inform 
drought resilience activities locally. This adaptive learning 
process will enable lessons to be incorporated into future 
planning and prioritisation activities to make subsequent 
drought resilience activities more impactful and effective. 
Benefits to regional partners 
• (Where the Plan is implemented successfully) reduced 
exposure to the negative impacts of drought, leading to:
	 > Avoided losses to production (sales) and higher inputs 
costs which lead to corresponding financial hardships.
	 > Avoided environmental losses and damages through better 
management of natural environments and water resources
	 > Avoided losses to social capital, cultural connectivity and 
community cohesion through better management of the 
connections that bind these communities of interest, and 
better management of the physical environments that play 
a role in enabling these communities to come together 
and undertake culturally significant activities. 
• Access to funding opportunities via the Future Drought 
Fund to deliver projects that enhance drought resilience – 
projects that will contribute towards other positive outcomes 
including stronger profitability within businesses, better risk 
management (and reduced financial exposure), and better 
quality amenities for regional communities. 
Empowering regional partners to own the Plan 
The co-design process by which the Plan has been developed 
does not end with the publication of a document. Rather, 
regional partners are being empowered to own the Plan going 
forwards, working to implement and refine priority actions as 
progress is made on different aspects of drought resilience, 
new information and funding becomes available and 
circumstances change in the Plan region. 
Key to ongoing ownership and maintenance of the Plan 
by regional partners will be an adaptive learning process 
whereby learnings from the implementation of the Plan (and 
delivery of priority actions across the Plan region) and drought 
resilience activities more broadly are shared with regional 
partners to help them adapt their approach to building drought 
resilience as knowledge grows and circumstances change. 
This adaptive learning process will be facilitated by Alliance 
members as part of the ongoing governance of the Plan. 
The importance of regional partners and stakeholders in implementing the Plan

79
78
Activities that will be undertaken by Alliance 
members in enabling activities by stakeholders in 
implementing the NYRDRP will include:
• Promoting the NYRDRP to regional partners and other
stakeholders to encourage them to incorporate/reflect on priority
actions when undertaking their strategic and business planning;
• Encouraging regional partners and stakeholders to engage with
Future Drought Fund programs to support the delivery of priority
actions from the NYRDRP;
• Monitoring regional partners and stakeholders’ strategic
planning and project delivery activities to identify whereas
activities align with relevant NYRDRP priority actions;
• Engaging with regional partners and stakeholders to understand
learnings from resilience activities being undertaken in sub
region, and where priorities may be changing;
• Identifying and incorporating new data and information relating
to scenario forecasting into the MEL Framework process and
information sharing with regional partners and stakeholders to
ensure decision makers and partners have access to current
data and information, to aid in decision making around drought
resilience activities;
• Engaging with stakeholders (both in-region and from relevant
communities of practice) to share new knowledge and insights to
building resilience to drought and in delivering priority activities
addressed in the NYRDRP, to enable adaptive learning to occur,
and;
• Reprioritising the priority actions for the sub-region annually,
using the MCA developed by Edge Environment, updated to
reflect new priorities or redundant actions for omission.
Notional allocations of responsibility for each of the sub-regions 
are as follows:
> Upper North and East - Legatus
> Mid North - RDAYMN
> Yorke Peninsula - NYLB
> Plains and Ranges - RDABGLAP
Activities being undertaken or planned at the regional level, or 
by Alliance members, will be monitored through the Alliance. 
New information, in terms of research, knowledge or funding 
opportunities, are also be to shared between Alliance members to 
enable this information to be shared with the relevant sub-region. 
Engagement with regional partners (as referenced in chapter 8 of 
the Plan) identified at the national, state and regional levels will 
occur through the Alliance; engagement with regional partners 
will occur via the relevant Alliance member responsible for that 
sub-region. 
Alongside these core delivery and implementation actities, the 
Alliance will oversee an ongoing monitoring, evaluation and 
learning (MEL) framework to ensure adaptive learning informs 
the maintenance of the Plan going forwards. 
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND 
LEARNING (MEL) FRAMEWORK
Progress made against the NYRDRP, changes to priority actions 
under the NYRDRP, and insights and learnings obtained through 
the MEL framework are to be captured and documented in the 
form of Table 24 below. 
A summary of the insights obtained through the MEL framework will 
be published through the Alliance annually to inform and enable 
the adaptive learning process, and aid in the dissemination of 
new insights and learnings. 
This information should form a key input to the annual 
reprioritisation of the priority action list at the sub-regional level. 
Future updates of the plans will develop multiple plausible 
scenarios with active stakeholder participation to consider how 
intervertion options develop over time, considering shocks and 
drivers of regional change and drought and other stresses. 
Table 24: An example of NYRDRP Activities, Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework
Figure 25. The Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan implementation framework
BUILD PLAN
AWARENESS.
1
NYRDRP Steering 
Committee
Launch communications 
plan and online platform 
- www.droughtresilientny.
com.au.
Each sub-regional zone to 
create an implementation 
plan according to their 
purpose and integrate with 
planning frameworks 
(refer to sections 8.1 - 8.5)
• Resilience planning support 
for industry, farming and 
community groups.
• Support on National 
Drought Resilience grants.
• Support through local 
grants schemes.
• Identify community 
governance gaps.
• Communications and case 
study sharing through the 
NYDRP online platform.
• Networking on progress
through the Drought 
Resilience Hub.
• Report on progress in 12 
months Alliance reports.
• Strategic review of drought 
investment annually.
• Strategic review of NYDRP 
5 yearly.
MAP & INTEGRATE
PLAN ACTION.
2
Regional Alliance
Partners
MONITOR &
EVALUATE.
5
Regional Alliance
Partners
BUILD GRASS
ROOTS CAPACITY.
3
Regional Alliance
Partners & Community
Stakeholders
IMPLEMENT & 
TRACK ACTION.
4
All Community
Stakeholders Networking 
through the Drought 
Resilience Hub
STAKEHOLDER
ACTIVITY
ALIGNMENT 
THEORY OF  
CHANGE
INDICATOR(S)
IMPACT(S)
LEARNINGS
Entity undertaking 
activity
(Planning, project 
or core/BAU 
activities being 
undertaken 
pertaining to 
drought resilience 
and related issues)
(Alignment 
of the activity 
against domain(s) 
of resilience 
(economic, 
environmental and 
social) specific 
NYRDRP themes, 
enablers and 
priority actions)
What risks(s) are 
being addressed 
through what 
mechanism(s) to 
improve which 
domain(s) of 
resilience)
(Measures of 
outcomes being 
achieved in 
respect of those 
objectives being 
pursued, defined 
in reference to 
impacts identified 
in chapter 3 of the 
Plan)
(Observed 
outcomes in 
respect of those 
indicators)
(Success and 
detracting factors 
observed; new 
knowledge 
created; 
lessons taken 
from activity; 
opportunities 
to share these 
learnings)
Legatus
Northern and 
Yorke Community 
Continuity 
Planning for 
Disasters
Domain: Social 
resilience
Theme: Resilient 
Communities 
Enabler: Health 
and Wellbeing
Improving 
community 
members’ 
awareness of 
risks to mental 
wellbeing, and the 
services available, 
will provide them 
with a better 
understanding of 
risk factors and 
opportunities for 
managing risks.
This improved 
awareness will 
increase utilisation 
of services, 
producing better 
mental health 
outcomes which 
in turn remove 
a barrier to 
participation
• Quality of
mental health
outcomes
• Prevalence of
health conditions
and co-morbidities
• Incidence of
suicide
• Rates of
volunteering
within the
community
[To be measured 
during and post 
implementation]
[To be captured 
during and post 
implementation]
The proposed template for implementing the MEL framework is featured below at Table 24. 
This template includes a live example in Legatus’ Northern and Yorke Community Continuity 
Planning for Disasters project for illustrative purposes. 
NYRDRP MEL TEMPLATE.
VISION
A FUTURE WHERE, DESPITE THE ENDURING AND INCREASING RISKS ASSOCIATED 
WITH DROUGHT, CLIMATE CHANGE AND ASSOCIATED SHIFTS IN RAINFALL AND 
MOISTURE AVAILABILITY, COMMUNITIES IN THE NORTHERN AND YORKE REGION 
ARE ABLE TO WITHSTAND THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPACTS OF DROUGHT IN ORDER TO FLOURISH AND PROSPER. 
IDENTIFYING AND 
INCORPORATING 
NEW DATA AND 
INFORMATION

81
80
REFERENCES.
Alston, M. & Kent, J., 2004. Social Impacts of Drought, Wagga Wagga: Centre for Rural 
Social Research, Charles Sturt University.
Alston, M. & Kent, J., 2006. The impact of drought on secondary education access in 
Australia’s rural and remote areas: a report to DEST and the Rural Education Program 
of FRRR, s.l.: Centre for Rural Social Research - Charles Sturt University.
Ashton, D., 2022. Statistician, ABARES [Interview] (25 February 2022).
Ausrtalian Dgital Inclusion Index, 2021. Key Findings. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.digitalinclusionindex.org.au/key-findings-and-next-steps/
[Accessed 12 May 2022].
Austin, E. et al., 2018. Drought-related stress among farmers: findings from the 
Australian Rural Mental Health Study. Medical Journal of Australia.
Australian Export Grains Innovation Centre, 2018. Australia’s grain supply chains, 
Perth, Western Australia: Australian Export Grains Innovation Centre.
Australian Renewable Energy Agency, 2021. $50 Million fund for regional microgrid projects. [Online] 
Available at: https://arena.gov.au/blog/arena-opens-50-million-fund-for-regional-microgrid-projects/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Bradley, M., 2020. Program Manager, Water Sensitive SA [Interview] (29 May 2020).
Broadbent, A. et al., 2018. The microscale cooling effects of water sensitive urban design and 
irrigation in a suburban environment. Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 134(1-2), pp. 1-23.
Brown, E., 2022. CEO, Flinders Ranges Council [Interview] (4 February 2022).
Bueau of Meteorology, 2022. Climate Statistics - Australian Locations. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/cw_018201.shtml
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2018. State of the Climate 2018, Canberra: 
Commonwealth of Australia.
Bureau of Meteorology, 2005. Australian Water Outlook. [Online] 
Available at: https://awo.bom.gov.au/products/historical/soilMoisture-
rootZone/4,-27.528,134.165/nat,-25.609,134.362/r/d/2022-05-16
[Accessed 15 May 2022].
Climate Change in Australia, 2020. Downscaling. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/learning-support
/climate-models/downscaling/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
CSIRO; Bureau of Meteorology; Farm Link, 2019. Regional Weather and Climate Guide, s.l.: s.n.
Dahl-helm, L., 2022. Environment Officer, Yorke Peninsula Council [Interview] (16 February 2022).
Data SA, 2020. Population Projections - South Australian Regions. [Online] 
Available at: https://data.sa.gov.au/data/dataset/population-projections-for-sa/
resource/6891e275-ab66-4cf8-842a-647156fad445#
[Accessed 12 May 2022].
Department for Environment and Water, 2018. Clare Valley Prescribed Water Resources Area 
Fractured rock aquifers, s.l.: Department of Environment and Water.
Department for Environment and Water, 2018. Soil groups - Southern South Australia, s.l.: 
Government of South Australia.
Alston, M. & Kent, J., 2004. Social Impacts of Drought, Wagga Wagga: Centre for Rural Social 
Research, Charles Sturt University.
Alston, M. & Kent, J., 2006. The impact of drought on secondary education access in Australia’s rural 
and remote areas: a report to DEST and the Rural Education Program of FRRR, s.l.: Centre for Rural 
Social Research - Charles Sturt University.
Ashton, D., 2022. Statistician, ABARES [Interview] (25 February 2022).
Ausrtalian Dgital Inclusion Index, 2021. Key Findings. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.digitalinclusionindex.org.au/key-findings-and-next-steps/
[Accessed 12 May 2022].
Austin, E. et al., 2018. Drought-related stress among farmers: findings from the Australian Rural 
Mental Health Study. Medical Journal of Australia.
Australian Export Grains Innovation Centre, 2018. Australia’s grain supply chains, Perth, Western 
Australia: Australian Export Grains Innovation Centre.
Australian Renewable Energy Agency, 2021. $50 Million fund for regional microgrid projects. [Online] 
Available at: https://arena.gov.au/blog/arena-opens-50-million-fund-for-regional-microgrid-projects/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Bradley, M., 2020. Program Manager, Water Sensitive SA [Interview] (29 May 2020).
Broadbent, A. et al., 2018. The microscale cooling effects of water sensitive urban design and 
irrigation in a suburban environment. Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 134(1-2), pp. 1-23.
Brown, E., 2022. CEO, Flinders Ranges Council [Interview] (4 February 2022).
Bueau of Meteorology, 2022. Climate Statistics - Australian Locations. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/cw_018201.shtml
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2018. State of the Climate 2018, Canberra: Commonwealth 
of Australia.
Bureau of Meteorology, 2005. Australian Water Outlook. [Online] 
Available at: https://awo.bom.gov.au/products/historical/soilMoisture-
rootZone/4,-27.528,134.165/nat,-25.609,134.362/r/d/2022-05-16
[Accessed 15 May 2022].
Climate Change in Australia, 2020. Downscaling. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/learning-support/climate-models/
downscaling/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
CSIRO; Bureau of Meteorology; Farm Link, 2019. Regional Weather and Climate Guide, s.l.: s.n.
Dahl-helm, L., 2022. Environment Officer, Yorke Peninsula Council [Interview] (16 February 2022).
Data SA, 2020. Population Projections - South Australian Regions. [Online] 
Available at: https://data.sa.gov.au/data/dataset/population-projections-for-sa/
resource/6891e275-ab66-4cf8-842a-647156fad445#
[Accessed 12 May 2022].
Department for Environment and Water, 2018. Clare Valley Prescribed Water Resources Area Fractured 
rock aquifers, s.l.: Department of Environment and Water.
Department for Environment and Water, 2018. Soil groups - Southern South Australia, s.l.: 
Government of South Australia.
Health Map, 2022. South Australia. [Online] 
Available at: https://studio.healthmap.com.au/
[Accessed 11 March 2022].
CSIRO; BOM.
Infrastructure Australia, 2022. Regional Strengths and Infrastructure Gaps , s.l.: Australian 
Government.
Jackson, W. et al., 2017. Australia State of the Environment 2016, Canberra: Department of 
Environment.
Johnson, D. T., 2020. Sustainable Infrastructure Engineer, City of Mitcham [Interview] 
(14 May 2020).
Johnson, D. T., 2022. Director, Treenet [Interview] 2022.
KBSS Engineering, 2020. Case Study - Sundrop Farms. [Online] 
Available at: https://kbssengineering.com.au/portfolio-items/sundrop-farms-project/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Kellock, J., 2022. Goyder Elected Member; MLA Advisoy Board Member [Interview] 
(4th February 2022).
Koch, J., 2022. Cluster Manager, Northern Adelaide Plains Food Cluster [Interview] 
(15 February 2022).
Landscapes SA - Northern and Yorke , 2022. Our Region. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ny/about-us/our-region
Landscapes South Australia Northern and Yorke, 2020. Plants and animals. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ny/plants-and-animals/native-plants-and-animals/
native-plants
[Accessed 12 May 2022].
Leonard, E., 2022. Director, AgriKnowHow [Interview] (11 April 2022).
Luong, T. et al., 2021. New Insights Into the Relationship Between Drought and Mental Health 
Emerging From the Australian Rural Mental Health Study. Psychiatry.
McCarthy, J. et al., 2001. Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, 
Cambridge: IPCC .
McCarthy, M., 2022. CEO, Barossa Council [Interview] (March 2022).
Melbourne Water, CRC Water Sensitive Cities, Manningham Council, 2015. ZAM-WSUD 
Handbook, Melbourne: Manningham Council.
Meuwissen, M. et al., 2019. A framework to assess the resilience of farming systems. 
Agricultural Systems.
National Farmers Federation, 2022. Roadmap 2030. [Online] 
Available at: https://nff.org.au/policies/roadmap/#:~:text=The%20National%20Farmers’%20
Federation%20(NFF,reach%20%2484bn%20by%202030.
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
National Parks and Wildlife Service South Australia, 2022. Adelaide International Bird Sanctuary - 
Winaityinaityi Pangkara. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.parks.sa.gov.au/parks/adelaide-international-bird-sanctuary-national-park
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
National Unity Government, n.d. [Online] 
Available at: http://nationalunitygovernment.org/pdf/aboriginal-australia-map.pdf
Northern and Yorke Landscapes Board, 2020. Our Region. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ny/about-us/our-region#:~:text=The%20
region%20supports%20a%20population,and%20the%20Southern%20Flinders%20Ranges.
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
NSW Health, 2022. Dust Storms Fact Sheet. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.health.nsw.gov.au/environment/factsheets/Pages/dust-storms.
aspx#:~:text=Prolonged%20exposure%20to%20airborne%20dust,problems%2C%20and%20
possibly%20heart%20disease.
O’Connell, D. et al., 2019. Resilience Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach -
 A guide to designing, implementing and assessing interventions for sustainable futures 
(version 2), s.l.: CSIRO.
Patagonia, 2020. Bright Sparks of Yackandandah. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.patagonia.com.au/blogs/roaring-journals/bright-sparks-yackandandah-
renewable-solar
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Price Waterhouse Cooper, 2020. Farming for the Future - Improving Natural Capital , s.l.: PwC; 
MadDoch Foundation; National Farmers Federation; Farming for the Future.
Primary Indutries and Regions South Australia, 2020. Primary Indutries in South Australia 
Fast Facts, Adelaide: Government of South Australia.
Profile ID, 2022. RDA Barossa-Gawler-Light-Adelaide Plains. [Online] 
Available at: https://economy.id.com.au/rda-barossa/industry-sector-analysis
Profile ID, 2022. RDA Yorke and Mid North Region. [Online] 
Available at: https://economy.id.com.au/rda-yorke-mid-north
Queensland Government, 2016. Impacts of erosion. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.qld.gov.au/environment/land/management/soil/erosion/
impacts#:~:text=The%20loss%20of%20this%20top,to%20store%20water%20and%20nutrients
Regional Development Australia Barossa Gawler Light Adelaide Plains, 2022. Food Industry. [Online] 
Available at: https://barossa.org.au/business-industry/industry-profile-food/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Regional Development Australia Yorke and Mid North, 2022. Community Development. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.yorkeandmidnorth.com.au/what-we-do/community-development/
[Accessed 2 May 2022].
SA Environmental Protection Authority, 2018. State of the Environment Summary Report 2018, 
Adelaide: EPA.
SA Water, 2022. Drinking water networks. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.sawater.com.au/water-and-the-environment/how-we-deliver-your-water-
services/networks-and-water-treatment-facilities#:~:text=Of%20all%20Australian%20water%20
utilities,at%20more%20than%20370%20kilometres.
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
SA Water, 2022. Reservoirs. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.sawater.com.au/water-and-the-environment/south-australias-water-
sources/reservoir-data
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Schmidt, G., 2022. Farmer, Eastern Drought Working Group [Interview] (12 May 2022).
Schmidt, S., 2022. Agronomist / Northern Sustainable Soils [Interview] (21 February 2022).
Schwartz, I. & McRae-Williams, P., 2009. Does major regional infrastructure influence the 
resilience of a rural community?, Ballarat, Victoria: Water in Drylands Collaborative Research 
Program, University of Ballarat.
Sommerville, N., 2022. Chair of Women in Ag; Farmer [Interview] (23 February 2022).
South Australian Drought and Innovation Adoption Hub, 2021. Node co-design workshops report, 
Roseworthy, South Australia: South Australian Drought and Innovation Adoption Hub.
Stanke, C. et al., 2013. Health Effects of Drought: a Systematic Review of the Evidence. 
National Library of Medicine, Volume 5.
Stevenson, D., 2022. CEO, DC of Goyder [Interview] (23 March 2022).
Sundrop Farms, 2020. Sundrop Farms. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.sundropfarms.com/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
Ting, I., Palmer, A. & Shatoba, K., 2022. Mapping Australia’s childcare blackspots. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-03-22/mapping-australia-s-childcare-
blackspots/100894808
[Accessed 11 March 2022].
Totally Renewable Yackandandah, 2021. Press Release. [Online] 
Available at: https://totallyrenewableyack.org.au/about/press/
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
UNESCO, 2018. Strengthening disaster risk reduction and resilience through education. [Online] 
Available at: https://en.unesco.org/strengthening-disaster-risk-reduction-and-resilience-through-
education
[Accessed 31 May 2022].
United Nations, 2018. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-
of-world-urbanization-prospects.html#:~:text=News-,68%25%20of%20the%20world%20
population%20projected%20to%20live%20in,areas%20by%202050%2C%20says%20
UN&text=Today%2C%2055%25%20of%20the%20
[Accessed 22 July 2020].
United Nations, n.d. Envision 2030 Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities. [Online] 
Available at: https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/envision2030-goal11.html
[Accessed 21 July 2020].
Webb, C., 2010. Reference Evapotranspiration Calculations, s.l.: Bureau of Meteorology.
Young, M.-A., 2022. Drought Recovery Facilitator, Department of Primary Industries and 
Regions [Interview] (28 February 2022).
Young, M., 2022. SAGIT President [Interview] (22 February 2022).

83
82
APPENDIX A: 
CLIMATE ANALOGUES.
Identification of areas that experience similar climatic conditions, but which may be separated 
in space or time (i.e. with past or future climates) can be helpful when starting to consider 
adaptation strategies to a changing climate. Locating areas where the current climate is similar 
to the projected future climate of a place of interest is a simple method for visualising and 
communicating the impact of projected changes.
Clare
Figure 26. The Clare 2030 RCP8.5 climate analogue
Figure 27. The Clare 2050 RCP8.5 climate analogues scenario

85
84
Figure 28. The Clare 2090 RCP8.5 Climate analogue
Figure 29. The Kadina 2030 RCP8.5 Climate analogue
Kadina

87
86
Figure 30. The Kadina 2050 RCP8.5 Climate analogue
Figure 31. The Kadina 2090 RCP8.5 climate analogue

89
88
Nuriootpa
Figure 32. The Nuriootpa 2030 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue
Figure 33. The Nuriootpa 2050 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue

91
90
Figure 34. The Nuriootpa 2090 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue
Figure 35. The Orroroo 2030 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue
Orroroo

93
92
Figure 36. The Orroroo 2050 RCP8.5 climate analogue
Figure 37. The Orroroo 2090 RCP8.5 climate analogue

95
94
Figure 38. The Port Pirie 2030 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue 
Figure 39. The Port Pirie 2050 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue
Port Pirie

97
96
Figure 40. The Port Pirie RCP8.5 2090 Climate Analogue
Figure 41. The Quorn 2030 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue
Quorn

99
98
Figure 42. The Quote 2050 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue
Figure 43. The Quorn 2090 RCP8.5 Climate Analogue

101
100
APPENDIX B: SOUTH AUSTRALIAN 
SOIL GROUPS.
Figure 44. Southern South Australia Soil Groups (Department for Environment and Water, 2018).
Figure 45. Southern SA existing soil organic carbon stocks 1990-2000 (Department for Environment and Water, 2021)

103
102
APPENDIX C: 
CONSULTATION SUMMARY.
A wide range of consultation methods were undertaken in the development of this Plan including face 
to face and online interviews, regional and key stakeholder workshops. From these interviews, the 
project team have taken notes of discussions and analysed for prominent themes. Prominent themes 
presented in this appendix are Resilient Farming Enterprises, Resilient Industry, Resilient Communities, 
Knowledge and Education, and Research and Innovation. Beneath each key theme are subthemes 
with examples of input from consultation which informed the strategic priorities.
Key Theme 1: Resilient Farming Enterprises
1) Risk Management
a) Off farm diversification 
i) Off-farm income is needed (Interview, Women in Ag 
president)
ii) Orroroo took 10 years to get back after drought - has to 
rely on off farm income (Interview, Regional Landscapes 
Facilitator AgEx Alliance)
b) On farm diversification
i) More of a focus on mixed farming systems (Interview, 
Regional Landscapes Facilitator AgEx Alliance)
ii) Some farmers are diversifying by buying land in different 
regions (Interview, Chair Mid North High Rainfall Group) 
c) Forward Planning
i) Looking at what science business/farmers/etc need to 
help 	
them understand risk going forward (Interview, 
Manager Climate Change Policy and Strategy, DEW)
d) Understanding and acceptance of a new reduced rainfall 
and increased evaporation scenario
i) Potential evaporation is increasing in the subtropics and 
southern Australia.  This means the atmosphere is sucking 
harder on whatever moisture is in the soil and this increases 
the chances of rapid drying and flash droughts (Interview, 
ANU)
e) Reduced reliance on expensive inputs
i) Water is twice as expensive (Interview, Viticultural 
Development Manager - Barossa Australia)
ii) Rising costs of higher fertilisers (Interview, Northern 
Sustainable Soils / Agronomist)
f) Integrated and coordinated mental health system
i) There’s need for a more coordinated approach to mental 
health services in the region (Interview, Legatus Group)
ii) There are existing initiatives and programs for farmer 
health and wellbeing. Examples include: Fat Farmers, I 
Farm Well and PIRSA’s FAB Mentor Program (Interview, 
Wellbeing SA)
2) Efficiency – doing more with less
a) Allocate further funding for natural resources management as 
a means of capturing and storing water
i) Lack of understanding of how catchment conditions such 
as soil processes and groundwater respond to and recover 
from acute and chronic drought (Interview, BOM)
b) Ensure sustainable use of water
i) Tapping into -waste water, mains water, reclaimed water 
(Mallala Workshop)
ii) Capture more stormwater (Eudunda workshop)
c) Conduct cost-benefit analysis of water reuse schemes.
i) Targeted impactful R&D – water re-use (Mallala workshop)
d) Increase research and development for key climate-
environment on-farm risks
i) develop more drought and frost resilient cereal varieties 
(Orroroo workshop)
3) Foresight Capabilities
a) Boost the number of agronomists, specialist farm advisors 
and direct training to address current and future gaps.
i) Over 70% of farmers use an agronomist (Interview, 
AgCommunicators)
b) Increase ability of soils to store moisture through directing 
funding for further research and extension. 
i) Need more work on soils, how to store moisture in the soils 
(Interview, Women in Ag)
ii) water stays in the paddocks when residues and soil 
structure are retained (Interview, SANTFA)
c) Increase access to localised, timely and accurate weather 
predictions.
i) Weather forecasts give 50% accuracy. Improved weather 
forecasting would greatly support the industry (Maitland 
workshop)
d) Increase communication of projected climate risks and key 
messages related to adaptation and transformation. 
i) Focus on making sure the science is coming through all 
levels of education
e) Buffer heat and evaporation through the development of a 
region-wide greening masterplan. 
i) Need funding for green areas (spaces – in the community/
towns) (Interview, Agrilink)
ii) Targeted impactful R&D, Urban greening (Mallala 
workshop)
f) Target forms of agriculture proven to work in low-rainfall 
environments.
i) more drought tolerant varieties - low rainfall legume 
(Interview, AgCommunicators)
ii) develop more drought and frost resilient cereal varieties 
(Orroroo workshop)
1)	Increase regional economic diversification
a)	 Regional diversification in industry form and function.
i) Geographic and industry diversification to reduce risk on 
sector (Interview, Financial Services SA)
b)	 Value add to existing regionally produced agricultural 
commodities.
i) Value add to a product - rather than selling wheat - 
manufacturing - food innovation - add value to something 
that are growing
c)	 Increasing understanding of market access and development.
i) Understand global market and global economy - Global 
market volatility will amplify climate risks and opportunities 
both in terms of input costs and commodity prices 
(Interview, National Broadacre Manager, AgXtra)
d)	 Encourage business investment in the carbon offset market for 
locations where farming viability is reduced. 
i) helping the farmer, looking at projects that helps resilience, 
e.g. how do we manage our soils, how do we engage in 
new world of carbon farming, e.g. looking to get funding 
to trial, extend (Interview AgEx Alliance)
e)	 Provide non-farming enterprises with a template and training 
for the development of business resilience plans (especially 
related to drought).
i) Gaps in business plan - accommodate for drought 
(Interview, AgCommunicators)
2)	Increase the liveability and employment opportunities 
available in the region
a)	 Increase the housing stock in the region through strategic 
expansion of townships in select locations.
i) have to move to areas where housing is available 
and more affordable (Interview, Women in Ag)
b)	 Increase digital access across the region.
i) Those who have reliable access to phone and 
internet continue to move ahead of those who do 
not (Interview, DC Goyder)
c)	 Increase access to health services.
i) Access to mental health services (Interview, 
AgCommunicators) 
d)	 Ensure sustainable use of water, including water reuse.
i) Water is the greatest sustainability issue for the valley 
(Interview, Barossa Council)
ii) Capture more stormwater (Eudunda workshop)
e)	 Support the development of strategic community infrastructure 
to enhance social and recreational wellbeing of local 
communities.
i) Tourism cycling trails/Art. Infrastructure aquifers. Promote 
our natural scenery walking, cycling, horse trails (Eudunda 
Workshop)
3)	Technology, automation, genetics.
a)	 Develop multiple demonstration sites showcasing and trialling 
use of precision agriculture, new crop genetic lines and 
options for agriculture and value-adding processes.
i) Drought results in reduced input spending - chemical 
companies don’t have money - don’t invest in trials 
(Interview AgXtra)
b)	 Adopt needed and innovative transitionary and 
transformation land management methods and systems.
i) Using containment areas for land management and 
and protection, native plans come back faster (Interview, 
Barossa Improved Grazing Group)
ii) The land is looking far better in these last few droughts - 
farmers have adopted good land management practices 
(Interview, PIRSA)
and store localised electricity for town use (community owned 
renewable energy).
i) Huge investment- Wind farms – solar farms on marginal 
land (farmers can be targeted) (Eudunda workshop)
Key Theme 2: Resilient Industry
Key Theme 3: Resilient Communities
1)	Health and Wellbeing
a)	 Improve capacity for mental health support 
i) There is an increase in suicidal ideation and mental health 
issues when communities are faced with drought (Interview, 
LHN)
b)	 A better connected and integrated community
i) Community based programs vital for resilient communities 
(Interview, Wellbeing SA)
c)	 Better access to health and wellbeing services
i) There’s need for a more coordinated approach to mental 
health services in the region (Interview, Legatus).
ii) Need more outreach services to allow everyone to have 
access (Wellbeing SA)
d)	 Maintain access to healthy natural environments
i) need funding for green areas (spaces – in the community/
towns) because green is important to people – “Need to 
go into town and see green lawn for morale” 
ii) Focussed on making the landscape of the town and 
surrounds into a more people friendly landscape 
(Interview, ANU)
e) Community involved in decision making
i) Involvement from community - Resilience in having farmer 
meetings and catchups (Interview, Barossa Improved 
Grazing Group)
2)	Towns and Infrastructure
a)	 Manage natural environments in urban areas for 
drought resilience
i) Focussed on making the landscape of the town and 
surrounds into a more people friendly landscape 
(Interview, ANU)

105
104
b)	 Ensure sustainable use of water
i) Long term planning to bring back, restructure water courses 
and use water for environmental purposes to build up 
and sustain the landscape so that it can survive ongoing 
drought conditions (Aboriginal engagement, Yaran). 
c)	 Support the development of strategic community 
infrastructure to enhance social and recreational wellbeing 
of local communities 
i) Tourism cycling trails/Art. Infrastructure aquifers. 
Promote our  natural scenery walking, cycling, 
horse trails (Eudunda Workshop)
3)	Community Innovation and Cultural Partnerships
a)	 Incorporation of Aboriginal knowledge and perspectives 
into planning and decision-making processes to increase 
drought resilience
i) Knowledge will diminish if not involved (Aboriginal 
Engagement, Yaran)
ii) Controlled vegetation burnings using traditional methods 
to mitigate the risk associated with the unsustainable hot 
burns that appear to occur more often during droughts 
(Aboriginal engagement, Yaran)
b)	 Build the capacity of Aboriginal controlled and operated 
organisations to be involved in sustainable project delivery 
across the long-term
i) Work with partners to restore sustainable cultural and 
environmental water flows to revive creeks and riparian 
zones (Aboriginal engagement, Yaran).
c) Build more sustainable and realistic relationships with farmers 
and other stakeholders to enhance and optimise land 
management
i) Wholistic approach to resilience planning i.e. consider all 
community members, industries, utilise bottom up AND top 
down approach (Wellbeing SA))
d)	 Boost the capacity and project-readiness of existing 
community incorporated associations 
i) Community based programs vital for resilient communities – 
streamline grants process (Interview, Wellbeing SA)
ii) Coordination of resources to help community (Lifeline 
BHC2C)
Key Theme 4: Knowledge and Education
Key Theme 5: Research and Innovation 
1)	Understanding climate projections and science
a)	 Develop appropriate communication materials to suit varied 
learning styles and educational levels. 
i) Education and information provision – diversify training 
systems for different learning styles (Orroroo workshop)
b)	 Co-develop materials with and for farmers, supply chains 
and rural communities.
i) Recognise acknowledge and include experience of elders 
in accumulation of knowledge share information (Orroroo 
workshop)
c)	 Effectively communicate the opportunities and need for 
rainfall independent income and revenue required for future 
farming enterprises.
i) Farmers do change if the technology is effective (Orroroo 
workshop)
ii) Since we started no till - systems have become farm 
more robust - extract more income from those dry years 
(Interview, SAGIT)
d) Connect community leaders who have experience of drought 
to the Drought Leaders Mentoring Program
i) Best to engage successful farmers in more marginal, high 
risk environments to share learnings and demonstrate risk 
management to landholders in closer to the coast where 
risks are emerging and increasing (Interview, ANU)
2)	Greater access to education and diversity and styles of learning
a)	 Liaise with primary, secondary and tertiary education sectors 
to increase knowledge of climate science, adaptation and 
transformation.
i) Access to training TAFE (Mallala workshop)
ii)	 Focus on making sure the science is coming through all 
levels of education (Interview, AgXtra)
b)	 Incorporate resilience training models across the education 
sector through a train the trainer model.
i) Farmers determining education needs and on ground 
training (Orroroo workshop)
ii) Education is vital for a resilient community (Interview, 
UniHub)
c) Upskill farmers, agricultural supply chain stakeholders 	
and regional business owners through increased community 
engagement, social media and targeted workshops. 
i) Ran drought management workshops; decision of buying 
in grain or livestock (Interview, Barossa Improved Grazing 
Group)
d)	 Accommodate for a diverse range of learning styles and 
inequitable digital access and literacy.
i) Education and information provision – diversify training 
systems for different learning styles (Orroroo workshop)
3)	Adoption of proven international, national and regional drought 
adaptation and transformation techniques
a)	 Incorporation of Aboriginal knowledge and perspectives into 
planning and decision-making processes to increase drought 
resilience
i) Long term planning to bring back, restructure water courses 
and use water for environmental purposes to build up 
and sustain the landscape so that it can survive ongoing 
drought conditions (Aboriginal engagement, Yaran).
ii) Controlled vegetation burnings using traditional methods 
to mitigate the risk associated with the unsustainable hot 
burns that appear to occur more often during droughts 
(Aboriginal engagement, Yaran)
b)	 Build the capacity of Aboriginal controlled and operated 
organisations to be involved in sustainable project delivery 
across the long-term
i) Work with partners to restore sustainable cultural and 
environmental water flows to revive creeks and riparian 
zones (Aboriginal engagement, Yaran).
c)	 Build more sustainable and realistic relationships with 
farmers and other stakeholders to change perspectives 
on land management
i) Wholistic approach to resilience planning i.e. consider 
all community members, industries, utilise bottom up 
AND top down approach (Wellbeing SA))
d)	 Develop partnerships with locations that have experienced 
conditions the Northern and Yorke Region will experience 
by 2030
i) Best to engage successful farmers in more marginal, high 
risk environments to share learnings and demonstrate risk 
management to landholders in closer to the coast where 
risks are emerging and increasing (Interview, ANU)
e)	 Develop information sharing partnerships with drought 
prone regions across the world (Israel, Saudi Arabia, 
Western USA, Southern Africa, Chile, Argentina)
i) In some areas around the world agricultural production 
has reduced by 40% despite CO2 fertilisation this may 
test the coping capacities and require transformative 
action rather than incremental change (Interview, ANU)
1)	Value add
a)	 Maximise the spike in tourism to offer locally produced 
goods through bricks and mortar shops.
i) Working on experiences at the wineries – helicopters, 
knife making (Interview, Barossa Australia).
b)	 Investigate options for digital marketplaces and online sales 
of locally produced goods.
i) Needs to be a focus on transitional process that 
lead away or are separate from farming/industry 
diversification (UniSA)
c)	 Increase variety of paddock to plate, farm tourism, stays 
and events. 
i) Keep promoting and developing tourism farm stays 
(Orroroo workshop)
d)	 Identify current assets and strengths and build upon these
i) Affordability, lifestyle, tree change (Eudunda workshop)
ii) Many lifestyle benefits of living in the region (Maitland 
workshop)
2)	Trans-disciplinary and integrated research
a)	 Research options for creating efficiencies across supply 
chains, considering the needs of global customers. 
i) GPS and auto steer – impact on efficiency (Maitland 
workshop)
b)	 Investigate options for manufacturing of agricultural goods 
produced locally. 
i) Develop a rural industry locally (Orroroo workshop)
ii) No food processing – what opportunities exist (Maitland 
workshop)
c)	 Examine the role that education can play in creating 
resilience across key regional industries.
i) Education - Regional resilience must be talked about 
separately or outside of crisis (UniSA)
ii)	 Education is vital for a resilient community (UniHub)
d)	 Determine the in-region educational programs that can seek 
to further diversify the regional economy.
i) Off-farm income is needed, better manage risk through 
education, decision making, choose when to sow / 
when not to sow (Women in Ag).

106
APPENDIX D: SOUTH AUSTRALIAN 
FARM MANAGEMENT DEPOSITS.
Table 23. Year on ear March quarter values held in South Australian (SA) Farm Management Deposits 
YEAR ON YEAR MARCH QUARTER VALUES HELD IN SA FARM 
MANAGEMENT DEPOSITS ($’000) 
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
CROPS
$29,526
`$27,231
$32,684
$30,888
$32,244
GRAIN
$309,571
$306,266
$298,312
$275,705
$251,308
GRAIN-SHEEP-BEEF
$268,275
$254,789
$269,551
$239,070
$213,097
SHEEP-BEEF
$53,362
$57,543
$68,369
$66,135
$69,689
SHEEP
$46,742
$54,102
$60,345
$53,664
$57,719
BEEF
$44,318
$45,210
$40,699
$37,514
$37,200

This project is part of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
Future Drought Fund and the Government of South Australia.
BAROSSA•GAWLER•LIGHT•ADELAIDE PLAINS
F
A
R
N
O
R
T
H
S
A
Y O R K E A N D M I D N O R T H
WE’RE
PREPARED.
WE’VE 
GOT 
A PLAN.
WE’RE
RESILIENT.
WE’RE 
INFORMED.