Outback SA 
Drought  
Resilience Plan
A framework  
to guide future 
effort and  
investment
OCTOBER 2024

FAR NORTH SA
2

Acknowledgement of Country
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
October 2024
3
Acknowledgement of Country
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee acknowledge 
Aboriginal people as the First Peoples and Nations of the lands and waters 
we live and work upon. We pay our respects to Elders past, present and 
emerging. We acknowledge and respect the deep spiritual connection and 
the relationship that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have to 
country and commit to working with the First Nations People of the region 
as we deliver the Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan. 
In particular, we acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the Outback SA 
region, including: 
•	 Adnyamathanha
•	 Antakirinja Matu – 
YankunytjatjaraKuyani
•	 Arabana
•	 Barngarla
•	 De Rose Hill – Ilpalka
•	 Dieri
•	 Eringa
•	 Far West
•	 Gawler Ranges People
•	 Irrwanyere
•	 Kokatha
•	 Malyankapa
•	 Ngadjuri
•	 Nukunu
•	 Tjayiwara Unmuru
•	 Walka Wani
•	 Wangkangurru/Yarluyandi
•	 Wilyakali
•	 Yandruwandha/Yawarrawarrka
Funding acknowledgement
This project is part of the Drought Resilience Planning program and is jointly funded 
South Australia.
This plan has been prepared by URPS for the Outback SA Regional Drought 
Resilience Steering Committee. The Steering Committee was chaired by Jan 
Ferguson OAM, Presiding Member, Outback Communities Authority with members 
including Jodie Gregg-Smith, General Manager, SA Arid Lands Landscape Board; 
Claire Wiseman, Chief Executive Officer, Regional Development Australia Far North; 
Margaret Howard, Director, Outback Communities Authority; Melissa Horgan, 
Principal Regional Advisor – Far North, Department of Primary Industries and 
Regions; and Tony Randall, Knowledge Broker, SA Drought Hub.

Contents
Contents 
Acknowledgement of Country	
3
1.0	
Introduction	
6
1.1	
Preparing this Plan	
8
2.0	
Our vision and goals	
9
3.0	
The Outback SA region	
11
3.1 	
Climate	
14
3.2 	
Defining features of the Outback SA region	
17
3.3 	
The Outback SA ‘system’	
20
3.4 	
Outback SA strategic content	
23
4.0	
Drought	
26
4.1 	
The National Drought Agreement	
27
4.2 	
Drought in the Outback SA region	
28
4.3	
Drought impacts on the Outback SA region	
29
4.4	
Climate projections and drought	
32
5.0	
Other drivers of change	
34
6.0	
Drought resilience	
36
6.1 	
Why is drought resilience important?	
37
6.2 	
Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities and regions	
37
4
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan

Contents
October 2024
5
7.0	
The Drought Resilience Strategy	
40
7.1	
Vision	
40
7.2	
Goals, Strategies and Opportunities	
41
7.3	
Delivery principles	
42
7.4	
Aboriginal partnerships	
43
7.5	
Community and visitor infrastructure	
44
7.6	
Community wellbeing	
45
7.7	
Economy	
47
7.8	
Environment	
48
7.9	
Essential services	
49
7.10	
Governance and advocacy	
51
7.11	
Primary production	
53
8.0	
Implementation, governance, monitoring and evaluation	
56
8.1	
Implementation	
57
8.2	
Governance	
57
8.3	
Monitoring, evaluation and reporting	
57
9.0	
Glossary	
60
10.0	
References	
61
11.0	
Appendix A	
64

Introduction
6
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
1.0	 Introduction 
Drought is part of life in South Australia’s Outback 
region. First Nations peoples have lived with drought 
for thousands of years and the natural environment has 
evolved to cope with cycles of droughts and floods. The 
Outback’s communities and industries have established 
in this environment.
Drought resilience refers to the ability of individuals, communities, 
industries or environments to adapt, reorganise or transform in response 
to drought to maintain or improve economic, environmental or social 
wellbeing. The existing and in some cases inherent resilience of the 
region’s people, communities, industries and environments explains why 
they have been able to survive the variability and impacts of drought so 
many times before.

Introduction
October 2024
7
Maintaining and strengthening this resilience as the climate changes is 
essential for the future of the region, as droughts become longer and 
hotter and rainfall even more unpredictable.
The strategies and opportunities for action proposed in this Outback SA  
Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan) will help South Australian Outback 
communities maintain and strengthen resilience. The Plan identifies 
opportunities to build resilience to ensure regional values are maintained 
and economic and social development opportunities are optimised. 
Delivering these actions will need people from all across the region 
working together, including pastoralists, community groups and 
organisations, government agencies and non-government organisations. 
By working together we can achieve a region that stays strong, connected 
and prosperous through the drought times we know will come our way.
The delivery of these opportunities will be led by the Outback SA Drought 
Steering Committee’s partner organisations; the Outback Communities 
Authority, SA Arid Lands Landscape Board and Regional Development 
Australia Far North, Department of Primary Industries and Regions and 
the SA Drought Hub. Their ongoing collaboration and strong connections 
to the people and environment of Outback SA will enable locally focused 
delivery that reflects and meets the often unique needs of each town, 
community and landscape.

Introduction
8
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
1.1	
Preparing this Plan
This Plan was informed by information collated through the following tasks:
•	 Literature review.
•	 Key informant interviews with local subject matter experts. 
•	 Key informant interviews with drought resilience planners from other 
regions. 
•	 Regional in-person engagement with 78 people across the Outback SA 
region.
•	 Online workshop and an online survey.
•	 Regular steering committee meetings.
This Plan contains a summary of the information gathered from these  
tasks. Further detail and findings from all tasks are described in the 
Background Paper (included as an attachment to this Plan).
Regional engagement including 16 face-to-face workshops, drop-in 
sessions and dinner conversations were undertaken with stakeholders and 
communities in 13 outback towns throughout March and April 2024. In 
total more than 4000km were travelled across some of the most remote 
areas of South Australia. Opportunities for online engagement were also 
provided through an online survey, online workshop and phone calls to 
individuals. 114 individuals took part in the engagement. 
The regional engagement helped the project team to understand:
•	 How is the Outback SA region impacted by drought?
•	 What makes Outback individuals, communities and regions resilient to 
drought? 
•	 How can the resilience of the Outback SA region to drought be 
maintained and enhanced? 
Community members and stakeholders shared a wide diversity of 
perspectives, experiences and priorities. These are summarised in the 
Engagement Summary Report that is included as an Appendix to the 
Background Paper and embedded through this Plan.
Quotes from community members and stakeholders collected through 
the engagement activities are included in the yellow speech bubbles 
throughout this Plan reflecting personal experiences and views of drought 
in their own words.

Our vision and goals
October 2024
9
2.0	 Our vision and goals 
DROUGHT RESILIENT OUTBACK SA 
Strong connected and healthy communities, sustainably 
managing Outback landscapes and resilient to drought.

Our vision and goals
10
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
ESSENTIAL
SERVICES
PRIMARY 
PRODUCTION
ABORIGINAL
PARTNERSHIPS
ECONOMY
Community 
WELLBEING
Community 
AND VISITOR 
INFRASTRUCTURE
GOVERNANCE
 AND 
ADVOCACY
ENVIRONMENT
goal: Partnerships 
with Aboriginal people 
that enhance the 
drought resilience of 
communities and the 
environment and create 
economic opportunity.
goal: Strong, connected, 
healthy, involved and 
supported local communities 
and individuals.
THE VISION
Strong connected and 
healthy communities, 
sustainably managing 
Outback landscapes and 
resilient to drought.
goal: Robust, 
appropriate and 
accessible social 
infrastructure 
that meets the 
needs of locals 
and visitors.
goal: A more diverse 
economy with growing 
tourism and successful 
local businesses.
goal: Healthy environments 
with diverse natural ecosystems, 
managed total grazing pressure and 
sustainable water resources.
goal: Reliable, secure 
and future proofed water, 
energy, communication and 
transport networks.
goal: Adaptive, 
innovative and 
sustainable agriculture 
and pastoralism.
goal: 
Coordinated, 
targeted and 
supportive local 
and regional 
governance and 
advocacy.

The Outback SA region 
October 2024
11
3.0	 The Outback SA region 
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan covers the 
region within the boundary of the unincorporated area 
of South Australia, as well as the Coober Pedy and Roxby 
Downs local government areas.


The Outback SA region
12
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
Conservation reserves
(NPWS)
South Australian Arid 
Lands Landscape Board
Outback Drought Resilience Plan 
project area
Iron Knob
Pimba
Woomera
Roxby Downs
Coober Pedy
Yalata
Marla
William Creek
Innamincka
Yunta
Penong
Oodnadatta
Marree
Parachilna
Leigh
Creek
Fowlers 
Bay
Cockburn
Manna 
Hill
Olary
Blinman
Angorichina
Beltana
Copley
Lyndhurst
Andamooka
Kingoonya
Glendambo
FIGURE 1: OUTBACK SA REGION
The region has less than 1% of the state’s population living in 63% of its land 
mass. Its immense land size, small population and mostly arid climate is 
different to every other part of South Australia. It also means there is high 
variability across the region in terms of its economies, environments, people 
and governance.

The Outback SA region
October 2024
13
 Learnt experience 
and reverting to practice 
that works helped us 
get through drought. 
KEY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OUTBACK SA REGION
Total Outback SA 
region
Unincorporated 
SA
Roxby Downs
Coober Pedy
South Australia
Resident 
population  
(ABS 2021)
8,554 
3,006
3,976 
1,566 
1,781,516 
Aboriginal and 
Torres Islander 
peoples
13.6%
24.4%
5.0%
15.1%
2.4% 
Volunteering rate
17.1%
21.8%
14.0%
15.1%
14.1%
Median age
37 years
42 years
31 years
50 years
41 years
Unemployment 
rate 
4.4%
5.0%
2.1%
11.8%
5.4%
Unincorporated SA
Roxby Downs
Coober Pedy
Top 3 Industries 
of employment 
(2021)
By place of 
residence
Agriculture (29.5%),
Mining (14.7%)
Accommodation and food 
services (10.5%)
Mining (49.9%)
Construction (11.4%)
Accommodation and food 
services (5.9%)
Accommodation and food 
services (18.5%)
Health care and social assistance 
(18.1%)
Retail trade (13.0%)
Top 3 Industries 
of employment 
(2021) 
By place of work
Mining (54.7%)
Construction (13.3%) 
Agriculture (7.6%)
Mining (57.1%)
Construction (15.1%)
Accommodation and food 
services (4.9%)
Accommodation and food 
services (21.0%)
Health care and social assistance 
(17.0%) 
Public administration and safety 
(11.5%)
Gross Regional 
Product (GRP) 
(2021)
$1.5 billion
(1.4% of SA’s gross state product) 
$425 million 
(0.5% of SA’s gross state product)
$91.82 million 
(0.08% of SA’s gross state 
product) 
All data sourced from 2021 Census. 
NOTE – The 2021 census data may not accurately reflect the population of very remote communities in South Australia.

The Outback SA region
14
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
3.1	
Climate
Most of the Outback SA region receives an average of 100-200mm of 
rainfall per year1 shown in Figure 2. The seasonality of this rainfall differs 
across the region. The majority of the region in the north experiences 
summer-dominant rainfall. A central zone generally experiences seasonal 
rainfall, and the southern-most part of the region receives winter  
dominant rainfall2.
In addition to different seasonal trends in different parts of the region, 
rainfall across the Outback SA region is highly variable. It experiences the 
boom and bust of wet and dry cycles. In the last 30 years (1989–2018) in  
the SA Arid Lands region, dry years (receiving the lowest 30% of total 
annual rainfall) have occurred nine times and wet years (highest 30%)  
11 times4. Bureau of Meteorology data shows the extremes in annual 
rainfall; Innamincka weather station has recorded a record annual low  
of 13.2mm of rain with a record high of 866.6mm5.
Iron Knob
Pimba
Roxby Downs
Coober Pedy
Yalata
Marla
William Creek
Innamincka
Yunta
Penong
Oodnadatta
Marree
Parachilna
Leigh
Creek
0mm
50mm
100mm
200mm
300mm
400mm
600mm
1000mm
Rainfall
FIGURE 2: 
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL 
1991 – 20203

The Outback SA region
October 2024
15
FIGURE 3: 
RAINFALL RELIABILITY 
2019
Oodnadatta
Woomera
Marree
Oodnadatta
Woomera
Marree
WINTER
SPRING
Oodnadatta
Woomera
Marree
SUMMER
Oodnadatta
Woomera
Marree
AUTUMN
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Average change in seasonal rainfall from year to year
60%
70%
80%
90% 100%
very
 reliable 
rainfall
usually
 reliable 
rainfall
unreliable 
rainfall
very
unreliable 
rainfall
 Rainfall reliability maps for the past 30 years (Figure 3) show that across 
the majority of the South Australian Arid Lands region, rainfall has been 
unreliable (red areas) across all seasons6. The only exception is winter 
rainfall, which has been moderately reliable in a limited area south of 
Woomera (beige and blue areas).
(Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO)

The Outback SA region
16
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
In Outback SA, 10 mm of rainfall is a critical threshold for feed growth to 
begin7. In the last 30 years in the SA Arid Lands region, useful rain events 
have occurred on average four times per year. On average, Woomera 
gets about five rainfall events (single or multi-day) of 10 mm or more each 
year, and Marree gets four, however this can range from zero to 12 events 
at both locations. There have been three years since records began that 
Woomera did not receive at least one 10 mm rainfall event. Marree has had 
only one year in the last 30 without a 10 mm rainfall event.
Pastoral areas can benefit from rainfall at any time of the year, however 
due to higher temperatures and increased evaporation in the warmer 
months more rain is required during this period to be effective in initiating 
vegetation growth and recruitment. In the cropping areas around Penong 
heavy summer rainfall can be damaging to production. 
The region experiences very high temperatures especially during summer, 
with most of the region experiencing average summer maximum 
temperatures in the high 30°Cs.
 The extended dry 
 spells are more 
impactful when it is  
also unusually hot.

The Outback SA region
October 2024
17
FIGURE 4: 
NUMBER OF DAYS PER YEAR 
OVER 38°C AT MARREE7
1920
YEAR
NUMBER OF DAYS OVER 38°C
20
40
60
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
In the last 30 years, there has been an increase in the number of hot days 
(temperature over 38°C). Figure 4 shows the annual number of hot days 
(red bars) with a 10-year running average (solid red line) for Marree. Marree 
experienced an average of 54 days per year above 38°C between 1989–
2018, compared to an average of 41 days per year above 38°C between 
1959–1988.
3.2	
Defining features of the Outback SA region
The outback is characterised by a set of features that are 
not individually unique, but which together cause it to 
function in ways that are fundamentally different to other 
physical and social environments8. 
These features have been reviewed and adapted in relation to the 
Outback SA region in the table below through research and discussions 
during stakeholder engagement. They influence the way community and 
stakeholders in the region are able to build resilience to drought.

The Outback SA region
18
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
FEATURES OF THE OUTBACK SA
Feature
What this looks like in the Outback SA region
Climate variability
The region experiences highly variable rainfall and other episodic weather events 
that rarely follow predictable annual cycles. One property can be in drought while its 
neighbour is in flood. Rainfall patterns differ greatly across the region. Every drought 
is different too. The droughts experienced in the past have affected different areas in 
different ways and been of varying durations.
Scarce resources
Low soil fertility and harsh conditions mean stocking rates are often kept low. 
High per capita delivery and maintenance costs influence the provision of physical 
infrastructure and community services including roads, internet and phone 
connectivity, water, energy and waste management. 
Sparse population
The human population in this region is small and geographically dispersed. Coober 
Pedy (population 1,427 in 2021) and Roxby Downs (pop. 3,671) are the largest towns, 
while the remaining scattered towns have less than 300 residents each. There are 
also many transient people that move out over the summer period or travel in and out 
to work in the mining industry. 
Remoteness
Many towns in the region are extremely isolated. Decision making is often centred 
far away in regional centres such as Port Augusta or Adelaide. Government service 
provision is often focused elsewhere due to the lack of population. Most markets are 
distant and transport networks are critical.

The Outback SA region
October 2024
19
FEATURES OF THE OUTBACK SA
Feature
What this looks like in the Outback SA region
Economic variability
Heavy reliance on the mining/resources sector can lead to uncertainty when 
this industry experiences downturn or other disruptions. Besides agriculture 
and pastoralism and tourism, the majority of other industries in the region are 
underpinned by the success or otherwise of mining. Agriculture and pastoralism is 
greatly impacted by drought and is vulnerable to changing commodity prices. 
Local knowledge 
Remoteness and sparse populations contribute to relatively low levels of research 
effort and formal capture of knowledge in the Outback SA region. In contrast, 
Aboriginal traditional knowledge is vast and their knowledge about their country is 
extensive. Many station people, pastoralists and farmers have lived and worked on 
their land for years. Many of the region’s residents have experienced multiple drought 
and flood cycles. 
Cultural differences
The people who choose to live in the Outback are accustomed to a unique way of life. 
They have a strong sense of identity, community and family. They recognise that living 
in the Outback means living with hot dry conditions and without many of the everyday 
conveniences available to city people. They love their country and way of life. 
Reliance on volunteers 
In the unincorporated areas, the lack of councils and emergency services mean 
that the locals ‘do it all’. Volunteers undertake everything from managing town 
infrastructure, running community events and upgrading community halls to 
responding to vehicle crashes and fires. There is a strong culture of volunteering. 
However, overreliance on volunteers can lead to burnout and impacts on the 
community. The number of volunteers in the regions is decreasing, and volunteers are 
ageing.

The Outback SA region
20
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
FIGURE 5: 
CONNECTIONS AND INTERACTIONS 
BETWEEN KEY FEATURES OF THE 
OUTBACK SA SYSTEM 
Note the location of the icons are 
placed for design purposes and 
not location specific.
3.3	
	The Outback SA ‘system’
The Outback SA region is a complex “system” of connections and 
interactions between people, industries and natural resources. These 
connections and interactions mean that when one feature is impacted, 
flow on effects will be experienced by other features in the system. 
Developing this understanding can help identify the factors that make the 
system resilient or vulnerable to change. The Outback SA system and its 
key features is conceptually depicted in Figure 5. 
EXPORTS
EMPLOYMENT
TOURISM
SERVICES
TRANSPORT
BIODIVERSITY
CULTURAL 
HERITAGE
MINING
GRAZING
WATER
RESOURCES
FOOD
COMMUNITY

The Outback SA region
October 2024
21
Water resources are a key feature of the system with many connections. 
Water resources are critical to sustain communities, biodiversity, grazing 
stock in pastoral areas and mining operations. The lakes, watercourses, 
springs and wetlands are of significant cultural value to the Aboriginal 
people of Outback SA and many are popular tourist attractions. Cultural 
values are intrinsically linked to water resources and biodiversity. 
Although annual rainfall is low, high intensity rainfall events can see more 
than the average annual rain fall in a single event, damaging infrastructure 
and eroding watercourses and floodways, limiting mobility and disrupting 
freight networks. Regional biodiversity has evolved with this variability 
which contributes to its inherent resilience. Some species are dependent 
on high intensity rainfall events to create suitable breeding conditions, 
and others are reliant only on groundwater from permanent or semi-
permanent springs. Rainfall from outside the region is important with 
northern floodplains reliant on flood pulses from upstream catchment 
areas in the Northern Territory and Queensland. 
In the north of the region most mines access groundwater from the Great 
Artesian Basin (GAB) to meet operational requirements. Research has 
demonstrated that the majority of recharge in the western margin on the 
GAB (aligning with the western edge of the Outback SA region) occurred 
over 10,000 years ago with virtually no recharge occurring since10 meaning 
that groundwater use by mining operations is unlikely to be impacted 
by drought. In southern areas around Penong and Yunta, groundwater is 
extracted from shallow aquifers for stock and domestic use. There are no 
observation wells in these areas however anecdotal information suggests 
lowering of groundwater levels during recent droughts.

The Outback SA region       
22
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
 There are less and 
less people doing more 
and more. 
The large distances separating communities and industries, the need to 
bring in food produced outside the region and the need for the community 
to access services outside the region, means that a reliable transport 
system is essential. Community and industry viability are vulnerable to 
weather impacts on the transport network. During drought, increased 
requirements to move stock can impact road condition. Heavy rainfall 
events following drought can be even more destructive to the road 
network, requiring significant maintenance or renewal and food drops.  
The impact of drought on the feed base in pastoral areas varies across the 
region and is impacted by total grazing pressure. During drought, annual 
feed sources (herbs and some grasses) and may not be available and stock 
will graze perennial native shrub and grass species, potentially having a 
great impact on local biodiversity11.
The Outback SA system supports the industries and businesses that sustain 
the region’s community. With agriculture and pastoralism and tourism 
as key employers, the impacts of drought on these sectors has flow on 
impacts to communities and individuals. The reliance of the community 
on food produced outside the region means food security is vulnerable to 
disruptions to transport. Although water security is being improved in some 
Outback SA towns through the installation of small-scale desalination plants, 
many remote residents rely on rainwater tanks to supply domestic use. 
The existing and in some cases inherent resilience of the region’s people, 
communities, industries and environments considered together as a 
system, explains why they have been able to survive the variability and 
impacts of drought so many times before. Some features of the system 
are more vulnerable to the impacts of drought and the potential for longer 
and hotter droughts and even more unpredictable rainfall have potential to 
have greater flow on effects to the Outback system.

Outback SA strategic context
October 2024
23
3.4	
Outback SA strategic context
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan aligns with 
other regional strategic plans developed by organisations 
on the Regional Drought Resilience Steering Committee, 
each aiming to build resilience in each organisation’s 
areas of responsibility.
Planning for the implementation of the opportunities in this Plan will 
identify alignment with these strategic plans to identify opportunities for 
collaboration, maximise efficiency and minimise duplication of effort.

Outback SA strategic context
24
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
The organisations represented on the Steering Committee, and how they 
relate to each other is represented in Figure 6 below.
The areas of responsibility and key strategic plans are outlined in the table 
on page 25.
FIGURE 6: 
CONNECTIONS AND INTERACTIONS 
BETWEEN THE ORGANISATIONS 
WITHIN THE STEERING COMMITTEE 
SA
DROUGHT 
HUB
department 
of primary 
industries 
And regions
(PIRSA)
REGIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
AUSTRALIA
FAR NORTH 
SA
OUTBACK 
COMMUNITIES 
AUTHORITY
(OCA)
REGIONaL 
STATEWIDE
SA Arid Lands 
Landscape 
Board

Outback SA strategic context
October 2024
25
REGIONAL
Organisations
Areas of responsibility
Strategic Plan
Landscapes  
South Australia  
SA Arid Lands
•	 Sustainable land and water management
•	 Biodiversity protection
•	 Connecting people
•	 Fostering partnership
South Australian Arid Lands Regional 
Landscape Plan 2021-2026
Outback 
Communiites 
Authority 
(OCA) 
•	 Public service provision
•	 Infrastructure development 
•	 Community advocacy
The Strategic Blueprint for Outback SA 
(draft for consultation)
Regional 
Development 
Australia  
Far North SA
•	 Economic development
•	 Strategic infrastructure investment
•	 Business capacity building
•	 Regional investment attraction
•	 Workforce development
The Regional Blueprint (Regional 
Development South Australia)
STATEWIDE
Organisation
Areas of responsibility
Strategic Plan
Department of 
Primary Industries 
and Regions 
(PIRSA)
•	 Pastoral management
•	 Biosecurity management
•	 Regional growth
•	 Agricultural innovation
Strategic Plan 2021-2025
SA Drought Hub
•	 Drought resilience
•	 Research and innovation
•	 Knowledge sharing

Drought
26
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
4.0	 Drought
Drought is not simply low rainfall. If this were the case, 
Outback SA could be considered to be in almost 
constant drought. Rather, drought is a comparatively  
dry period compared to normal conditions. It also 
considers the ability of those affected to cope with drier 
than usual conditions

Drought
October 2024
27
FOR THIS PLAN, DROUGHT IS DEFINED AS: 
	A prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions that 
impact negatively on water availability and agricultural 
production in a region and, consequently, impacts 
negatively on the economy and environment of the 
region and the health and wellbeing of its residents.
4.1	
The National Drought Agreement
Many community members referred to concerns about drought 
declarations, and perceived inequities when lines on maps are drawn to 
delineate where drought is and is not.
It is important to note that the Government of South Australian no longer 
makes any declaration of drought, consistent with the National Drought 
Agreement. 
signed a National Drought Agreement that sets out a joint approach to 
drought preparedness, responses and recovery12. One of the principles 
underpinning this agreement was that ‘there should no longer be 
Exceptional Circumstances declarations and associated lines on maps’. 
This means that all government agreed that drought declarations would 
no longer be made as a trigger for support becoming available during 
droughts.
A review of the 2018 NDA was published in 2022, including 
recommendations to strengthen the Agreement to ensure that farm 
businesses, farming families and farming communities across the country 
are appropriately supported in advance of, during, and post drought 
events. Recommendation 25 describes proposed updated principles for 
the next iteration of the Agreement, including that ‘support needs are 
highly variable, and eligibility should be based on need, not activated by 
drought declarations13.
The development of this Plan is consistent with the Agreement’s 
objectives to prioritise objectives and outcomes that enhance long-term 
preparedness, sustainability, resilience and risk management for farming 
businesses and farming communities in Australia.
During the engagement undertaken to inform the development of this plan 
it was evident that there remains a strong belief that drought declarations 
may still be made in South Australia. Increasing awareness and understand 
of the NDA has been identified as an opportunity for action.
 As a primary  
producer the biggest 
impact is on your well-
being and finances. It 
takes years to recover 
both financially and 
mentally from drought.

Drought
28
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
4.2	
Drought in the Outback SA region
Drought in the Outback SA region is caused by a number of natural 
atmospheric conditions including the Positive Indian Ocean Dipole and 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation. A positive Indian Ocean Dipole typically 
results in significantly less rainfall across Outback SA and higher than 
normal temperatures during winter and spring14. El Niño typically results 
in reduced rainfall over Outback SA and warmer temperatures. Although 
most major Australian droughts have been associated with El Niño, analysis 
of past El Niño events shows that widespread drought does not occur with 
every event, and the strength of an El Niño is not directly proportional to 
the rainfall impacts15.
The Background Paper summarises information on these climate drivers 
developed by the Bureau of Meteorology. 
Before European colonisation, the Aboriginal people of the Outback SA 
region would have experienced numerous drought periods. Since written 
records started, the region has experienced a number of significant 
declared droughts including16:
•	 The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902.
•	 The 1914 to 19 drought. 
•	 The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945.
•	 The 1965 to 1968 drought (only affecting parts of the region). 
•	 The 1982 to 1983 drought.
•	 The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009 (in particular 2002-2003 for the 
Outback region).
•	 The 2017 to 2019 drought (the Tinderbox drought). 
The 2017 to 2019 drought, whilst one of the shortest, was extremely severe 
in the eastern parts of the Outback SA region. In Yunta, rainfall in 2019 was 
close to the lowest in recorded history. In the western parts of the Outback 
SA region around Penong, impacts were much lower as annual rainfall was 
near average for 2017-2018 and only below average in 2019.
 It’s terrible to watch 
the land deteriorate 
and see the animals 
and native wildlife be 
decimated

Drought
October 2024
29
4.3	
Drought impacts on the Outback SA region
Past droughts have had widespread impacts across the region. Key 
impacts shared by community members that have lived through drought 
in the region are summarised below.
Social impacts
•	 Significant impacts on mental health and wellbeing exacerbated by 
financial pressure and associated with feelings of stress, exhaustion and 
loss of control, resulting in family violence and family breakdowns and 
death by suicide in extreme cases.
•	 Reduced community cohesion and connection caused by an increased 
farm business workload and less time or inclination to socialise. 
•	 Reduced amenity, health and wellbeing and an increased workload 
resulting from a decline in the condition of the natural environment (loss 
of trees and reduced cover, dead animals, dust etc.).
•	 Impacts on the wellbeing of children and young people associated with 
household stress and environmental degradation.
 It was difficult to 
watch the community 
struggle with financial 
and social impacts of 
drought. I felt very 
helpless.

Drought
30
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
Aboriginal Cultural impacts 
•	  Reduced condition of natural cultural heritage sites including surface 
water and groundwater dependent ecosystems and culturally significant 
plants and animals. This can lead to impacts on health, and wellbeing as 
cultural and environmental stewardship duties are made more difficult 
and the condition of the country is diminished.
Economic and Financial impacts
•	 Reduced income for pastoralists, farmers and local business owners, 
leading to staff layoffs and reduced spend in the local economy. This is 
often coupled with increased production and business costs associated 
with the provision of supplementary feeding or agistment.
•	 Difficulties in finding staff following droughts as people leave the region 
and do not return.
•	 While tourism numbers don’t seem to be majorly affected by drought, 
local communities have less capacity to manage tourist impacts such as 
overuse of water, and off-road vehicle impacts.  
Pastoral and Agricultural impacts
•	 Reduced feed and water mean graziers need to provide supplementary 
feed, destock or move stock to agist in areas less affected by drought.
•	 Lower capacity of pastoralists and farmers to plan for and develop their 
business as their time is taken up by an increased work load, particularly 
when staff have been laid-off. 
Environmental impacts
•	 Loss of native vegetation and wildlife, lack of surface water and increases 
in soil wind erosion.
•	 Reduced recharge and increased extraction of groundwater leading to 
lower groundwater levels.
•	 Loss of gardens and community green spaces.
Infrastructure impacts
•	 Drying of bores, rainwater tanks and dams requiring installation of 
additional water infrastructure (eg new bores) or carting in water. 
•	 Reduced road surface condition with reduced water for grading and 
more trucks on the roads transporting stock. 
•	 Increase in power outages on hot days and during dry lightning storms 
resulting in no telecommunications and inability to pump water, run 
fridges and freezers and run air conditioners.
•	 Drought breaking rains often damage roads, bores, solar panels, fences 
and tanks. 
 I worked with 
farmers that had gone 
broke and some took 
their own lives.

Drought
October 2024
31
Beneficial impacts
While droughts have overwhelmingly negative impacts, there can be 
beneficial impacts resulting from drought, or the action taken during 
drought including:
•	 Reduction in the number of pest and overabundant animals such as goats, 
camels, horses, rabbits and kangaroos.
•	 Provision of grants and other funding for community projects which have 
a lasting beneficial impact.
•	 Encouragement of economic diversification.
•	 Improved community resilience, connection and sense of community 
support when times are tough. 
•	 Increased water use efficiency.
•	 Innovation in land and water management practices.

Drought
32
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
4.4	
Climate projections and drought
The drought projections developed by the Earth Systems and Climate 
Change Hub indicate that under a warming climate the Outback SA region 
will tend to spend more time in drought, with longer drought duration and 
more intense drought. Nevertheless, there is considerable uncertainty in 
the projections, with the positive end of results indicating positive (less) 
drought outcomes and the negative end of results indicating very extreme 
drought outcomes17.
Climate Change in Australia provides the following projections for the 
region18:
PROJECTIONS FOR OUTBACK SA
Weather event
Projection
Confidence
Rainfall
Summer rainfall
Changes are possible but unclear.
Direction of change cannot 
be reliably projected
Winter rainfall
Projected to decrease in the south.
High
Drought
Time spent in drought is projected to increase. 
Medium
Extreme rainfall events
Increase in intensity.
High
Average temperatures
Increase in all seasons. 
Very high
Mean, maximum and 
minimum temperatures
Continued substantial increases.
Very high
Hot days and heatwaves
Substantial increase in the temperature reached on hot days, the 
frequency of hot days, and the duration of warm spells. 
Very high
Potential evaporation
Increase in all seasons as warming progresses.
High
Climate Change in Australia notes that on an annual and decadal basis, 
natural variability in the climate system can act to either mask or enhance 
any long-term human induced trend, particularly in the next 20 years and 
for rainfall.


Drought
October 2024
33
Climate projections for locations in the region can be sourced from 
http://myclimateview.com.au	

Rainfall and temperature projections from MyClimateView for 3 locations 
in the region at 2050 using RCP 8.5 are shown in the table below. For 
Innamincka, annual rainfall is projected to increase by 2050 driven largely 
by an increase in summer rainfall. For Yunta and Penong, annual rainfall 
is projected to decline. At Yunta, spring rainfall is projected to have the 
greatest decline, with slight increases projected for summer and autumn. 
At Penong, rainfall is projected to decline in all seasons. Consistent with the 
regional statements from Climate Change in Australia described above, 
maximum temperatures are projected to increase at all locations and there 
will be a substantial increase in the number of hot days (over 35°C).
RAINFALL AND TEMPERATURE PROJECTIONS 
Innamincka
Yunta
Penong
1994 – 2023
2050s 
average
1994 – 2023
2050s 
average
1994 – 2023
2050s 
average
Total annual 
rainfall
189 mm
203 mm
218 mm
211 mm
289 mm
248 mm
Summer rainfall
81 mm
92 mm
67 mm
70 mm
52 mm
35 mm
Autumn rainfall
39 mm
37 mm
37 mm
41 mm
63 mm
50 mm
Winter rainfall
30 mm
32 mm
45 mm
43 mm
109 mm
104 mm
Spring rainfall
46 mm
41 mm
70 mm
55 mm
66 mm
56 mm
Average 
maximum 
temperature
29.9°C
31.8°C
24.8°C
26.5°C
23.4°C
24.7°C
Annual hot days 
(over 35°C)
113 days
141 days
42 days
61 days
27 days
34 days

Other drivers of change
34
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
5.0	 Other drivers of change
Global, national and regional influences are driving 
changes in markets, technology, governance 
arrangements, values, and social factors. Key drivers 
and their implications for the Outback SA region are 
described overleaf, with additional information available 
in the Background Report.

Other drivers of change
October 2024
35
KEY DRIVERS
Global drivers
Climate change and 
decarbonisation
Responding to climate change requires a shift in the global economy to reduce carbon 
emissions and action to adapt to a new and changing climate. In Outback SA mining, agriculture 
and pastoralism and transport industries that are key sources of emissions will require 
transformational change.
Urbanisation
Larger towns and cities and high amenity areas continue to draw population growth and 
economic activity away from many smaller towns. It can be challenging for the Outback SA 
region to compete with the economic, education and social opportunities available in  
urban areas. 
National and state drivers
Increased cost of living 
Increasing costs of living is placing pressure on Australians to fund their everyday needs. There 
is high variability in the income security of the Outback SA community and this driver will be felt 
differently in different communities. 
Health challenges 
The research and engagement for this project highlighted the significant adverse impacts on 
mental health of drought and the need for increased services to remote communities.  
Regional drivers
Decreasing population 
The Outback SA’s population has decreased by 22% from 2011 to 2021. While the overall 
population is projected to stabilise in the coming years, this smaller population often means  
less community diversity, resources and services. Some towns may experience greater decline 
than others.
Difficulty attracting and 
retaining labour
As our world becomes increasingly urbanised, regional areas such as Outback SA experience 
greater difficulty in attracting and retaining labour. A lack of local services and amenities 
contributes to this.
High reliance on 
volunteers
Volunteers play a critical role in the vitality of the Outback SA. However, an overdependence on 
these volunteers can lead to burnout, with flow-on impacts to local communities. Volunteering 
rates are falling in the Outback SA region.
Increased digital 
connectivity
Recent improvements including Starlink have greatly improved the Outback SA region’s digital 
connectivity. This has opened new opportunities for education, employment, health and social 
connection however the cost of digital access is prohibitive for many households and may 
amplify disadvantage for those that cannot afford access.

Drought resilience
36
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
6.0 	Drought resilience 
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In some 
cases, disruption can be seen as an opportunity to move 
in a new direction, not just recover back to a previous 
state. Resilience is about proactively changing in order 
not to be changed.

Drought resilience
October 2024
37
FOR THIS PLAN, DROUGHT RESILIENCE IS DEFINED AS: 
Drought resilience means the ability to adapt, reorganise 
or transform in response to changing temperature, 
increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and 
changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, 
environmental and social wellbeing.
6.1	
Why is drought resilience important?
In the past, droughts have had serious impacts on the Outback SA region. 
Past droughts had major consequences for employment and income, 
mental health and wellbeing, the ability to feed livestock or grow crops, 
the size of regional populations, and the health and function of the 
environment. 
Resilience is about taking action to try to avoid or minimise these negative 
impacts before they happen rather than waiting until they do occur to 
act, or just focusing on recovery. Building resilience can help to create 
economic, social and environmental development opportunities.
Drought resilience often has a focus on the agricultural sector. However, 
the unique climate, geographic, social and economic factors of the 
Outback region mean that drought affects communities as a whole and 
other industries outside of the agricultural sector. 
Building resilience will help the Outback SA region to endure droughts with 
less negative impact, and recover from them sooner.
6.2	
Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, 
communities and regions
Resilience looks different for every person, community and region 
depending on its unique experience, attributes, risks and characteristics. 
However, there are a number of common attributes of drought resilience 
identified in the Outback SA community engagement (refer Background 
Paper for more detail). 
Drought resilient individuals in the Outback SA region are or have:
•	 Strong relationships with friends and family and are part of a connected 
communities.
•	 Able to or have shared their struggles, are willing to accept support and 
understand the impacts on those around them.
•	 Good relationships with staff from organisations that provide health, 
education, land management and community support.
•	 Willingness to try doing things differently and innovate and adapt to 
different conditions, whether it be on the land or in town.
•	 Good long-term business and financial planning and decision-making – 
ability to ‘play the long game’ and use the profits from good years to get 
through the bad years.
•	 Diverse sources of household income.
•	 Access to and awareness of financial support available.

Drought resilience
38
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
•	 Pastoralists that manage total grazing pressure and undertake sustainable 
land management.
•	 Land managers that understand their land, rainfall variability and drought 
risk and undertake long-term proactive planning.
•	 Land managers that have a plan on how to manage property and 
livestock leading into, during, and post drought, and implementing the 
plan in a timely manner.
•	 Access to good education, healthcare and digital connectivity.
•	 Reliable water infrastructure that maximises water capture and minimises 
water loss.
•	 High quality housing with large rainwater tanks or bores and good 
thermal insulation.
•	 Drought resilient Aboriginal people are able to live and work on Country, 
access cultural heritage sites, practice cultural activities and share 
knowledge between generations.
Drought resilient communities in the Outback SA region are or have:
•	 Strong, connected, caring communities that help each other in times of 
need.
•	 Good relationships between Aboriginal people, wider communities, and 
government agencies.
•	 Strong community organisations and volunteer base who are willing and 
able to put in the work for the benefit of their community.
•	 Local services including shops and medical facilities (including mental 
health and preventative health) and access to regional centres with 
health, education and support services.
•	 Reliable access to water, power, energy, digital connectivity and food.

Drought resilience
October 2024
39
•	 Diversified local economies that may include tourism, mining, workers 
accommodation, carbon farming, renewable energy etc. 
•	 Access to community grants and other funding.
•	 Investment in projects that give good return to the community and 
employ local people.
•	 Local employment opportunities that support people to stay in the 
community.
•	 Low populations of pest/overabundant animals through proactive 
management before drought.
•	 Maintainable public spaces which improve amenity, wellbeing and 
tourism attraction and enable local people to come together.
•	 Support from external agencies in ways that meet the unique needs of 
each community.
•	 Opportunities to undertake training and skills development and 
diversification.
Drought resilient regions are or have:
•	 Road and roadside infrastructure to support movement of stock, local 
travel and tourism (including sealed roads, toilets, rubbish bins, parking 
bays, showers etc.).
•	 Timely and localised provision of information about rainfall and forecasts, 
along with information about available support or activities that will help 
communities during drought.
•	 Good communication and provision of information about available 
community grants and programs, best practice management options, 
and other resources to provide assistance.
•	 Coordinated services with permanency of support staff to provide a 
sense of continuity and allowing trusted relationships to be built.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
40
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
7.0	 The Drought Resilience 
Strategy
7.1	
Vision
THE OUTBACK SA REGION’S VISION IS FOR:
Strong, connected and healthy communities, sustainably 
managing Outback landscapes and resilient to drought.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
41
7.2	
Goals, strategies and opportunities 
The goals, strategies and opportunities to build drought resilience in the 
Outback SA region are described in the following sections. The strategies 
seek to leverage existing strategic planning and avoid duplication of effort 
by referring to the implementation of other regional plans. Strategies 
will be high level to provide flexibility to accommodate changing 
circumstances, new evidence and evolving knowledge while remaining 
accountable to stated goals, vision, and regional values.
The goals, strategies and opportunities are presented under the following 
themes:
•	 Aboriginal partnerships
•	 Community wellbeing
•	 Community and visitor infrastructure
•	 Economy
•	 Environment.
•	 Essential services.
•	 Governance and advocacy
•	 Primary production.
The practical and implementable strategies and opportunities to build 
drought resilience have been developed with the region’s community 
and stakeholders who have identified and supported them because they 
believe they will be effective
The timing for delivery of each opportunity has been categorised 
according to when it would fit within the drought cycle:
A lead for each opportunity has been identified. Lead organisations are 
members of the Drought Resilience Steering Committee, or the Steering 
Committee itself.  
Priority strategies that have potential to have the greatest influence in 
building drought resilience are identified with a star icon. These priorities 
have been identified by stakeholders and the community through 
engagement on the draft plan.  
Many of the strategies relate to work that is already underway, and either 
needs to be extended, expanded or accelerated to have greater benefit.  
Some of the strategies present opportunities that are limited in their 
current application, or are not at all part of current action in the  
Outback SA region.These present new opportunities that could lead to 
significant or transformational change for the region, and are flagged with 
a lightbulb icon. 
RECOVERING 
FROM DROUGHT
RESPONDING 
TO DROUGHT
PREPARING 
FOR DROUGHT
PREPARING 
FOR DROUGHT 
FOUNDATION

The Drought Resilience Strategy
42
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
Where a project officer is mentioned in the opportunity, this does not 
necessarily mean delivery requires a full-time resource, but rather than 
delivery requires additional resources. One or two full time roles may be 
able to support all of the project officer opportunities.
7.3	
Delivery principles 
Through the community and stakeholder engagement, a number of ideas 
were consistently raised and have been used to inform the following 
drought resilience project principles:
•	 All of the Outback’s communities have developed as a result of differing 
needs over time. The consultation highlighted the significant differences 
across town and districts that often have unique and differing needs 
during drought. The planning, design and delivery of drought resilience 
building projects will be tailored to each town, community or landscape, 
reflecting their unique characteristics and needs. Local community 
involvement is key to provide each community with what they need to be 
resilient. 
•	 Investment in drought resilience projects will focus on enhancing long-
term preparedness and resilience. Resilience building outcomes will be 
optimised when project delivery occurs when times are good and the 
community has energy and focus.
•	 Support will be available to everyone and not disadvantage those that 
respond early to emerging risks or issues, or focus on those that are slow 
to respond.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
43
7.4	
Aboriginal partnerships
Aboriginal people have strong enduring cultural, social and spiritual 
connections with the Outback landscapes. 
A greater proportion of the Outback SA region’s population community 
identify as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander people than in other areas 
of the State. Native Title has been determined to exist across most of the 
region.
Traditional Owner groups in the region lead and are involved in a range 
of land management, environmental management, tourism, mining and 
pastoral activities including environmental monitoring and management, 
livestock management, mine activity land remediation, and heritage. 
The region’s Aboriginal people have contributed to the development of the 
strategies and opportunities to build the drought resilience of Aboriginal 
people and the environment.
GOAL
PARTNERSHIPS WITH ABORIGINAL PEOPLE THAT ENHANCE THE DROUGHT RESILIENCE OF COMMUNITIES AND THE 
ENVIRONMENT
Potential partners
• Traditional Owner groups • Aboriginal community groups • SA Arid Lands Landscape Board • mining companies  
• Co-management Boards • NGOs • Indigenous ranger groups
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
Engage with Aboriginal 
people to understand 
opportunities to build 
drought resilience
Employ a project officer to engage further with Aboriginal 
people to understand their needs and what would assist 
in enhancing the drought resilience of their communities 
and the environment and support the delivery of identified 
projects.  
OCA
Support programs that 
deliver on Aboriginal 
priorities
Support programs that enable Aboriginal people to 
share cultural land management knowledge across 
generations and use this to build the resilience of the natural 
environment.
SAALLB
Support Emerging and other Ranger Groups and other 
Aboriginal people’s delivery of land management and 
monitoring including pest plant and animal control, water 
and erosion management.
SAALLB  
OCA
OCA	
Outback Communities Authority 
SAALLB 	 SA Arid Landscape Board

The Drought Resilience Strategy
44
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
7.5	
Community and visitor infrastructure
Community and visitor infrastructure is key to facilitating community 
events and activities and supporting tourism. In the Outback SA region, 
each community is different and so needs fit for purpose infrastructure 
that supports their unique characteristics. any towns include halls, sporting 
clubs, ovals and associated facilities, some have playgrounds and other 
recreation facilities. In smaller communities, the hall is often the only 
available community space which becomes heavily used during droughts 
for community activities to support wellbeing. 
The Outback Communities Authority has a role to manage and 
promote improvements to public facilities and infrastructure across the 
unincorporated area, with Roby Council and Coober Pedy Council taking 
these responsibilities in their towns. 
GOAL
ROBUST, APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE INFRASTRUCTURE THAT MEETS THE NEEDS OF LOCALS AND VISITORS
Potential partners
• Outback Communities Authority (OCA) • Department for Infrastructure and Transport • Regional Development Far North 
• Progress Associations and other community organisations • Councils • local businesses
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
 PRIORITY
Improve provision of 
regional infrastructure 
that facilitates community 
events and tourism to 
build resilience before 
droughts occur
Funding upgraded or new community infrastructure that is 
maintainable, sustainable and provides a place for community 
connection and diverse uses (including community halls, 
sporting facilities, irrigated green space, community facilities 
with backup power generation etc.).
OCA
Enhance town environments through the establishment of 
additional landscaping and green infrastructure that can be 
adequately and sustainably maintained.
OCA
Undertake a needs analysis to identify opportunities to build 
additional and upgrade existing infrastructure to support 
economic diversification via tourism in towns including public 
toilets, showers, water , shaded outdoor tables and chairs, 
campground facilities etc.
OCA  
RDA
Implementing the recommendations of the Kati-Thanda Lake 
Eyre Flood Tourism Management Plan to support a strategic 
approach to visitor facility provision and management19..
RDA
OCA	
Outback Communities Authority 
RDA 	
Regional Development Far North

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
45
 The weather 
associated with drought 
brings down mains 
power and this means no 
water (pumps), no aircon, 
no refrigeration. It takes 
too long for the power to 
be reinstalled. 
7.6	
Community wellbeing
The region’s population is small, declining and geographically dispersed. 
Apart from the larger centres of Roxby Downs and Coober Pedy, all other 
towns have less than 300 people with the largest being Andamooka, 
Iron Knob, Leigh Creek, Oodnadatta, Penong and Woomera. There are 
numerous smaller townships, communities and settlements scattered 
across the region. 
The regions’ communities have high rates of volunteering and strong 
connections. Many people have lived in the region for many years, 
following generations of family members that have made the region home. 
In the unincorporated areas of Outback SA, Progress Associations and 
other community groups are responsible for local services and facilities. 
Many people “wear many hats” involved in social, sporting, health and 
education organisations. 
Community and stakeholders in nearly all locations shared the lasting 
impacts of droughts on the community. Drought-breaking rains do not 
mean the impacts of drought immediately reduce. Recovery can take 
significant time – individuals, families and businesses can still be recovering 
well after the environment has recovered.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
46
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
GOAL
STRONG, CONNECTED, HEALTHY, INVOLVED AND SUPPORTED LOCAL COMMUNITIES AND INDIVIDUALS
Potential partners
• Outback Communities Authority • Councils • Progress Associations and other community groups  
• Royal Flying Doctors Service • SA Health • PIRSA • Family and Business (FaB) mentors • Rural councillors • Centrelink  
• Rural Aid • Not for Profit organisations • external/out of region community organisations • regional and community programs  
Communications and the Arts 
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
 PRIORITY
Maintain and strengthen  
community wellbeing
Convene a working group to bring potential delivery 
partners together and determine delivery mechanisms 
for mentoring, counselling, financial advice, training, and 
support services for Outback communities to support and 
enhance drought preparedness and resilience. 
Employ a project officer to support service delivery with 
appropriate reach and depth of provision. 
OCA
Work with and support the Royal Flying Doctor Service, 
Country Health and other Aboriginal health service providers 
to provide services, including mental health (for men and 
women) and allied/preventative health, and preferably with 
continuity of staff who build trusted relationships with the 
local community. 
OCA  
SA Health
Increase opportunities for 
community connection 
during drought
Employ a project officer to develop a program of social 
events and activities for Outback communities that reflect 
the creativity and individuality of each town or audience. 
Target different activities to different audiences including 
whole families, children, young people, women and men, 
First Nations and culturally diverse communities.
OCA
Facilitate knowledge exchange and sharing of drought 
experiences among communities in formal event and 
informal settings.
SADH
Support volunteer activity 
Continue volunteer training on skills such as preparing grant 
applications, writing minutes, financial management, what 
resources are available, event management, digital literacy, 
managing insurances etc. 
OCA
Explore new ways to support volunteer and volunteer 
organisation involvement, and review systems and processes 
to identify opportunities for improvement to reduce burden 
on volunteers and make it easy for volunteers to participate.
trusted relationships with the local community. 
OCA
OCA	
Outback Communities Authority 
SADH 	
SA Drought Hub

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
47
GOAL
STRONG, CONNECTED, HEALTHY, INVOLVED AND SUPPORTED LOCAL COMMUNITIES AND INDIVIDUALS
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
Provide easy to access, 
direct financial support
Employ a project officer to support community awareness 
and understanding of community grant opportunities and 
support grant applications that allow funding for project 
management.
OCA  
RDA
Advocate for accessible, quick, easy, streamlined personal/
business financial supports during drought such as long-
term low interest business loans, water infrastructure 
rebates, supports similar to Job Keeper etc. with minimal 
red tape. Town residents may also need access to financial 
support for example with cost of living (power and water 
costs).
RDRSC
Advocate for financial support to help the region to recover 
and rebuild after drought.
RDRSC
Improve financial literacy
Provide mentoring or training for business finances and 
planning, succession planning and sharing information on 
the types of business support that is available. 
RDA
Supporting households to diversify their incomes prior to 
drought, especially into industries that are not reliant on 
water (for example historical tourism, dark sky tourism, 
station stays, fossil tourism, cultural tourism, education, health 
or community services).
RDA 
OCA
Maintain township 
vibrancy
Promote remote Outback life to encourage people to move 
to remote communities.
RDA
OCA	
Outback Communities Authority  
RDA 	
Regional Development Far North  
RDRSC 	 Regional Drought Resilience Steering Committee
7.7	
Economy
The economy of the Outback SA region is dominated by mining as 
measured by both employment and contribution to Gross Regional 
Product. Pastoralism, tourism and construction are other key industries 
of employment. The reliance on mining makes the region vulnerable to 
economic shocks caused by falling commodity prices.
Regional Development Australia (RDA) Far North has a key role to play in 
developing a more resilient and sustainable economy through their work in 
supporting existing businesses to develop, attract new enterprises to the 
region, and assisting the growth of strong and viable businesses as well as 
working towards attracting new business investment to grow the economy 
of the region.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
48
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
GOAL
A MORE DIVERSE ECONOMY WITH GROWING TOURISM AND SUCCESSFUL LOCAL BUSINESSES 
Potential partners
• Regional Development Australia Far North • Outback Communities Authority • Councils 
• Flinders Ranges and Outback Tourism Committee • Tourism SA • National Parks and Wildlife Service SA • tourism operators 
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
Support local 
employment
Support and promote full time and part time local jobs and 
education that allow local people to diversify their work and 
stay in the local community. Ensure local promotion of local 
job opportunities.
RDA
Support industries which enable local employment and 
economic benefit (eg culture and recreation, tourism, 
manufacturing, construction, administration) through the 
provision of training, grants and infrastructure.
RDA
Promote Outback tourism
Increase promotion of outback tourism across the Outback 
SA region, optimising opportunities to enhance regional 
identity.
RDA
Consult with DEW and other relevant parties to explore 
opportunities for safe, sustainable and culturally appropriate 
visitor experiences in protected areas, as identified in 
relevant management plans.
RDA
RDA 	
Regional Development Far North
7.8	
Environment
The Outback SA’s environment is shaped by low, irregular rainfall, episodic 
weather and limited human disturbance. The region includes some of 
the driest parts of Australia and has the largest percentage of intact 
ecosystems and natural biodiversity in the state. Prolonged droughts 
can be followed by intense rainfall events and flooding which lead to an 
explosion of life.
Water resources are critical to sustain communities, biodiversity, grazing 
stock in pastoral areas and mining operations. The lakes, watercourses, 
springs and wetlands are of significant cultural value to the Aboriginal 
people of Outback SA and many are popular tourist attractions. Some of 
these connections are more greatly influenced by drought than others. 
Cultural values are intrinsically linked to water resources and biodiversity. 
The SA Arid Lands Landscape Board plays a key role in managing the 
region’s natural resources. Working in partnership with Traditional Owner 
groups, Landscape Groups, local organisations and landholders the Board 
delivers programs and projects to improve land and water management, 
biodiversity and pest animal and plant control. The Department for 
Environment and Water through the National Parks and Wildlife Service 
are responsible for the management of the 45 conservation reserves 
and national parks that cover nearly 30% of the region. Biodiversity is also 
protected on private land through Heritage Agreements and on a number 
of privately owned or managed reserves and sanctuaries.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
49
GOAL
HEALTHY ENVIRONMENTS WITH ABUNDANT NATIVE VEGETATION, MANAGED TOTAL GRAZING PRESSURE AND 
SUSTAINABLE WATER RESOURCE 
Potential partners
• SA Arid Lands Landscape Board (SAALLB) • Traditional Owner groups • Landscape Groups  
• Department for Environment and Water • National Parks and Wildlife Service • National Park Co-management Boards  
• conservation and environmental NGOs 
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
Control overabundant 
native animals and feral 
animals’ contribution to 
total grazing pressure
Ongoing support and partnerships for land managers to 
manage feral animals and over-abundant native species.
SAALLB
Improving drought 
resilience of threatened 
species and ecological 
communities 
Undertake landscape scale planning to inform management 
interventions including pest plant and animal control, that 
improve the resilience of native species and communities to 
drought. 
SAALLB
Monitor and report on 
environmental  condition
Work in partnership to improve long-term monitoring of 
groundwater, surface water, native flora and fauna including 
during drought to increase knowledge of the impacts 
of drought on keystone species and support adaptive 
management.
Undertake regular reporting of monitoring outcomes to the 
community and key stakeholders.
SAALLB
Deliver conservation 
priorities
Implement SA Arid Lands Landscape Board conservation 
priorities to protect and enhance biodiversity to build 
resilience before drought:
•	 Managing key threats to protect natural values.
•	 Taking action for threatened species and ecosystem 
	 recovery.
SAALLB
Continue to support action to progress the goals and 
objectives of the Lake Eyre Basin Strategic Plan20, and Great 
Artesian Basin Strategic Management Plan21. 
SAALLB
SAALLB 	 SA Arid Landscape Board
7.9	
Essential services
The resilience of the Outback SA region is highly dependent on 
infrastructure that can function effectively and deliver essential services 
under all conditions. 
The large distances separating communities and industries, the need 
to bring in food produced outside the region and the need for the 
community to access services outside the region, means that a reliable 
transport system is essential. Essential services such as power, water and 
communications are inconsistent across the region. Some towns still do 
not have household supply of mains water, and many areas have power 
supplies that are frequently disrupted, impacting food storage and internet 
connections and sometimes taking days to restore.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
50
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
There are multiple organisations with responsibility for regional 
infrastructure. The Department of Infrastructure and Transport is 
responsible for about 10,000km of outback roads. SA Water is responsible 
for the operation of desalination plants to supply town water to numerous 
towns. Other towns and communities rely on local water supply options, 
including ground water and rainwater tanks. Leigh Creek, Woomera and 
Roxby Downs are connected to the national electricity grid. The state 
government own the electricity supply infrastructure to several towns. 
Coober Pedy, Andamooka and Yunta are supplied through power purchase 
agreements from independent suppliers22. Other communities and 
stations rely on on-site generation through either renewables and/or diesel 
generators. Private companies supply telecommunications.
GOAL
RELIABLE, SECURE AND FUTURE PROOFED WATER, ENERGY AND TRANSPORT NETWORKS
Potential partners
• Outback Communities Authority • Department for Infrastructure and Transport • SA Water  
• Department for Energy and Mining • SA Power Networks 
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
 PRIORITY
Improve provision of 
regional infrastructure
Undertake a needs analysis to identify required improvements 
to road and roadside infrastructure for stock agistment, local 
travel and tourism, including road sealing, unsealed road 
maintenance, and installation of parking bays, toilets, showers 
and rubbish bins.
Present analysis to Outback Roads Consultative Forum.
RDA 
OCA
Improving water security for all communities, prioritising 
communities identified as having medium and high risks to 
water supply23.
OCA with 
other 
agencies
Encourage decentralised community scale production and 
storage of renewable energy to improve energy security 
and reduce power outages (which also cut out water 
pumps, fridges, air conditioners, telecommunications etc.).
OCA with 
other 
agencies
Deliver universal access to public Wi-Fi so the community 
and visitors can better access emergency services, health, 
education and other support services.
OCA 
RDA
Encourage and support water recycling initiatives and expand 
town Community Wastewater Management Systems.
OCA
Improve efficiency of 
household infrastructure
Providing incentives for household solar generation and storage, 
energy and water efficient housing and rainwater tanks.
RDRSC
OCA	
Outback Communities Authority  
RDA 	
Regional Development Far North  
RDRSC 	 Regional Drought Resilience Steering Committee

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
51
7.10	
Governance and advocacy
The majority of the Outback SA region is unincorporated, meaning it has 
no local government areas. Instead, the Outback Communities Authority 
manages and promotes improvements to public services and facilities in 
outback communities, and articulates the views, interests and aspirations 
of outback communities.
Each community generally has a Progress Association (or similar) to 
represent it. These associations generally assist with community needs 
and priorities and, where resources allow, maintain facilities and services 
and undertake important town management roles including running 
community events. Membership of the Progress Associations is voluntary 
and positions are unpaid. 
There are two local government areas in the region for this Plan: District 
Council of Coober Pedy and Municipal Council of Roxby Downs (Roxby 
Council) although these councils have different operating structures to 
most local government bodies in South Australia. During the engagement 
undertaken to inform this Plan, numerous community members referred 
revised National Drought Agreement that recognises the need to support 
farming businesses and farming communities to manage and prepare for 
climate change and variability25.

The Drought Resilience Strategy
52
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
GOAL
COORDINATED, TARGETED AND SUPPORTIVE GOVERNANCE AND ADVOCACY
Potential partners
• Outback Communities Authority • Regional Development Australia Far North • Councils • SA Arid Lands Landscape Board
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
 PRIORITY
Instigate effective 
drought governance to 
support project delivery 
Establish a cross-agency group to coordinate and support 
drought resilience project funding applications and project 
delivery, and improve the coordination and funding of 
programs from different agencies.
OCA
Investigate how inclusion of drought as a hazard in 
the State Emergency Management Plan could benefit 
communities and unlock alternate approaches and support 
for preparation, response and recovery through a review of 
other jurisdictions’ approaches.
OCA
Advocate for and support long-term funding, review and 
improvement processes to ensure governance agencies 
learn from past experiences.
RDRSC
Encourage city-based volunteer groups to come into 
regional communities and help during drought times 
through for example running social events, assisting with 
weed management etc. 
OCA
Engage with communities 
and promote available 
support
Employ a project officer to support community 
access to and knowledge of the full range of drought 
resilience, management, and support opportunities and 
initiatives including the National Drought Agreement 
and mechanisms to access support.
OCA
Undertake ongoing engagement with communities to 
understand what they need and want, and delivering this in 
partnership with the community.
OCA
Increase visibility and access to government agencies (eg 
PIRSA, OCA, RDA, SAALLB) in on-ground work in the regions, 
including more personal contact and relationships in the 
regions (not just in Port Augusta) and supporting continuity 
of staff where possible.
RDRSC
Celebrating and sharing 
success 
Celebrating volunteering and community successes, 
promoting good practice that will strengthen drought 
resilience. 
OCA  
SAALLB
OCA	
Outback Communities Authority  
RDRSC 	 Regional Drought Resilience Steering Committee 
SAALLB 	 SA Arid Landscape Board

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
53
7.11	
Primary production 
Primary production is a key industry of the Outback, as one of the region’s 
largest employers, a key contributor to GRP and the industry most 
impacted by drought. The region’s 323 pastoral stations cover more than 
400,000km2 or 70% of the region. There are  
areas of cropping near the west coast around Penong where rainfall is 
more reliable. 
In pastoral areas, drought results in greater competition for available feed 
sources and where grazing pressure from pest or native species  is high, 
feed available for sheep and cattle may be inadequate and supplementary 
feed or destocking may be necessary to avoid environmental damage. 
Carbon farming projects are being initiated across South Australia that 
include practices that increase the amount of carbon stored in soil and 
vegetation (sequestration) or avoid or reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
These can be achieved through rotational grazing with extended rest spells 
that allow vegetation cover to recover, or by removing stock completely 
from pastoral properties. Carbon farmers can receive revenue from carbon 
Emissions Reduction Fund or to private investors or businesses, providing 
an opportunity for alterative on-farm income26. Future demand for 
verifiable and premium carbon credits is expected to grow however  
it is understood that carbon credit estimation methods are currently  
under review. 
 As an employee 
there was a cut down 
of staff so more work 
for those of us left

The Drought Resilience Strategy
54
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
The World Economic Forum and United Nations have identified 
biodiversity loss as a major risk to businesses and financial capital27. Global 
conservation organizations, institutes, and business and finance coalitions 
are seeking a target of nature positive by 203028. A market for biodiversity 
credits is emerging and may present opportunities for regional landholders 
to receive financial benefit from taking nature-positive action.
Key agricultural stakeholders include the Pastoral Board which has 
responsibility to manage and conserve pastoral land in the region and 
the SA Arid Lands Landscape Board which supports land and water 
management and pest animal and plant control. Primary Industry and 
Regions South Australia (PIRSA) are support the delivery of two drought 
programs in South Australia under the Future Drought Fund including the 
Farm Business Resilience Program which with industry partners such as 
Livestock SA will support Australian farmers to better manage risks relating 
to drought and improve resilience. 
 
GOAL
ADAPTIVE, INNOVATIVE AND SUSTAINABLE PASTORALISM AND AGRICULTURE 
Potential partners
• SA Arid Lands Landscape Board (SAALLB) • Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board • Pastoral Board • PIRSA • SA Drought Hub 
• Primary Producers SA • Livestock SA • Grain Producers SA • farming systems groups • agricultural service providers 
• Fisheries and Forestry
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
 PRIORITY
Increase capacity of pastoralists 
and farmers to undertake 
adaptive land management and 
manage total grazing pressure
Increase pastoralists’ capacity in adaptive land 
management, including rotational grazing, destock 
decision making, locating watering points and 
erosion control to support uptake and increase 
pastoral sustainability and resilience.
SAALLB
Support landowners to manage total  grazing 
pressure associated with stock, pest animals (eg 
goats, pigs, deer) and overabundant native animals.
SAALLB
Provide information and support for pastoralists 
to make early and informed decisions about stock 
management during drought, for example alternative 
feed sources, destocking or agistment when 
vegetation cover is declining to prevent overgrazing. 
PIRSA 
SAALLB 
SADH
 PRIORITY
Support and promote carbon 
farming and nature positive 
outcomes
Investigate and share emerging opportunities 
for biodiversity credits, carbon farming, 
emissions reduction and other approaches that 
enable diversification and can deliver finanical 
benefit from nature positive outcomes.
PIRSA 
SAALLB
Promote land management approaches that 
create nature positive outcomes.
SAALLB
Support pastoral properties to diversify to nature 
positive markets through increasing sustainable 
practices and by providing clear pathways. 
Facilitate information sharing from properties 
that have already done this.
SAALLB
PIRSA	
Department of Primary Industries and Regions 
SAALLB 	 SA Arid Landscape Board 
SADH 	
SA Drought Hub

The Drought Resilience Strategy
October 2024
55
GOAL
ADAPTIVE, INNOVATIVE AND SUSTAINABLE PASTORALISM AND AGRICULTURE 
Potential partners
• SA Arid Lands Landscape Board (SAALLB) • Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board • Pastoral Board • PIRSA • SA Drought Hub 
• Primary Producers SA • Livestock SA • Grain Producers SA • farming systems groups • agricultural service providers 
• Fisheries and Forestry
Strategies
Opportunities 
Lead
Timing
Share information and resources 
about climate and drought 
response
Share links to online information for pastoralists 
seeking information during/after drought, with 
information including registered stockists or 
providers for feed or agistment. Contextualising 
technical information such as climate data, forecasts, 
tools etc. to individual property or business decisions.
SAALLB 
PIRSA
Encourage, support and 
accelerate long-term property 
planning 
Deliver individual farm business assessments 
which support producers to assess their drought 
preparedness and develop long-term plans for 
improvement that address land management, 
financial sustainability and succession planning. 
SAALLB 
PIRSA
Deliver local research and 
innovation
Research and trial new and improved grazing and 
cropping land management practices in the Outback 
SA context.
SADH  
SAALLB
Improve localised weather and climate forecasting, 
monitoring and warning systems.
SAALLB
Support infrastructure that 
reduces workload and improves 
water use efficiency
Support the uptake of proven infrastructure that 
reduces workload through pastoral property 
demonstrations of proven equipment, practices and 
technologies eg telemetry to monitor water levels, 
stock grids to replace gates.
SADH  
SAALLB
PIRSA	
Department of Primary Industries and Regions 
SAALLB 	 SA Arid Landscape Board 
SADH 	
SA Drought Hub

Implementation, governance, monitoring and evaluation
56
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
8.0	 Implementation, 
governance, monitoring 
and evaluation

Implementation, governance, monitoring and evaluation
October 2024
57
8.1	
Implementation
This Plan has been prepared as a framework or 
prospectus to guide future effort and investment in 
regional drought resilience. 
The opportunities identified in this Plan are unfunded and some may only 
be progressed with further investment.
It is the intention that the implementation of this Plan will be addressed 
by a number of different delivery partners. The Outback SA community 
will be able to address some, while others will require coordination 
and cooperation between government agencies, non-government 
organisations and the private sector.
Through the engagement to support the development of this Plan we have 
heard clearly that communities want to be involved in the decisions that 
affect them. Planning the delivery of all projects will include the community 
from the start, to get buy-in and support and more beneficial outcomes.
8.2	
Governance
It is proposed to establish a cross-agency group to coordinate and support 
project funding applications and project delivery to avoid duplication 
of effort and maximise local and regional benefits. The group would 
include the partners involved in the development of this Plan, as well as 
representatives from health. It is proposed the group meets regularly to 
maintain an ongoing shared understanding of emerging issues as well as 
being ready to support funding applications to any available source.
8.3	
Monitoring, evaluation and reporting
This Plan and its implementation will be monitored, evaluated and reported 
on according to the Regional Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Guide 
prepared by the Department for Primary Industries and Regions for the 
South Australian Regional Drought Resilience Plans.
Monitoring and evaluation are essential parts of delivering any plan, project 
or program. Undertaking monitoring and evaluation will help the Steering 
Committee, stakeholders and the community understand if the vision and 
goals are being progressed and assist in refining the project approaches to 
optimise outcomes. It also ensures accountability and provides information 
to share with partners and stakeholders to demonstrate program value.
This monitoring and evaluation framework is based upon a program 
logic approach. Program logic illustrates cause and effect relationships to 
provide understanding of how program resources are used to produce 
outputs and deliver outcomes in the short to long term. The model also 
acknowledges the interaction of assumptions and external factors with 
outputs and outcomes. The elements of the program logic model shown in 
Figure 7 are defined overleaf29.

Implementation, governance, monitoring and evaluation
58
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
Outputs: 	
measurement of the direct actions taken, for example the activities and 
events delivered, the services provided and the funds spent. Output 
measures include both activities and associated participation.
Assumptions: 	
the expectations we have that the actions we take and the participants 
involved will lead to the outcomes or change we seek to achieve.
Outcomes: 	
the desired results of direct actions on individuals, groups, communities, 
organisations and the environment in the short-medium and medium-
long term. Outcomes in the medium-long term are often influenced 
more by external factors (actions undertaken by others or changes in 
environmental, social or governance factors).
External Factors: 	
the uncontrollable factors in the wider environment surrounding our 
programs that may interact with and influence outcomes. 
FIGURE 7: 
PROGRAM LOGIC MODEL
WHAT 
WE DO
WHo 
WE 
REACH
WHAT 
WE 
DO
SHORT-
MEDIUM
TERM
1-5 YEARS
IMPACT 
MEDIUM-
LONG
TERM
5-20 YEARS 
IMPACT
MONITORING 
AND 
EVALUATION
EXTERNAL
FACTORS
ACTIONS
OUTCOMES
ACTIONS
OUTPUTS
WHAT 
WE 
INVEST
ACTIONS
INPUT
FUNDS
STAFF
STAFF
COMMUNITY
PARTNERS
ASSUMPTIONS

Implementation, governance, monitoring and evaluation
October 2024
59
The program logic and monitoring indicators for the priority strategies  
of the Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan are provided in  
Appendix A. This will be reviewed and revised as projects are funded and 
planning for delivery commences. 
As projects are scoped for funding and then implemented, an evaluation 
process will be established that will consider:
•	 How effective was the project/program in achieving its intended outputs 
and outcomes?
•	 To what extend did the project/program contribute to the relevant goals, 
and what other things helped or hindered its implementation?
Once implementation commences, a biannual evaluation of the Outback 
SA Drought Resilience Plan itself will be initiated that will consider:
•	 To what extent has the Plan been implemented and has impacted on 
regional stakeholders’ capacity and resources to better plan, manage and 
recover from drought?
•	 What changes/support are/is needed to ensure that the Plan best 
provides an effective framework for action and stakeholders can 
effectively work together towards implementing those actions?

Glossary
60
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
9.0	 Glossary
Climate projection	
A scenario of future climate, generally resulting from running a global 
climate model (GCM) with a specified greenhouse gas concentration 
scenario (or RCP). A projection differs from a prediction in that it is 
conditional on the representation of a particular GCM and the uncertain 
assumptions of the model inputs (primarily the greenhouse gas 
concentration scenario, or RCP)30.
Carbon farming	
Carbon farming includes:
•	 sequestering carbon in the landscape through regeneration and planting 
of native vegetation; farm and plantation forestry; and improving soil 
management to ensure that carbon inputs exceed outputs.
•	 reducing emissions, such as livestock methane emissions; fertiliser 
emissions and through manure management31.
Carbon insetting	
Carbon insetting is when a company offsets their emissions with a carbon 
offset project that comes from their own value chain. Insetting on a 
pastoral property would means the carbon credits never enter the open 
market and instead be used to balance out the emissions generated on 
that property32.
Decarbonisation	
The removal or reduction of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases 
output into the atmosphere.
Drought	
A prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions that impact negatively on 
water availability and agricultural production in a region and, consequently, 
impacts negatively on the economy and environment of the region and the 
health and wellbeing of its residents.
Drought resilience 	
Drought resilience means the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform 
in response to changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity 
of rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, 
environmental and social wellbeing.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation	
El Niño refers to the extensive warming of the central and eastern Pacific 
Ocean that leads to a major shift in weather patterns across the Pacific. In 
Australia (particularly eastern Australia), El Niño events are associated with 
an increased probability of drier conditions33.
Green infrastructure	
Green Infrastructure refers to all of the vegetation that provides 
environmental, economic and social benefits such as clean air and water, 
climate regulation, food provision, erosion control and places for recreation 
in a township or urban setting. It includes parks and reserves, watercourse 
corridors, street trees and roadside verges34.
Indian Ocean Dipole	
The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) is defined by the difference in sea surface 
temperatures between the eastern and western tropical Indian Ocean. 
A negative phase typically sees above average winter-spring rainfall in 
Australia, while a positive phase brings drier than average seasons35.
Nature positive	
Nature positive is a term used to describe circumstances where nature – 
species and ecosystems – is being repaired and is regenerating rather than 
being in decline36.
Total grazing pressure	
The combined grazing pressure exerted by all herbivores – domestic and 
wild, native and feral – on the vegetation present in an area.

References
October 2024
61
10.0	 References 
1	
Bureau of Meteorology 2021b, Average annual, seasonal and monthly 
rainfall maps, Commonwealth of Australia.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/ 
2	
Bureau of Meteorology 2021b, Average annual, seasonal and monthly 
rainfall maps, Commonwealth of Australia.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/ 
3	
Bureau of Meteorology 2021b, Average annual, seasonal and monthly 
rainfall maps, Commonwealth of Australia., 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/
4	
Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate 
Guides, Commonwealth of Australia.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/ 
5	
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Climate Data Online, Commonwealth of 
Australia. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/ 
6	
Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate 
Guides, Commonwealth of Australia.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/
7	
Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate 
Guides, Commonwealth of Australia.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/

References
62
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
8	
Stafford Smith Mark 2008, The ‘desert syndrome’ – causally-linked factors 
that characterise outback Australia. The Rangeland Journal 30, 3-14. 
https://doi.org/10.1071/RJ07063 
9	
South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 2021, Water Allocation 
Plan For the Far North Prescribed Wells Area, Government of South 
Australia, accessed 27 February 2024. https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/
landscape/docs/saal/6087_wap_feb2021_final020321.pdf 
10	
Department of Primary Industries and Regions 2020, Drought 
Management and Recovery for South Australian Pastoralists 2020-21, 
Government of South Australia, Adelaide.  
https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/374797/Drought_
management_and_recovery_for_South_Australian_Pastoralists.pdf
11	
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Indian Ocean influences on Australian 
climate, Commonwealth of Australia, 2024.  
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/iod 
12	
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/
sitecollectiondocuments/ag-food/drought/drought-policy/national-
drought-agreement.pdf
13	
Drought Agreement 2022, Review of the National Drought Agreement, 
CC BY 4.0. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/
nda-review-report.pdf 
14	
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Indian Ocean influences on Australian 
climate, Commonwealth of Australia, 2024. | 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/iod 
15	
Bureau of Meteorology 2021a, What is El Niño and how does it impact 
Australia?, Commonwealth of Australia. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/
updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-australia.shtml 
16	
Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of 
Australia. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/
previous-droughts.shtml 
17	
National Environmental Science Program (NESP) (n.d) Drought projections 
for Australia, Climate change science brief prepared for ESCC Hub Project 
5.4: Water futures under climate change. https://nespclimate.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/04/ESCC_Drought-projections_Factsheet.pdf
18	
CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Climate Change in Australia website, 
Regional Climate Change Explorer.  
https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/
regional-climate-change-explorer/super-clusters/ 
19	
Lennon S. and Gibbins, R 2022, Kati-Thanda Lake Eyre Flood Tourism 
Management Plan Prepared on behalf of Regional Development Australia 
Far North and The Outback Communities Authority December 2022., 
https://rdafn.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/Kati-Thanda-Lake-
Eyre-Flood-Tourism-Management-Plan_Final_Dec-2022.pdf 
20	
DCCEEW 2024, Lake Eyre Basin Strategic Plan, Department of Climate 
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, Canberra. https://www.
dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/national/lake-eyre-basin/strategic-plan 
21	
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water, 2020, 
Great Artesian Basin Strategic Management Plan. https://www.dcceew.
gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/strategic-management-plan.pdf

References
October 2024
63
22	
Department of Energy and Mining, n.d. Remote Area Energy Supply. 
https://www.energymining.sa.gov.au/consumers/energy-grid-and-
supply/remote-area-energy-supply 
23	
Department for Environment and Water (2024). Assessment of water 
security risks to self-supplied remote communities in South Australia, DEW 
Technical report 2024/2, Government of South Australia, Department for 
Environment and Water, Adelaide.  
https://www.waterconnect.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/DEW/
TechRept_WaterSecurityRisksRemoteCommunities.pdf 
24	
Agriculture Victoria 2021, Victoria’s Drought Preparedness and Response 
Framework. https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/managing-
for-and-during-drought/drought-preparedness-and-response-framework 
25	
Agreement. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/drought/drought-policy/national-drought-agreement 
26	
Government of South Australia 2022, Carbon Farming Road Map. 
https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/428893/carbon-
farming-roadmap.pdf 
27	
World Economic Forum, 2023, 50% of the global economy is under threat 
from biodiversity loss. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/02/
biodiversity-nature-loss-cop15/ 
28	
Nature Positive Initiative, 2024, What is Nature Positive. 
https://www.naturepositive.org/what-is-nature-positive/
29	
Taylor-Powell, E. (2003) Logic models to enhance program performance, 
https://images.creativetemplate.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Logic-
Model-Template-PDF.pdf 
30	
Department for Environment and Water 2022, Guide to Climate 
Projections for Risk Assessment and Planning in South Australia 2022, 
Government of South Australia, through the Department for Environment 
and Water, Adelaide.  
https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20
to%20climate%20projections%20for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20
planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf 
31	
Government of South Australia 2022, Carbon Farming Road Map. 
https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/428893/carbon-
farming-roadmap.pdf 
32	
Barker E., 2023, What is insetting and how is different to offsetting?  
https://www.beefcentral.com/carbon/what-is-insetting-and-how-is-
different-to-offsetting/ 
33	
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Australian Water Information Dictionary. 
http://www.bom.gov.au/water/awid/id-180.shtml 
34	
CSIRO, 2024, The Challenge – Greening our Cities. https://www.csiro.au/
en/research/environmental-impacts/sustainability/Green-infrastructure 
35	
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Climate Driver Update 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/enso/#tabs=Indian-Ocean 
36	
DCCEEW 2022, Nature Positive Plan: better for the environment, better 
for business, Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and 
Water, Canberra, December. https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/
files/documents/nature-positive-plan.pdf

Appendix A
64
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
11.0	 Appendix A 
Program logic and monitoring indicators for priority strategies 
The tables below describes the program logic for the priority strategies in 
the Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan and identifies proposed 
monitoring indicators for outputs and outcomes.
PRIORITY STRATEGY:  
IMPROVE PROVISION OF REGIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE THAT FACILITATES COMMUNITY EVENTS AND TOURISM
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ACTION
•	 Fund upgrades or new community infrastructure
•	 Enhance town environments through the establishment of additional landscaping and green infrastructure 
•	 Undertake a needs analysis to identify opportunities to build additional and upgrade existing tourism infrastructure
•	 Implement the recommendations of the Kati-Thanda Lake Eyre Tourism Management Plan
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-20 years
•	 Number of upgrades or 
new assets delivered
•	 Number of people living in 
communities services by 
new or upgraded assets
•	 Number of towns with 
additional landscaping
•	 Completion of tourism 
infrastructure needs 
analysis 
•	 Number of 
recommendations in 
Tourism Management Plan 
contributed to 
Robust, appropriate 
and accessible social 
infrastructure that meets the 
needs of locals and visitors
•	 Number of events and 
activities facilitated 
through new or upgraded 
assets (target increase)
•	 Action plan for new 
tourism infrastructure 
developed (target 
completion)
•	 Community connections 
(target increase / 
strengthen connections)
•	 Liveability of remote towns 
and communities (target 
increase)
•	 Economic contribution 
of tourism to the 
region (target increase 
contribution from tourism)

Appendix A
October 2024
65
PRIORITY STRATEGY: MAINTAIN AND STRENGTHEN COMMUNITY WELLBEING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ACTION
•	 Convene a working group to bring potential delivery partners together and determine delivery mechanisms for mentoring, 
counselling, financial advice, training, and support services 
•	 Employ a project officer to support service delivery with appropriate reach and depth of provision
•	 Work with and support the Royal Flying Doctor Service, Country Health and other Aboriginal health service providers to 
provide services
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-20 years
•	 Establishment of working 
group
•	 Development of program 
for service provision 
•	 Employment of project 
officer
•	 Number of health providers 
engaged
Strong, connected, healthy 
involved and supported local 
communities and individuals
•	 Number of people 
accessing support services 
(target increase)
•	 Geographic distribution of 
people accessing support 
services (target increase)
•	 Resilience and wellbeing of 
regional communities and 
primary producers (target 
increase)
PRIORITY STRATEGY: IMPROVE PROVISION OF REGIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ACTION
•	 	Undertake a needs analysis to identify required improvements to road and roadside infrastructure 
•	 	Improve water security for all communities 
•	 	Encourage decentralised community scale production and storage of renewable energy 
•	 	Provide safe community spaces with backup power sources for community to go when the power goes out 
•	 	Deliver universal access to public Wi-Fi 
•	 	Encourage and support water recycling initiatives and expand town Community Wastewater Management Systems
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-20 years
•	 Completion of transport 
needs analysis
•	 Number of water security 
projects delivered
•	 Number of households 
with increased water 
security
•	 Number of small scale 
renewable energy projects
•	 Number of community 
respite places established 
•	 Number of public Wi-Fi 
sites established
•	 Number of water recycling 
initiatives commenced 
Reliable, secure and future 
proofed water, energy, 
communication and 
transport networks
•	 Action plan for Outback 
transport delivered
•	 Community-scale risk 
to water security (target 
decrease)
•	 Community risk to energy 
security (target decrease)
•	 Volume of water recycled 
(target increase) 
•	 Effective function of 
transport network (target 
reduce disruption from 
extreme weather)
•	 Equitable access to 
telecommunications 
(target increase)
•	 Electricity disruptions 
(target decrease time 
without access to 
electricity)

Appendix A
66
Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan
PRIORITY STRATEGY: INSTIGATE EFFECTIVE DROUGHT GOVERNANCE TO SUPPORT PROJECT DELIVERY
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ACTION
•	 Establish a cross-agency group to coordinate and support drought resilience project funding applications and project 
delivery 
•	 Investigate inclusion of drought as a hazard in the State Emergency Management Plan
•	 Advocate for and support long-term funding, review and improvement processes 
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-20 years
•	 Establishment of cross-
agency group and 
development of Terms of 
Reference
•	 Investigation into drought 
hazard complete
•	 Number of advocacy 
submissions
Coordinated, targeted and 
supportive local and regional 
governance, advocacy and 
project delivery
•	 Number of successful 
funding applications and 
value of funding received
•	 Outback SA voice 
represented in decisions 
that affect drought 
resilience in the region
•	 Community and 
stakeholder satisfaction 
with project delivery and 
support
•	 Success of drought 
resilience project delivery 
on time and on budget
•	 Reputation of cross-
agency group to support, 
deliver and advocate 
(target increase) 
PRIORITY STRATEGY: INCREASE CAPACITY OF PASTORALISTS AND FARMERS TO UNDERTAKE ADAPTIVE LAND 
MANAGEMENT AND MANAGE TOTAL GRAZING PRESSURE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ACTION
•	 Increase pastoralists’ capacity in adaptive land management
•	 Support landowners to manage total grazing pressure 
•	 Provide information and support for pastoralists to make early and informed decisions about stock management during 
drought
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-20 years
•	 Number of capacity 
building events or activities
•	 Number of pastoralists and 
landowners participating 
in events and activities
•	 Support provided to 
manage pest animal 
populations
•	 Development of templates 
to provide information to 
pastoralists
Adaptive, innovative and 
sustainable pastoralism and 
agriculture
•	 Total grazing pressure 
(target maintain at 
sustainable levels)
•	 Land cover in pastoral 
areas (target maintain and 
increase)
•	 Soil erosion and dust 
issues (target decrease)
•	 Regional economic 
contribution of primary 
production (target 
maintain and increase)

Appendix A
October 2024
67
PRIORITY STRATEGY: SUPPORT AND PROMOTE CARBON FARMING AND NATURE POSITIVE OUTCOMES
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ACTION
•	 Investigate and share emerging opportunities for biodiversity credits, carbon farming, emissions reduction and other 
approaches 
•	 Promote land management approaches that create nature positive outcomes 
•	 Support pastoral properties to diversify to nature positive markets 
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-20 years
•	 Quantity of information 
shared 
•	 Number of landowners 
accessing information 
•	 Number of capacity 
building events or activities
•	 Number of pastoralists and 
landowners participating 
in events and activities
Adaptive, innovative and 
sustainable pastoralism and 
agriculture
•	 Number of properties 
implementing nature 
positive land management 
(target increase)
•	 Area of land managed to 
provide economic benefit 
from non-agricultural 
purposes (eg carbon 
farming or biodiversity 
credits) (target increase) 
•	 Distribution and 
abundance of keystone 
species (target maintain 
and increase)
•	 Land cover in pastoral 
areas (target maintain and 
increase)

Outback SA  
Regional Drought Resilience Plan  
Steering Committee
C/-	 Outback Communities Authority 
PO Box 3326 
Port Augusta West SA 5700
T	
(08) 8648 5386
droughtresilientoutbacksa.com.au

Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee 
23ADL-0865 
21 October 2024 
Outback SA Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan – 
Background Paper

Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan – Background Paper 
21 October 2024 
Lead consultant 
URPS 
27 Halifax Street 
Enter via Symonds Pl 
Adelaide  SA  5000 
(08) 8333 7999 
urps.com.au  
Prepared for 
Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Steering 
Committee 
Consultant Project Manager 
Anna Pannell, Associate Director 
apannell@urps.com.au 
URPS Ref 
23ADL-0865 
Document history and status 
Revision 
Date 
Author 
Reviewed 
Details 
V1 
23/04/24 
E. Mansfield 
A. Pannell 
Draft for Steering Committee 
review 
V2 
3/07/24 
E. Mansfield, A 
Pannell 
Steering 
Committee  
Final delivery  
V3 
21/10/24 
E. Mansfield, A 
Pannell 
CSIRO 
Updated final paper

Contents | i 
Contents 
Acknowledgement of Country ................................................................................................... iii 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 1 
Preparing the Background Paper .................................................................................................. 1 
The Outback SA Region .................................................................................................. 3 
The Outback SA “system” ............................................................................................................... 4 
Population ............................................................................................................................................ 5 
First Nations people .......................................................................................................................... 7 
Economy .............................................................................................................................................. 8 
Natural environment ......................................................................................................................... 9 
Climate ..................................................................................................................................................11 
Assets and infrastructure ................................................................................................................ 17 
Governance ....................................................................................................................................... 18 
Defining features of Outback SA ................................................................................................ 19 
Drought ............................................................................................................................. 22 
A definition of drought .................................................................................................................. 22 
Causes of drought .......................................................................................................................... 22 
Past droughts ................................................................................................................................... 24 
Future climate and drought projections ................................................................................... 28 
Other drivers of change ................................................................................................ 33 
Global drivers of change ............................................................................................................... 33 
National and state drivers of change ......................................................................................... 34 
Regional trends ............................................................................................................................... 35 
Drought resilience ..........................................................................................................36 
A definition of resilience ............................................................................................................... 36 
The importance of drought resilience .......................................................................................38 
Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, and regions ................... 39 
Approaches to drought resilience planning ............................................................ 43 
Learnings from other planning regions ..................................................................................... 43 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework .. 44 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy ...................................................................... 46

Contents | ii 
Opportunities for increasing drought resilience in the Outback SA region .... 47 
Agricultural opportunities .............................................................................................................. 47 
Community opportunities ..............................................................................................................48 
Economic opportunities ................................................................................................................ 50 
Environmental opportunities ....................................................................................................... 50 
First Nations cultural opportunities ............................................................................................. 51 
Governance and advocacy opportunities ............................................................................... 52 
Infrastructure opportunities ......................................................................................................... 53 
Types of change ............................................................................................................................. 54 
References ....................................................................................................................... 55 
Appendix A – Engagement summary report ...................................................................... 65 
Funding acknowledgement 
This project is part of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program and is jointly funded 
This plan has been prepared by URPS for the Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Steering 
Committee. The Steering Committee was chaired by Jan Ferguson OAM, Presiding Member, 
Outback Communities Authority with members including Jodie Gregg-Smith, General Manager, SA 
Arid Lands Landscape Board; Claire Wiseman, Chief Executive Officer, Regional Development 
Australia Far North; Margaret Howard, Director, Outback Communities Authority; Melissa Horgan, 
Principal Regional Advisor – Far North, Department of Primary Industries and Regions; and Tony 
Randall, Knowledge Broker, SA Drought Hub.

iii 
Acknowledgement of Country  
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee acknowledge Aboriginal people as the 
First Peoples and Nations of the lands and waters we live and work upon. We pay our respects to 
Elders past, present and emerging. We acknowledge and respect the deep spiritual connection and 
the relationship that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have to country and commit to 
working with the First Nations People of the region as we deliver the Outback SA Drought Resilience 
Plan.  
In particular, we acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the Outback SA region, including:  
− 
Adnyamathanha 
− 
Kokatha 
− 
Antakirinja Matu – Yankunytjatjara 
− 
Kuyani 
− 
Arabana 
− 
Malyankapa 
− 
Barngarla 
− 
Ngadjuri 
− 
De Rose Hill – Ilpalka 
− 
Nukunu 
− 
Far West 
− 
Tjayiwara Unmuru, 
− 
Dieri 
− 
Walka Wani 
− 
Eringa 
− 
Wangkangurru/Yarluyandi, 
− 
Gawler Ranges People 
− 
Wilyakali, 
− 
Irrwanyere 
- 
Yandruwandha/Yawarrawarrka,

1 
 Introduction  
Drought is part of life in South Australia’s Outback region. First Nations peoples have lived with 
drought for thousands of years and the natural environment has evolved to cope with cycles of 
droughts and floods. The Outback’s communities and industries have established in this 
environment. 
Drought resilience refers to the ability of individuals, communities, industries or environments to 
adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing temperature, increasing variability and 
scarcity of rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, to maintain or improve economic, 
environmental or social wellbeing. The resilience of the region’s people, communities, industries and 
environments explains why they have been able to survive the variability and impacts of drought so 
many times before.  
Maintaining and enhancing this resilience as the climate changes and the boom and bust of drought 
cycles become more unpredictable is essential for the future of the region.   
Regional Drought Resilience Plan to prepare for and manage future drought risks. 
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee is guiding the preparation of a Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan for Outback SA, URPS has been engaged to work with the Steering 
Committee to develop the Plan. 
The Outback Drought Resilience Plan will document how the region’s shared values might be 
impacted by drought, describe a desired future vision that acknowledges increasing impacts of 
drought and identifies strategies and actions to build resilience to ensure regional values are 
maintained and economic and social development opportunities are optimised.  
This Background Paper was prepared as the foundation for preparing the Outback SA Drought 
Resilience Plan. 
 Preparing the Background Paper 
This Background Paper was prepared through the following tasks: 
• Literature review: collation and synthesis of published and unpublished information about the 
region and shared values, challenges and opportunities through review of regional plans and 
strategies and other relevant regional documents. The review also looked at literature on leading 
resilience practice, planning and implementation from elsewhere to identify ‘lessons learnt’ or 
ideas for action. 
• Key informant interview with local subject matter experts to understand how drought has 
impacted the Outback SA region in the past, what programs have worked well to build drought 
resilience and how the Drought Resilience Plan can best be implemented. Interviews were held 
with the following stakeholders:  
‒ Principal Scientist Climate Applications, SARDI (South Australian Research and Development 
Institute)

2 
‒ Director, Native Vegetation, Pastoral Land Management and Landscape Services, Manager 
Pastoral Land Management and Senior Policy Officer Landscape Services, Pastoral Board  
‒ Chair, South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 
‒ General Manager, South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 
‒ Director, Office for the Outback Communities Authority 
‒ Chair, Outback Communities Authority 
‒ Principal Regional Advsior, Far North, Primary Industries and Regions (PIRSA) 
‒ Chief Executive Officer, Regional Development Australia (RDA) Far North 
‒ Knowledge Broker, Ag Excellence Alliance and SA Drought Hub 
• Key informant interviews with drought resilience planners from other regions to learn from the 
experiences of other regions and gain insights into how the Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
can be prepared most effectively for the Outback SA region. Interviews were held with drought 
resilience planners who worked on the following Regional Drought Resilience Plans:  
‒ Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan  
‒ South West Queensland Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
‒ The Murraylands and Riverland Plan. 
• Regional engagement with 78 people across Outback SA to understand how drought impacts 
the region, what makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought, and what the 
region needs to build its resilience to drought. Workshops were held in the following locations: 
• Andamooka 
• Marla 
• Port Augusta 
• Coober Pedy 
• Marree 
• William Creek 
• Copley 
• Oodnadatta 
• Yunta 
• Gawler Ranges (Nonning) 
• Parachilna 
• Innamincka 
• Penong 
• Online workshop and an online survey to engage community and stakeholders unable to attend 
the regional workshops. 
• Regular Steering Committee meetings 
In total 114 individuals were engaged, in addition to the Steering Committee. 
Appendix A contains the Regional Engagement Summary Report.

3 
 The Outback SA Region  
The Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan covers the region within the boundary of 
unincorporated areas of mainland South Australia, as well as the Coober Pedy and Roxby Downs 
local government areas (Figure 1). This covers almost two thirds of South Australia, from the state’s 
north-east corner to its borders with the APY Lands, New South Wales, Queensland and Northern 
Territory. The region also encompasses the far west coast from Penong to the Western Australian 
border.  
Figure 1 The Outback SA Regional Drought Plan region 
The region has less than 1% of the state’s population, living in 63% of its land mass. Its immense land 
size and small population makes it different to every other part of South Australia. It also means 
there is high variability across the region in terms of its people, economies, environments, climate 
and governance.

4 
 The Outback SA “system” 
The Outback SA region is a complex “system” of connections and interactions between people, 
industries and natural resources. These connections and interactions mean that when one feature is 
impacted, flow on effects will be experienced by other features in the system. Developing this 
understanding can help identify the factors that make the system resilient or vulnerable to change. 
The Outback SA system is conceptually depicted in Figure 2. 
Figure 1 Connections and interactions in the Outback SA system 
Water resources are a key feature of the system with many connections. Water resources are critical 
to sustain communities, biodiversity, grazing stock in pastoral areas and mining operations. The 
lakes, watercourses, springs and wetlands are of significant cultural value to the First Nations people 
of Outback SA and many are popular tourist attractions. Some of these connections are more greatly 
influenced by drought than others.  Cultural values are intrinsically linked to water resources and 
biodiversity. Although annual rainfall is low, high intensity rainfall events can see more than the 
average annual rainfall fall in a single event. Regional biodiversity has evolved with this variability. 
Some species are dependent on high intensity rainfall events to create suitable breeding conditions, 
and others are reliant only on groundwater from permanent or semi-permanent springs. Rainfall from 
outside the region is important with northern floodplains reliant on flood pulses from upstream 
catchment areas in the Northern Territory and Queensland.

5 
Most mines access groundwater from the Great Artesian Basin (GAB) to meet operational 
requirements. Research has demonstrated that the majority of recharge in the western margin on 
the GAB (aligning with the western edge of the Outback SA region) occurred over 10,000 years ago 
with virtually no recharge occurring since. (SAAL Landscape Board 2021) meaning that groundwater 
use by mining operations is unlikely to be impacted by drought. 
The large distances separating communities and industries, the need to bring in food produced 
outside the region and the need for the community to access services outside the region, means 
that a reliable transport system is essential. Although drought itself has a low impact on road, rail 
and air transport, heavy rainfall events after drought can be destructive and require significant 
maintenance or renewal.  
The impact of drought on the feed base in pastoral areas varies across Outback SA,  and depending 
on the vegetation type, condition and  the total grazing pressure. Annual grasses and herbs that 
provide the bulk of nutrition stock feed require rain and the types of feed available will depend on 
the timing and amount of rain. During drought, annual feed may not be available and stock will graze 
perennial native shrub species, potentially having a great impact on local biodiversity (Department of 
Primary Industries and Regions 2020). 
The Outback SA system supports the industries and businesses that sustain the region’s community.  
With agriculture and tourism as key employers, the impacts of drought on these sectors will have 
flow on impacts to communities and individuals. The reliance of the community on food produced 
outside the region means food security is vulnerable to disruptions to transport. Although water 
security is being improved in many Outback SA towns through the installation of small-scale 
desalination plants, many remote residents rely on rainwater tanks to supply domestic use.  
Further information on community demographics, statistics and features of the region is summarised 
in the following sections. 
 Population 
The region’s population is small and geographically dispersed. Larger townships include Roxby 
Downs, Coober Pedy, Penong, Andamooka, Woomera, Iron Knob, Oodnadatta and Leigh Creek. 
There are numerous smaller townships and settlements scattered across the region. The population 
of many settlements is highly variable with large numbers of fly-in-fly-out workers and residents that 
move to cooler areas during the hot summers.  
Key demographic statistics from the Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021 Census have been 
summarised in the table below. The 2021 census data may not accurately reflect the population of 
very remote communities in South Australia. 
Table 1 Key demographics for the Outback SA region and SA 
Total Outback 
SA region   
Unincorporated 
SA 
Roxby Downs 
Coober Pedy 
South Australia 
Resident 
population  
8,554 people 
3,006 people 
3,976 people 
1,566 people 
1,781,516 
people 
Population 
change 
Decreasing 
population 
(22% decrease 
Decreasing 
population  
Decreasing 
population (-
15.4% decrease 
from 2011-2021) 
Decreasing 
population 
(7.6% decrease 
from 2011-2021) 
Increasing 
population 
(11.3% increase

6 
Total Outback 
SA region   
Unincorporated 
SA 
Roxby Downs 
Coober Pedy 
South Australia 
from 2011 to 
2021) 
(32.3% 
decrease from 
2011-2021) 
from 2011 to 
2021) 
Projected 
population 
Stable – 0.1% 
decrease from 
2021-2041 
(medium 
growth 
scenario) 
-0.4% decrease 
from 2021-2031 
(medium 
growth 
scenario) 
0.3% increase 
from 2021-2031 
(medium 
growth 
scenario) 
-0.7% decrease 
from 2021-2031 
(medium 
growth 
scenario) 
11.0% increase 
from 2021-2031 
(medium 
growth 
scenario) 
Median age 
37 years 
42 years 
31 years 
50 years 
41 years 
Ages cohorts 
As compared to 
SA: 
Higher 
proportion of 
children 0-9 
years and 
workforce 25-
59 years 
Lower 
proportion of 
older people 
aged 60+ 
As compared to 
SA: 
Higher 
proportion of 
people aged 45 
to 69 years 
Lower 
proportion of 
young people 
aged 0-19 
Lower 
proportion of 
people age 50+ 
As compared to 
SA: 
Higher 
proportion of 
young people 
age 0-14 years 
and workforce 
aged 25-44 
years  
Lower 
proportion of 
people aged 
50+ 
As compared to 
SA: 
Lower 
proportion of 
young people 
aged 0-24 
years  
Higher 
proportion of 
older people 
50+  
N/A 
Aboriginal and 
Torres Islander 
peoples 
13.6% 
24.4% 
5.0% 
15.1% 
2.4%  
Households 
where a non-
English 
language is 
used 
13.6% 
15.2% 
11.5% 
30.3% 
19.0%  
Most common 
language other 
than English 
used at home 
Pitjantjatjara 
(3.2% speak at 
home)  
Pitjantjatjara 
(8.3%) 
Tagalog (1.7%) 
Sinhalese 
(4.5%) 
Greek (4.5%) 
Mandarin (1.8% 
speak at home)  
Highest level of 
education  
   Bachelor 
degree level 
and above 
11.1% 
7.9% 
13.7% 
11.4% 
22.7%

7 
Total Outback 
SA region   
Unincorporated 
SA 
Roxby Downs 
Coober Pedy 
South Australia 
   Certificate III 
& IV Level 
   Year 12 
   Year 10  
22.3% 
12.8% 
9.7% 
18.4% 
13.1% 
11.0% 
28.7% 
13.9% 
8.9% 
15.5% 
9.9% 
9.3% 
17.6% 
15.2% 
9.4% 
Labour force 
(includes 
employed and 
unemployed) 
12,647 people 
8,139 people 
(noting Olympic 
Dam is located 
in 
Unincorporated 
SA) 
3,913 people 
594 people 
834,812 people 
Unemployment 
rate  
4.4% 
5.0% 
2.1% 
11.8% 
5.4% 
Population that 
needs 
assistance with 
core activities  
2.8% 
3.2% 
1.1% 
5.7% 
6.7% 
Volunteering 
rate 
17.1% 
21.8% 
14.0% 
15.1% 
14.1%  
Median weekly 
household 
income 
N/A  
$1,105 
$3,140 
$764 
$1,455 
SEIFA Index of 
Relative Socio-
economic 
Disadvantage 
(The lower the 
number, the 
greater 
disadvantaged) 
 N/A 
905 (ranked 61st 
out of 71 LGAs) 
1048 (7th out of 
71 LGAs) 
868 ( 67thout of 
71 LGAs) 
982 
 First Nations people 
A greater proportion of the Outback SA region’s population community identify as Aboriginal or 
Torres Strait Islander people. 
Native Title has been determined to exist across most of the region.  
Traditional Owner groups include: 
• 
Adnyamathanha 
• 
Kokatha 
• 
Antakirinja Matu – Yankunytjatjara 
• 
Kuyani

8 
• 
Arabana 
• 
Malyankapa 
• 
Barngarla 
• 
Ngadjuri 
• 
De Rose Hill – Ilpalka 
• 
Nukunu 
• 
Far West 
• 
Tjayiwara Unmuru, 
• 
Dieri 
• 
Walka Wani 
• 
Eringa 
• 
Wangkangurru/Yarluyandi 
• 
Gawler Ranges People 
• 
Wilyakali 
• 
Irrwanyere 
• 
Yandruwandha/Yawarrawarrka 
Traditional Owner groups in the region lead and are involved in a range of land management, 
environmental management, tourism, mining and pastoral activities including environmental 
monitoring and management, land livestock management, mine activity remediation, and cultural 
heritage assessments (surveys and site visits). 
 Economy 
The economy of the Outback SA region is dominated by mining as measured by both employment 
and contribution to Gross Regional Product. Agriculture (mainly sheep and cattle), tourism and 
construction are the other key industries of employment.  
The economic data provided in Table 2 is taken from the Region Economic Growth & Investment 
Strategies prepared for the Outback Communities Authority, Roxby Downs and Coober Pedy 
regions (RDA Far North & OCA 2019, RDA Far North & District Council of Coober Pedy 2019, RDA 
Far North & Roxby Council 2016) unless otherwise specified. 
Table 2 Economic characteristics of the Outback SA region 
Unincorporated 
SA 
Roxby Downs 
Coober Pedy 
Total Outback SA 
Industries of employment 
 Data 
source: ABS 
Census 2021 
Mining (54.7%), 
construction 
(13.3%) and 
agriculture (7.6%) 
Mining (57.1%), 
construction 
(15.1%), and 
accommodation & 
food services 
(4.9%) 
Accommodation & 
food services 
(21.0%), health care 
& social assistance 
(17.0%) and public 
administration & 
safety (11.5%) 
Mining (66.7%), 
construction 
(17.1%) and 
accommodation & 
food services 
(7.9%) 
Gross Regional Product (GRP) 
Total GRP 
$3.3 billion (1.4% of 
SA’s gross state 
product)  
$1.7 billion 
$130 million (0.08% 
of SA’s gross state 
product)  
$5.1 billion  
(3.6% of SA’s GSP)

9 
Unincorporated 
SA 
Roxby Downs 
Coober Pedy 
Total Outback SA 
GRP per capita  
$1 million per 
capita 
$435,252 per 
capita 
$83,020 per capita 
Compares to 
$79,727 per capita 
for SA 
GRP per worker  
$483,666 per 
worker 
$417,104 per 
worker 
$237,244 per 
worker 
Compares to 
$170,140 per 
worker for SA 
 Natural environment 
The Outback SA’s environment is shaped by low, irregular rainfall, episodic weather, and limited 
human disturbance. The region includes some of the driest parts of Australia and has the largest 
percentage of intact ecosystems and natural biodiversity in the state. Prolonged droughts can be 
followed by extensive flooding which leads to an explosion of life.  Key features and characteristics 
of the region’s natural environment are described in Table 3. 
Table 3 Natural environment - key features and characteristics 
Theme 
Key features and characteristics 
Protected areas 
45 conservation reserves and national parks, accounting for 28% of the 
Outback SA’s area (Conservation Reserve Boundaries - data.sa.gov.au) 
Malkumba-Coongie Lakes National Park protects Coongie Lakes which is 
listed as a Ramsar Wetland of International Importance. 
Species with 
conservation status 
Outback and Far West NPW Districts (includes APY lands and excludes 
south-eastern part of Outback SA region) record: 
• 16 flora species and 70 fauna species with national conservation ratings 
under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 
1999 
• 238 flora species and 175 fauna species with state conservation ratings 
under the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972 
Pastoral land use 
66% of the region is used for grazing of native vegetation

10 
2.5.1 Water Resources 
Water resources in the Outback SA region are critical to communities, plant and animal health, 
maintenance of cultural values, and the viability of regional pastoral, mining, and tourism industries. 
Groundwater is the only reliable source of water in the arid outback as rainfall occurs sporadically 
and is highly variable.  
The Water Allocation Plan for the Far North Prescribed Wells Area (FNPWAPWA) describes the 
volumes of groundwater that can sustainably be extracted from all groundwater sources in the Far 
North PWA including the Great Artesian Basin.  
The surface catchments of the central and northern parts of the region are large, lowland interior 
basins. Following large rainfall events, surface water flows down networks of minor waterways that 
join to form large, broad, and often braided streams across extensive floodplains, to terminal surface 
water features such as clay pans, small fresh brackish lakes and ephemeral water holes, and the 
large salt lakes of Lake Torrens, Lake Frome and Lake Eyre. 
The Lake Eyre Basin (the Basin) contains one of the largest unregulated river systems in the world. 
The Basin is home to many rare, endangered, and endemic species of plants and animals that have 
adapted to survive the floods and droughts that characterise the environment. 
Table 4 Water resources – key features and characteristics  
Water 
resource 
Key features and characteristics 
Great Artesian 
Basin 
Much of the water used across the north of the region is supplied by 
groundwater from the Great Artesian Basin: 
• 
One of the largest underground freshwater basins in the world.  
• 
Spans more than one-fifth of the Australian continent. 
• 
Estimated total storage capacity of 65 million gigalitres. 
• 
Recharges extremely slowly. 
• 
Critical to the health of ecological communities, the viability of the 
pastoral, mining and tourism industries, and to First Nations’ cultures. 
• 
Provides water for many towns and stations.  
(Smerdon et al, 2012, Australian, New South Wales, Queensland, South 
Australian and Northern Territory Governments 2019) 
Springs 
Great Artesian Basin springs are points of natural discharge of water from the 
aquifers of the GAB. 
Support a range of unique flora and fauna. 
Of great spiritual and cultural significance for First Nations people. 
Valued by local communities and provide tourism opportunities. 
In some areas of the region, artificial wetlands have been created from free-
flowing bores drilled into the Great Artesian Basin. 
(SA Arid Lands Landscape Board n.d.) 
Other aquifers 
There are a number of other groundwater aquifers across the region of varying 
depths and salinity (South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 2021).

11 
Water 
resource 
Key features and characteristics 
Surface water 
Surface water is limited in the region. 
Following rainfall events, water travels through a huge dispersal system of 
braided channels, floodplains, claypans, waterholes and wetlands. 
Farm dams have been constructed across the region to provide water for stock 
after rain. 
The shallow water is exposed to extreme evaporation. Creeks and rivers run 
only for short periods, 
The Kati Thanda – Lake Eyre Basin contains one of the largest unregulated river 
systems in the world. It is home to many rare, endangered, and endemic 
species. 
Many people in the region have large rainwater tanks to capture rainfall 
Dams are used to capture and store surface water on pastoral properties  
(Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water 2023) 
SA Water 
township 
supply 
SA Water operates a number of desalination plants in the region to supply 
townships including in Yalata, Oodnadatta, Leigh Creek and Marla, with another 
under construction in Marree. 
 Climate  
2.6.1 Rainfall  
Most of the Outback SA region experiences an arid or semi-arid climate. Arid zones are defined as 
areas which receive an average rainfall of 250mm or less. Semi-arid zones receive an average 
rainfall between 250-350mm. 
Figure 3 shows that majority of the Outback SA region receives on average 100-200mm of rainfall 
per year (Bureau of Meteorology 2021b). This places much of the region among the driest in 
Australia.

12 
Figure 2 Average annual rainfall 1991 – 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology)  
The region covers three broad rainfall zones (Wiseman & Bardsley 2015, South Australian Arid Lands 
Landscape Board 2022). The majority of the region in the north, experiences summer-dominant 
rainfall. A central zone generally experiences aseasonal rainfall, and the southern-most part of the 
region receives winter dominant rainfall (refer Figure 4 and Figure 5, BOM 2021).  
Figure 3 Percentage of annual average rainfall occurring in summer 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology)

13 
Figure 4 Percentage of annual average rainfall occurring in winter 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology) 
This means that rainfall patterns are very different in different parts of the region. Figure 6 below 
shows that Penong (in the south-west) receives winter dominant rainfall, while Innamincka (north 
east) receives a summer dominant rainfall and on average in smaller amounts. 
Figure 5 Average monthly rainfall 1889 to 2022, Penong and Innamincka (Bureau of Meteorology) 
In addition to different seasonal trends in different parts of the region, rainfall across the Outback SA 
region tends to be highly variable. It experiences the boom and bust of dry and wet cycles. In the 
last 30 years (1989–2018) in the SA Arid Lands region, dry years (the lowest 30% of total annual 
rainfall) have occurred nine times and wet years (highest 30%) 11 times (Bureau of Meteorology & 
CSIRO 2019). Historic Bureau of Meteorology data shows that rainfall can be extremely low in some 
years and high in others. For example, Innamincka weather station has recorded an annual record 
low of 13.2mm of rain with an annual record high of 866.6mm (BOM 2024c).  
Rainfall reliability maps for the past 30 years (Figure 7) show that across the majority of the South 
Australian Arid Lands region, rainfall has been unreliable (red areas) across all seasons of the year 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Average monthly rainfall (mm)
Penong
Innamincka

14 
times (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). The only exception is winter rainfall, which has been 
moderately reliable in a limited area south of Woomera (beige and blue areas). 
Figure 6 Rainfall reliability (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019) 
In Outback SA, 10 mm of rainfall is a critical threshold for feed growth to begin (Bureau of 
Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). In the past 30 years in the SA Arid Lands region, useful rain events 
have occurred on average four times per year. On average, Woomera gets about five rainfall events 
(single or multi-day) of 10 mm or more each year, and Marree gets four, however this can range from 
zero to 12 events at both locations. There have been three years since records began that Woomera 
did not receive at least one 10 mm rainfall event. Marree has had only one year without a 10 mm 
rainfall event. 
Pastoral areas can benefit from rainfall at any time of the year, however due to higher temperatures 
and increased evaporation in the warmer months more rain is required during this period to be 
effective in initiating vegetation regeneration. 
2.6.2 Temperature  
The Outback SA region experiences very high temperatures especially during summer, with most of 
the region experiencing average summer maximum temperatures in the high 30°Cs (see Figure 8 
and Figure 9).

15 
Figure 7 Average annual maximum temperature 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology, 2022) 
Figure 8 Average summer maximum temperature 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology, 2022) 
The Outback SA region has experienced more hot days in the past 30 years. Figure 10 shows the 
annual number of days above 38 °C (red bars) with a 10-year running average (solid red line) for 
Marree (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). Marree experienced an average of 54 days per year

16 
above 38 °C between 1989–2018, compared to an average of 41 days per year above 38 °C between 
1959–1988. 
Figure 9 Number of days per year over 38oC (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019) 
2.6.3 Evapotranspiration 
Evapotranspiration is a collective term for the transfer of water, as water vapour, to the atmosphere 
from both vegetated and un-vegetated land surfaces. It is affected by climate, availability of water 
and vegetation.  
Point potential evapotranspiration in the region is between 2 and 3.2 meters (refer Figure 11). This is 
significant in a region that receives on average 100-200mm of rainfall per year (BOM 2005). 
In contrast, actual evapotranspiration is low in the region due to the lack of available water in 
vegetated and unvegetated land surfaces.

17 
Figure 10 Average point potential evapotranspiration 1961 to 1990 (total annual) (Bureau of Meteorology, 
2005) 
 Assets and infrastructure  
Key infrastructure that supports the individuals, communities and industries of the Outback SA 
region are described in Table 5.  
Table 5 Key infrastructure in the Outback SA region 
Infrastructure  
Description  
Road transport 
Major sealed and unsealed roads (including the Stuart Highway, Outback 
Highway, Eyre Highway, Birdsville Track and Oodnadatta Track) Strzelecki 
Track?  
Rail transport 
Railway lines (interstate mainlines (linking Tarcoola/Northgate, Port Augusta, 
and Crystal Brook across to NSW, VIC, NT and WA) and The Ghan)  
Air transport 
Airports (including Olympic Dam airport and Coober Pedy airport)  
Sealed airstrips including at Innamincka, Marree, Oodnadatta, William Creek, 
and Leigh Creek.

18 
Infrastructure 
Description 
Mining 
Mining and energy infrastructure associated with the Roxby Downs Olympic 
Dam, Carrapateena and Oak Dam Mine Site, Moomba Gas Fields and 
Prominent Hill and other mines 
Defence 
Defence - Royal Australian Air Force Woomera Range Complex 
Water 
Desalination plants (including private plants and SA Water desalination plants 
in Leigh Creek, Oodnadatta, Marla, Marree, Roxby Downs and Yalata) 
Tele-
communications 
Telstra and Optus telecommunications (patchy connection in many areas) 
supplemented by increasing uptake of household Starlink (satellite) 
infrastructure for high-speed Wi-Fi.  
Community 
infrastructure 
Relatively scarce community infrastructure such as waste dumps or recycle 
centres, community and recreational facilities. 
Hospital in Coober Pedy, health centres in Leigh Creek, Roxby Downs, 
Oodnadatta,  
Royal Flying Doctor Service Remote Community Health Clinics at Andamooka, 
Marla and Marree and William Creek.  
Governance 
The majority of the Outback SA region is unincorporated, meaning it has no local government areas. 
Instead, the Outback Communities Authority is the Outback SA’s statutory authority established 
under the Outback Communities Act 2009. Its functions are to manage and promote improvements 
to public services and facilities in outback communities, and to articulate the views, interests, and 
aspirations of outback communities. 
Each community generally has a Progress Association (or similar) incorporated under the 
Associations Incorporations Act, (1985) to represent it. These associations generally assist with 
community needs and priorities and, where resources allow, maintain facilities and services, and 
undertake important town management roles including running community events. Membership of 
the Progress Associations is voluntary, and positions are unpaid.

19 
The OCA also recognises co-existing Aboriginal community groups in three towns – the Marree 
Arabanna Peoples' Committee (Marree); Dunjiba Community Council (Oodnadatta) and the Aroona 
Aboriginal Council (Copley). I know this is on our website but not accurate at the moment… will 
explain.  
There are two local government areas in the region for this Plan: District Council of Coober Pedy and 
Municipal Council of Roxby Downs (Roxby Council). These councils operate differently to most local 
government bodies in SA. Roxby Council does not have Elected Councillors, has separate power 
and water authorities, and The State Government and BHP Billiton are required to approve the 
Council budget and fund an annual operating Municipal deficit. District Council of Coober Pedy is 
currently under suspension, with its Elected Member body replaced by State Government appointed 
administrators.  
A number of other organisations have legislative responsibilities in the region. These include: 
• The SA Arid Lands Landscape Board  (SAALLB) which administers the Landscape South Australia 
Act 2019, managing the region’s natural resources with an emphasis on land and water 
management, biodiversity and pest animal and plant control. The Water Allocation Plan for the 
Far North Prescribed Wells Area is prepared by the SAALLB under the Landscapes Act 
• The Pastoral Board which administers the Pastoral Land Management and Conservation Act 
1989, managing and conserving pastoral land in the region.  
• The Department for Environment and Water which administers the National Parks and Wildlife 
Act 1972 that describes the requirements for the management of protected areas including 
National Parks and Conservation Parks. 
Other organisations with responsibilities in the region include: 
• Regional Development Australia (RDA) Far North is a not-for-profit Incorporated Association 
funded through a core agreement with the Commonwealth, State and Local Government bodies 
to foster and enhance the regional economy. 
• The Department for Infrastructure and Transport, responsible for 10,000km of outback roads.  
• SA Water which is responsible for the operation of desalination plants to supply town water in 
Yalata, Oodnadatta, Leigh Creek, and Marla, with another plant under construction in Marree.  
• The state government own the electricity supply infrastructure to several towns under the 
Remote Area Energy Supply (RAES) scheme. Coober Pedy, Andamooka and Yunta are supplied 
through power purchase agreements from independent suppliers. Other communities and 
stations rely on on-site generation through either renewables and/or diesel generators. 
  Defining features of Outback SA 
Stafford Smith (2008) identifies a set of features that define outback Australia in his paper ‘The 
‘Desert Syndrome – causally-linked factors that characterise outback Australia’. He writes that the 
outback is characterised by a set of features that are not individually unique, but which together 
cause it to function in ways that are fundamentally different to other physical and social 
environments. 
These characteristics have been reviewed and adapted for the Outback SA region in the table 
below through research and stakeholder engagement. They have important implications for the 
development of the Drought Resilience Plan as they influence the way community and stakeholders 
in the region are able to build resilience to drought.

20 
Table 6 Desert syndrome features in the Outback SA region 
Key characteristic and 
description (adapted from 
Stafford Smith 2008) 
What this looks like in the Outback SA region 
Climate variability 
The region is large and experiences highly variable rainfall and other 
episodic weather events that rarely follow predictable annual cycles. One 
property can be in drought while its neighbour is in flood. Rainfall patterns 
differ greatly across the region. Every drought is different too. The 
droughts experienced in the past have affected different areas in different 
ways and been of varying durations 
Scarce resources 
Low soil fertility and harsh conditions mean stocking rates are often kept 
low. High per capita delivery and maintenance costs influence the 
provision of physical infrastructure and community services including 
roads, internet and phone connectivity, water, energy and waste 
management.  
Sparse population 
The human population in this region is small and geographically dispersed. 
Coober Pedy (population 1,427 in 2021) and Roxby Downs (pop. 3,671) are 
the largest towns, while the remaining scattered towns have less than 300 
residents each. There are also many transient people that move out over 
the summer period or travel in and out to work in the mining industry. 
Remoteness 
Many towns in the region are extremely isolated. Decision making is often 
centred far away in regional centres such as Port Augusta or Adelaide. 
Governments often focus elsewhere due to the lack of population. Most 
markets are distant, which results in economic flows out of the region.  
Economic variability 
Heavy reliance on the mining/resources sector can lead to uncertainty 
when this industry experiences downturn or other disruptions. Besides 
agriculture and tourism, majority of other industries in the region are 
underpinned by the success or otherwise of mining. Agriculture is greatly 
impacted by drought and is vulnerable to changing commodity prices.  
Local knowledge  
Remoteness and sparse populations contribute to relatively low levels of 
research effort and formal capture of knowledge in the Outback SA region. 
In contrast, Aboriginal traditional knowledge is vast and their knowledge 
about their country is extensive. Many station people, pastoralists and 
farmers have lived and worked on their land for years. Many of the region’s 
residents have experienced multiple drought and flood cycles. 
Cultural differences 
The people who choose to live in the Outback are accustomed to a unique 
way of life. They have a strong sense of identity, community, and family. 
They recognise that living in the Outback means living with hot dry 
conditions and without many of the everyday conveniences available to 
city people. They love their country and way of life.  
Reliance on volunteers  
In the unincorporated areas, the lack of councils and emergency services 
mean that the locals ‘do it all’. Volunteers undertake everything from 
managing town infrastructure, running community events and upgrading 
community halls to responding to vehicle crashes and fires. There is a 
strong culture of volunteering. However, overreliance on volunteers can

21 
Key characteristic and 
description (adapted from 
Stafford Smith 2008) 
What this looks like in the Outback SA region 
lead to burnout and impacts on the community. The number of volunteers 
in the regions is decreasing, and volunteers are ageing.

22 
 Drought  
 A definition of drought 
Because people use and view water in so many different ways, there is no universally agreed 
definition of drought. It is measured in different ways and at different timescales, for example:  
• Meteorologists monitor the extent and severity of drought in terms of rainfall deficiencies (or 
shortages, compared to average rainfall for the period). 
• Agriculturalists rate the impact on primary industries. 
• Hydrologists examine surface and groundwater levels (Bureau of Meteorology, 2024a). 
• Sociologists define it by social expectations and perceptions and the impact on the community.  
This lack of a clear definition can present a barrier to effective drought planning (Hughes et al. 
2022). Governments often select meteorological indicators (such as rainfall and temperature) to 
serve as drought policy triggers due to their objectivity and transparency. However, this fails to 
capture the socio-economic outcomes of drought, which can lead to some non-drought affected 
regions receiving assistance and vice versa. 
The Bureau of Meteorology defines drought as a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the 
amount of available water is insufficient to meet our normal use (Bureau of Meteorology, 2024a). 
Drought is not simply low rainfall. If this were the case, Outback SA would be in almost constant 
drought. Rather, drought is a comparatively dry period compared to normal conditions. It also 
considers the ability of those affected to cope with drier than usual conditions.  
For the purpose of the Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan, drought is defined as:  
A prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions that impact negatively on water availability and 
agricultural production in a region and, consequently, impacts negatively on the economy and 
environment of the region and the health and wellbeing of its residents. 
  Causes of drought  
Drought in the Outback SA region is caused by a number of natural atmospheric conditions 
including the Positive Indian Ocean Dipole and El Niño-Southern Oscillation. Anthropogenic climate 
change is also projected to impact on drought conditions. The following descriptions have been 
adapted from the Bureau of Meteorology website. 
3.2.1 Positive Indian Ocean Dipole 
The Indian Ocean Dipole is one of the strongest climate drivers for the Outback SA region. The 
Indian Ocean Dipole refers to sustained changes in the difference between sea surface 
temperatures of the tropical western and eastern Indian Ocean (Bureau of Meteorology 2021b). The 
Indian Ocean Dipole has three phases: neutral, positive, and negative. 
During the positive Indian Ocean Dipole phase, westerly winds weaken along the equator allowing 
warm water to shift towards Africa. Changes in the winds also allow cool water to rise up from the 
deep ocean in the east. This sets up a temperature difference across the tropical Indian Ocean with 
cooler than normal water in the east and warmer than normal water in the west. Generally, this 
means there is less moisture than normal in the atmosphere to the northwest of Australia. This 
changes the path of weather systems coming from Australia's west, often resulting in less rainfall 
and higher than normal temperatures over parts of Australia during winter and spring.

23 
A positive Indian Ocean Dipole typically means: 
• Significantly less rainfall across Outback SA (see Figure 12) 
• Higher than normal temperatures during winter and spring 
Figure 12 Winter-spring mean rainfall deciles during positive Indian Ocean Dipole years (Bureau of 
Meteorology, 2023) 
3.2.2 El Niño  
El Niño and La Niña also influence drought conditions in Outback SA (Bureau of Meteorology 2021a). 
They are a part of a natural cycle known as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and are 
associated with many months of warming (El Niño) or cooling (La Niña) in the central and eastern 
tropical Pacific. The ENSO cycle loosely operates over timescales from one to eight years. 
El Niño typically results in: 
• Reduced rainfall over Outback SA, with the records show greater rainfall reductions over the 
eastern part of Outback SA and into NSW and Queensland  
• Warmer temperatures 
• Shift in temperature extremes 
• Increased frost risk 
• Reduced tropical cyclone numbers 
• Later monsoon onset 
• Increased fire danger in southeast Australia

24 
An El Niño occurs when sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean 
become substantially warmer than average, which causes a shift in atmospheric circulation. 
Typically, the equatorial trade winds blow from east to west across the Pacific Ocean. El Niño events 
are associated with a weakening, or even reversal, of the prevailing trade winds. 
The shift in rainfall away from the western Pacific, associated with El Niño, means that Australian 
rainfall is usually reduced through winter–spring, particularly across the eastern and northern parts 
of the continent. 
Although most major Australian droughts have been associated with El Niño, analysis of past El Niño 
events shows that widespread drought does not occur with every event, and the strength of an El 
Niño is not directly proportional to the rainfall impacts. 
Figure 11 Winter-spring mean rainfall deciles during El Niño years (Bureau of Meteorology, 2023) 
 Past droughts 
Before European colonisation, the First Nations of the Outback SA region would have experienced 
numerous drought periods. Since then, the region has experienced a number of significant declared 
droughts including (Bureau of Meteorology 2020.): 
• The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902 
• The 1914 to 1915 drought  
• The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945 
• The 1965 to 1968 drought (only affecting parts of the region)  
• The 1982 to 1983 drought

25 
• The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009 (in particular 2002-2003 for the Outback region) 
• The 2017 to 2019 drought (the Tinderbox drought)  
The 2017 to 2019 drought, while one of the shortest on record, was extremely severe in the eastern 
parts of the Outback SA region. In Yunta, rainfall in 2019 was close to the lowest in the recorded 
history.  In the western parts of the Outback region around Penong, impacts were much lower as 
annual rainfall was near average for 2017-2018 and only below average in 2019. 
3.3.1 Past impacts of droughts 
These past droughts have had widespread impacts across the region. The literature and 
stakeholders have identified the following key impacts (Fleming-Muñoz, Whitten & Bonnett 2023, 
Lehmann 2023, RDA Far North SA 2016, Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary Report):  
Social impacts  
• Reduced mental and physical health and wellbeing for individuals, families, and communities, 
contributing to domestic and family violence, family breakdowns, and death by suicide in extreme 
cases. 
• Feelings of exhaustion, stress, and loss of control from an increased workload, loss of income 
and the need to make big business decisions. 
• Reduced social connection. 
• Migration out of the region especially of young people who may not return following drought. 
• Dust, causing and exacerbating health conditions such as asthma, increasing need for cleaning 
and reducing surface water quality. 
• High temperatures resulting in heat stress, loss of sleep, increased power bills and general 
discomfort. Pastoralists may work at night to avoid the hotter temperatures. 
• Higher demand for mental health services. 
• Decline in condition of the natural environment (loss of trees and reduced cover, dead animals 
etc.) leading to reduced amenity and personal wellbeing. 
• Household financial stress resulting in reduced expenditure on recreational activities, withdrawal 
of school enrolments etc.  
• Poorly planned or managed support programs resulting in a sense of disconnection and feel that 
‘city bureaucrats’ are not listening to what locals need.  
• Intergenerational impacts with children and young people affected by their parents’ stress, lack 
of money for education and amusement, environmental impacts and sometimes a reduced desire 
to stay in the region or take on the family businesses.  
• Less water for personal use and gardens. 
First Nations cultural impacts  
• Reduced condition of natural cultural heritage sites associated with surface water and 
groundwater dependent ecosystems.

26 
• Reduced ground cover leading to exposure of cultural sites following wind or rain, and other sites 
being impacted by dust or sediment. 
• Reduced ground cover leading to dust impacts and later erosion and channel deepening when it 
rains. 
• Pest animals taking away feed from native species and damage soil and vegetation. 
• Many weed species can survive lower rainfall and are often the first plants to recover when it 
rains. 
• Reduction in numbers of culturally significant plants and animals, which impacts on ability to 
undertake cultural activities such as hunting and collection of bush tucker.  
Economic impacts 
• Reduced income for pastoralists, farmers, and local business owners, which results in reduced 
spend in the local economy.  
• Some business can’t afford to keep employees during drought, and it can be hard to find new 
employees when they are needed after the drought ends.  
• Increased need for off-farm employment 
• Changing market conditions negatively impacting pastoralists as fodder and freight prices may 
increase and stock prices may decrease although this is not always the case. 
• While tourism numbers don’t seem to be affected by drought, local communities have less 
capacity to manage the negative impacts of tourism such as overuse of water, vandalism, search, 
and rescue etc.  
• Running out of water resulting in the need to cart in water, drill additional bores or install other 
water infrastructure at a very high cost. 
• Difficulties in paying boarding school fees or other ongoing costs.  
• High expenses during the drought recovery period meaning low cash flow to assist with 
restocking and herd rebuilding 
Agricultural impacts  
• Lack of feed and water to support stock means pastoralists need to destock or move stock to 
agist in areas less affected by drought. 
• Stock often sold at a lower price and bought back following drought at a higher price. 
• Lower capacity of pastoralists and farmers to plan for and develop their business as their time is 
taken up by an increased workload, particularly when staff have been laid-off. 
• Increases in costs including transportation of stock and purchase of water and fodder. 
• Reduced crop yields. 
• Increased grazing pressure from pest and native species (eg kangaroos) that may graze in 
protected areas during normal conditions when there is water available but move out to pastoral 
areas when there is no water in parks.

27 
Environmental impacts 
• Loss of vegetation cover as a result of grazing pressure and heat/water stress increasing the risk, 
magnitude and severity of dust storms.  
• Native species are often outcompeted by weeds. Perennial species are lost and recruitment can 
be limited. Biodiversity loss and reduction in condition of native species.  
• Loss of native birds and animals.  
• Reduced surface water runoff and recharge of shallow groundwater, increased groundwater 
extraction, and often changes in water quality, especially increases in the salinity of groundwater 
as the levels in the aquifer are depleted and there is increased mixing within the resource  
• Decrease in groundcover, soil moisture and soil health increases the risk of wind erosion  
• Loss of green space in townships 
• Drought breaking rains resulting in soil erosion, flooding or removal of vegetation, and salt flush 
killing trees and other vegetation.  
• Increased biosecurity risks as stock and fodder are transported across the region.  
Infrastructure impacts 
• Drying of bores, rainwater tanks and dams requiring installation of additional water infrastructure 
or carting in water.  
• Degradation of community infrastructure as populations and volunteer capacity decreases.  
• Reduced road surface condition with reduced water and funds for grading and more trucks on 
the roads transporting stock.  
• Increase in power outages on hot days and during dry lightning storms resulting in no 
telecommunications, an inability to pump water, and run fridges,  freezers, and  air conditioners. 
• Kangaroos, goats and camels seeking water and food damaging irrigation infrastructure and 
eating gardens. 
• Lack of sufficient water supplies for fighting fires.  
• Drought breaking rains damaging roads, water infrastructure (pumps and pipes), solar panels, 
fences, and tanks.  
Beneficial impacts  
While droughts have overwhelmingly negative impacts, there can be a number of beneficial impacts 
as a result of drought including:  
• Reduction in the number of feral animals such as goats, camels, horses,,, cats and rabbits with 
flow on reduction in impacts on infrastructure and reduced total grazing pressure. 
• Reduction in the number of overabundant kangaroos and emus which reduces the total grazing 
pressure on native vegetation. 
• Provision of grants and other funding for community projects and community infrastructure which 
can have a lasting benefit.

28 
• Encouragement of economic diversification. 
• Improved community resilience, connection, and sense of community support when times are 
tough.  
• Increased water use efficiency. 
• Innovation in land management practises. 
• Attraction of tourists or film companies in some places known for their arid, barren landscapes 
such as the Breakaways near Coober Pedy. 
• Improvement in gypsum and salt mining conditions due to increased evaporation. 
 Future climate and drought projections 
Climate projections describe what the future climate could be liked, sourced from multiple climate 
models, and based on numerous assumptions about the factors that influence climate and the 
trajectory of change in greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. 
The CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology have used up to 40 global climate models to develop 
projections for different parts of Australia.  Each model uses different assumptions and algorithms to 
project how climate variables such as temperature, rainfall and evapotranspiration will respond in 
different emissions scenarios over different time frames. The projections presented in online tools 
and viewers each use a different combination of global climate models and so show slightly different 
results. Three of the projections tools most commonly used in South Australia are described in the 
following sections: 
1. 
My Climate View (national focus) 
2. Climate Change in Australia (national focus) 
3. DEW South Australian Climate Projections Viewer (SA focus) 
3.4.1 My Climate View (myclimateview.com.au) 
My Climate View is a collaboration between Australia's national science agency CSIRO and the 
Bureau of Meteorology and has been designed together with Australian farmers as part of the 
Drought Fund. Climate trends for specific commodities at a local scale are presented to support 
decision making. 
My Climate View presents projected future rainfall, temperature, and relative humidity data from 
Climate Change in Australia (see following section), using its Application-Ready dataset.  It also 
presents seasonal forecast data from the Bureau of Meteorology.  
My Climate View allows users to select a location and if desired, a commodity (for example sheep or 
wheat.  Projections include key commodity climate factors, for example for sheep it will include 
winter rainfall for pasture growth and cold exposure at lambing. For wheat it will include growing 
season rainfall, frost at flowering and heat damage at flowering and grain fill. A default growing 
season is defined for each location but can be altered in the tool. 
Data is presented for each location and commodity at 2050 for a medium emissions scenario (RCP 
4.5) as a default, with users able to explore 2030, 2050 and 2070 at a medium or high (RCP 8.5) 
emissions scenario,

29 
Data is not mapped across the region. Rainfall and temperature projections for 3 locations at 2050 
using RCP 8.5 are shown in Table 7. 
Table 7 Selected climate projections for three Outback locations  
Innamincka 
Yunta 
Penong 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
Total annual 
rainfall  
189 mm 
203 mm 
218 mm 
211 mm 
289 mm 
248 mm 
Summer rainfall  
81 mm 
92 mm 
67 mm 
70 mm 
52 mm 
35 mm 
Autumn rainfall 
39 mm 
37 mm 
37 mm 
41 mm 
63 mm 
50 mm 
Winter rainfall 
30 mm 
32 mm 
45 mm 
43 mm 
109 mm 
104 mm 
Spring rainfall 
46 mm 
41 mm 
70 mm 
55 mm 
66 mm 
56 mm 
Average 
maximum 
temperature 
29.9oC 
31.8 oC 
24.8 oC 
26.5oC 
23.4 oC 
24.7 oC 
Annual hot days 
(over 35oC) 
113 days 
141 days 
42 days 
61 days 
27 days 
34 days 
3.4.2 Climate Change in Australia (climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au) 
Climate Change in Australia was developed by the CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology and 
provides a number of data products and tools that present projections at different scales for four 
timescales (centred on 2030, 2050, 2070 and 2090) and three emissions scenarios (RCPs 2.5, 4.5 
and 8.5).   
The Regional Climate Change Explorer provides a summary of projections across large “cluster” 
areas. The Outback SA region is within the Rangelands cluster as shown in Figure 14.  
Figure 12 Rangelands Cluster area

30 
Key messages for the cluster are described below: 
• Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons (very high confidence). 
• Increased intensity of extreme rainfall events is projected, with high confidence. 
• On an annual and decadal basis, natural variability in the climate system can act to either mask or 
enhance any long-term human induced trend, particularly in the next 20 years and for rainfall. 
• Increased intensity of extreme rainfall events is projected, with high confidence. 
• Time spent in drought is projected, with medium confidence, to increase over the course of the 
century. 
• Changes to summer rainfall are possible but unclear. Winter rainfall is projected to decrease in 
the south with high confidence. For the near future, natural variability will dominate any projected 
changes. 
• Changes to annual and summer rainfall for late in the century are possible, but the direction of 
change cannot be confidently projected given the spread of model results. Impact assessment in 
this region should consider the risk of both a drier and wetter climate. 
• Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons (very high confidence). 
• There is very high confidence in continued substantial increases in projected mean, maximum 
and minimum temperatures in line with our understanding of the effect of further increases in 
greenhouse gas concentrations. 
• By late in the century (2090), for a high emission scenario (RCP8.5) the projected range of 
warming is 2.9 to 5.3 °C. Under an intermediate scenario (RCP4.5) the projected warming is 1.5 to 
2.9 °C. 
• Potential evapotranspiration is projected to increase in all seasons as warming progresses (high 
confidence). 
NOTE – Climate Change in Australia refers to confidence in a climate projection as a measure of 
how plausible the projected range of change is for a given emission scenario. High agreement of 
numerous, high quality lines of evidence is needed to have high confidence.  
3.4.3 DEW South Australian Climate Projections and Viewer  
The Guide to climate projections for risk assessment and planning in South Australia (DEW 2022) 
provides a summary of the changes in climate and sea levels likely to occur in South Australia, 
together with guidance on the use of climate projections for risk assessment and planning. 
Projections are presented for Landscape management regions, with the Alinytjara Wilurara (AW) 
Eyre Peninsula (EP) and SA Arid Lands (SAAL) Landscape Regions 
The guide identifies that by 2030, time spent in drought (over a 20-year period) is projected to 
increase slightly for the AW and SAAL Landscape Regions, with a small additional increase by 2050. 
For the EP region, time spent in drought is projected to nearly double.

31 
The AW, EP and SAAL Landscape will experience strong increases in temperature, that especially in 
the long term, are projected to be more extreme in the Outback SA region than other parts of South 
Australia. 
In the short term, annual rainfall will decrease, offset somewhat by significant increases in summer 
rainfall. In the longer term, both annual and summer rainfall will decrease.   
At the same time, potentially damaging heavy rainfall events are projected to increase in frequency 
and intensity, and bushfire weather will become harsher. The variability of rainfall is likely to 
increase. 
The South Australian Climate Projections Viewer is a new online tool for climate projection maps and 
data. The interactive maps display projected changes to temperature and rainfall across South 
Australia for a range of future time periods. The climate data can be displayed in 10km and 50km 
grids or for individual SA landscape regions for a range of future time periods, climate variables and 
parameters.  
This tool shows that while the AW, EP and SAAL regions will experience decreases in rainfall as a 
whole, northern parts of AW and SAAL regions are projected to experience increases in summer 
rainfall in the short term.  
3.4.4 Earth Systems and Climate Change Hub 
Researchers at the Earth Systems and Climate Change Hub have delivered updated and improved 
drought projections for Australia at a national and regional level. The new drought projections 
indicate that under a warming climate Australia will spend more time in drought, with longer and 
more intense drought conditions, particularly across southern and eastern Australia. Figure 15 shows 
the results of this work, illustrating projected changes of the Standardised Soil Moisture Index (SSMI) 
drought metrics in the 21st century (2006-2100) under the RCP8.5 (high emission scenario), relative 
to the 20th century (1900-2005) (NESP, n.d.)

32 
Figure 13 Projected changes in Standardised Soil Moisture Index indicating changes in drought and extreme 
drought (NESP, n.d.) 
The region will tend to spend more time in drought, with longer drought duration and more intense 
drought. Nevertheless, there is considerable uncertainty in the projections, with the positive end of 
results indicating positive drought outcomes (less time in drought) and the negative end of results 
indicating very extreme drought outcomes.

33 
 Other drivers of change 
A number of other economic, social and environmental trends may influence the resilience of the 
Outback SA to drought. These are occurring at different scales and have different implications for 
the region. 
 Global drivers of change 
Table 8 describes global drivers of change (CSIRO 2022, PwC 2022, Taylor et al. 2017) and how 
they are or have potential to influence the Outback SA region. 
Table 8 Global drivers of change  
Global trend 
Description  
Climate change 
and 
decarbonisation 
Rising greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere are causing temperatures to 
rise, annual rainfall to reduce, and extreme weather events to become more 
frequent and more severe. Responding to climate change requires a shift in 
the global economy to reduce carbon emissions and action to adapt to a 
new and changing climate. In Outback SA agriculture and pastoralism, 
mining and transport industries that are key sources of emissions will require 
transformation change. 
Technological 
disruption 
A new digital world is filled with opportunities for online work and study, 
telehealth, online shopping, and digital currency. With technology and 
automation come consequences for jobs and security. A lack of access to 
technology due to a lack of infrastructure can lead to disadvantages 
compared to those with access.  In the Outback SA region, access to satellite 
technology for more reliable and unlimited internet access has increased 
opportunities for online access to education and health, however 
households that cannot afford this access may be disadvantaged.  
Urbanisation 
Larger towns and cities and high amenity areas continue to draw population 
growth and economic activity away from many smaller towns and remote 
communities. It can be challenging for the Outback SA region to compete 
with the economic, education and social opportunities available in urban 
areas. 
Trade disruptions  
Sudden and unexpected widespread trade disruptions brought through 
global pandemics, conflict, geopolitical tensions, or similar events can have 
significant impacts on supply chains, demand, and commodity prices. The 
COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on the tourism industry globally, 
with impacts also felt across the Outback SA region.  
Consumer focus 
Globally there is a strong consumer and citizen push for decision makers to 
consider trust, transparency, fairness, and environmental and social 
governance. Demand for sustainable meat is growing and in response the 
Australian red meat and livestock industry has set a target to be Carbon

34 
Neutral by 2030. A number of Outback SA pastoralists are responding by 
altering their production. 
Increased 
demand for meat  
As many developing countries become wealthier and individuals receive 
more income, demand for meat is increasing. In the Outback SA region, 
pastoralists have an opportunity the contribute to meeting this demand.  
Disease  
Disease outbreaks can threaten the agricultural industry.  
 National and state drivers of change  
Table 9 describes national and state drivers of change (CSIRO 2022, Australian Bureau of Statistics 
2021) and how they are or have potential to influence the Outback SA region. 
Table 9 National and state drivers of change  
National and/or 
state trend 
Description  
Emissions 
targets and 
limits  
Australia has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. This may 
have significant impacts on high emissions industries including mining and 
agriculture. It also presents opportunities to build renewable energy and low 
pollution economies and limit the scale of climate change.  
As noted above, the Outback SA agriculture and pastoralism, mining and 
transport industries that are key sources of emissions will require 
transformation change to contribute to emissions reduction targets. 
Increased cost 
of living  
Increasing costs of living is placing pressure on Australians to fund their 
everyday needs. There is high variability in the income security of the Outback 
SA community and this driver will be felt differently in different communities, 
especially by those most vulnerable. 
Health 
challenges  
The post-pandemic world has exacerbated existing health challenges posed 
by an ageing population and growing burden of chronic disease. One in five 
Australians report high or very high levels of psychological distress. 
Responding to our health risks and improving health outcomes is becoming 
more and more important. The research and engagement for this project 
highlighted the significant adverse impacts on the mental health of the people 
and communities experiencing drought and the need for increased services.  
Remote and rural communities often experience disadvantage in access to 
health services and poorer health outcomes, which can be exacerbated by 
drought. 
The increase in availability of tele-health (consultation with a healthcare 
provider by phone or video call) post COVID-19 is beneficial for Outback 
communities.

35 
 Regional trends 
Through the research and engagement (Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary Report) 
undertaken for this Background Paper, a number of trends described in Table 10 have been noted at 
a reginal scale. 
Table 10 Regional trends 
Regional trend 
Description  
Decreasing 
population  
The Outback SA’s population has declined significantly in recent years, 
reducing by 22% from 2011 to 2021. While the overall population is projected to 
stabilise in the coming years, this smaller population often means less 
community diversity, resources, and services. Some towns may experience 
greater decline than others. Anecdotally we are aware that more people would 
move to, or back to many of our outback townships but lack of housing is a 
constraint.  
At the same time as population is decreasing, the number of visitors to the 
region is increasing placing increasing pressure on community facilities.  
Aging 
population 
The Outback SA’s population is ageing. This has consequences for economic 
growth, labour force participation and demand for services. 
Difficulty 
attracting and 
retaining 
labour 
As the world becomes increasingly urbanised, regional areas such as the 
Outback SA experience greater difficulty in attracting and retaining labour. A 
lack of local services contributes to this.  
High reliance 
on volunteers 
Volunteers play a critical role in the vitality of the Outback SA. However, an 
overdependence on these volunteers can lead to burnout, with flow-on 
impacts to local communities. Volunteering rates are falling in the Outback SA 
region. 
Increased 
digital 
connectivity 
Recent improvements including Starlink have greatly improved the Outback SA 
region’s digital connectivity. This has opened up a number of opportunities for 
education, employment, health, social connection and more.

36 
 Drought resilience  
 A definition of resilience 
The term ‘resilience’ is commonly used in a number of subject areas from health and wellbeing to 
natural resources and the economy. A range of Regional Drought Resilience Plans and literature 
were analysed to compare their definitions of ‘drought resilience’. These are presented in Table 8. 
From this analysis, the following definition of drought was selected from the Future Drought Fund 
Water and the Environment 2020): 
Drought resilience means the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing 
temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, for 
improved economic, environmental and social wellbeing. 
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In many cases, the intent is to use disruption as an 
opportunity to move in a new direction, not just recover back to a previous state. It is about changing 
in order not to be changed. 
Building resilience will help the Outback SA region to endure droughts with less negative impacts 
and recover from them sooner. 
Table 11 Definitions of resilience from various drought plans 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
Forestry 2024) 
South West 
Queensland  
‘Resilience’ is harder to define. The World Bank has defined resilience as the 
ability “… to anticipate, absorb, accommodate or recover from the effects of a 
hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner”. 
Australia’s CSIRO perhaps more specifically states: “drought resilience will 
result in a regional Australia that can endure deeper, longer droughts, and 
recover from them sooner. This will allow our food and agribusinesses to boost 
national farm income, increase food security, and protect the regional jobs that 
rely on agriculture. It will increase the resilience of rural and regional 
communities that depend on agriculture and improve environmental outcomes 
Murraylands & 
Riverlands  
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In many cases, we want to use 
disruption as an opportunity to move in a new direction, not just recover back to 
exactly where we were.  
Northern & 
Yorke 
Resilience has multiple definitions; common traits of resilience include the ability 
of a system, organisation or individual to withstand adversity and bounce back. 
For the purpose of the NYRDRP, the definition of resilience has been taken from 
the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 and is described as: “the 
ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing temperature, 
increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed seasonality of rainfall, 
for improved economic, environmental and social wellbeing”. (Australian 
Government, 2019).

37 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
Also includes a quote from a participant: Resilience is the ability to withstand 
bad times or disasters – not to just get back up, but figure out how to move 
forward, progress and grow in capacity to prevent it from happening again. Must 
be able to adapt to prevent. - Anita Kuss, Unihub Spencer Gulf 
ACT 
While resilience can be defined as “The capacity of a system to absorb 
disturbance and reorganise so as to retain essentially the same function, 
structure and feedbacks”, rather than framing resilience as “bouncing back”, it 
could be more accurately described as adapting or transforming as needed in 
response to change. 
Gippsland 
Victoria  
Walker (2020) defines resilience as the capacity of a system to absorb a 
disturbance and reorganise so as to keep functioning in the same kind of way. 
Rather than just ‘bouncing back,’ resilience is all about changing and adapting 
to circumstances, rather than having them change you. 
For the purpose of this document, resilience is used to describe the ability to 
respond positively to the known impacts of drought and maintain business 
functions. It is about being able to adapt, thrive and take advantage of 
opportunities when encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ 
of the current situation, or being stoic, resilience includes the ability to adapt 
and be decisive during uncertainty and change. 
Wimmera 
Victoria  
For the purpose of this document, resilience is defined as the ability of a system 
to effectively respond to disruptions, like drought, while maintaining function. It 
is about being able to consistently and collectively develop, hone and create 
the tools to adapt, thrive and take advantage of opportunities when 
encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ of the current 
situation resilience includes the ability to adapt and potentially transform the 
way things are done during periods of uncertainty and change. 
Mid West WA  
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system 
to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks 
so as to continue to deliver values. 
Southern 
Wheatbelt WA 
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system 
to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks 
so as to continue to deliver values. 
Maru et al. 2017 
The capacity of a linked social-ecological system to absorb disturbance and 
reorganize so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, and 
feedbacks – to have the same identity. Resilience thinking embraces the ideas 
of adaptation of the current system, and also transformation to a different kind 
of system when the existing one is in an irreversibly undesirable state, or on a 
trajectory towards such a state.

38 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
Walker 2020  
The simplest definition of resilience is the ability to cope with shocks and to 
keep functioning in much the same kind of way. It is a measure of how much an 
ecosystem, a business, a society can change before it crosses a tipping point 
into some other kind of state that it then tends to stay in. 
Possibly the most common misinterpretation of resilience is “bouncing back.” 
Resilience is in fact the ability to adapt and change, to reorganize, while coping 
with disturbance. It is all about changing in order not to be changed. A resilient 
system responds to a disturbance by changing the relative amounts of its 
different parts and how they interact, thereby changing the way it functions. It 
stays the same kind of system by learning from a disturbance, to be able to 
better cope with a similar disturbance in the future. It does not bounce back to 
look and behave exactly like it did before. Resilient systems are learning 
systems. 
Resilience is largely about learning how to change in order not to be changed. 
Trying to protect a system by keeping it in a constant state reduces its 
resilience. 
Carpenter et al. 2012 
Resilience, in the context of environmental management and sustainability, is 
the capacity of a social-ecological system to absorb disturbance, reorganize, 
and thereby retain essential functions, structures and feedbacks. 
South Australian Fire 
and Emergency Services 
Commission, 2019 
The ability to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what happens. 
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan is focused on drought resilience. However, enhancing 
drought resilience will help the region respond to and recover from other stresses or pressures such 
as bushfire, flooding rains, pandemics and economic market changes. 
 The importance of drought resilience  
In the past, droughts have had serious impacts on the Outback SA region. It has had major 
consequences for jobs and income, mental health and wellbeing, the ability to feed livestock or 
grow crops, the size of regional populations, and the health of the environment.  
Resilience is about taking action to try to avoid or minimise these negative impacts before they 
happen rather than waiting until they do occur to act, or just focusing on recovery. Building 
resilience can help to create economic, social, and environmental development opportunities. 
Drought resilience often has a very large focus on the agricultural sector. However, the Outback SA 
Drought Resilience Plan will recognise that the unique climate, geographic, social, and economic 
factors of the Outback region mean that drought impacts more than just the agricultural sector. In 
this region, drought has a massive impact on communities as a whole and other industries outside of 
the agricultural sector.

39 
  Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, and 
regions 
It is important to consider resilience at a variety of scales from the individual to the community and 
the whole region. Resilience looks different for every community depending on its unique 
experience, attributes, risks, and characteristics. However, there are a number of common attributes 
of a drought resilient region that have been identified by stakeholders, community (see Appendix A 
2011; South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission 2019; Walker 2020)  
5.3.1 Individuals  
Characteristics of resilient individuals are described in Table 12.  
Table 12 Characteristics of resilient individuals  
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Social 
characteristics 
• Social connection and strong relationships with friends and family  
• Sharing your struggles with others, being willing to accept support and 
understanding that others are also doing it tough and that you are not alone. 
• Good relationships with staff from support organisations including the SAAL 
Landscape Boards (SAAL, AW, EP), PIRSA, OCA, banks, counsellors etc.  
• A sense of purpose – employment, education, volunteering, family etc.  
• Experience from previous droughts, including passing this knowledge onto 
the next generation.  
• Self sufficiency  
• Being willing to do things differently and adapting to new conditions 
First Nations 
cultural 
characteristics 
• Being able to live and work on Country, access cultural heritage sites and 
share knowledge between generations. 
• Landholders and communities having access to drought relief funding 
Economic 
characteristics 
• Good long-term business and financial planning and decision-making – 
ability to ‘play the long game’ and use the profits from good years to get 
through the bad years. 
• Diverse sources of household income 
• Access to and awareness of financial support available 
Environmental 
characteristics 
• Managing total grazing pressure and undertaking sustainable land 
management 
• Land management that seeks to achieve nature positive outcomes

40 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
• Good soil and water management that maximise soil health and land cover 
to minimise erosion.  
Agricultural 
characteristics 
All economic and environmental characteristics as well as: 
• Innovation and implementation of new techniques, tools, and technology 
• Understanding your country, your business, and the risk of drought 
• Having land outside of drought affected areas to agist stock. 
• Infrastructure that reduces workload eg telemetry for stock water monitoring, 
grates instead of gates etc. 
• Security of water supply for stock and domestic use 
• Proactive preparation for drought, including plans for before, during and after 
that facilitate making timely decisions informed by seasonal changes 
• Willingness to trial and adopting new practices and technology 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Access to good education, healthcare, and digital connectivity 
• Reliable water infrastructure that maximises water capture and minimises 
water loss. 
• High quality housing with large rainwater tanks or bores and good thermal 
insultation 
5.3.2 Communities  
Characteristics of resilient communities are described in Table 13.  
Table 13 Characteristics of resilient communities 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Social 
characteristics 
• Strong, connected, caring communities that help each other in times of 
need 
• Strong community organisations and volunteer base who are willing and 
able to put in the work for the benefit of their community 
• Proximity to regional centres with health, education, and support 
services 
First Nations 
cultural 
characteristics  
• Ability to maintain connections to country 
• Good relationships between First Nations peoples, wider communities, 
and government agencies 
• Local employment opportunities that enable First Nations employment

41 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Economic 
characteristics 
• Diversification of local economies into tourism, mining, workers 
accommodation, goats, renewable energy etc.  
• Access to community grants and other funding  
• Investment in projects that give good return to the community, employ 
local people and have social licence 
• Local employment opportunities that support people to stay in the 
community 
Agricultural 
characteristics 
• Pastoralists and farmers who are aware of how to minimise their 
environmental impacts  
• Uptake of new, improved and adaptive technology and practises 
Environmental 
characteristics  
• Low populations of pest/overabundant animals through proactive 
management before drought 
• Maintainable public green spaces which improve amenity, wellbeing, 
and tourism attraction 
• Good baseline native vegetation cover with a diverse mix and more 
resilience perennials. 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Local services including shops, medical facilities (including mental 
health and preventative health), tradespeople etc.  
• Reliable access to water, power, energy, digital connectivity, and food 
• Community spaces that enable people to come together  
Governance 
characteristics 
• Place-based collaborative, long-term approaches and support from 
external agencies in ways that meet the unique needs of each 
community 
5.3.3 Regions  
Characteristics of resilient regions are described in Table 14. 
Table 14 Characteristics of resilient regions 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Road and roadside infrastructure to support movement of stock, local travel 
and tourism (including sealed roads, toilets, rubbish bins, parking bays, 
showers etc.) 
• Security of energy and water supply and telecommunications

42 
Economic 
characteristics 
• Strong agricultural commodity market conditions  
• Diverse business and industry sectors. 
Governance 
characteristics 
• Timely and localised government declaration of drought which can unlock 
funding and support. 
• Good communication and provision of information about available 
community grants and programs  
• Strategic and proactive preparation for drought - investing in good times to 
increase resilience during bad times 
• Coordinated services 
• Permanency of support staff to provide a sense of continuity and allowing 
trusted relationships to be built 
• Policy informed by local people, for local people .

43 
 Approaches to drought resilience 
planning 
 Learnings from other planning regions 
Many other regions across Australia have already prepared draft or final Regional Drought 
Resilience Plans through the Future Regional Drought Resilience Planning program. A desktop 
review of these plans and online meetings with a number of plan leaders has helped to: 
• 
Understand what has worked well or not worked well in the process of preparing Drought 
Resilience Plans in other regions around Australia, including in engagement, research, and 
reporting phases.  
• 
Identify the types of strategies and actions proposed for other regions and the collated 
evidence that suggests they will be successful in building drought resilience. 
The key findings of this review and engagement are summarised below. 
Table 15 Key learnings from other planning regions 
Planning 
element 
Key findings 
Structure of 
plan 
• Short, simple, easy to read plans with lots of graphics are more effective than 
long, context-heavy plans.  
• Ensure the plan is written for the target audience (ie the people who make 
decisions about what to do about drought, from Community based 
organisations, local business owners to state and federal agencies). 
• Drought resilience plans should be high level to enable flexibility in 
implementation. The ‘how to actually do it’ is critical but this sits separately to 
the plan itself. 
• Including some tools such as My Climate View/Climate Ready can be useful 
for those who want something more tangible from the plan (eg support and 
advice).  
• Providing a list of potential partners is more effective and achievable than 
identifying particular responsibilities for each goal/action. 
• Preparing a ‘plan on a page’ summary of the plan is a useful approach for 
those who do not want to read the entire plan. 
Strategies 
and actions 
• Strategies and actions should be grouped by themes. 
• The plan should take a social focus – social/people/community actions are 
usually the most effective in building drought resilience. 
• Supporting/funding community clubs/organisations to deliver their own 
community programs is a very successful approach and helps to ensure the 
community can continue to implement the plan themselves, and that actions 
are led by and designed for the community.

44 
Planning 
element 
Key findings 
• Actions should be considered across the range of change types (eg 
maintaining, modifying, and transforming) with some in each category. 
Engagement 
• Leverage existing relationships and networks to increase engagement, 
including for First Nations engagement. 
• Tailor engagement messaging to ensure you reach all parts of the community.  
• Online engagement can work well.  
Approach 
• A risk assessment framework approach is an effective approach.   
• Using the Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) 
Framework (Crossman, 2018) is an effective approach.  
 The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy 
(DRAMP) Framework 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman, 2018) 
published by the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) takes an integrated, 
multi-pronged approach to reduce risks and impacts of drought. The Framework includes six goals, 
aligned with three pillars of drought risk reduction illustrated in Figure 16.

45 
Figure 14 The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman, 
2018) 
The six goals of the DRAMP Framework are: 
1. 
Reduce exposure to drought: reduce the potential for loss of people, livelihoods, ecosystem 
services and resources, infrastructure, as well as economic, social or cultural assets in 
places that could be adversely affected by drought;  
2. Reduce vulnerability to drought: reduce tendency to be adversely affected by drought; 
3. Increase resilience to drought risk: strengthen the ability of communities, ecosystems and 
economies to anticipate, absorb, accommodate or recover from the effects of drought 
quickly and efficiently by ensuring the preservation, restoration or improvement of natural 
capital;  
4. Transformation: alter fundamental attributes of social, economic and ecological systems, 
including value systems; regulatory, legislative, or bureaucratic regimes; financial 
institutions; and technological or biological systems;  
5. Prepare, respond, and recover from drought: the backbone of management and planning 
approaches to reduce drought risk, including development of comprehensive drought 
monitoring and early warning systems.  
6. Transfer and share drought risks: distribute risks among wider section of society to include 
those who benefit directly and indirectly from robust drought risk management.

46 
 South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy was prepared to provide a foundation upon which 
state and local government, non-government organisations, businesses, and communities can work 
together to make a safer, more resilient South Australia.  The Strategy includes eight guiding 
principles described in Figure 17 for building disaster resilience that are applicable to drought 
resilience planning. 
Figure 15 Guiding principles for building disaster resilience (Government of South Australia, 2019)

47 
 Opportunities for increasing drought 
resilience in the Outback SA region 
The following strategies and opportunities have been identified through phase 1 and 2 engagement 
(see Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary Report) and the literature review (Climateworks 
Centre 2023; Fisher & Rola-Rubzen 2011; Nielsen et al 2020; Outback Communities Authority 2021; 
Rola-Rubzen & McGregor 2009; SA Drought Hub n.d). 
These strategies and opportunities will be further explored and considered as the Outback Drought 
Resilience Plan is prepared, and are presented in the following themes: 
• Agriculture 
• Community 
• Economy 
• Environment 
• First Nations people 
• Governance and 
• Infrastructure 
 Agricultural opportunities 
Strategies and objectives to build the drought resilience of the agricultural sector are described in 
Table 16. 
Table 16 Strategies and objectives to increase drought resilience of agriculture in the Outback SA region 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Managing 
total grazing 
pressure 
Providing advice on management strategies and, where appropriate, greater 
support for agistment or destocking to assist moving stock off the land and 
preventing overgrazing.  
Supporting landowners more with pest/overabundant native animal control. 
Educating 
pastoralists 
and farmers 
Training pastoralists on adaptive land management processes (eg, rest based 
grazing, when and how fast to destock, location of watering points etc.) to support 
uptake and increase their sustainability and resilience. 
Providing a one-stop-shop website for pastoralists seeking information 
during/after drought, with registered stockists or providers for eg hay/stock etc. 
Providing awareness raising, training and support for uptake of carbon farming, 
particularly in pastoral areas. 
Contextualising technical information such as climate data, forecasts, tools etc. to 
individual property or business decisions.

48 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Encouraging 
good long-
term 
planning 
processes 
Delivering an individual farm assessment program which supports pastoralists to 
assess their drought preparedness and develop an improvement plan. 
Supporting long-term financial planning to help the benefit of good years allow 
farmers to get through bad years. 
Supporting business and succession planning 
Delivering 
local 
research and 
innovation 
Researching and trialling new and improved grazing and cropping land 
management practices in the Outback SA context 
Improving weather and climate forecasting, monitoring, and warning systems. 
Reducing 
workload 
Installing infrastructure that reduces workload eg telemetry to monitor water 
levels, stock grids to replace gates 
Promoting 
sustainability 
Promoting the sustainability of red meat (green/blue tick or similar certified 
marking) to provide financial benefit for pastoralists using sustainable practises 
and increase recognition of pastoralists. 
 Community opportunities 
Strategies and objectives to build the resilience of the community are described in Table 16. 
Table 17 Strategies and opportunities to build resilience of the Outback SA community  
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Improving 
community 
connection 
Delivering or supporting community events, including a mix of drought/mental health 
focused events and general events which promote positivity and community connection.  
Facilitate knowledge exchange and sharing of drought experiences among communities. 
Maintaining 
and 
enhancing 
community 
wellbeing 
Continuing to provide free mentoring, counselling, financial advice, training, and support 
services such as PIRSA Family and Business (FaB) mentors, Centrelink representatives, 
Mental Health First Aid Course, Are you Bogged Mate etc. Promote continuity of quality 
staff where possible to enable the formation of trusted relationships.  
RFDS continuing to provide their services, including mental health (for men and women) 
and allied/preventative health, and preferably with continuity of staff who get involved in 
the local community.   
Providing 
community 
infrastructure 
Funding of infrastructure that benefits the whole community in the long term and is 
maintainable eg community halls, sporting facilities, irrigated green space etc.

49 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Supporting 
volunteers  
Training for volunteers on skills such as preparing grant applications, writing minutes, 
financial management, what resources are available, event management, digital literacy, 
managing insurances etc. Many participants identified that rather than general trainings, 
communities would benefit from tailored support that meets local needs and can help 
with answering individual questions. It was noted that upskilling community volunteers on 
a range of topics would help to combat overreliance on individual community members. 
I’m a little sceptical… volunteers are already stretched. Recent ‘leadership’ programs 
offered by Ariid Lands have struggled for participants. I think we need to look for paid 
positions.  
Providing 
easy to 
access, direct 
financial 
support 
Providing community members with more accessible, quick, easy, streamlined 
personal/business financial supports during drought such as long-term low interest 
business loans, freight subsidies, fodder subsidies, water infrastructure rebates, supports 
similar to Job Keeper etc. with minimal red tape. Town residents may also need financial 
support, not just pastoralists, for example with cost of living (power and water costs).  
Providing more accessible, quick, easy, streamlined community grant opportunities. 
Where possible, provide grants that allow allocating funds for project management. 
Improve communication and awareness of available grants. Support community 
organisations with grant application writing.  
Continuing financial support after the drought breaks to help the region to recover and 
rebuild. 
Providing in-kind support such as hay drops, water truck donations etc. 
Improving 
financial 
literacy 
Mentoring/training for business planning, business finances, succession planning and 
what business support is available.  
Supporting households to diversify their incomes prior to drought, especially into 
industries that are not reliant on water (eg historical tourism, dark sky tourism, station 
stays, fossil tourism, cultural tourism, government-based jobs or other work from home 
jobs). 
Enabling local 
employment  
Providing local jobs and education that allow local people to diversify their work and stay 
in the local community.See comment above about volunteers  
Maintaining 
township 
vibrancy 
Promote country life to encourage people to move to remote communities. Not sure this 
is about ‘country’ life… another term?

50 
 Economic opportunities 
Strategies and objectives to build the drought resilience of local and regional economies are 
described in Table 17. 
Table 18 Strategies and objectives to increase the drought resilience of the Outback SA economy 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Supporting 
local 
employment 
Better advertising of local jobs (eg health, education, NRM) to local people to 
enable people to diversity and stay in the region.  
Also job design nnd remote working opportunities.  
Supporting industries which enable local employment and economic benefit (eg 
culture and recreation, tourism, manufacturing, construction). 
Promoting 
Outback 
tourism 
Increasing promotion and signage of outback tourism (separate from Flinders 
Ranges)  
SATC may have a different policy position – need for joined up policy.  
 Environmental opportunities 
Strategies and objectives to build the drought resilience of the natural environment are described in 
Table 18. 
Table 19 Strategies and objectives to increase drought resilience of the Outback SA environment 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Controlling 
total grazing 
pressure 
Managing total grazing pressure by controlling feral animals and over-abundant 
native species and stock 
Supporting landowners more with pest/overabundant native animal control. 
Planning and 
monitoring 
Undertaking landscape scale planning and management to support the condition 
and extent of native flora and fauna.  
Improving long-term monitoring of groundwater, native flora and fauna including 
during drought to increase knowledge of the impacts of drought on keystone 
species. 
Delivering 
conservation 
priorities 
Focusing conservation efforts during drought in areas which naturally have 
greater water flows.  
Implementing Landscape Board conservation priorities. 
Supporting 
uptake of 
Supporting uptake of carbon farming through education and awareness raising, 
pilot projects and training.

51 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
carbon 
farming 
Maintaining 
township 
environments 
Maintain highly valued environments such as township green space where 
possible through drought 
Reducing 
emissions 
Promoting and striving towards carbon neutrality on pastoral and agricultural 
properties and in townships. 
Promote 
nature 
positive 
outcomes 
Promote land management approaches that create nature positive outcomes.   
  First Nations cultural opportunities 
Strategies and objectives to build the resilience of First Nations people are described in Table 19 
Table 20 Strategies and opportunities to build drought resilience of First Nations people in the Outback SA 
region 
Objective  
Opportunities  
Engaging 
with First 
Nations 
Engaging with First Nations peoples to understand what they need and what 
would assist them.  
Supporting 
programs 
that deliver 
on First 
Nations 
priorities 
Enhance the Outback community’s awareness of cultural heritage values and 
support programs that build generational knowledge of cultural land 
management. 
Support for land management including pest plant and animal control, water and 
erosion management  
Enable local First Nations employment that facilitates working and living on 
Country

52 
  Governance and advocacy opportunities 
Strategies and objectives to build the resilience of the region through governance and advocacy are 
described in Table 21. 
Table 21 Strategies and opportunities to build drought resilience through governance and advocacy in the 
Outback SA region 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Providing 
effective 
drought 
governance  
Communities noted that New South Wales and Queensland properties have in 
the past received assistance earlier, while in the same or even better conditions 
than their South Australian counterparts. Participants emphasised the importance 
of ensuring drought declarations accurately reflect the conditions on the ground 
rather than being based on lines on a map.  
Defining drought as a hazard in the State Emergency Management Plan. 
Educate the 
community 
about 
available 
support 
Improve pastoralist farmer and community access to and knowledge of the full 
range of drought resilience, management, and support opportunities and 
initiatives. 
Engaging 
with 
communities  
Engaging with communities to understand what they need and want and 
delivering this in partnership with the community. 
RDA) in on-groundwork in the regions, including more personal contact and 
relationships in the regions (not just in Port Augusta) and supporting continuity of 
staff where possible. 
Developing a clear vision and collective identity for the Outback SA region and 
each outback town in consultation with the community 
Supporting 
volunteers  
Simplifying requirements for community organisations and volunteers where 
possible. Consider providing funds to cover volunteer hours for community works 
or providing greater OCA support for community organisations.   
Funding on-
ground 
projects that 
provide the 
community 
with what 
they need to 
be resilient 
Investing when times are good, including more grants and support for resilience 
building actions. 
Ensuring more long-term funding, review, and improvement processes to ensure 
governance agencies learn from past experiences. 
Ensuring that money hits the ground in the regions/with community organisations 
where it is needed most. 
Better coordinating programs and funding from different agencies in the regions.

53 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Improving 
coordination 
of drought 
programs  
Encouraging city-based volunteer groups to come into regional communities and 
help during drought times through for example running social events, assisting 
with weed management etc. 
Partnering with mining companies, Roxby Council and District Council of Coober 
Pedy to increase support for local communities in region. 
  Infrastructure opportunities  
Strategies and objectives to build the drought resilience through infrastructure upgrades and of 
infrastructure assets in the Outback SA region are described in Table 22. 
Table 22 Strategies and opportunities to build drought resilience through infrastructure in the Outback SA 
region 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Improve 
community 
infrastructure 
provision 
Improving road and roadside infrastructure for stock transport, local travel and 
tourism. This may include sealing roads, better maintaining unsealed roads, and 
installing parking bays, toilets, showers, and rubbish bins. 
Improving water security for all communities , including in Andamooka (certainty 
of water-carting service from the Roxby Downs-Andamooka pipeline to individual 
properties), Innamincka (back up groundwater bore for town water supply), 
Gawler Ranges (plastic lining catchments and bore drilling) Yunta and Copley.  
Funding upgraded or new community infrastructure that is maintainable, 
sustainable and provides a place for community connection and diverse uses 
(including community halls, sporting facilities, irrigated green space, community 
facilities with backup power generation etc.) 
Deliver universal access to public Wi-Fi so the community and visitors can better 
access emergency services, health, education and other support services 
Increasing local production and storage of renewable energy or otherwise 
improve energy security and reduce power outages (which also cut out water 
pumps, fridges, air conditioners, telecommunications etc.). 
Building more infrastructure to support tourism in towns including public toilets, 
showers, water (can be pay for use), shaded outdoor tables and chairs, 
campground facilities etc. 
Providing safe community spaces with backup power sources for community to 
go when the power goes out – with good thermal insulation, drinking water 
supply, air conditioning, fridges/freezers etc.

54 
Strategies 
Opportunities  
Encourage and support water recycling initiatives 
Improve 
efficiency of 
household 
infrastructure 
Providing incentives for household solar generation and storage, energy and 
water efficient housing and rainwater tanks. 
 Types of change  
Building the resilience of the Outback SA region to drought will likely require change in practices 
and processes.  
Severe and unpredictable events such as droughts, floods and extreme heat will impact Outback 
communities and the way they live and it likely that changes in current systems are needed. Three 
types of change are identified (Roggema et al, 2012): 
• Incremental change – associated with slow processes and small adjustments, which modify the 
landscape only slightly. They are often associated with ongoing improvements in current 
practice. For the Outback SA region, strategies to change support structures to Progress 
Associations would be an example of incremental change. 
• Transition change – associated with moving from one way of doing things to another in a 
deliberate way.  
• Transformation change – associated with a fundamental shift in the system. They are usually 
multi-actor, multi-scale processes, where the change is highly non-linear. Examples may be 
initially controversial or cause wide-spread apprehension, for example if the Outback SA region 
was to propose a restriction on grazing. 
The type of change of each strategy and opportunity identified in the Drought Resilience Plan will be 
considered in the final Plan.

55 
 References  
.id 2022, Outback Communities Authority community profile, .idcommunity, viewed 12 February 
2024, https://profile.id.com.au/outback-communities/abouthttps://profile.id.com.au/outback-
communities/about https://profile.id.com.au/outback-
communities/abouthttps://profile.id.com.au/outback-communities/about 
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021, Table Builder, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 12 January 
2024, 
https://tablebuilder.abs.gov.au/webapi/jsf/dataCatalogueExplorer.xhtmlhttps://tablebuilder.abs.gov.a
u/webapi/jsf/dataCatalogueExplorer.xhtml 
https://tablebuilder.abs.gov.au/webapi/jsf/dataCatalogueExplorer.xhtmlhttps://tablebuilder.abs.gov.a
u/webapi/jsf/dataCatalogueExplorer.xhtml 
Australian, New South Wales, Queensland, South Australian and Northern Territory Governments 
2019, ‘Great Artesian Basin Strategic Management Plan’, viewed 27 February 2024. 
https://www.awe.gov.au/water/policy/national/great-artesian-basin/strategic-management-
planhttps://www.awe.gov.au/water/policy/national/great-artesian-basin/strategic-management-
planhttps://www.awe.gov.au/water/policy/national/great-artesian-basin/strategic-management-
planhttps://www.awe.gov.au/water/policy/national/great-artesian-basin/strategic-management-plan  
Bennett, B., Zhang, L., Potter, N.J., and S. Westra, 2018, Climate Resilience Analysis Framework: 
Testing the resilience of natural and engineered systems, Goyder Institute for Water Research 
Technical Report Series No. goyderinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/goyder_trs_18-
2_craft.pdf  
BOM 2021, Rainfall percentage of annual rainfall maps, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 15 
January, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall-percentage/?periodRange=3-
month&period=decfebhttp://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall-
percentage/?periodRange=3-month&period=decfeb 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall-percentage/?periodRange=3-
month&period=decfebhttp://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall-
percentage/?periodRange=3-month&period=decfeb 
Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate Guides, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 1 February 2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-
guides/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-
guides/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/  
Bureau of Meteorology 2005, Average annual and monthly evapotranspiration maps, 
Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 8 February, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/evapotranspiration/ 
Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 8 February, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml  
Bureau of Meteorology 2021a, What is El Niño and how does it impact Australia?, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 2 February, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-
australia.shtmlBureau of Meteorology 2005, Average annual and monthly evapotranspiration maps, 
Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 8 February, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/evapotranspiration/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/

56 
maps/averages/evapotranspiration/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/evapotranspirati
on/ 
Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 8 February, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-
droughts.shtmlhttp://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml 
Bureau of Meteorology 2021a, What is El Niño and how does it impact Australia?, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 2 February, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-
australia.shtml http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-
australia.shtmlhttp://www.bom.gov.au/climate/updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-australia.shtml 
Bureau of Meteorology 2021b, Average annual, seasonal and monthly rainfall maps, Commonwealth 
of Australia, viewed 2 February, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averag
es/rainfall/ 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averag
es/rainfall/ 
Bureau of Meteorology 2022, Average monthly and annual temperature maps, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 8 February 2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/ 
.http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/ . 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/ 
.http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/ . 
viewed 18 December 2023, 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/http://www.bom.gov.au/cli
mate/data/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/  
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Regional Weather and Climate Guides, Bureau of Meteorology, 
viewed 4 January 2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-
guides/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/ http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-
guides/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/ 
Bureau of Meteorology 2024a, Understanding drought, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 8 
February 2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-
centre/understanding.shtmlhttp://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-
centre/understanding.shtml http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-
centre/understanding.shtmlhttp://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-
centre/understanding.shtml 
Bureau of Meteorology 2024b, Indian Ocean influences on Australian climate, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 8 February 
2024,http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/iod/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/iod/http://www.bom.gov.au
/climate/iod/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/iod/  
Bureau of Meteorology 2024c, Climate Data Online, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 8 February 
2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/ 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/

57 
Carpenter, S. R., K. J. Arrow, S. Barrett, R. Biggs, W. A. Brock, A.-S. Crépin, G. Engström, C. Folke, T. 
P. Hughes, N. Kautsky, C.-Z. Li , G. McCarney, K. Meng , K.-G. Mäler, S. Polasky, M. Scheffer, J. 
Shogren, T. Sterner, J. R. Vincent, B. Walker, A. Xepapadeas, and A. De Zeeuw. 2012. General 
resilience to cope with extreme events. Sustainability 4(12):3248-3259. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/4/12/3248https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/4/12/3248https://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/4/12/3248https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/4/12/3248  
Climateworks Centre 2023, Renovate homes to cope with cost of living crisis and climate change 
impacts, https://www.climateworkscentre.org/news/renovate-homes-to-cope-with-cost-of-living-
crisis-and-climate-change-impacts-climateworks-centre-says/  
Australia, https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/national-strategy-disaster-
resilience.pdfClimateworks Centre 2023, Renovate homes to cope with cost of living crisis and 
climate change impacts, https://www.climateworkscentre.org/news/renovate-homes-to-cope-with-
cost-of-living-crisis-and-climate-change-impacts-climateworks-centre-says/ 
https://www.climateworkscentre.org/news/renovate-homes-to-cope-with-cost-of-living-crisis-and-
climate-change-impacts-climateworks-centre-
says/https://www.climateworkscentre.org/news/renovate-homes-to-cope-with-cost-of-living-crisis-
National Strategy for Disaster Resilience, Commonwealth of Australia, 
https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/national-strategy-disaster-resilience.pdf 
https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/national-strategy-disaster-
resilience.pdfhttps://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/national-strategy-disaster-
resilience.pdf 
Crossman, 2018, Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework, 
UNCCD, Bonn, viewed 15 January 2024,  https://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/2019-
04/DRAMP_Policy_Framework.pdfhttps://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/2019-
04/DRAMP_Policy_Framework.pdf https://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/2019-
04/DRAMP_Policy_Framework.pdfhttps://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/2019-
04/DRAMP_Policy_Framework.pdf 
CSIRO 2022, Seven megatrends that will shape the next 20 years, CSIRO, viewed 14 February 2024, 
https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-20-
yearshttps://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-
20-years https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-
next-20-yearshttps://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-
the-next-20-years 
Department for Energy and Mining 2024, Major projects and mining activities, Government of South 
Australia, viewed 15 February 2024, https://www.energymining.sa.gov.au/industry/minerals-and-
mining/mining/major-projects-and-mining-
activitieshttps://www.energymining.sa.gov.au/industry/minerals-and-mining/mining/major-projects-
and-mining-activities https://www.energymining.sa.gov.au/industry/minerals-and-
mining/mining/major-projects-and-mining-
activitieshttps://www.energymining.sa.gov.au/industry/minerals-and-mining/mining/major-projects-
and-mining-activities

58 
Science and Knowledge Plan, Government of South Australia through the Department for 
Environment, Adelaide, https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Climate-Change-
Science-and-Knowledge-Plan.pdfhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Climate-
Change-Science-and-Knowledge-
Plan.pdfhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Climate-Change-Science-and-
Knowledge-Plan.pdfhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Climate-Change-
Science-and-Knowledge-Plan.pdf  
Department for Environment and Water 2020, South Australian Trend and Condition Report Cards 
2020, Enviro Data SA, viewed 5 January 2024, https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Trend-and-
condition-reports/Pages/default.aspxhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Trend-and-condition-
reports/Pages/default.aspx https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Trend-and-condition-
reports/Pages/default.aspxhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Trend-and-condition-
reports/Pages/default.aspx 
Department for Environment and Water 2022, Guide to Climate Projections for Risk Assessment and 
Planning in South Australia, Government of South Australia through the Department for Environment, 
Adelaide 
https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%2
0for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdfhttps://
data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20for%2
0risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf 
https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%2
0for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdfhttps://
data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20for%2
0risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf 
Department for Environment and Water 2022, New climate projections for South Australia Maps and 
key findings, Government of South Australia, Adelaide 
Department for Environment and Water 2024, SA Climate Ready, Enviro Data SA, viewed 8 January 
2024, https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Climate/SA-Climate-
Ready/Pages/default.aspxhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Climate/SA-Climate-
Ready/Pages/default.aspx https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Climate/SA-Climate-
Ready/Pages/default.aspxhttps://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Climate/SA-Climate-
Ready/Pages/default.aspx 
Department for Environment and Water 2024, South Australian Climate Projections Viewer, viewed 4 
January, https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/climate-
viewer/details/https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/climate-viewer/details/ 
https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/climate-
viewer/details/https://www.environment.sa.gov.au/climate-viewer/details/ 
Department for Environment and Water, 2022. Guide to Climate Projections for Risk Assessment 
and Planning in South Australia 2022, Government of South Australia, through the Department for 
Environment and Water, Adelaide. 
https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%2
0for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdfhttps://
data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20for%2

59 
0risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf 
https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%2
0for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdfhttps://
data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20for%2
0risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf 
food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund/regional-drought-resilience-
planninghttps://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fund/regional-drought-resilience-planning 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund 
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water 2023, About Kati Thanda–Lake 
https://www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/national/lake-eyre-basin/about 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fundhttps://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fundhttps://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fundhttps://www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/national/lake-eyre-
basin/abouthttps://www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/national/lake-eyre-
basin/abouthttps://www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/national/lake-eyre-basin/aboutDepartment of 
Primary Industries and Regions 2020, Drought Management and Recovery For South Australian 
Pastoralists 2020-21, Government of South Australia, Adelaide  
Department of Primary Industries and Regions n.d. Premier’s Drought Tour Outcomes Hawker, 
Government of South Australia 
DR.SAT 2024, Assess Your Farm’s Resilience, DR.SAT, viewed 8 January, 
https://www.drsat.com.au/https://www.drsat.com.au/ 
https://www.drsat.com.au/https://www.drsat.com.au/ 
DTI 2024, Population Projections for South Australian Local Government Areas, 2021-41, January 
2024 release, Department for Trade and Investment, Government of South Australia, Adelaide, 
https://plan.sa.gov.au/state_snapshot/population/population-
projectionshttps://plan.sa.gov.au/state_snapshot/population/population-
projectionshttps://plan.sa.gov.au/state_snapshot/population/population-
projectionshttps://plan.sa.gov.au/state_snapshot/population/population-projections  
Fisher & Rola-Rubzen 2011, More Than a Drop in the Ocean: How Can Good Examples of Remote 
Services be Replicated?, 
https://www.nintione.com.au/resource/NintiOneWorkingPaper_79_MoreThanADropInTheOcean.pdf
https://www.nintione.com.au/resource/NintiOneWorkingPaper_79_MoreThanADropInTheOcean.pdf 
https://www.nintione.com.au/resource/NintiOneWorkingPaper_79_MoreThanADropInTheOcean.pdf
https://www.nintione.com.au/resource/NintiOneWorkingPaper_79_MoreThanADropInTheOcean.pdf

60 
Fleming-Muñoz DA, Whitten S & Bonnett GD 2023, The economics of drought: A review of impacts 
and costs, The Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, vol #64, no#4, viewed 14 
February 2024, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-
8489.12527https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-
8489.12527https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-
8489.12527https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-8489.12527  
Government of South Australia 2019, South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 2019 – 2024,  
https://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINE
T%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdfhttps://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINE
T%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdf 
https://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINE
T%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdfHughes N, Soh WY, Boult C & Lawson K 2022, Defining drought 
from the perspective of Australian farmers, Climate Risk Management, vol #35, viewed 14 February 
2024, 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096322000274https://www.sciencedirect.co
m/science/article/pii/S2212096322000274https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S22120
96322000274https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096322000274  
Lehmann E 2023, Understanding the true cost of drought, CSIRO, viewed 14 February 2024, 
https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2023/July/cost-of-
drought%20https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2023/July/cost-of-drought%20 
https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2023/July/cost-of-
drought%20https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2023/July/cost-of-drought%20 
Maru Y, O’Connell D, Grigg N, Abel N, Cowie A, Stone-Jovicich S, Butler J, Wise R, Walker B, Million 
AB, Fleming A, Meharg S, Meyers J 2017, Making ‘resilience’, ‘adaptation’ and ‘transformation’ real 
for the design of sustainable development projects: piloting the Resilience, Adaptation Pathways 
and Transformation Assessment (RAPTA) framework in Ethiopia, CSIRO, Australia. 
Meat & Livestock Australia 2021, Tools and resources for building business resilience during dry 
times, Meat & Livestock Australia, Sydney, https://www.mla.com.au/globalassets/mla-
corporate/research-and-development/documents/210928-tools-and-resources-for-building-business-
resilience_v6.pdf  
Meat & Livestock Australia 2024, Responding to weather and climate variability, Meat & Livestock 
Australia, viewed 11 December, https://www.mla.com.au/climateMeat & Livestock Australia 2021, 
Tools and resources for building business resilience during dry times, Meat & Livestock Australia, 
Sydney, https://www.mla.com.au/globalassets/mla-corporate/research-and-
development/documents/210928-tools-and-resources-for-building-business-resilience_v6.pdf 
https://www.mla.com.au/globalassets/mla-corporate/research-and-development/documents/210928-
tools-and-resources-for-building-business-
resilience_v6.pdfhttps://www.mla.com.au/globalassets/mla-corporate/research-and-
development/documents/210928-tools-and-resources-for-building-business-

61 
resilience_v6.pdfhttps://www.mla.com.au/climatehttps://www.mla.com.au/climatehttps://www.mla.co
m.au/climate  
My Climate View 2024, Your location. Your commodity. Your climate. My Climate View, viewed 4 
January, https://myclimateview.com.au/https://myclimateview.com.au/ 
https://myclimateview.com.au/https://myclimateview.com.au/ 
National Environmental Science Program (NESP) (n.d) Drought projections for Australia, Climate 
change science brief prepared for ESCC Hub Project 5.4: Water futures under climate change, 
accessed 15 January 2024 https://nespclimate.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/ESCC_Drought-
projections_Factsheet.pdfhttps://nespclimate.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/ESCC_Drought-
projections_Factsheet.pdf 
Nielsen et al 2020, Challenges, solutions and research priorities for sustainable rangelands, 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059 
Nielsen Uffe N, Stafford-Smith Mark, Metternicht Graciela I., Ash Andrew, Baumber Alex, Boer 
Matthias M., Booth Sandy, Burnside Don, Churchill Amber C., El Hassan Marwan, Friedel Margaret H., 
Godde Cecile M., Kelly Dana, Kelly Mick, Leys John F., McDonald Sarah E., Maru Yiheyis T., Phelps 
David G., Ridges Malcolm, Simpson Geoff, Traill Barry, Walker Brian, Waters Cathleen M. , Whyte 
Angus W. (2020) Challenges, solutions and research priorities for sustainable rangelands. The 
Rangeland Journal 42, 359-373. 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059https://www.
publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/pdf/RJ20059  
Outback Communities Authority 2021, Outback Futures Report, Outback Communities Authority 
Outback Communities Authority, n.d. Outback Futures: Stage 1 Consultation – What we heard, 
Outback Communities Authority 
Plan SA n.d., What We Heard – Far North Regional Plan Visioning Workshop, State Planning 
Commission, Government of South Australia, Adelaide  
PwC 2022, Megatrends - Five global shifts reshaping the world we live in, Price Waterhouse 
Coopers, viewed 14 February 2024, 
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.htmlhttps://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.
html 
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.htmlhttps://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.
html 
RDA Far North SA 2016, Far North and Outback SA Climate Change Adaptation Plan. A plan 
prepared for the RDA Far North SA, Outback Communities Authority and the South Australian Arid 
Lands Natural Resource Management Board by Seed Consulting Services and URPS, Adelaide, 
https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/far-north-outback-regional-adaptation-
plan.pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/far-north-outback-regional-adaptation-
plan.pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/far-north-outback-regional-adaptation-
plan.pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/far-north-outback-regional-adaptation-
plan.pdf  
RDAFN & OCA 2019, Outback Communities Authority Region Economic Growth & Investment 
Strategy, prepared by SC Lennon & Associates Pty Ltd on behalf of Regional Development Australia

62 
Far North (RDAFN) and the Outback Communities Authority (OCA), The Gap, Queensland, 
https://rdafn.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2016005_001_RDAFarNorthOCARegionEGIS_RevisedJan2019.pdfhttps://r
dafn.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2016005_001_RDAFarNorthOCARegionEGIS_RevisedJan2019.pdfhttps://r
dafn.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2016005_001_RDAFarNorthOCARegionEGIS_RevisedJan2019.pdfhttps://r
dafn.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2016005_001_RDAFarNorthOCARegionEGIS_RevisedJan2019.pdf   
RDAFN & Roxby Council 2016, Roxby Downs Region Economic Growth & Investment Strategy, 
prepared by SC Lennon & Associates Pty Ltd on behalf of Regional Development Australia Far North 
(RDAFN), the Outback Communities Authority (OCA) and Roxby Council, The Gap, Queensland, 
https://www.roxbydowns.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0034/279376/Roxby-Downs-Region-
Economic-
Growth.pdfhttps://www.roxbydowns.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0034/279376/Roxby-Downs-
Region-Economic-
Growth.pdfhttps://www.roxbydowns.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0034/279376/Roxby-Downs-
Region-Economic-
Growth.pdfhttps://www.roxbydowns.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0034/279376/Roxby-Downs-
Region-Economic-Growth.pdf  
RDAFR & District Council of Coober Pedy 2019, Coober Pedy Economic Growth & Investment 
Strategy, prepared by SC Lennon & Associates Pty Ltd on behalf of Regional Development Australia 
Far North (RDAFN) and the District Council of Coober Pedy, The Gap, Queensland, 
https://rdafn.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2018012_001_FinalCooberPedyEGIS_March2019.pdfhttps://rdafn.com.au/
wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2018012_001_FinalCooberPedyEGIS_March2019.pdfhttps://rdafn.com.au/
wp-
content/uploads/2021/09/2018012_001_FinalCooberPedyEGIS_March2019.pdfhttps://rdafn.com.au/
wp-content/uploads/2021/09/2018012_001_FinalCooberPedyEGIS_March2019.pdf  
Regional Development Australia Far North and the Outback Communities Authority 2019, Outback 
Communities Authority Region Economic Growth & Investment Strategy, prepared by SC Lennon & 
Associates Pty Ltd on behalf of Regional Development Australia Far North and the Outback 
Communities Authority 
Roggema R, Vermeend T, Dobbelsteen AVd. Incremental Change, Transition or Transformation? 
Optimising Change Pathways for Climate Adaptation in Spatial Planning. Sustainability. 2012; 
4(10):2525-2549. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102
525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525  
Rola-Rubzen & McGregor 2009, The structure of the desert economy: risks and strategies for long-
term sustainable growth, https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/48028/files/Rola-
Rubzen%201.pdfhttps://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/48028/files/Rola-Rubzen%201.pdf 
https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/48028/files/Rola-
Rubzen%201.pdfhttps://ageconsearch.umn.edu/record/48028/files/Rola-Rubzen%201.pdf

63 
SA Drought Hub 2021, Node Co-Design Workshops Report, South Australian Drought Resilience 
Adoption and Innovation Hub  
SA Drought Hub 2024, Knowledge Base, SA Drought Hub, viewed 8 January, 
https://sadroughthub.com.au/resources/knowledge-base/  
SA Drought Hub n.d., SA Drought Hub 2024, Knowledge Base, SA Drought Hub, viewed 8 January, 
https://sadroughthub.com.au/resources/knowledge-base/ 
https://sadroughthub.com.au/resources/knowledge-
base/https://sadroughthub.com.au/resources/knowledge-base/SA Drought Hub n.d., Node Co-
Design Workshops Report, South Australian Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub, 
https://sadroughthub.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/FINAL_SA-Drought-Hub_Node-Co-
Design-Workshops-Report-1.pdfhttps://sadroughthub.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2022/08/FINAL_SA-Drought-Hub_Node-Co-Design-Workshops-Report-1.pdf 
https://sadroughthub.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/FINAL_SA-Drought-Hub_Node-Co-
Design-Workshops-Report-1.pdfhttps://sadroughthub.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2022/08/FINAL_SA-Drought-Hub_Node-Co-Design-Workshops-Report-1.pdf 
Smerdon, Brian; Marston, Frances; Ransley, Tim. Water resource assessment for the Great Artesian 
Water Resource Assessment. Australia: CSIRO; 2012. csiro:EP132686. 
https://doi.org/10.4225/08/584c45ad1c34fhttps://doi.org/10.4225/08/584c45ad1c34fhttps://doi.org/1
0.4225/08/584c45ad1c34fhttps://doi.org/10.4225/08/584c45ad1c34f  
South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 2021, South Australian Arid Lands Regional 
Landscape Plan, South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board, Port Augusta 
South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 2021, Water Allocation Plan For the Far North 
Prescribed Wells Area, Government of South Australia, accessed 27 February 2024, 
https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/saal/6087_wap_feb2021_final020321.pdfhttps://c
dn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/saal/6087_wap_feb2021_final020321.pdfhttps://cdn.envir
onment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/saal/6087_wap_feb2021_final020321.pdfhttps://cdn.environment
.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/saal/6087_wap_feb2021_final020321.pdf  
South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board 2022, South Australian Arid Lands Districts and 
Bioregions, South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board, Port Augusta 
https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/images/SAAL_districts_and_Bioregions.pdfhttps://cdn.
environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/images/SAAL_districts_and_Bioregions.pdf 
https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/images/SAAL_districts_and_Bioregions.pdfhttps://cdn.
environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/images/SAAL_districts_and_Bioregions.pdf 
South Australian Arid Lands Landscape Board n.d., Ground Water, viewed 27 February,  
https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/saal/water/managing-water-resources/ground-
waterhttps://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/saal/water/managing-water-resources/ground-water 
https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/saal/water/managing-water-resources/ground-
waterhttps://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/saal/water/managing-water-resources/ground-water 
South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission, 2019, South Australia’s Disaster 
Resilience Strategy 2019-2024, https://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINE
T%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdfhttps://resources-

64 
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINE
T%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdf 
South Australian Tourism Commission 2021, South Australian Regional Visitor Strategy 2025 – 
Flinders Ranges and Outback, Government of South Australia 
https://tourism.sa.gov.au/regions/flinders-ranges-outbackhttps://tourism.sa.gov.au/regions/flinders-
ranges-outbackhttps://tourism.sa.gov.au/regions/flinders-ranges-
outbackhttps://tourism.sa.gov.au/regions/flinders-ranges-outback  
Stafford Smith DM 2008, The ‘Desert Syndrome’ – Causally-Linked Factors That Characterise 
Outback Australia, viewed 15 January, https://www.nintione.com.au/resources/rao/the-desert-
syndrome-causally-linked-factors-that-characterise-outback-
australia/https://www.nintione.com.au/resources/rao/the-desert-syndrome-causally-linked-factors-
that-characterise-outback-australia/ https://www.nintione.com.au/resources/rao/the-desert-
syndrome-causally-linked-factors-that-characterise-outback-
australia/https://www.nintione.com.au/resources/rao/the-desert-syndrome-causally-linked-factors-
that-characterise-outback-australia/ 
Taylor, B, Walton, A, Loechel, B, Measham, T & Fleming, D 2017, Strategic foresight for regional 
Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities, Canberra, Australia. 
https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:EP175665https://publications.csiro.au/pu
blications/publication/PIcsiro:EP175665https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:E
P175665https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:EP175665   
Walker B. 2020. Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecology and Society, vol 25, no 2, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_nothttps://www.
researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_not 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_nothttps://www.
researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_not 
Wiseman n & Bardsley D 2015, Adapting to Climate Change on Country, Geography, Environment 
and Population, the University of Adelaide, South Australia, prepared for the Alinytjara Wilurara 
Natural Resources Management Board 2015, Government of South Australia, Adelaide, 
https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/Climate-Change-Addendum-Technical-Report-
for-the-AW-Regional-Management-
Plan.pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/Climate-Change-Addendum-Technical-
Report-for-the-AW-Regional-Management-
Plan.pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/Climate-Change-Addendum-Technical-
Report-for-the-AW-Regional-Management-
Plan.pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/Climate-Change-Addendum-Technical-
Report-for-the-AW-Regional-Management-Plan.pdf

65 
Appendix A – Engagement summary 
report

Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee 
Project Reference 
22 April 2024 
Regional 
Engagement 
Summary Report 
Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan

https://urpsau.sharepoint.com/sites/Synergy/Shared Documents/Projects/23ADL/23ADL-0865 - Outback SA Drought Resilience Plan/Reports/240319_R4_v1_Regional Engagement Summary Report.docx 
Regional Engagement Summary Report 
22 April 2024 
Lead consultant 
URPS 
27 Halifax Street 
Enter via Symonds Pl 
Adelaide  SA  5000 
(08) 8333 7999 
urps.com.au  
Prepared for 
Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering 
Committee 
Consultant Project Manager 
Anna Pannell, Associate Director 
apannell@urps.com.au 
Document history and status 
Revision 
Date 
Author 
Reviewed 
Details 
V1 
17.4.24 
E. Mansfield,  
A. Pannell 
Draft for client review 
V2 
We acknowledge the Kaurna People as the Traditional Custodians of the land on which we work and pay respect to their Elders past, present and emerging. 
This report has been prepared for URPS’ client. URPS and its associated consultants are not liable to any person or entity for any damage or loss that has occurred, 
or may occur, in relation to that person or entity taking or not taking action in respect of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to herein.

Regional Engagement Summary Report  |  Contents | i 
Contents 
Acknowledgement of Country ................................................................................................ 1 
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 2 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 4 
What we wanted to know ........................................................................................................................ 4 
How we engaged .......................................................................................................................................... 4 
Our key findings .............................................................................................................................................. 6 
How does drought impact the Outback SA region? ............................................ 7 
Social impacts ................................................................................................................................................. 7 
First Nations cultural impacts................................................................................................................... 8 
Economic impacts .......................................................................................................................................... 8 
Agricultural impacts...................................................................................................................................... 9 
Environmental impacts ................................................................................................................................ 9 
Infrastructure impacts............................................................................................................................... 10 
Beneficial impacts ...................................................................................................................................... 10 
What makes individuals, communities, and regions resilient to drought? 11 
Individuals ...................................................................................................................................................... 11 
Communities ................................................................................................................................................. 12 
Regions ............................................................................................................................................................ 13 
What would help enhance drought resilience? .................................................. 14 
Social and community opportunities .................................................................................................. 14 
First Nations opportunities ..................................................................................................................... 15 
Governance and advocacy opportunities ........................................................................................ 15 
Economic opportunities ............................................................................................................................ 16 
Infrastructure opportunities .................................................................................................................... 16 
Agricultural opportunities ........................................................................................................................ 17 
Environmental opportunities .................................................................................................................. 18 
Local opportunities ..................................................................................................................................... 18 
Regional characteristics ............................................................................................ 21 
Consistent characteristics ....................................................................................................................... 21

Regional Engagement Summary Report  |  Contents | ii 
Unique characteristics .............................................................................................................................. 21 
Appendix A - Verbatim workshop notes ..............................................................................  
Appendix B – Online survey responses .................................................................................

Regional Engagement Summary Report | Executive Summary  |  1 
Acknowledgement of Country 
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee acknowledge Aboriginal people as the First 
Peoples and Nations of the lands and waters we live and work upon. We pay our respects to Elders past, 
present and emerging. We acknowledge and respect the deep spiritual connection and the relationship 
that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have to Country and commit to working with the First 
Nations People of the region to maintain and enhance drought resilience.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | Executive Summary  |  2 
Executive Summary 
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee is currently preparing a Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan for the Outback SA region.  
Regional engagement including 16 face-to-face workshops, drop-in sessions and dinner conversations 
were undertaken with stakeholders and communities in 13 outback towns throughout March and April 
2024. Opportunities for online engagement were also provided through an online survey, online workshop 
and phone calls to individuals. 114 individuals took part in the engagement.  
The regional engagement helped the project team to understand: 
• How is the Outback SA region impacted by drought? 
• What makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought?  
• How can the resilience of the Outback SA region to drought be maintained and enhanced?  
Community members and stakeholders shared a wide diversity of perspectives, experiences and priorities. 
These have been summarised in this report and will be used as the foundation of the draft Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan.  
Some of the comments which were heard most frequently through the engagement included the 
following:  
How does drought impact the Outback SA region?  
• Impacts on people from drought are profound. The impacts on mental health and wellbeing were 
highlighted again and again. Exhaustion, heat stress, degradation of the natural environment and loss 
of income impact all parts of the community.  
• Droughts have had a major financial impact on pastoralists. Impacts on tourism have been minor, 
although an abundance of water draws more tourists. 
• Vegetation cover, native wildlife, surface water, groundwater (excluding the Great Artesian Basin) and 
soil are majorly impacted by drought, with large loss of life and environmental condition.  
• In areas without access to the Great Artesian Basin, bores, rainwater tanks and dams run dry affecting 
the capacity to maintain stock.  
What makes people, communities and regions resilient to drought?  
• Social connection and good relationships/support. 
• Strong volunteer base and a community that contributes. 
• Diverse sources of household income. 
• Long term financial planning that accounts for good and bad years.  
• Managing total grazing pressure and understanding your country. 
• Low populations of pest/overabundant native animals. 
• Reliable access to water, power, energy and digital connectivity.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | Executive Summary  |  3 
•
Pastoralists having land outside of drought affected areas to agist their stock.
•
Experience from previous droughts.
How can the resilience of the Outback SA to drought be enhanced? 
•
Supporting the delivery of community events which promote community connection and wellbeing.
•
Engaging with communities to understand what they need and want, and delivering projects in 
partnership with the community
•
Timely and localised government declaration of drought which unlocks funding and support.
•
Improved roads and roadside infrastructure for stock agistment, local travel and tourism.
•
Accessible, quick, easy, streamlined financial support such as community grants, long-term low interest 
business loans, freight subsidies etc. with minimal red tape.
•
Funding of infrastructure that benefits the whole community in the long term eg community halls, 
sporting facilities, irrigated green space etc.
•
Support for volunteers.
•
Increased water security for town water supplies.
•
Supporting landowners with pest/overabundant native animal control.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | Introduction  |  4 
Introduction  
What we wanted to know  
The Outback SA Drought Resilience Steering Committee is currently preparing a Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan for the Outback SA region. The Regional Drought Resilience Plan will identify opportunities 
to enhance the region’s ability to prepare for, respond to and recover from drought, which will also help 
them be more resilient to other stresses or pressures. 
Community and stakeholder engagement is an integral part of the Plan’s preparation.  
Engaging with local communities and stakeholders has: 
• Enabled people and organisations to contribute their own knowledge, expertise and experience to the 
plan. 
• Built capacity of people to think, plan and act proactively to build resilience to drought. 
• Provided the foundation for an ongoing and enduring process that empowers people to activate the 
Plan developed by this project and drive the implementation of actions. 
This phase of engagement aimed to understand: 
• How is the Outback SA region impacted by drought? 
• What makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought?  
• How can the resilience of the Outback SA region to drought be maintained and enhanced? 
How we engaged  
16 face-to-face workshops, drop-in sessions and dinner conversations were undertaken with 
stakeholders and communities in 13 towns across the region throughout March and April 2024. 
Opportunities for online engagement were also provided through an online survey, online workshop and 
phone calls to individuals. 114 individuals took part in the engagement.  
The number of participants identified in the table below excludes URPS staff, and Steering Committee 
staff at their subsequent engagements following the internal stakeholder workshop.   
Table 1 – Regional engagement undertaken to inform the draft Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Location  
Engagement format 
Number of participants  
Date (2024) 
Port Augusta  
Internal stakeholder 
workshop 
14 
Tuesday 12 March  
Workshop 
3 
Wednesday 12 March

Regional Engagement Summary Report | Introduction  |  5 
Location  
Engagement format 
Number of participants  
Date (2024) 
First Nations drop-in 
session 
2 
Wednesday 12 March 
Drop-in session 
1 
Wednesday 12 March  
Yunta 
Workshop 
7 
Thursday 14 March 
Andamooka 
Workshop 
4 
Monday 18 March 
William Creek  
Dinner conversation 
4 
Monday 18 March 
Marree  
Workshop 
10 
Tuesday 19 March 
Copley 
Workshop 
6 
Tuesday 19 March  
Parachilna 
Workshop  
5 
Wednesday 20 March  
Innamincka 
Dinner conversation 
6 
Wednesday 20 March  
Oodnadatta 
Workshop 
2 
Thursday 21 March  
Marla 
Workshop 
1 
Thursday 21 March  
Coober Pedy 
Workshop 
3 
Friday 22 March  
Penong 
Workshop 
6 
Tuesday 9 April 
Gawler Ranges  
Workshop 
4 
Wednesday 10 April  
Online  
Workshop  
8 
Tuesday 2 April  
Survey 
27 
Friday 23 February – 
Friday 12 April  
Phone calls 
1 
Thursday 11 April 
Total 
114

Regional Engagement Summary Report | Introduction  |  6 
Participants included the following groups: 
• Staff from the Steering Committee organisations including Outback Communities Authority, SA Arid 
Lands Landscape Board, Regional Development Association Far North, PIRSA (Primary Industries and 
Resources South Australia)  and SA Drought Hub  
• Other government staff including representatives from SA Health, PIRSA Family and Business (FaB) 
mentors, Department for Environment and Water / National Parks and Wildlife Service  
• Pastoralists and farmers (station/farm owners, families of station owners, and employees)  
• Members of progress associations or other community organisations/clubs 
• General community members 
• Tourism and hospitality operators including pub, hotel and homestay owners, airline operators, and 
general store owners 
• Members of peak bodies and boards including Livestock SA, SA Drought Hub 
• Miners 
• Truck drivers 
• Teachers. 
Most participants had experienced a drought before, either in the Outback SA region or elsewhere.  
NOTE -  a number of key informant interviews with local subject matter experts and drought planners 
from other regions in Australia have also been undertaken. The results from this engagement have been 
reported through the literature review and are not captured in this engagement summary report.  
Our key findings  
The following sections summarise the key themes of the workshops, drop-in sessions, dinner 
conversations, survey and phone conversations. Verbatim workshop notes can be found in Appendix A.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | How does drought impact the Outback SA region?  |  7 
How does drought impact the Outback SA region? 
Community and stakeholders were asked how drought impacts the Outback SA region. A wide range of 
negative impacts on the community, economy, agricultural sector, environment, infrastructure and culture 
were identified. A small number of positive impacts from drought were also identified.  
Community and stakeholders consistently noted that the severity of drought has a major influence on the 
impacts experienced. Many participants identified that the most recent 2017-2019 drought experienced in 
eastern parts of the region, while short, was very severe and had consequences far greater than previous 
longer droughts of a lower severity.   
It was also commonly recognised that the impacts of drought do not end with drought-breaking rains. It 
can take many years for the vegetation and soil to recover, pastoralists to restock, and businesses to build 
back. Mental health and community impacts can be ongoing. The impacts of drought also cannot be 
examined without considering the impact of associated weather patterns including drought breaking 
rains, heat and dry thunderstorms.  
Key impacts identified through the regional engagement have been summarised by theme below.  
Social impacts 
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on the community and individuals: 
• Reduced mental health and wellbeing, having significant impacts on individuals and families resulting 
in suicide in extreme cases. High feelings of stress and loss of control. 
• Exhaustion and stress from an increased workload when farm workers may have been laid off and 
there is increased demand to feed and water stock , loss of income and the need to make big business 
decisions. 
• Reduced social connection – pastoralists are too busy and do not come into towns as often, less 
interaction with others, reduced volunteer base, less time spent with family. 
• Dust, causing and exacerbating health conditions such as asthma, increasing need for cleaning and 
reducing surface water quality. 
• High temperatures resulting in heat stress, loss of sleep, increased power bills and general discomfort. 
Miners and pastoralists may work at night to avoid the hotter temperatures.  
• Decline in condition of the natural environment (loss of trees and reduced cover, dead animals etc.) 
leading to reduced amenity and personal wellbeing. 
• Reduced regional population, especially young people employed on farms and in small businesses, and 
people tending not to come back after the drought. 
• Intergenerational impacts with children and young people affected by their parents’ stress, lack of 
money for education, environmental impacts and sometimes a reduced desire to stay in the region or 
take on the family businesses.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | How does drought impact the Outback SA region?  |  8 
• Poorly planned or managed support programs resulting in a sense of disconnection and feel that ‘city 
bureaucrats’ are not listening to what locals need.  
• Less water for personal use and gardens. 
Workshop participants were invited to share their personal experiences of drought. Several quotes that 
reveal the real toll of drought on individuals are provided below: 
“It was difficult to watch the community struggle with financial and social impacts of drought. I felt 
very helpless.” 
“It’s very hard to get up and face the same everyday.” 
“I worked with farmers that had gone broke and some took their own lives.” 
“As a primary producer the biggest impact is on your well-being and finances.  It takes years to 
recover both financially and mentally from drought.” 
“It impacted my mental health seeing our country in severe stress and as a young person how it 
impacted on my parents” 
“Terrible to watch the land deteriorate and see the animals and native wildlife be decimated.“ 
First Nations cultural impacts  
First Nations participants identified the following impacts of drought  
• Reduced condition of natural cultural heritage sites associated with surface water and groundwater 
dependent ecosystems. 
• Reduced ground cover leading to exposure of cultural sites following wind or rain, and other sites being 
impacted by dust or sediment. 
• Reduced ground cover leading to dust impacts and later erosion and channel deepening when it rains. 
• Pest animals taking away feed from native species and damage soil and vegetation. 
• Many weed species can survive lower rainfall and are often the first plants to recover when it rains 
• Reduction in numbers of culturally significant plants and animals, which impacts on ability to undertake 
cultural activities such as hunting and collection of bush tucker.  
Economic impacts  
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on the economy: 
• Reduced income for pastoralists, farmers and local business owners, which results in reduced spend in 
the local economy. Some employees are let go during drought, and it can be hard to find new 
employees after drought.  
• Changing market conditions negatively impacting pastoralists as fodder and freight prices increase 
and stock prices decrease. High stock prices following drought can inhibit recovery. Greater financial

Regional Engagement Summary Report | How does drought impact the Outback SA region?  |  9 
support for pastoralists in other states can result in more unfavourable market conditions for South 
Australians.  
• While tourism numbers don’t seem to be affected by drought, local communities have less capacity to 
manage the negative impacts of tourism such as overuse of water, vandalism, search and rescue etc. 
Tourism numbers increase when there is water in the landscape, particularly Lake Eyre and 
wildflowers. 
• Running out of water resulting in the need to cart in water, drill additional bores or install other water 
infrastructure at a very high cost. 
• Difficulties in paying boarding school fees or other ongoing costs.  
Agricultural impacts  
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on agriculture:  
• Lack of feed and water to support stock means pastoralists need to destock or move stock to agist in 
areas less affected by drought. 
• Stock often sold at a lower price, and bought back following drought at a higher price. 
• Lower capacity of pastoralists and farmers to plan for and develop their business as their time is taken 
up by an increased work load, particularly when staff have been laid-off. 
• Increases in costs including transportation of stock and purchase of water and fodder. 
• Reduced crop yields. 
• Increased grazing pressure from native species (eg kangaroos) that may graze in protected areas 
(National Parks etc) during normal conditions when there is water available but move out to pastoral 
areas when there is no water in parks. 
Environmental impacts 
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on the environment:  
• Loss of vegetation cover as a result of  grazing pressure andheat/water stress leading to dust storms. 
Native species are often replaced by weeds. Once thresholds are reached, vegetation may never 
recover without intervention. Associated loss of leaf litter habitat. 
• Loss of native wildlife (kangaroos, birds, emus, fish, frogs, snakes etc.) and introduced animals (cattle, 
sheep, goats, camels, horses, rabbits etc.). Native animals which would previously travel to find water 
are stopped by fencing. Hot weather exacerbated by climate change can be especially deadly.  
• Reduced surface water runoff and recharge of shallow groundwater, increased groundwater 
extraction, and increased salinity of groundwater.  
• Reduced soil health and increased wind erosion of =.  
• Loss of gardens and community green spaces.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | How does drought impact the Outback SA region?  |  10 
• Drought breaking rains resulting in soil erosion, flooding or removal of vegetation, and salt flush killing 
trees and other vegetation.  
• Increased biosecurity risks as stock and fodder are transported across the region.  
Infrastructure impacts  
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on infrastructure:  
• Drying of bores, rainwater tanks and dams requiring installation of additional water infrastructure (eg 
new bores) or carting in water.  
• Degradation of community infrastructure as populations and volunteer capacity decreases. For 
example, schools are closed, community halls are not maintained, funding for upgrades is not applied 
for etc. 
• Reduced road surface condition with reduced water and funds for grading and more trucks on the 
roads transporting stock.  
• Increase in power outages on hot days and during dry lightning storms resulting in no 
telecommunications and inability to pump water, run fridges and freezers and run air conditioners. 
• Kangaroos seeking water and food damaging irrigation infrastructure and eating gardens. 
• Lack of sufficient water supplies for fighting fires.  
• Drought breaking rains damaging roads, bores, solar panels, fences and tanks.  
Beneficial impacts  
Some participants identified that in some instances drought can have some beneficial impacts including: 
• Reduction in the number of feral animals such as goats, camels, horses and rabbits. 
• Reduction in the number of overabundant kangaroos and emus (considered by pastoralists in some 
areas to be a benefit due to the reduction in total grazing pressure). 
• Provision of grants and other funding for community projects and community infrastructure which can 
have a lasting benefit. 
• Encouragement of economic diversification. 
• Improved community resilience, connection and sense of community support when times are tough.  
• Increased water use efficiency. 
• Innovation in land management practises. 
• Attraction of tourists or film companies in some places known for their arid, barren landscapes such as 
the Breakaways near Coober Pedy. 
• Improvement in gypsum and salt mining conditions due to increased evaporation.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What makes individuals, communities, and regions resilient to drought?  |  11 
What makes individuals, communities, and regions 
resilient to drought? 
Community and stakeholders were invited to explore the characteristics which make individuals, 
communities and regions resilient to drought. Each of these scales of resilience are important to consider 
in a Regional Drought Resilience Plan. Commonly identified characteristics have been summarised in the 
following sections.  
Individuals  
Participants identified that characteristics that help individuals to be resilient to drought include:  
Social 
characteristics 
• Social connection and strong relationships with friends and family  
• Sharing your struggles with others, being willing to accept support and 
understanding that others are also doing it tough and that you are not alone 
• Good relationships with staff from support organisations including the Landscape 
Board, PIRSA, OCA, banks, counsellors etc.  
• A sense of purpose – employment, education, volunteering, family etc.  
• Experience from previous droughts, including passing this knowledge onto the next 
generation  
• Self sufficiency  
First Nations 
cultural 
characteristics 
• Being able to live and work on Country, access cultural heritage sites and share 
knowledge between generations 
• Landholders and communities having access to drought relief funding 
Economic 
characteristics 
• Good long-term business and financial planning and decision-making – ability to 
‘play the long game’ and use the profits from good years to get through the bad 
years 
• Diverse sources of household income 
• Access to and awareness of financial support available 
Environmental 
characteristics 
• Managing total grazing pressure and undertaking sustainable land management 
Agricultural 
characteristics 
All economic and environmental characteristics as well as: 
• Innovation and implementation of new techniques, tools and technology 
• Understanding your country, your business and the local climate including the cyclic 
occurrences of drought

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What makes individuals, communities, and regions resilient to drought?  |  12 
• Having land outside of drought affected areas to agist stock 
• Infrastructure that reduces workload eg telemetry for stock water monitoring, 
grates instead of gates etc. 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Access to good education, healthcare and digital connectivity 
• Reliable water infrastructure that maximises water capture and minimises water 
loss 
• High quality housing with large rainwater tanks or bores and good thermal 
insultation 
Communities  
Participants identified that characteristics that help communities to be resilient to drought include:  
Social 
characteristics 
• Strong, connected, caring communities that help each other 
• Strong community organisations and volunteer base who are willing and able to 
put in the work for the benefit of their community 
• Proximity to regional centres with health, education and support services 
First Nations 
cultural 
characteristics  
• Good relationships between First Nations peoples, wider communities, and 
government agencies 
• Local employment opportunities that enable First Nations employment 
Economic 
characteristics 
• Diversification of local economies into tourism, mining, workers accommodation, 
goats, renewable energy etc.  
• Access to community grants and other funding  
• Investment in projects that give good return to the community and employ local 
people 
• Local employment opportunities that support people to stay in the community 
Agricultural 
characteristics 
• Pastoralists and farmers who are aware of how to minimise their environmental 
impacts  
• Uptake of new and improved technology and practises 
Environmental 
characteristics  
• Low populations of pest/overabundant animals through proactive management 
before drought 
• Maintainable public green spaces which improve amenity, wellbeing and tourism 
attraction

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What makes individuals, communities, and regions resilient to drought?  |  13 
• Good baseline native vegetation cover 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Local services including shops, medical facilities (including mental health and 
preventative health), tradespeople etc.  
• Reliable access to water, power, energy, digital connectivity and food 
• Community spaces that enable people to come together  
Governance 
characteristics 
• Support from external agencies in ways that meet the unique needs of each 
community 
Regions  
Participants identified that characteristics that help regions to be resilient to drought include: 
Infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Road and roadside infrastructure to support movement of stock, local travel and 
tourism (including sealed roads, toilets, rubbish bins, parking bays, showers etc.) 
Economy 
characteristics 
• Strong agricultural commodity market conditions  
Governance 
characteristics 
• Timely and localised government declaration of drought which can unlock funding 
and support. 
• Good communication and provision of information about available community 
grants and programs  
• Strategic and proactive preparation for drought - investing in good times to 
increase resilience during bad times 
• Coordinated services 
• Permanency of support staff to provide a sense of continuity and allowing trusted 
relationships to be built

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  14 
What would help enhance drought resilience? 
Community and stakeholders were asked to identify opportunities to help Outback SA people, 
communities and regions to enhance their resilience to drought. Commonly raised opportunities have been 
summarised by theme below.  
Social and community opportunities  
Community-centred opportunities were the most commonly raised at engagements across the region. It 
was felt that events, services, training and infrastructure that support the whole community and promote 
connection, wellbeing and positivity were among the best ways to improve drought resilience.  
One participant from the Parachilna workshop shared that the “highlight of the hay drop was the 
opportunity to come into town and talk with others”. The opportunity to come together whatever the 
reason and socialise is highly valued by community during tough times and can provide benefits for 
townspeople as well as pastoralists.  
Community focused drought resilience opportunities identified by participants included: 
• Delivering or supporting free community events. This can include a mix of drought/mental health 
focused events and general events which promote positivity and community connection. Events across 
the year should be diverse with something to suit everyone. Examples include comedy, music, BBQs, 
sport events, training/counselling sessions, circus for kids, service fairs, Tasting Australia, quiz nights, 
kayaking, cricket and conversations, Christmas shows etc. It was emphasised that some communities 
prefer grants which allow them to run events their own way, while other communities prefer having 
events run for them to reduce burden on volunteers.  
• Continuing to provide free mentoring, counselling, financial advice, training, and support services such 
as PIRSA Family and Business (FaB) mentors, Centrelink representatives, Mental Health First Aid 
Course, Are you Bogged Mate etc. Promote continuity of quality staff where possible to enable the 
formation of trusted relationships.  
• Funding of infrastructure that benefits the whole community in the long term and is maintainable eg 
community halls, sporting facilities, irrigated green space etc. 
• RFDS continuing to provide their services, including mental health (for men and women) and 
allied/preventative health, and preferably with continuity of staff who get involved in the local 
community.   
• Training for volunteers on skills such as preparing grant applications, writing minutes, financial 
management, what resources are available, event management, digital literacy etc. Many participants 
identified that rather than general trainings, communities would benefit from tailored support that 
meets local needs and can help with answering individual questions. It was noted that upskilling 
community volunteers on a range of topics would help to combat overreliance on individual community 
members.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  15 
• Providing local jobs and education that allow local people to diversify their work and stay in the local 
community. 
• Promote country life to encourage people to move to remote communities.  
First Nations opportunities 
First Nations participants identified the following opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
• Engaging with First Nations peoples to understand what they need and what would help them.  
• Support for land management including pest plant and animal control, water and erosion management  
• Enhance the Outback community’s awareness of cultural heritage values and support programs that 
build generational knowledge of cultural land management. 
Governance and advocacy opportunities 
Participants identified the following governance and advocacy-based opportunities for enhancing drought 
resilience: 
• Delivering earlier and more locally nuanced official declarations of drought in South Australia was 
frequently identified across the region as critical to drought resilience for pastoralists. Participants 
identified that official drought declarations (which can unlock additional support) often come much too 
late in South Australia. Communities noted that New South Wales and Queensland properties have in 
the past received assistance earlier, while in the same or even better conditions than their South 
Australian counterparts. Participants emphasised the importance of ensuring drought declarations 
accurately reflect the conditions on the ground rather than being based on lines on a map.  
• Engaging with communities to understand what they need and want, and delivering this in partnership 
with the community. 
• Reducing red tape for community organisations and volunteers where possible. Consider providing 
funds to cover volunteer hours for community works, or providing greater OCA support for community 
organisations.   
• Investing when times are good, including more grants and support for resilience building actions. 
work in the regions, including more personal contact and relationships in the regions (not just in Port 
Augusta) and supporting continuity of staff where possible.  
• Ensuring more long-term funding, review and improvement processes to ensure governance agencies 
learn from past experiences. 
• Ensuring that money hits the ground in the regions/with community organisations, rather than being 
used up in government departments before it reaches local people. 
• Better coordinating programs and funding from different agencies in the regions.  
• Encouraging city-based volunteer groups to come into regional communities and help during drought 
times through for example running social events, assisting with weed management etc.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  16 
• Defining drought as a hazard in the State Emergency Management Plan. 
• Developing a clear vision for the Outback SA region and each outback town. 
• Partnering with mining companies to increase support for local communities in region. 
• Providing more emergency services.  
One participant from the Copley workshop said that “we need the systems put in place by Government 
so that WE don’t need to be so damn resilient”. This participant highlighted that the unique governance 
and infrastructure setting of the Outback makes it much more challenging for Outback SA residents to 
maintain high resilience as compared to other parts of SA and Australia. The lack of ‘council’ services, 
red tape associated with community organisations accessing many grants/support, lower energy, 
telecommunications and water security and ouitback road infrastructure are major barriers to drought 
resilience. Addressing these gaps and providing more services and infrastructure (or making it easier for 
Outback communities to do this for themselves) will reduce the burden on individuals to maintain a high 
level of individual resilience.   
Economic opportunities 
Participants identified the following economy-based opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
• Providing community members with more accessible, quick, easy, streamlined personal/business 
financial supports during drought such as long-term low interest business loans, freight subsidies, 
fodder subsidies, water infrastructure rebates, supports similar to Job Keeper etc. with minimal red 
tape. Town residents  may also need financial support, not just pastoralists, for example with cost of 
living (power and water costs).  
• Providing more accessible, quick, easy, streamlined community grant opportunities. Where possible, 
provide grants that allow allocating funds for project management. Improve communication and 
awareness of available grants. Support community organisations with grant application writing.  
• Continuing financial support after the drought breaks to help the region to recover and rebuild. 
• Supporting households to diversify their incomes prior to drought, especially into industries that are not 
reliant on water (eg historical tourism, dark sky tourism, station stays, fossil tourism, cultural tourism, 
government based jobs or other work from home jobs). 
• Mentoring/training to help individuals and businesses to understand their finances and businesses and 
what support is available.  
• Increasing promotion and signage of outback tourism (separate from Flinders Ranges)  
• Providing in-kind support such as hay drops, water truck donations etc. 
• Better advertising of local jobs (eg health, education, NRM) to local people to enable people to diversity 
and stay in the region.  
Infrastructure opportunities

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  17 
Participants identified the following infrastructure-based opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
• Improving road and roadside infrastructure for stock agistment, local travel and tourism. This may 
include sealing roads, better maintaining unsealed roads, and installing parking bays, toilets, showers 
and rubbish bins. 
• Improving water security, including in Andamooka (certainty of water-carting service from the Roxby 
Downs-Andamooka pipeline to individual properties), Innamincka (back up groundwater bore for town 
water supply), Gawler Ranges (plastic lining catchments and bore drilling) Yunta and Copley.  
• Funding upgraded or new community infrastructure that is maintainable, sustainable and provides a 
place for community connection and diverse uses (including community halls, sporting facilities, 
irrigated green space, community facilities with backup power generation etc.) 
• Increasing local production and storage of renewable energy or otherwise improve energy security and 
reduce power outages (which also cut out water pumps, fridges, air conditioners, telecommunications 
etc.). 
• Providing incentives for household solar generation and storage, energy and water efficient housing 
and rainwater tanks. 
• Building more infrastructure to support tourism in towns including public toilets, showers, water (can be 
pay for use), shaded outdoor tables and chairs, campground facilities etc. 
• Providing safe community spaces with backup power sources for community to go when the power 
goes out – with good thermal insulation, drinking water supply, air conditioning, fridges/freezers etc. 
Agricultural opportunities 
Participants identified the following agriculture-based opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
• Providing greater support for agistment or destocking to assist moving stock off the land and 
preventing overgrazing.  
• Support uptake of adaptive management practises to keep land in a good condition. 
• Training pastoralists on new technology, land management processes, financial management and 
property planning etc. to increase their sustainability and resilience. 
• Installing infrastructure that reduces workload eg telemetry to monitor water levels, stock grids to 
replace gates 
• Providing a one-stop-shop website for pastoralists seeking information during/after drought, with 
registered stockists or providers for eg hay/stock etc. 
• Delivering an individual farm assessment program which supports pastoralists to assess their drought 
preparedness and develop an improvement plan. 
• Promoting the sustainability of red meat (green/blue tick or similar certified marking) to provide 
financial benefit for pastoralists using sustainable practises and increase recognition of pastoralists.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  18 
• Providing awareness raising, training and support for uptake of carbon farming, particularly in pastoral 
areas.  
• Supporting long-term business/property/financial planning to help the benefit of good years allow 
farmers to get through bad years. 
• Researching and trialling new and improved grazing and cropping land management practices. 
Environmental opportunities 
Participants identified the following environment-based opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
• Managing total grazing pressure by controlling feral animals and over-abundant native species and 
stock access.  
• Supporting landowners more with pest/overabundant native animal control. 
• Undertaking landscape scale planning and management to support the condition and extent of native 
flora and fauna.  
• Improving long-term monitoring of groundwater, native flora and fauna including during drought to 
increase knowledge of the impacts of drought on keystone species. 
• Focusing conservation efforts during drought in areas which naturally have greater water flows.  
• Supporting uptake of carbon farming through awareness raising and training.  
Local opportunities 
In each location where engagement was undertaken, key opportunities for the district were identified by 
participants.  
Township  
Key opportunities for enhancing local drought resilience 
Yunta and 
district 
• Low interest loans for pastoralists and farmers during drought. 
• Support with goat control. 
• Early declaration of drought. 
• Support that is easy and quick to apply for. 
Andamooka 
and district 
• Enhancing water security. 
• Support with grant writing. 
William 
Creek and 
district 
• Community events. 
• Growing tourism.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  19 
Township  
Key opportunities for enhancing local drought resilience 
Marree and 
district 
• Supporting mental health through community events including ones run for them. 
• Better infrastructure in particular roads and roadside infrastructure. 
• Low interest long term loans. 
• Early and localised definitions of drought. 
Copley and 
district 
• Simple and quick community grant application processes, including grants that allow 
funding for project management time. 
• Better backup systems for power outages. 
• Training for community organisations to apply for and manage grants, events etc.  
• Genuine community engagement with all outback communities. 
Parachilna 
and district 
• Support with both time and money for community events. 
• Individualised training for communities to build their skills in their required skills eg 
grant applications, financial management, Centrelink applications etc. 
• Supporting people to stay in the region through better promotion of government jobs, 
local training opportunities, supporting kids through drought etc. 
Innamincka 
and district 
• Increased security of town water supply, for example a backup bore for emergency 
water supply. 
• Community events run for the community.  
• Greater support for landholder management of pest plants and animals. 
• Upgraded town tourism infrastructure including an outdoor table and chairs, 
upgraded campground facilities, upgraded septic system. 
Oodnadatta 
and district 
•  
• Support for community organisations 
• More community events and facilities for entire town. 
Marla and 
district 
• More SA Arid Lands Landscape Board events/support in the region including with 
pest control. 
• Support for pastoralists to implement technology such as telemetry. 
Coober 
Pedy and 
district 
• Addressing cost of living pressure to support people's resilience to drought, including 
support for housing insulation, power and water bills, energy efficient appliances etc.

Regional Engagement Summary Report | What would help enhance drought resilience?  |  20 
Township  
Key opportunities for enhancing local drought resilience 
• Community events for both townspeople and pastoralists.  
• Improving community facilities to be better equipped for hot weather. 
Penong and 
district 
• Continue to support community organisations to reduce workload on a small number 
of individuals, deliver benefits to the community and visitors, and maintain a sense of 
township vibrancy  
Gawler 
Ranges 
district  
• Advocacy for local wind farm to proceed. 
• Support with pest/overabundant native animal control (kangaroos, goats, emus). 
• Support for time involved in running community events. 
• Training programs/support for better land management practises, property 
management planning and carbon farming.

Regional Engagement Summary Report |  Regional characteristics  |  21 
Regional characteristics  
Through the engagement at each town throughout the region, it was clear that there are some strengths, 
weaknesses, challenges and opportunities that are consistent across Outback SA. However, it was also 
clear that each town has their own perspectives, priorities and needs. The vastness of the region means 
that there is significant regional variation.  
It is important that the Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan considers and works with the 
regional characteristics that are consistent across the region. It will also need to acknowledge and cater to 
regional differences where possible.  
Consistent characteristics 
Consistent characteristics that were identified across the Outback SA region included: 
• A strong sense of community, identity and family.  
• Recognition that living in the Outback means living with hot dry conditions and at times drought. 
• High reliance on volunteers to “run” towns, with few traditional government services provided.  
• Limited or unreliable  provision of infrastructure and services compared to all other parts of South 
Australia, including infrastructure such as roads, telecommunications, town water supply, town power 
supply, community facilities etc. and services including health and education..  Reducing numbers of 
volunteers, and volunteer burnout – ‘less and less people doing more and more’. 
• Ageing demographic and decreasing population (except in towns near regional centres).  
• High vulnerability to changing commodity prices. 
• Variability of rainfall – rainfall can be very localised, falling on only parts of a property  or not on its 
neighbour. 
Unique characteristics 
While the majority of impacts, resilience characteristics and opportunities to enhance resilience were 
reflected across the region, each location in which workshops were undertaken identified particular 
aspects that were unique to their district. It is acknowledged many of these may also apply to other 
districts or towns. 
Catering to local conditions is critical to effective drought resilience programs.  
Unique elements that emerged through the engagement  
Yunta and 
district 
• Water supply to the town is undrinkable (although currently being upgraded). 
• Limited tourism opportunities as Yunta is a ‘pass through’ town. Most tourism impacts 
are negative, including vandalism and stealing of water.

Regional Engagement Summary Report |  Regional characteristics  |  22 
Unique elements that emerged through the engagement  
• Close proximity to border – have often seen townships in NSW under similar drought 
conditions receive greater support and funding than them. 
• Currently high goat populations. 
• Medium population size. 
• Shallow aquifers on properties which have caused bores used for stock water to run 
dry in previous droughts.  
Andamooka 
and district 
• Potable town water supply through Roxby Downs – Andamooka pipeline, which is 
then carted to individual properties and into two town water tanks. 
• Close access to Roxby Downs services and infrastructure (downside of this has been 
the closure of local services such as a general stores and pubs). 
• Large town population (relative to other Outback SA towns). 
• Higher proportion of new residents than most other Outback areas. 
• Greater diversity of employment than many outback towns.  
William 
Creek and 
district 
• Reliable GAB bore water access. 
• Good town infrastructure (water, power, bituminised road, irrigated town trees, new 
RFDS facility with unique equipment such as dental equipment). 
• Strong tourism offering with large accommodation offering, aviation tourism, 
proximity to Lake Eyre, high amenity township. 
• Very small population base. 
Marree and 
district 
• Strong tourism offerings – close to Lake Eyre, Marree Man. 
• Medium population. 
• SA Water desalination plant currently being constructed to provide town water.  
Copley and 
district 
• Close access to services and facilities in Leigh Creek. 
• Desire to maintain unique persona as a separate town to Leigh Creek.  
• Medium population. 
• SA Water supplies treated groundwater to town. 
Parachilna 
and district 
• Small town and population. 
• Close to Flinders Ranges Council and associated services and facilities.

Regional Engagement Summary Report |  Regional characteristics  |  23 
Unique elements that emerged through the engagement  
• Popular tourism offerings (Prairie Hotel, Nilpena Ediacara National Park, station 
stays). 
•  
Innamincka 
and district 
• Causeway can cut access to township from Queensland when high flows in Coober 
Creek. 
• Coober Creek and associated planted greenery provides amenity and tourism 
opportunities.  
• Only fuel stop in vicinity so most tourists and trucks stop. 
• Very small population. 
• Town water supply from Creek when flowing and from town local aquifer at all other 
times.  
Oodnadatta 
and district 
• Medium population. 
• New SA Water desalination plant from GAB water.  
• Large Aboriginal population, governed by Dunjiba Community Council who provide a 
range of services and infrastructure. 
Marla and 
district 
• Small population. 
• Limited volunteer base.  
• New SA Water desalination plant.  
Coober 
Pedy and 
district 
• Very large population. 
• High levels of socio-economic disadvantage Opal mining supports industry and 
tourism.  
• Strong tourism operations, including access through public airport. 
• High cost of water and power, large proportion of poorly quality housing.  
Penong and 
district 
• Larger population. 
• Marginal cropping and sheep country 
• Relatively unimpacted by drought in recent years 
• Economic diversity, cash flow in good years and long-term business planning results 
in high baseline resilience to drought.

Regional Engagement Summary Report |  Regional characteristics  |  24 
Unique elements that emerged through the engagement  
• Range of water sources including rainwater tanks, shallow groundwater, and SA 
Water mains piped to 8km away from town (piped into football club and caravan 
park and carted to some other properties)  
• Proximity to Ceduna and associated services, facilities and employment. 
Gawler 
Ranges 
region 
• Very small, dispersed population. 
• More vegetation cover than the Far North, but less secure water, making lack of 
water a more influential driver for destocking. 
• Range of water sources including rainwater, dams, and shallow bores. 
• Proximity to Kimba and associated services and population. 
• Proximity to National Park results in high numbers of pest/overabundant native 
animals.