Southern Wheatbelt Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan

Wheatbelt Development Commission

This document has been prepared using best available information and expert analyses to provide an evidence 
base for the Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan. We have developed the Plan to the best of 
our ability and within the limits of our knowledge and resources. 
Elements of this inaugural Regional Drought Resilience Plan may require review as updated information and 
research becomes available. 
The interventions identified in this Plan are conceptual and not endorsed by the State. The implementation of 
these resilience building interventions and the proposed actions is subject to further development, feasibility 
studies and endorsement with consortia stakeholders and lead delivery agencies.
The Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development and the State 
of Western Australia accept no liability whatsoever by reason of negligence or otherwise arising from the use or 
release of this information or any part of it. 
Version: 1.0 
An electronic copy of this plan may be obtained at www.wheatbelt.wa.gov.au.
Front cover photo: PUBLIC Silo Trail, Newdegate (2018) by Brenton See. Photography by Bewley Shaylor, courtesy of FORM (6)-2
The Wheatbelt Development Commission thanks their consortia partners in their guidance and support in the 
development of the Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan.

Table of contents
Acknowledgement of Country	
4
1. Foreword	
6
2. Executive Summary	
7
3. Introduction	
8
4. Vision, Goals and Outcomes	
12
4.1 Developing Our Vision	
13
4.2 Goals and Outcomes	
14
4.3 Definitions	
16
5. Stakeholder Engagement and 
Partnerships	
18
6. The Evidence Base	
22
6.1 Range and Quality of Data	
23
6.2 Plan Alignment	
25
7. The Southern Wheatbelt Region - 
System Description	
26
Geography and population 	
27
Landscapes and natural resources	
29
Regional Strategic Priorities	
29
8. An Assessment of the Southern 
Wheatbelt’s Resilience	
30
8.1 Drought Indicators	
31
8.2 Impacts of drought on the 
Southern Wheatbelt 	
35
8.3 Building on Existing Resilience	
39
9. Opportunities Moving Forward	
42
10. The Plan	
46
10.1 Resilient Water	
47
10.2 Resilient Communities	
50
10.3 Resilient Agriculture Systems	
53
10.4 Resilient Landscapes	
56
10.5 Resilient Regional Economy	
58
11. Investment framework and 
implementation of the Plan	
60
12. Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning	
60
13. Project Contact	
67
14. Appendix 1: Inland Great Southern 
Policy, Strategy and Plan Alignment	 68
15. Appendix 2: Transformative 
Option review	
70
16. Appendix 3: Supporting 
Technical Reports	
71

We respectfully acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the lands that we 
live and work on:
The family and clan groups of the Ballardong, Goreng, Gubrun, Kalamaia, 
Njaki-Njaki, Whadjuk, Wilman, Wudjari, Yued and Yamaji People, their Elders 
past, present and emerging.
We acknowledge their living culture and their important role in the 
sustainable economic development and prosperity of the Wheatbelt region.
Acknowledgement of 
Country
Sandalwood seed harvesting
4          Great Southern Development Commission

Welcome to the Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan. This plan is jointly funded through the 
of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD). 
The Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a locally led project that champions drought 
resilience and preparedness in the region. The Shires of Dumbleyung, Kondinin, Kulin, Lake Grace and Wagin 
have supported the development of the Plan.
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the 330 people representing 150 different organisations and businesses in the region 
who contributed to the development of this plan through participation in interviews, meetings and workshops. 
The in-kind contribution of the Climate Science and Geographic Information Systems teams at DPIRD, and the 
work of the consultants who undertook literature reviews and data syntheses on our behalf were integral in the 
development of this document.
We thank the members of the Southern Wheatbelt Program Advisory Group, along with the Steering Committee 
and Technical Working Group that contributed to the review and refinement of elements of this plan. We also 
acknowledge the partner agencies, organisations and stakeholders who have supported and contributed to this 
plan including: 
•	
The Shires of Dumbleyung, Kondinin, Kulin, Lake Grace and Wagin 
•	
The Wheatbelt, Mid-West and Great Southern Development Commissions
•	
	South-West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	
	Wheatbelt NRM 
•	
	Grower Group Alliance
•	
	Local community groups and business networks
•	
Indigenous groups
•	
Utility providers and research organisations
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              5

1. Foreword
The Wheatbelt region of Western Australia is known 
for its contribution to agriculture, the region’s key 
economic driver.  The $3 billion industry supports 
communities across a 150,000 square kilometre 
expanse, from the West Australian west coast north 
of Perth to edge of the Goldfields in the east.
The ongoing profitability and sustainability of 
agriculture is key to the economic prosperity of the 
Wheatbelt. Since the 1970s, there has been a 10-20% 
decline in rainfall across the South West land division 
of WA, challenging the agricultural industry and the 
communities it supports. With further declines in 
rainfall and increases in temperatures predicted, the 
incidence of climate related events likely to increase. 
This will expose the Wheatbelt to more frequent 
drought, fire and extreme weather events such as 
frost and heat waves.
We know that the impact of these events stretches 
beyond the agricultural industry and can bring 
uncertainty and strain to local communities and the 
broader economy.  
It is for this reason that the Wheatbelt Development 
Commission has partnered with the experts and the 
Southern Wheatbelt consortia of local governments 
to better understand climate variability and its 
impacts; and understand how those impacts can be 
mitigated in this part of the world. 
The Southern Wheatbelt Drought Resilience Plan is 
one of three Pilot Plans for WA, and has emerged 
from extensive stakeholder engagement and 
technical analysis.  
The Plan will assist in presenting a case to investors 
in interventions that are more likely to prepare the 
Southern Wheatbelt region for future climate related 
events. It will also present future facing opportunities 
to facilitate the realisation of the benefits that a 
decarbonised world presents. 
Climate sensitive water infrastructure, resilient 
agricultural systems and economic diversification are 
identified as priorities for the Southern Wheatbelt 
region. 
With strong alignment to local, State and Federal 
climate and water related planning and policy, the 
Plan strongly complements the work of the South 
West WA Drought Resilience Innovation and Adoption 
Hub. 
I’d like to acknowledge and thank everyone who 
took part in the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning process. This input, paired with a strong 
evidence base, will be invaluable when considering 
new options for better managing dry seasons and 
reduced growing season rainfall in the Southern 
Wheatbelt for years to come.  
Proactive planning and forward thinking are vital for 
our region to keep ahead of the climate challenge. 
Susan Hall
A/Chief Executive Officer
Wheatbelt Development Commission 
6          Wheatbelt Development Commission

2. Executive Summary
The Southern Wheatbelt region is one of three 
regions developing Regional Drought Resilience 
Plans (RDRPs) in Western Australia. The Wheatbelt 
Development Commission (WDC) partnered with 
the Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development (DPIRD) to support the delivery of the 
plan across the area encompassing the Shires of 
Dumbleyung, Wagin, Lake Grace, Kulin and Kondinin.  
Stakeholder consultation facilitated the contribution 
of more than 330 individuals, representing 150 
organisations, to the RDRP and Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment (DVA). The DVA informs and should be 
read in conjunction with the RDRP. 
The Southern Wheatbelt region’s agricultural 
sector has a history of active engagement in 
climate adaptation and drought preparedness. It 
is recognised that more can be done to build on 
existing drought resilience. 
The Southern Wheatbelt RDRP has five key themes, 
with a range of interventions and suggested actions 
identified. 
These key themes include:
Resilient Water
Resilient Communities 
Resilient Agriculture 
Resilient Landscapes 
 Resilient Regional Economies 
Our proposed interventions align strongly with 
the Future Drought Fund’s strategic priorities and 
objectives.  
Notably, Southern Wheatbelt stakeholders identified 
improving water system resilience and reliability 
as the number one priority to build drought 
resilience in the region. There was also a desire 
to better articulate agricultural systems research 
and development needs and build strengthened 
connections within and across the region.
The themes and interventions within this Plan 
provide exposure to a broad range of investment 
opportunities and have an evidence base to support 
engagement with stakeholders on implementation.
The RDRP is intended to be a living document, 
guiding State, Federal, Local Government, 
community, and industry action on drought 
resilience.  Implementation of the RDRP is subject 
to further collaboration with project partners and 
local government stakeholders. This will also include 
identification of high impact and high feasibility 
interventions that can be further developed into 
investable projects.  
Lake Dumbleyng Sunset
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              7

Australia is a country with a history of drought. In the Southern Wheatbelt 
Region, there has been a recurring theme of drier growing seasons over the 
past 30 years, adversely affecting the agricultural sector and agriculturally 
dependent rural and regional communities. These impacts will become 
more frequent and severe with climate change. Proactive regional drought 
resilience planning is imperative to developing locally applicable solutions 
and responses. 
3. Introduction
 Image courtesy of Wheatbelt NRM
8          Wheatbelt Development Commission

provides secure, continuous funding for drought 
resilience initiatives, including development of RDRPs 
across States and Territories. These RDRPs focus on 
innovative ways to build regional drought resilience 
across the agricultural sector and supporting 
industries, through a triple bottom line, collaborative 
and evidence-based approach.  
In the inaugural year of the program in WA, RDRPs 
have been completed for three regional consortia 
areas, identified due to their reliance on agriculture, 
and their experiences of recent exposure to 
prolonged dry conditions (Figure 1). 
The consortia include: 
•	
Southern Wheatbelt - Wheatbelt Development 
Commission and five LGAs (Dumbleyung, Kulin, 
Kondinin, Lake Grace and Wagin) 
•	
Inland Great Southern - Great Southern 
Development Commission and eight LGAs 
(Jerramungup, Kent, Gnowangerup, Katanning, 
Kojonup, Cranbrook, Woodanilling and 
Broomehill Tambellup)
•	
Northern Agricultural - Mid-West Development 
Commission, Northern Agricultural Catchments 
Council and three LGAs (Greater-Geraldton, 
Northampton and Chapman Valley) 
Figure 1: Pilot Consortia Areas of WA for Regional Drought Resilience Planning
Gascoyne
LAKE GRACE
WAGIN
JERRAMUNGUP
KONDININ
KATANNING
Regional Development Commission boundary
Participating Shire
Partner Development Commission
GOLDFIELDS-
ESPERANCE
WHEATBELT
GREAT
SOUTHERN
SOUTH WEST
PEEL
MID WEST
KALGOORLIE
MEEKATHARRA
GERALDTON
ALBANY
PERTH
BUNBURY
ESPERANCE
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
REGIONAL DROUGHT
RESILIENCE PLANNING
NORTHAMPTON
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              9

To inform the planning process for the Inland Great Southern DRP, input was sought from a range of 
stakeholders. The following figure (Figure 2, page 12) presents an overview of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Program, with a description of each of the four stages undertaken as part of our approach. 
Regional Drought Resilience Program
The Plans were developed in a four stage process, underpinned by strong governance structure. The program 
Wheatbelt, Great Southern and Mid West Development Commissions and the Northern Agricultural Catchment 
Council, and supported the development of Regional Drought Resilience Plans (RDRP) for three sub-regions 
across Western Australia.
 A DROUGHT RESILIENT REGION
STAGE 1 - GOVERNANCE
The RDRP has strong alignment to the Strategic Plans of the three Regional Development Commissions, 
and the participating Local Governments. The Plans will be developed in partnership with DPIRD, Local 
Governments, Regional Development Commissions, community and industry. The program will be overseen 
by a Steering Committee, Project Advisory Groups (PAG) and technical experts.
Steering Committee
Project Team
Project Advisory Group
Technical Advisory Group
STAGE 2 - DROUGHT VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT
The development of the drought vulnerability assessment is a vital informing piece of work for the Plans. 
This will ensure a science-based approach, incorporation economic, social and environmental resilience factors.
Demographic 
analysis and 
literature review
Climate risk and 
spatial analysis
Economic 
impacts analysis
Environmental 
impacts analysis
Social impacts 
analysis
Indicators of 
drought
STAGE 3 - DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN DEVELOPMENT
Engagement of the community by the Project Teams to identify projects. This will be completed with the 
support of contracted Project Officers and Regional NRM Organisations. The Plan will be reviewed by the 
Project Advisory Group.
First Nations 
projects
Agriculture and 
related supply chain 
projects
Local government 
service deliver 
projects
Transformational 
projects
Business and 
community sector 
projects
STAGE 4 - INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT
A framework of investment ready Drought Resilience Actions will be developed, allowing targeting of
 public and private investment
Includes potentially 
shovel-ready business 
cases
RDRP funding per region 
to implement plan* 
PLANNING WITH COMMUNITY AND PAG
VALIDATION WITH PAG
CO-DESIGNED, COLLABORATIVE, 
AND REGIONALLY SPECIFIC
*subject to negotiation with 
the Federal government 
Figure 2: Regional Drought Resilience Program Overview
10          Wheatbelt Development Commission

To build structural resilience to 
drought that supports sustainable 
and thriving communities.
“
“
Southern Wheatbelt 
Drought Resilient Vision
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              11

4. Vision, Goals and Outcomes
Wave Rock, Image courtesy of Phil Davison
12          Wheatbelt Development Commission

4.1 Developing Our Vision
The purpose of the Southern Wheatbelt RDRP is to identify actions to prepare for future droughts and a drying 
climate, with a sharp focus on the agricultural sector and allied industries, including economic interventions that 
sustain local economies and communities. By identifying a pipeline of investable drought resilience projects, this 
plan will inform future investments and assist in securing future funding.  
Our drought resilience vision for the Southern Wheatbelt is based on a grass roots assessment of what can 
realistically be achieved at a community, government and industry level to ensure the region is prepared and 
capable of withstanding more frequent and severe droughts in the future. 
By creating a shared vision and agreed goals and outcomes, we have set a common direction and aspirational 
view of our region’s future from a drought resilience perspective. 
Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc (WNRM) has played a key role in providing input into this plan and, 
in their consultation report1, they articulated the region’s long-term goal for drought resilience as follows:
This vision has emerged from widespread stakeholder input. There is an aspiration in the community to continue 
to build capacity to withstand the challenges of drought. It is recognised this requires an integrated approach, 
and requires a shared responsibility across local communities, State and Federal government and industry.
The vision, priorities and outcomes of the Future Drought Found have provided the background and context for 
the development of this drought resilience vision for the Southern Wheatbelt.  
1	 Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning Grass Roots Community Consultation, Southern 
Wheatbelt Pilot Area.
“The Southern Wheatbelt 
will build a structural 
resilience to 
drought that supports a 
sustainable and thriving 
commuity.”
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              13

4.2 Goals and Outcomes
Our stakeholder engagement process revealed five key themes, each with a long-term desired outcome. These 
form the foundation of our overall vison for drought resilience in our communities and are presented in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Southern Wheatbelt’s Proposed Outcomes for a Vision of a Drought Resilient Region
RESILIENT 
WATER
Outcome: A water 
system that can 
sustain industry, 
agriculture and the 
community for two 
consecutive low 
rainfall years
What a 
drought 
resilient 
region
looks like
RESILIENT COMMUNITY 
Outcome: Communities that are 
resourceful, adaptable and 
supported to mentally and physically 
bounce back from drought
RESILIENT
LANDSCAPES
Outcome: Healthy landscapes 
with natural resources able 
to sustain industry and 
environmental services
RESILIENT
REGIONAL ECONOMY 
Outcome: A diverse, forward 
looking, adaptable business     
sector, not wholly 
     dependant on seasonal     
conditions
RESILIENT 
AGRICULTURE 
SYSTEMS
Outcome: An 
agriculture sector 
that is highly 
engaged in 
innovating farming 
systems to be 
resilient to drought
THEME
THEME
THEME
THEME
THEME
14          Wheatbelt Development Commission

We have provided specific priorities and actions associated with each of these themes and outcomes in greater 
detail in Section 10 of this plan. The final Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Stakeholder Engagement 
Report outlines five to ten year drought resilience outcomes2. The interventions detailed in this plan will guide 
investment to build drought resilience, with actions implemented in partnership between communities, regional 
organisations, local government and industry. 
From a government and funding perspective, the following figure illustrates how our five drought resilience 
themes align with the outcomes of the Drought Resilience Funding Plan.
Figure 4: Southern Wheatbelt’s Proposed Outcomes for a Vision of a Drought Resilient Region
2	 Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning Grass Roots Community Consultation, Southern 
Wheatbelt Pilot Area.
THEME 1
RESILIENT 
WATER
THEME 2
RESILIENT 
COMMUNITY
THEME 3
RESILIENT 
AGRICULTURE
THEME 4
RESILIENT 
LANDSCAPES
THEME 5
RESILIENT REGIONAL 
ECONOMY
FDF OBJECTIVE
Grow the self-
reliance and 
performance of the 
agriculture sector
FDF OBJECTIVE
Strengthen the 
wellbeing and social 
capital of rural, 
regional and remote 
communities 
FDF OBJECTIVE
Grow the self-
reliance and 
performance 
(productivity and 
profitability) or the 
agriculture sector
FDF OBJECTIVE
Improve the natural 
capital of agricultural 
landscapes 
for better 
environmental 
outcomes
FDF OBJECTIVE
Grow the self-
reliance and 
performance 
(productivity and 
profitability) or the 
agriculture sector
Kulin slide - Wheatbelt Development Commission
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              15

4.3 Definitions
The need for a regionally appropriate definition of drought was raised several times during stakeholder 
engagement for the RDRP.  Community groups defined drought as ‘consecutive dry seasons where there is 
no rainfall over two or more seasons.’ Indicators that they are in a drought were the lack of opening rains to 
commence their seeding operations and / or little winter rainfall to fill dams or finish the crop off3.  The Technical 
Working Group (TWG) defined drought for the RDRP project as follows:
Assessment of meteorological definitions of drought indicated that a definition based on growing season 
rainfall (between April to October) is more appropriate for the Southern Wheatbelt region than a definition 
based on total annual rainfall. Growing season rainfall better represents agricultural drought in the region, 
where dryland cropping in autumn and winter is the primary land use4.  A more in-depth analysis of terms and 
definitions can be found in the Southern Wheatbelt Drought Vulnerability Assessment in Sections 1 and 4.
A range of terms have been used throughout this document. They are defined below. 
Exposure: the extent to which a given system, community or region will be subjected to a particular hazard. For 
the RDRP, exposure is measured in terms of the extent to which a focus region will be exposed to drought and 
drought-related climate change processes such as increasing atmospheric temperatures and changes in rainfall 
patterns and soil moisture.  
Sensitivity: the extent to which a given system, community or region will be affected by a particular hazard. For 
the RDRP, sensitivity is fundamentally about the ways in which regions are impacted by drought. It is measured 
in terms of the effect of drought on crop and animal production and the influence of regional characteristics 
such as soil types and farming systems on the effect that a drought has in the region. 
Adaptive Capacity: the extent to which a system can exploit opportunities and resist or adjust to change. For 
the RDRP, adaptive capacity is measured in terms of historical response to droughts in the regions or estimated 
according to a set of vulnerability proxies such as income, education, community participation rates and 
drought resilience natural features (ground cover, topography). 
Resilience: the capacity of a rural community and landscape as social-ecological system to absorb disturbance, 
reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks to continue to deliver values. Planning for resilience is 
about building:
•	
Absorptive capacity for maintaining the system;
•	
Adaptive capacity for modifying the systems when needed;
•	
Transformative capacity for systemic change when maintaining and modifying existing system are 
untenable; and
•	
Developing new configuration of networks and institutions to implement these capacities.
3	 Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning Grass Roots Community Consultation, Southern 
Wheatbelt Pilot Area.
4 Mastrantonis, Stanley. (2022). Defining Drought in Western Australia. Centre for Crop and Disease Management, School of Molecular and Life 
Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA.
“The term drought refers to a prolonged period of abnormally 
dry conditions that impact negatively on water availability and 
agricultural production in a region and, consequently, impacts 
negatively on the economy and environment of the region and the 
health and well-being of its residents.”
16          Wheatbelt Development Commission

ThreeFarmers oats - Image courtesy of Wheatbelt Development Commission
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              17

Pingrup silos - Shire of Kent
As part of a deliberative regional stakeholder 
engagement process, project partners worked 
collaboratively to:
•	
Demonstrate the WA Government’s commitment 
to supporting farm businesses and communities 
become more prepared for, and resilient to, the 
impacts of drought;
•	
Identify the appropriate targeted audiences 
in each region, share program benefits and 
promote the importance of becoming drought-
resilient and drought-prepared;
•	
	Engage local stakeholders in each region, 
undertaking communication activities that 
promoted the importance of regional-scale 
planning, building commitment to the process 
and strengthening partnerships between 
relevant stakeholders; and
•	
	Maximise participation and engagement in 
regional planning processes.
Strong partnerships were key in the successful 
delivery of the program. Figure 5 outlines the 
governance framework supported the achievement of 
our engagement goals. 
5. Stakeholder Engagement and 
Partnerships
18          Wheatbelt Development Commission

STEERING COMMITTEE
(DPIRD, 3 x RDCs, SW WA 
Hub, LGA Rep for each RDC)
PROGRAM: Future Drought Fund
TECHNICAL WORKING 
GROUP
(DPIRD, DWER, CSIRO, Water 
Corporation, GIS expert, 
other experts as required, 
RDC representatives)
Legend:
Reporting	
       Flow of funds	            Ongoing working relationaship
EXECUTING ENTITY: Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development
MID WEST 
DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION
Local Project 
Advisory Group and 
Implementation 
Consortium
GREAT SOUTHERN 
DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION
Local Project 
Advisory Group and 
Implementation 
Consortium
WHEATBELT 
DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION
Local Project 
Advisory Group and 
Implementation 
Consortium
Figure 5: Governance Framework for the WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program
To ensure our plan was well informed by local views, 
values, interests, knowledge and experience, we 
engaged a diverse range of stakeholders in a fair and 
non-discriminatory way by creating a collaborative 
environment where everyone was encouraged to have 
a voice and contribute their views, without judgement.  
Stakeholders were targeted with guidance from 
the Southern Wheatbelt Project Advisory Group, 
informed by the FDF’s three strategic priorities 
of environmental, economic and social resilience. 
Engagement activities occurred between October 
2021 and June 2022, involving more than 330 
individuals representing 150 organisations. 
In addition to the Steering Committee, Project 
Advisory Group and Technical Working Group, 
stakeholders engaged included:
•	
	Agricultural and natural resource management 
groups
•	
	Agricultural and non-agricultural businesses
•	
	Elders of the Ballardong Noongar community 
and Noongar Land Enterprise Group
•	
	Community organisations, leaders, and local 
champions
•	
	Research organisations
•	
	Tertiary organisations
•	
	CSIRO
5 Middleton, S. 2022. AgDots. Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program Global Literature Review – Key Drivers Report. Prepared for 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development. 
•	
	Agricultural industry representatives
•	
	State Government agencies and government 
trading enterprises
•	
	Financial experts, organisations and institutions
•	
	Farm and agricultural advisers, consultants, 
agronomists, and stock and station agents. 
Engagement sessions focused on reviewing 
emerging technical analyses, sharing the results of 
earlier engagement efforts, and identifying drought 
resilience project ideas for inclusion in the Southern 
Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan.  A range 
of methods were used including in-person interviews, 
meetings, surveys (online and in person), phone 
interviews, online engagement and workshops.  
The Southern Wheatbelt Project Advisory Group 
(PAG), consisting of Local Government Executive 
and Elected Members from across the participating 
Shires, assisted in targeting stakeholder engagement 
and guided the RDRP focus areas.  
In addition to this consultation work, a global review 
of drought innovation5 was commissioned to identify 
global resilience projects and assess their potential 
application to regional WA.  Areas of research were 
developed and workshopped with regional areas to 
identify key priorities. These are outlined in more 
detail in “Section 10. The Plan” of this document. 
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              19

Strong stakeholder engagement generated buy-in from the community and stimulated interest in the project, 
building and strengthening relationships across and within the region that will outlive the RDRP program. As 
part of our engagement, interventions were identified within each of our five emerging themes.  
Outlined in Table 1, these interventions are grouped under their associated theme, and classified according to 
their identified pathway – maintain, modify, or transform. These pathways identify the type of change needed 
in the region to achieve our desired outcomes. This allows for decision making around which set of intervention 
options to start with, given available resources.  
Further work is being undertaken to further prioritise these interventions for development into funding ready 
projects.
MAINTAIN 
MODIFY
TRANSFORM
Resilient Water
Southern Wheatbelt 
small water 
infrastructure projects
Future looking and coordinated total water 
management planning.
Better water data to support planning and 
better regional development outcomes
Incentivise the uptake of on farm and 
household water supply improvement
Alternative non potable 
water source investigation 
and development to 
“climate proof” water 
supplies in the region
Resilient 
Communities
Maintain spaces 
and places to build 
connection
Small town-big events 
program
Reduced red tape to 
hold impromptu events
Development of local leadership capacity
Build cultural connections to integrate 
traditional owner knowledge
Increasing community capacity to understand, 
plan and manage for drought
Community building activities to engage all 
ages
Refine the Drought 
Vulnerability Assessment 
model to better incorporate 
social indicators and 
implement longitudinal 
monitoring in vulnerable 
cohorts
Resilient 
Agriculture 
Systems
Farm Business Resilience 
and Small Business 
climate resilience 
planning workshops in 
the region
Building drought, climate, and carbon literacy 
to support risk management planning
Articulating research and development needs 
for the region
Build a better understanding of business and 
climate risk
WA Drought Indicators 
Platform and longitudinal 
monitoring program
Identify transformative 
agricultural land uses that 
could operate in areas of 
high risk to drought
Resilient Landscapes
Monitor impact of 
drought on natural 
resources
Community activities 
that bring people 
together and support 
environmental and 
economic outcomes 
such as Red Card for the 
Red Fox
Explore diversification 
options to increase value 
of marginal land at risk 
of drought
Natural resource condition report card and 
natural capital accounting for the regions
Best bet land and infrastructure design 
uses to support improved natural resource 
functioning 
Building regional capacity to 
manage natural resources
Attract projects that 
support wide scale 
landscape benefits such 
as wide scale woody 
vegetation planting for 
biofuel production
Strategic region wide 
revegetation program 
in vulnerable and less 
productive areas
Resilient Regional 
Economy
Monitor impact 
of drought on 
infrastructure
Addressing constraining enabling 
infrastructure to support industry growth and 
regional resilience to climate change
Regional collaboration to support tourism 
product development
Quantify and qualify the impact of SMEs and 
business and industry diversity on climate/
drought resilience
Supporting business 
development through grass 
roots business incubation
Encouragement and 
maximisation of community 
and economic benefit 
of emerging industry 
investment in the region
Table 1: Southern Wheatbelt Drought Resilience Themes, Interventions and Pathways
20          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Lake Baladjie
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              21

This RDRP provides a high-level summary of the findings from our Drought 
Vulnerability Assessment (DVA). The DVA provides the evidence base to 
support the identification of actions to mitigate drought impacts in the 
Southern Wheatbelt region. The development of the DVA was a formative 
step in providing the foundation for the development of the Southern 
Wheatbelt RDRP and supports the identification of actions to mitigate 
impacts of droughts and drying seasons in the region. The development 
of the DVA was a formative step in providing the foundation for the 
development of our Plan.
6. The Evidence Base
22          Wheatbelt Development Commission

6.1 Range and Quality of Data
Effective early engagement and relationship 
management throughout the project allowed for a 
diverse range of region-specific knowledge and skills 
to be harnessed, resulting in a collectively owned 
region-specific plan for the Southern Wheatbelt. 
As the foundational evidence base, the DVA is 
comprised of a literature review, socio-economic 
analysis, spatial prioritisation, risk assessment, and 
additional input and analysis from technical experts, 
research professionals and industry leaders. Extensive 
stakeholder and community engagement allowed 
for the harnessing of perspectives and insights 
from people’s lived experience and provided the 
opportunity to better understand how the regions 
have been affected by drought in the past, and 
what has already been done to mitigate the impacts 
of future droughts. This in-depth evidence base 
supports:
•	
An improved understanding of the impacts of 
drought in the region; 
•	
	Synthesis of program and policy initiatives 
related to drought at a local, regional, State and 
Federal level;
•	
Investigation of alternative definitions of 
drought, based on growing season rainfall, 
better-suited to the broadacre cropping areas in 
the Southern Wheatbelt region;
•	
In depth analyses of the economic, 
environmental, social and water impacts of 
drought, including the impacts of drought on 
Aboriginal communities;
•	
	Development of a multi-criteria mapping 
methodology that synthesises many datasets 
into a single decision-support tool highlighting 
priority areas for investment in resilience 
building activities; 
•	
An exploration of how readily measurable 
biophysical and socio-economic factors, often 
publicly available data, might serve as indicators 
of drought and used to understand and / or 
predict the impacts of drought; and 
•	
A drought vulnerability index using the data 
collected to create the drought risk priority 
areas map. 
The following figure outlines the key information 
sources used to develop the DVA in WA, with the 
broad range of information sources that contribute to 
the final Drought Resilience Assessment. 
Figure 6: Overview of the Drought Vulnerability Assessment Process
NDVI at the end of 
the growing season 
(20yr average, 
lowest  10%)
Average household 
income
Farm profit
Percentage 
employment in 
agriculture
Average farm size
DROUGHT
 IMPACT
Change in growing 
season rainfall 
(historical)
ADAPTIVE 
CAPACITY
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY
Change in maturing 
season temperature 
(historical)
Change in growing 
season rainfall 
(projected)
Change in maturing 
season temperature 
(projected)
Rainfall intensity 
events > 10mm
Change in drought 
frequency
Rainfall intensity 
events > 25mm
Distance from the 
coast
NATURAL CAPITAL
•	 Soil capability
•	 Plant available soil 
moisture
•	 Native vegetation 
extent
•	 Trend in NDVI
•	 Surface salinity
•	 Important water 
resources
•	 Groundwater resources
•	 Groundwater quality
•	 Proclaimed water 
protection areas
Water quality
High quality 
agriculture land
Livestock 
production 
(numbers; sheep, 
cattle)
Crop population (t/
ha; wheat, canola, 
barley)
Average potential 
wheat yield
Change in root zone 
soil moisture
Change in timing of 
the autumn break
Change in potential 
yield
FINANCIAL CAPITAL
SOCIAL CAPITAL
DROUGHT VULNERABILITY 
AND RESISTANCE
Ability to absorb, respond to and 
recover from drought
HUMAN CAPITAL
•	 Population > 65yrs
•	 Percentage 
unemployment
PHYSICAL CAPITAL
•	 Road infrastructure
•	 Strategic community 
water supplies
•	 Scheme water 
coverage
Presence of bores 
and dams
Farm diversity
remoteness index
Population trends
Areas declared 
water deficient
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              23

To strengthen the evidence base, the following 
technical reports were commissioned to gain 
regionally specific insights into drought resilience. 
These insights informed the DVA and were drawn 
from:
•	
Socio-economic and literature review (Anna 
Dixon Consulting)
•	
Drought Indices (CSIRO): Repeated the recent 
CSIRO NSW drought indicators exercise by 
deploying a Random Forest Analysis to Nous 
data relevant to the three focus regions.
•	
Defining Drought in WA (Curtin University): 
Assessment of the suitability of the current BoM 
definition of drought in decile 1 over two or more 
consecutive years and investigation of other 
drought definitions or indices appropriate for 
the regions. 
•	
Drought Risk Assessment (DPIRD): Analysis of 
historical and future drought risk scenarios for 
each region. 
•	
Economic and Environmental Impacts of 
Drought (LA One Economics and Consulting): 
Review of historical and potential future 
economic and environmental impacts of 
drought on farming businesses, communities, 
agribusiness and supply chain sectors in the 
region. 
•	
Social Impacts of Drought (UWA): Identification 
of primary social impacts of drought in the 
region and assessment of the effectiveness of 
actions taken in the past.
•	
Transformative Review (AgDots): Research 
was desktop rapid evaluation of key investment 
areas that could build resilience. Focus for the 
research was local, regional, state and global 
with some occurring via interviews and online.
•	
	Regional Water Issues and Policy Analysis 
Wheatbelt and Great Southern (Aurora): An 
investigation into issues and policies relating to 
provision of non-potable water during drought 
for agriculture, community and local government 
authority use.
•	
Water Supply and Demand Assessment 
(Murdoch University): A report summarising 
a high-level water balance for the Wheatbelt 
and Great Southern Consortia Shires. This 
report demonstrates state of water supply and 
demand, identifying gaps and modelling the risk 
to water supplies under drought and climate 
change scenarios.
•	
Valuing Noongar People and Practices in 
Drought Resilience (Noongar Landcare 
Enterprises): A review of the impacts of drought 
on First Nations land management practices, 
with a focus on Noongar country; and the 
impacts of drought on the Noongar region. 
Capturing Noongar knowledge and practices for 
integration into Drought Resilience Strategies.
•	
WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
Grass Roots Community Consultation, 
Southern Wheatbelt Pilot Area: A summary 
of drought risks, impacts and strategies to 
increase drought resilience from stakeholders in 
the Southern Wheatbelt. 
•	
WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
– Targeted Consultation with Aboriginal 
Communities on Drought in the Lower 
Wheatbelt: A report that collates information 
from stakeholders in First Nations Communities 
of the Southern Wheatbelt and captures risks 
and impacts of drought and strategies to 
increase drought resilience.
This plan has been developed using a partnership and 
co-design process that has leveraged diverse region-
specific knowledge and skills from the following 
sources, further adding to the range and quality of 
data: 
•	
South West Drought Resilience and Innovation 
Hub 
•	
Relevant Council plans  
•	
Economic Development Plans
•	
Strategic Community Plans
•	
Australian Drought Plan 
•	
Regional Development Commission Strategic 
Plans 
•	
WA Government’s Climate Policy 
•	
State Infrastructure plans
Previous and current strategies such as the North 
Eastern Agricultural Region Strategy and the 
and Preparedness Plan, a review of relevant science-
based initiatives, such as the DPIRD WaterSmart 
Farms project and the work of the South West 
Drought Innovation and Adoption Hub, inform the 
Plans evidence base.
It is recommended to regularly review the DVA to 
integrate updated or new datasets of relevance. This 
would inform future planning and investment and 
enable longitudinal monitoring of drought resilience. 
The Southern Wheatbelt DVA should be read in 
conjunction with the Southern Wheatbelt RDRP. 
See Appendix 3 for references.
24          Wheatbelt Development Commission

6.2 Plan Alignment
The Southern Wheatbelt RDRP is consistent with 
the goals and objectives of the National Framework 
for Drought Policy (National Drought Agreement) 
Resilience and Preparedness Plan (fitting under pillar 
3). The Drought Resilience Plan has a focus on long 
term resilience and preparedness. The RDRP also has 
strong alignment with National, State, Regional and 
Local plans, strategies and policies, including: 
Nationally: 
•	
Infrastructure Australia 2022 Regional 
Infrastructure Strengths and Infrastructure Gaps
•	
Fund;
•	
South West WA Drought Resilience Innovation 
and Adoption Hub
At a State level: 
•	
Infrastructure WA State Infrastructure Strategy 
2022
•	
Western Australian Climate Policy
•	
DPIRD Primary Industries Plan 2020–2024;
•	
DPIRD Strategic Intent 2018-2021;
•	
Department of Water ( Strategic priority - Water 
for Growth 2016 plan);
•	
Water Corporation - Water Forever (Water 
Recycling and Water Efficiency)
•	
Western Australian Agricultural Research 
Collaboration
•	
DPIRD State Soil Health Strategy
•	
Diversity WA (a framework to support the WA 
Government’s economic development priorities)
Regionally: 
•	
The Wheatbelt Development Commission 
Strategic Plan 2020-2023;
•	
Wheatbelt South Economic Analysis 2021
•	
Wheatbelt NRM Inc Strategic Plan
•	
Wheatbelt South Sub-Regional Economic 
Strategy 2014;
•	
Entrepreneurial Innovation in the Wheatbelt 
2016 – Regional Development Australia 
Wheatbelt;
•	
Wheatbelt Regional Planning and Infrastructure 
Framework 2015
•	
Southwest Native Title Settlement Agreement
Locally: 
•	
LGA Community Strategic Community plans;
•	
Local Government Emergency Rural Water Plans
Appendix 1 presents a detailed outline of how the 
Southern Wheatbelt Plan aligns with the above 
strategies, plans and policies. 
Image courtesy of Wheatbelt Development Commission
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              25

The Southern Wheatbelt Consortia (the Consortia) covers an area of 
28,512 km2 in the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia, and includes 
the local government Shires of Dumbleyung, Kondinin, Kulin, Lake 
Grace and Wagin, as shown in Figure 7. 
7. The Southern Wheatbelt Region - 
System Description
Image courtesy of Wheatbelt NRM
26          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Figure 7: Geographic scope of the RDRP in Southern Wheatbelt in foundation year of the Future Drought Fund RDRP Program.
Key characteristics of the Southern Wheatbelt 
Consortia include:
1.	 	The Shire of Wagin has the largest population, 
followed by Lake Grace.
2.	 	All areas have a median age above the WA 
median, with the largest variance in Wagin.
3.	 	Overall, most Shires had net out-migration, with 
a trend towards neutral in/out migration in 2020. 
4.	 	The Shires of Wagin, Dumbleyung and Kondinin 
have more disadvantage than greater regional 
WA and WA, the Shires of Kulin and Lake Grace 
have more advantage. 
5.	 	Agriculture accounts for over 50% of economic 
output and over 50% direct employment in the 
Shires of Lake Grace, Dumbleyung and Kulin.
Geography and population 
The Consortia is located on land covered by the 
Ballardong6, Wagyl Kaip/Southern Noongar7 and 
Gnaala Karla Booja Indigenous Land Agreement 
Groups in the South West Native Title Settlement 
Area. The combined Agreement areas include the 
Ballardong, Njakinjaki, Kaneang, Koren, Minang and 
Wudjari people. 
6  Native Title Tribunal. (2022). Ballardong People Indigenous Land Use Agreement. Retrieved 28 January 2022 from: http://www.nntt.gov.au/
searchRegApps/NativeTitleRegisters/Pages/ILUA_details.aspx?NNTT_Fileno=WI201 7/012 
7 Native Title Tribunal. (2022). Wagyl Kaip and Southern Noongar Native Title Agreement. Retrieved 28 January 2022 from: http://www.nntt.gov.
au/searchRegApps/NativeTitleRegisters/Pages/ILUA_details.aspx?NNTT_Fileno=WI201 7/014  
The region covers the south-eastern portion of 
the Wheatbelt Development Commission region, 
bordering the Great Southern Development 
Commission’s northern boundary, and Goldfields-
Esperance Development Commission and Great 
Western Woodland western boundary. It includes the 
H4 (high rainfall south), M4 (medium rainfall south) 
and L4 (low rainfall south) agro-economic zones as 
WA.
The Southern Wheatbelt Consortia is home to 5,323 
people, and between 2017 and 2019 most Shires had 
net out-migration, with a trend towards neutral in / 
out migration in 2020. All Shires are above the WA 
median age of 36, being highest in the Shire of Wagin 
at 49, and in other Shires ranging from 40-44.
The Index of Relative Socio-economic Advantage and 
Disadvantage (IRSAD SEIFA) score, which measures 
both advantage and disadvantage, found the Shires 
of Wagin, Dumbleyung and Kondinin have greater 
disadvantage than wider regional WA and WA, 
while the Shires of Kulin and Lake Grace have more 
advantage. 
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              27

The Index of Disadvantage in 2021 Dropping Off the 
Edge (DOTE) gives a score by Australian Bureau of 
Statistics Statistical Area 2 (SA2). Across the two SA2 
in the Consortia (Wagin SA2 and Kulin SA2) common 
areas of vulnerability were: psychiatric admissions, 
family violence, no post-school qualification, 
particulate matter (air quality), no access to internet 
at home and no access to recreational parks. In the 
wider Wheatbelt region the last published figures 
show an average wait time of 74 weeks for public 
housing, with 290 people on the waitlist8.
Towns in the Consortia are considered car dependent, 
with walk scores ranging from 0 to 43 and very limited 
public transport options impact on health service 
Economy
The Consortia has an annual economic output of 
$1.506 billion and 9.52% of all jobs for the Wheatbelt 
region (2,818 jobs). Overall, the agriculture industry 
accounts for just over a third of economic output 
(36.07%) at $543.16 million and 44.85% of direct 
employment (1,264 jobs). In the Shires of Lake 
Grace, Dumbleyung and Kulin over 50% of economic 
output and over 50% of direct employment is in the 
agriculture sector. 
Wheat production dominates gross value of 
agricultural production across all Shires except 
Wagin, with a higher value attributed to livestock 
production. There are shifts towards more diversity, 
with value adding and niche market development 
occurring, particularly in the agribusiness sector, 
and the increasing concentration and sophistication 
of health and aged care services centred out of the 
adjacent Shire of Narrogin. Mining exploration is 
increasing across the region, with established nickel 
mining in the Shire of Kondinin and a new kaolin mine 
due to commence production in nearby Wickepin. 
Planned renewable energy projects in Kondinin 
and development of a biodiesel production plant in 
Narrogin present further economic diversification 
opportunities based on the region’s competitive 
advantages.
Agricultural businesses make up 636 of the 1098 
in the region. Of those businesses, 160 (25%) have 
a turnover of less than $200,000; 114 (18%) have a 
turnover between $2 million and $5 million; with three 
having a turnover of more than $10 million (all located 
in Kondinin). 
8 Government of Western Australia. (2018). Rethink Social Housing. Retrieved 11 February 2022 from: http://www.rethinksocialhousing.com/The-
Waitlist
9  WAPHA. (2016). Population Health Needs Assessment: Country WA PHN. WA Primary Health Alliance
Across all regional businesses, 28 have a turnover $5 
million (including 15 over $10 million) across wholesale 
trade, manufacturing, retail trade, agriculture and 
professional, scientific and technical services. They 
are based in the Shires of Lake Grace, Wagin and 
Kondinin. Lake Grace has the highest number of total 
businesses, including 218 agricultural businesses. 
This is due to its large physical size, larger population 
and strategic location. Wagin has slightly more 
diversity than other shires and the second highest 
number of businesses due to its western Wheatbelt 
location and proximity to major regional centres of 
Narrogin and Katanning. 
With agriculture a key driver to the economy, there is 
an established local supply chain network with strong 
presence of transport, warehousing and mechanical 
repair services businesses. Agriculture is the primary 
occupation of employees in the region, though the 
number employed has decreased over time due to 
increasing productivity and consolidation of farms, 
and shift of farming enterprises towards grain 
growing. 
Growth opportunities in the Wheatbelt South sub-
region include those that build on existing strengths 
such as agricultural support and population services, 
and in the development of opportunity industries 
such as large scale biofuels and renewable energy 
projects, grain cereal product manufacturing, meat 
processing, tourism and niche agricultural product.
“The global push to decarbonise 
economies presents an opportunity 
for the Southern Wheatbelt region. 
The region is well placed to benefit 
from the increasing investment in 
renewable energy, carbon farming 
and biofuel development.”
Wheatbelt Development Commission
28          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Key socioeconomic indicators are summarised in the table below. 
Table 2: Key socioeconomic indicators Southern Wheatbelt
Landscapes and natural 
resources
The landscape and landforms of the Southern 
Wheatbelt ranges from medium rainfall and 
more dissected landscapes in the west, to flatter 
landscapes, with extensive salt lake chains, dotted 
with granite exposures towards the east10. 
The region falls into two major catchment areas, 
the Blackwood and the Lockhart. The Blackwood 
Catchment drains towards the south west, 
downstream from Lake Dumbleyung. The Lakes sub-
catchment of the Lockhart Catchment, in the Avon 
River Basin, drains to the north west. 
The region forms part of the Great Plateau of WA, 
an ancient landform that has weathered variably 
to give way to its current gently undulating form 
with low-relief uplands and flat bottomed valleys. 
The landscape consists of fragmented remnant 
vegetation, with medium and open woodland and 
mallee scrub. Succulent steppe vegetation such as 
saltbush, bluebush and samphire Saline dominate the 
valley floor areas.
Soils vary across the region, though are primarily 
shallow sandy duplexes. The region uses a mix of 
distantly derived potable and locally derived non-
potable water sources. These resources soils support 
the dominant use of the land across the region, 
broadacre cropping and livestock (sheep and cattle).
The region has abundant solar, wind and biomass 
resources, potentially well suited to in situ bioenergy 
production. 
11 Shire of Dumbleyung (2022) Shire of Dumbleyung Strategic Community Plan 2022-2032. Retrieved 7 July 2022 from: https://www.dumbleyung.
wa.gov.au/_files/ugd/7929f4_b8401cd708cc490e937d15ce32a9f37b.pdf
12 Shire of Kondinin (2022) Community Strategic Plan 2022-2032. Retrieved 7 July 2022 from: https://www.kondinin.wa.gov.au/Profiles/kondinin/
Assets/ClientData/Shire_of_Kondinin_Strategic_Community_Plan_-_March_2022.pdf
13 Wheatbelt Development Commission (2021). Strategic Plan 2020-2023. Retrieved 8 February 2022 from https://www.wheatbelt.wa.gov.au/
files/5016/1794/3026/Strategic_Plan_Final_050321_COMPRESSED.PDF
14 Wheatbelt Development Commission. (2014a). Wheatbelt South Sub-Regional Economic Strategy. Retrieved 10 February 2022 from: https://
www.wheatbelt.wa.gov.au/files/5714/1041/7002/Wheatbelt_South_SubRegional_Economic_Strategy_FINAL1_for_web
Regional Strategic Priorities
Local governments in the Consortia combine under 
various regional organisations to work collaboratively 
for regional planning and shared projects that 
benefit the region. Individual local governments 
have recently completed major reviews of their 
Strategic Community Plans. The Shire of Dumbleyung 
has prioritised a Dumbleyung Smart Farming 
Development Plan and the Dumbleyung Alternative 
Water Access Study11. The Shire of Kondinin has a 
strategic priority to support and advocate for the 
agricultural industry in the Shire12.
The 4WDL ROC includes the Shire of Dumbleyung, 
Wagin and Lake Grace and has a strategic focus 
on increased water security and reduce reliance 
on current systems, improved internet and mobile 
connectivity, and identifying opportunities to work 
across the region to promote tourism.
The Consortia is in the Wheatbelt South sub-region 
of the Wheatbelt Development Commission area. The 
WDC 2020-2023 identifies several strategic priorities 
that are relevant in the context of this report:
•	
Enabling infrastructure;
•	
Diversifying the economic base;
•	
Sustainable landscapes and communities; and 
•	
Entrepreneurship and innovation13. 
Agriculture, Livestock & Food Supply Chains is one 
of four key themes in the Wheatbelt Development 
Commission economic strategy for the Wheatbelt 
South sub-region14.
Consortia
Shire of 
Dumbleyung
Shire of 
Kondinin
Shire of 
Kulin
Shire of 
Lake Grace
Shire of 
Wagin
Area (km2)
28,512
2,541
7,422
4,717
11,886
1,946
Population (ERP 2020)
5,323
681
847
769
1,265
1,761
Median Age (years) - WA 36
-
44
46
44
41
49
SEIFA - greater regional WA 
965; WA 1,015
-
996
979
1,021
1,017
929
DOTE Index (Score)
2-3
3
2
3
3
2
Annual economic output ($)
$1.506 
billion
$130.74 
million
$543.24 
million
$166.26 
million
$327.14 
million
$338.96 
million
Agriculture (% of economic 
output)
36.07%
63.7%
17.10%
66%
52.60%
25.20%
Agriculture* (% of jobs)
44.85%
62.3%
31.5%
66.8%
53.7%
28.6%

8. An Assessment of the Southern 
Wheatbelt’s Resilience
The Southern Wheatbelt Drought Vulnerability Assessment (DVA) identifies key 
areas of the region’s vulnerability to drought. The Southern Wheatbelt region, 
defined in this plan as the Shires of Dumbleyung, Wagin, Lake Grace, Kulin and 
Kondinin, is a region at high risk of the impacts of drought, particularly those 
Shires on the eastern edge. 
Image courtesy of Wheatbelt Development Commission
30          Wheatbelt Development Commission

The characteristics of each vulnerability driver are:
•	
Exposed areas – show long-term increases 
in temperature and decreases in rainfall, 
measurable increases in drought frequency and 
measurable declines in potential wheat yield 
and root zone soil moisture. 
•	
	Sensitive areas - have marginal crop and livestock 
production, low vegetation cover, high levels 
of economic dependence on agriculture and 
demographic factors such as relative remoteness, 
population size and economic diversity. 
15 Maru, Yiheyis & Tom Measham. (2021). CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission: Transition planning for building resilient communities in drought 
affected regions. National Science Agency.
•	
	Areas with low adaptive capacity - relatively 
poor access to infrastructure and resources, 
high unemployment and reliance on degraded 
and/or poor-quality natural resources, including 
water and soils.
Areas of strength and resilience, which should be 
maintained and built upon, lie in the region’s soil 
and production capability. Adaptive capacity and 
resilience to drought may be impacted by inadequate 
infrastructure and health services, and by social 
disadvantage15. 
SOUTHERN WHEATBELT 
DROUGHT RESILIENCE STRENGTHS
SOUTHERN WHEATBELT 
DROUGHT RESILIENCE WEAKNESSES
•	
Access to critical infrastructure 
•	
	Limited exposure to production risk 
•	
Soil and production capability
•	
Normalised Difference Indication Index 
(vegetation greenness) trends 
•	
Expected impacts of climate change on 
temperature and rainfall patterns  
•	
Increasing drought frequency 
•	
	Direct dependence of local economies and 
livelihoods on agriculture
Table 3: Southern Wheatbelt drought resilience strengths and weaknesses
8.1 Drought Indicators
Mapping Drought Vulnerability
Using GIS-based multi-criteria analysis (MCA), DPIRD’s 
Geographical Information System (GIS) team spatially 
integrated relevant economic, environmental and 
social data at an appropriate decision-making scale. A 
set of maps were developed identifying high priority 
drought risk areas.
Inputs into the MCA follow the RDRP conceptual 
framework, investigating aspects of exposure, 
sensitivity, impact and adaptive capacity. The 
stakeholder engagement process guided how each of 
these components relate to and inform vulnerability 
and resilience to drought in the regions. 
Maps were developed for drought exposure, drought 
sensitivity, drought impact, adaptive capacity and 
vulnerability, and can be found in the Drought 
Vulnerability Assessment in Section 6. The drought 
vulnerability map (Figures 8 and 9) is a composite of 
adaptive capacity and drought impact and showed 
variability across the region, with higher vulnerability 
in the north and east. 
There is a high level of agreement between the 
three Pilot regions (highlighted in figure 8) and those 
identified through a participatory mapping process 
involving regional stakeholders, many of whom have 
lived experience of drought. 
In the Southern Wheatbelt region, stakeholders 
identified areas most vulnerable to drought as 
those with lower levels of access to reliable water 
supplies and water infrastructure, including strategic 
community water supplies, piped scheme water and 
on-farm water capture and storage. Specific localities 
were mentioned as more vulnerable than others due 
to the lack of reliable water supplies. 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) considered 
most vulnerable to drought are those with short term 
planning and narrow focus; less skills in management; 
fewer resources; limited market share and a 
conservative approach to risk management. 
Those with direct links to rainfall, such as those 
servicing the agricultural industry are particularly 
exposed. In depth analysis of the methodology 
and the full Vulnerability Assessment are in Section 
6, 7 and 8 of the Southern Wheatbelt Drought 
Vulnerability Assessment. 
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              31

Figure 8 Final drought vulnerability map for south-west Western Australia showing areas most vulnerable to drought are in 
the north and east of the region.
Figure 9 Final drought vulnerability map at Southern Wheatbelt region scale, showing high to very high vulnerability across the 
region, with Kondinin more vulnerable than Wagin. 
32          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Vulnerability Index Results 
A Vulnerability Index was developed for the Southern 
Wheatbelt region with ten indicators chosen to reflect 
exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. 
It provides a snapshot of vulnerability to drought 
which can be repeated and tracked over time and 
aims to assist local decision makers and managers 
in the rapid evaluation of drought risk in the region. 
Each indicator was rated on a sliding scale from 1-5, 
with one being the lowest vulnerability and five the 
highest. 
We acknowledge there are limitations to some of 
the data, particularly the human capital datasets 
used that inform adaptive capacity to drought. 
Technical experts noted that the availability, quality 
and resolution of human capital datasets was not 
sufficient to provide confidence in the adaptive 
capacity assessment. 
The assumptions about the direction of effect of 
these datasets may also not hold in all regions and 
in all situations. There are opportunities to continue 
to build and review the model to incorporate 
further socio-economic information to strengthen 
understanding and measurement of resilience in 
regional areas. 
The average score across indicators gave an overall 
index of 3.3 for the Southern Wheatbelt, indicating 
moderate vulnerability to drought. Due to the degree 
of variation between indicators it is important to 
consider them individually. 
Areas of strength in drought resilience in the 
Southern Wheatbelt region are access to critical 
infrastructure (1.5), limited exposure to production 
risk (2.5) and soil and production capability (3). 
Weaker areas were identified across each area of 
exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity. 
They were NDVI trends (3.5), the expected impacts of 
climate change on temperature and rainfall patterns 
(4), increasing drought frequency (4.5), and the 
level of direct dependence of local economies and 
livelihoods on agriculture (5).
0
1
2
3
4
5
Climate change
Autumn break
Drought frequency
Production
NDVI
Employment in Ag
Unemployment
Access to
infrastructure
Groundwater quality
Soil capability
Figure 10 Vulnerability index
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              33

The exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity in terms of resilience as identified through the spatial mapping 
is summarised in the following table.
Table 4: The exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity of the Southern Wheatbelt Region
AREA OF 
RESILIENCE
RISK RESULT BY 
INDICATOR
RESULT BY LOCALITY 
KEY ISSUES AND RESPONSE
Exposure
2- projected 
temperature and 
rainfall change, 
moderate increases 
in temperature and 
moderate drying
4 - change in timing 
of the autumn break 
experienced to date
4.5 - increasing 
drought frequency
Moderate in the far west 
(Wagin)
High (parts of 
Dumbleyung, Kondinin, 
Kulin and Lake Grace) 
Very high in Dumbleyung 
and the eastern edge 
of Kulin, Lake Grace and 
across the majority of 
Kondinin. 
Despite high resilience in agricultural 
production capability, the region is 
highly exposed to the impacts of climate 
change and faces several general 
resilience challenges including economic 
diversification and access to infrastructure, 
services and reliable, good quality water. 
Higher risk was a result of decline in 
growing season rainfall.
The focus of resilience action should be 
improving understanding of and responses 
to these challenges.
Sensitivity
2.5 - production risk
3.5 - lowest 10% of 
NDVI values recorded 
between 2002-2021
5 - % of the 
population that 
is employed in 
agriculture
Less risk in the west 
(moderate-high in Wagin)
Consistently high-very 
high across remaining 
parts of the region. 
Lake Grace and Kondinin 
have a higher proportion 
of very high sensitivity 
compared to other Shires.
remoteness, percentage of Drought Risk by 
farm profit, higher numbers of livestock in 
some Shires (Kondinin, Lake Grace), count 
of declared water deficiencies by Shire 
and low counts of water assets (bores and 
dams), and the high percentage of workers 
reliant on agriculture.
Adaptive Capacity
2 - levels of existing 
unemployment in the 
region
1.5 - access to 
water services 
and transport 
infrastructure
5 - groundwater 
quality
3 - soil capability
Lower levels of adaptive 
capacity linked to ageing 
population (southwest 
Wagin, east Kondinin). 
Higher in north and 
central areas.
Through community engagement and 
the outcomes of the social impact study, 
a strong link was identified between 
natural and physical capital and economic 
prosperity, which impacts on individual 
wellbeing and social and community 
resilience. 
Very low unemployment rate relates to 
better adaptive capacity, though this does 
not reflect the issues with attracting labour 
due to lack of housing options for workers. 
More exploration is needed to ascertain 
true adaptive capacity to drought.
Kerrigan Beef grain
34          Wheatbelt Development Commission

8.2 Impacts of drought on the Southern Wheatbelt 
16 Native Title Tribunal. (2022). Ballardong People Indigenous Land Use Agreement. Retrieved 28 January 2022 from: http://www.nntt.gov.au/
searchRegApps/NativeTitleRegisters/Pages/ILUA_details.aspx?NNTT_Fileno=WI201 7/012
The impacts of drought in the Southern Wheatbelt 
are cross-cutting. Stakeholder engagement revealed 
drought impacts can be significant and wide ranging 
affecting the economic, social and environmental 
functioning of the Southern Wheatbelt community 
and industries. 
Except for western parts of Wagin, the entire 
Southern Wheatbelt RDRP study region has high and 
very high likelihood of being impacted adversely by 
drought (Figure 10). Areas of most concern are the 
Shire of Kondinin, Western and Eastern Kulin, most of 
Dumbleyung, West and North East Lake Grace. 
The impacts of settlement and the subsequent 
environmental changes caused by drought and 
climate change and other issues is consistent across 
the region and the impacts on culture and Country16. 
A summary of the main impacts of drought in the 
Southern Wheatbelt region, identified through the 
stakeholder engagement and technical review 
process, are outlined below. A detailed analysis of 
drought impacts can be found in Section 5 of the 
Southern Wheatbelt DVA.
Figure 11: Drought impact in Southern Wheatbelt Consortia.
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              35

Economic Impacts
17 Kingwell, R. and Xayavong, V. (2017). How Drought Affects the Financial Characteristics of Australian Farm Businesses. Australian Journal of 
Agricultural and Resource Economics, Vol. 61, Issue 3, pp. 344-366, 2017, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3004174 or http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1467-8489.12195
Agriculture is a key driver of the economy in the 
region and, as drought has a direct biophysical 
impact on production of crops and livestock due to 
reduced available water and higher temperatures, it 
has a collective adverse impact on the total economic 
output of the region attributed to agriculture.  As the 
Southern Wheatbelt has a collective value of $466 
million, this impact is significant. 
Southern Wheatbelt stakeholders report experiencing 
financial stress due to of failed production during 
drought. Farming families sell or euthanise livestock, 
liquidate assets or increase their debt to survive. 
It should be noted some farmers do benefit from 
drought, through increases in farm size and becoming 
more crop dominant, increasing their wealth over 
time17. 
Stakeholders noted that the lessons learnt over 
time from dealing with dry seasons, adoption of 
new practice and improved business management 
(including use of the Australian Tax Office Farm 
Management Deposit Scheme), have mitigated 
impacts for some, smoothing weather-influenced 
income variability. 
Non-farming families experience reduced income, 
reduced employment opportunities, inability to retain 
staff, and reduced cash flows.  SMEs considered 
most vulnerable to drought are those with short term 
planning and narrow focus, less skills in management, 
fewer resources, limited market share and a 
conservative approach to risk management. Those 
with direct links to rainfall, such as those servicing the 
agricultural industry, are particularly exposed. 
Water is an underpinning resource to support 
industry and business in the region. The Southern 
Wheatbelt is dependent on piped potable scheme 
water located in distant geographical areas, and a 
mix of locally sourced supplies for non-potable use. 
Groundwater is limited due to geology and requires 
desalination for productive use.  
Drought impacts on-farm and community water 
supplies, triggering water deficiency declarations, 
and the carting of water at the expense of the State 
government. To reduce reliance on scheme supplies, 
and enhance ability to cope with consecutive dry 
seasons, continued farm water supply improvement, 
and local and regional scale water supply planning 
and investment is required to address supply 
constraints and future demand under climate change 
scenarios.  
“Small business gets forgotten – 
like the tyre fitter or mechanic. 
More support for mum and dad 
businesses, including the local 
contractors is needed.” 
Farmer and Agricultural Consultant 
interviewed April 2022.
“I realise now what a luxury it is 
living in town on scheme water. 
I recently made the decision to 
move so I no longer have the 
stress of surviving on tank/bore 
water. My pumps broke and I have 
horses, so we were cautious with 
our water and all our drinking 
water had to be brought in.” 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Participant, 2022.
36          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Environmental
Drought can have serious, long-term consequences 
for soil health, vegetation cover and biodiversity. 
Reduced vegetation cover and drier soils increase 
the risk of erosion and invasion by weeds, pests and 
diseases. This also impacts on the functioning of the 
landscape for economic and social purposes. 
Droughts exacerbate impacts on already fragile 
environments. In the context of broader degradation, 
drought conditions can have a significant impact 
on natural resources, including irreversible damage 
to water quality, soil and vegetation, leading in turn 
to dust storms and a loss of topsoil, soil nutrients, 
organic matter and soil carbon. 
Declining condition and amenity of reserves due to 
drought impacts detracts visitors from these areas.
Aboriginal community members expressed concern 
about the impact of drought on vegetation, water 
and fire regimes in the region, as well as the impact 
of land transformation and climate change on the 
region’s vulnerability to drought.
Social
Southern Wheatbelt stakeholders stated that drought 
negatively affects mental health, led to business 
closures, causing people to move away from the 
region, reducing population sizes and access to skills 
and services. Drought strained community services 
and support networks. Stakeholders highlighted the 
need for stronger support to community groups and 
networks during drought. Aboriginal communities are 
likely to be disproportionately affected by drought 
based on pre-existing health and social disadvantage. 
Drought contributes to failed businesses, causing 
people to move away and, in turn, reducing 
population sizes, access to skills and services and 
the availability of community services and support 
networks in the region. 
“It is distressing to see plants 
have lived a long time, die due to 
lack of water.” 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Participant, 2022.
“Mental health is bad if you 
have stock. If you are finding a 
couple dead or abandoned lambs 
every few days. Trees dying in the 
landscape also effects 
mental health.” 
Stakeholder Engagement 
Participant, 2022.
Newdegate Skate Park
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              37

Future Scenarios
18 Lester, L., Flatau, P. and Kyron, M. (2022). Understanding the Social Impacts of Drought. Prepared by the Centre for Social Impact, Prepared by 
the Centre for Social Impact, The University of Western Australia.
19 Sue Middleton. 2022. AgDots. Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program Global Literature Review – Key Drivers Report. Prepared for 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development.
As the climate changes, temperatures will continue 
to increase, and growing season rainfall will continue 
to decrease across the region. The time spent 
in meteorological drought, where conditions are 
significantly drier than the average over the preceding 
30 years, will increase over the course of the century. 
Analyses of rainfall and temperature data highlight a 
potentially concerning trend, with the composite hazard 
of hot drought beginning to occur in recent years. 
Appropriate steps must be taken to anticipate and 
mitigate the potentially devastating effects of hot 
droughts.
The potential future environmental impacts of 
drought are soil degradation, increasing risk of fire, 
damage from feral animals and weeds and ongoing 
biodiversity loss. Soils are non-renewable resources 
that are critically vulnerable to loss and degradation, 
particularly during drought. 
Reduced rainfall and higher temperatures dry out the 
soil, creating cracks that reduce the moisture and 
volume of the soil, affect the activity of soil microbes, 
reduce soil particle cohesion, change soil texture, 
decrease soil water holding capacity and limit plant 
growth. 
Erosion is one of the greatest risks to soil health 
during drought, as it strips away the fertile top layers 
of soil and organic matter. Erosion affects agricultural 
production and water quality.  
Crop and livestock farms in the region will be 
adversely affected by climate change, with projected 
increases in extreme events. Broadacre crop and 
pasture production may also decline. 
Drought is expected to impact adversely on crop and 
livestock production in the region, through increases 
in extreme events, and water supplies potentially not 
able to meet industry and community demand. 
Climate change projections for the Southern 
Wheatbelt, a high level of direct dependency on 
agriculture18 and the demonstrated ability for 
the agricultural industry, regional businesses and 
communities to adapt to changing conditions, 
make the region an excellent candidate for drought 
resilience action. 
The Southern Wheatbelt Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment describes Future Drought scenarios in 
Section 4 and details the vulnerability of the region 
to future climate impacts, along with potentially 
transformative actions.  
Additional future impacts of climate to consider at the 
regional level include:
•	
economic pressures
•	
increased input costs and energy prices
•	
competing land use pressures
•	
policy related economic pressures, such 
as measures to mitigate greenhouse gas 
emissions.
Exploration of mega-trends and drivers was 
completed for the program, with the following table 
identifying these and the impact on the regions19.   
The region is responding to these mega trends 
through adoption of innovation, particularly in 
agricultural systems, and through developing 
locally derived water supply systems to augment 
geopgraphically distant delivered water supplies.
MEGA TREND
IMPACT/RELEVANCE
DRIVER
Supply + Demand 
shocks
High input costs – substitution inputs, tight supply 
commodities, confidence ag industry, land value increases
Supply chain disruptions
Food Trends
Vegetable oil and plant protein demand, aquaculture 
product demand, onshoring meat production
Demand has other drivers 
such as geopolitical tensions 
and consumer confidence.
Climate change
Need for adaptive responses, ecosystem services, natural 
capital market, carbon market opportunities
Net zero transition/
decarbonising economy
Resource Scarcity
Oil, gas, water, labour underpinning inputs for region’s 
economy
Water, energy, labour key 
drivers
Digital 
Transformation
Connectivity is the new highway, and data is currency
Connectivity and digitisation 
of industries and communities
Neo-ecology
Sustainability becoming major economic driver
Sustainability credentials for 
trade and markets
Global level
Less safe world, which is very connected, ongoing impact 
from major events and tensions
Biosecurity
Wellbeing
Wellbeing of communities impacted by drought
Building community cohesion

8.3 Building on Existing Resilience
The region faces several resilience challenges 
including economic diversification, access to 
infrastructure and services and reliable, good quality 
water. Improving understanding of and responses 
to these challenges should be the focus of drought 
resilience action in the region. Individual resilience 
factors that influence farmers’ ability to cope with 
drought previously include:
•	
The pre-existing viability of the business
•	
Income security
•	
Managing risk and decision making
•	
Role diversification
•	
Opportunities to engage
•	
Health and wellbeing
•	
Gender, and age.
Southern Wheatbelt stakeholders identified initiatives 
that have been successful in supporting communities 
through the challenges of drought. These are 
summarised below according to the regional 
resilience themes identified. Through Wheatbelt NRM 
discussions with the community, it was clear that a 
holistic approach is needed to make the Southern 
Wheatbelt more resilient in the face of future 
droughts. 
People do not want handouts so much as hand ups. 
They want knowledge to be shared with them so they 
can continue to change and adapt. They would like to 
see more support and advice given proactively before 
disasters like droughts happen. They are looking for 
innovative technologies to help make their businesses 
more sustainable.
Goldfields and Agricultural Water Supply
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              39

What’s working?
Theme 2: Resilient Communities
The people that felt supported during tough times by their communities were more equipped to adapt/
cope mentally than people who felt “left out” by the community. The social opportunities such as 
impromptu catch ups at sporting events are not to be underestimated in helping people “forget” during 
droughts. Large events that enable volunteer participation support the building of social capital. The 
following are examples of what has worked for the region:
•	
Southern Wheatbelt is adept at running large events that bring people together and draw people 
to the region;
•	
There is significant existing social capital in the region, with large events in the Southern Wheatbelt 
include the Wagin Woolarama, Newdegate Machinery Field Days, the Kulin Bush Races, the Wave 
Rock Weekender;
•	
An increase in community events was applauded as this gave people a good distraction from the 
pressures of drought -in non-drought times, these events are important in building social capital 
and connection;
•	
	Maintaining green spaces and accessible community spaces to support social connection, 
particularly through sport and cultural events, and networking opportunities;
•	
Counselling services provided by Regional Men’s Health and Rural West to help support mental and 
financial health;
•	
The Southern Wheatbelt community identified that social connection is vital in building a sense of 
community, with people coming together to support each other in times of drought;20 and
•	
Lessons learned from previous droughts and the community experiences of how they have adapted 
when going through a drought period. 
“We are lucky to have a supportive community here in Kukerin. It is 
known for its sporting activity and keeping things going – holding 
things together.” Community Member – Wheatbelt NRM Report 2022.
Theme 1: Resilient Water
Most people seem to be able to cope if it is a one year drought or extra dry season because they can still 
gain a yield off their crops on a lower rainfall year. The added pressure of carrying livestock, the impact of 
carting water, access to water sources, dams drying and seeing the livestock suffer can take a huge mental 
and economic toll.  Experience with drought has seen the region respond strongly to addressing water 
related challenges in the following ways:
•	
Investment into water – both on farm and for community supplies;
•	
Additional tanks to support more reliable emergency water supplies initiated by Shires;
•	
Farm Water Rebate scheme and the ATO Farm Management Deposit scheme helpful in supporting 
farm businesses through drought, and in preparing for drought;
•	
Installing, maintaining and cleaning dams and installing and maintaining road catchments;
•	
More farmers exploring and equipping ground water supplies; and 
•	
Government provision of emergency water supplies.
20 Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc (2022). WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning – Grass Roots Commmunity Consultation, 
Southern Wheatbelt Pilot Area.

Theme 3: Resilient Agriculture Systems
The Southern Wheatbelt has a good track record in capacity to adapt and respond to risks, with increasing levels 
of grain production occurring despite reduced growing season rainfall.
All farmers indicated that they have plans and sowing dates were important. Decisions are made based on past 
experiences, observations, and the plan they were following. They try not to look “over the fence” and have more 
trust in their own decision-making skills. The following are examples of actions taken to build drought resilience: 
•	
Adoption of research innovation (no-till, new varieties, low input cropping) to support productivity 
increases despite declining growing season rainfall;
•	
Increasing sophistication of farm business management, including use of professional farm consultants 
and advisors, use of ATO farm management deposits;
•	
Earlier decision making to mitigate and manage risk;
•	
Adoption of smart farming technology;
•	
Farmers destocking or agisting livestock in dry times;
•	
More resilient livestock breeds; 
•	
Exploration of pasture and perennial systems to make use of summer rainfall; 
•	
Niche high value adding opportunities – to commodities, new products, tourism; and
•	
Off farm income.
Theme 5: Resilient Regional Economy
Businesses able to diversify their incomes and client bases were able to adapt to a loss of income more 
easily. Local job opportunities that are not reliant on the fortunes of agriculture were considered important 
to keep people in the community. While climate change impacts can result in devastating impacts for First 
Nation communities, there is strong interest and commitment in the region for Noongar engagement and 
participation to support resilience activities. There is opportunity to develop culture based economies in 
areas such as biodiversity conservation, land and water management and carbon sequestration22. The 
following are examples of what has worked:
•	
Business diversification including multi-industry servicing and expansions of clientele base;
•	
	Improved online presence and e-commerce;
•	
Reduced spending, good business planning, learning from experience; and 
•	
Accessing professional advice.
Theme 4: Resilient Landscapes
Consultation with Aboriginal Elders identified that when country is not healthy, the people are not healthy. 
They articulated that there is no single person, or organisation who can heal country. This requires 
collaboration with First Nations People and all who are present on Country. Wheatbelt NRM has a long 
history of engagement with the community to support improved ecosystem services and sustainable 
farming21. The following are examples of what has worked:
•	
Improving farming practices to build soil health, including on farm demonstrations;
•	
Active efforts to rehabilitate and regenerate landscapes restoring connection to land, while supporting 
the economic participation of Aboriginal people through business opportunities including seed 
collection and seedling raising and revegetation efforts.;
•	
Noongar people bringing value from cultural knowledge and practices that benefit local ecology;
•	
Switching to sustainable farming solutions; and
•	
Government funding to support revegetation of degraded landscapes. 
21 Noongar land Enterprise Enterprise Group (2022). Valuing Noongar People and Practices in Drought Resilience.
22 Noongar Land Enterprise Group (2022). Valuing Noongar People and Practices in Drought Resilience.
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              41

9. Opportunities Moving Forward
Whilst the region already has in place several initiatives and interventions that are working well in terms of 
drought preparedness and mitigation, efforts should be made to reduce socio-economic vulnerabilities and 
increase institutional capacities. Recurring themes emerging from each of the Local Government Strategic 
Community Plans include economic diversification and community sustainability, quality long term water supply, 
water security, and water holding infrastructure and harvesting. 
The Noongar Land Enterprises Group   proposed the need for a Framework for Action to facilitate genuine 
coordinated engagement of Noongar people in initiatives across the regions. This approach may facilitate an 
approach and commitment from government and industry to genuinely incorporate Noongar knowledge and 
practices.  Climate and drought resilience initiatives would be important to include as part of the economic 
framework being developed to sit alongside the Indigenous Land Use Agreements that form part of the 
Southwest Settlement. The following is a summary of the opportunity areas for investment that form the basis 
of “Section 10. The Plan” in this document. 
Image courtesy of Shire of Dumbleyung
42          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Shire of Gnowangerup - Street Art 
Theme 2: Resilient Communities
There is a need for the whole community to be supported during drought, with many non-farming people 
and businesses also impacted by the loss of income and regional outmigration associated with drought. 
Research from UWA into the social impacts of drought identified four elements of a roadmap to social 
drought resilience. These include infrastructure, good governance, population retention and social capital. 
There is opportunity to strengthen connections across the region, based on the experience of those that 
are involved with the delivery of high quality, large-scale events held in the region. It was recognised that, 
while these large events are successful, they rely heavily on volunteers and are becoming increasingly 
stressful to run. A streamlined approach to reduce red tape would be welcomed. Provision of stand up 
small ad hoc events, and small community projects that involve community members were considered 
worthy of investigation.
Theme 1: Resilient Water
The number one priority for Southern Wheatbelt communities to build drought resilience is increasing their 
confidence in available water systems to ride out at least two successive drought years. This would ensure 
agricultural businesses can continue to function, through direct access to water and to enable critical road 
maintenance to be undertaken. It would also maintain amenity of community spaces to support social 
wellbeing and adequate supplies to support emergency situations such as bushfires. 
The Southern Wheatbelt’s water supply relies on piped potable scheme water located in distant 
geographical areas, and a mix of locally sourced supplies for non-potable use. Groundwater is limited 
due to geology and requires desalination for productive use.  To reduce reliance on scheme supplies, and 
enhance ability to cope with consecutive dry seasons, continued on-farm water supply improvement, and 
local and regional scale water supply planning and investment is required to address supply constraints 
and future demand under climate change scenarios. 
Theme 3: Resilient Agriculture Systems
The region has a good track record in terms of capacity to adapt and respond to risks, with increasing 
levels of grain production occurring despite reduced growing season rainfall. There are still areas for further 
investigation to enable continued productive capacity and profitability in the face of a drying climate. With 
the plethora of actors working in the agricultural research, it is essential that a joint approach is fostered. 
The targeting and extension of research and development of climate resilient farming systems is considered 
essential. 
The South West Western Australia Drought Hub is already actively collaborating with Grower Groups and 
consortia partners to develop and enhance the uptake of farmer-centred drought innovation and adoption 
practices in the region. There are also opportunities to tap into the recently announced WA Farming Systems 
project, a partnership between DPIRD and the Grains Research and Development Corporation, that has focus 
areas in the low and medium rainfall zones, including consortia locations. 
Early detection and monitoring of seasonal conditions, and dissemination of relevant and timely information 
to farming communities about the potential for drought conditions will allow for timely decisions. Using 
the right measures to understand drought in a timely manner will assist with the management of farm 
businesses and assist policy decisions. With early information, appropriate services can be provided and 
accessed by rural and regional communities experiencing drought. 
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              43

Drought Policy and Support Mechanisms
A range of policy ideas were raised during consultation, including: 
•	
Defining drought for WA to ensure consistent and fair allocation of drought resilience/ drought support 
funding;
•	
Policies and programs to incentivise upgrading of water infrastructure on farms and in communities;
•	
Tax incentives for landholders/ businesses to invest in water supplies; and
•	
Extension of ATO Farm Management Deposits to rural businesses that rely on agriculture.
Projections of climate change in the Southern Wheatbelt, high levels of direct dependency on agriculture and a 
demonstrated ability for the agricultural industry, regional businesses and communities to adapt to changing 
conditions make the region an excellent candidate for drought resilience action.
Theme 5: Resilient Regional Economy
There is strong potential to capture opportunities for decarbonisation of the economy, with growing 
interest and investment in renewable energy and biofuels projects, and large-scale carbon farming 
plantings. Niche value adding on farm, off farm diversification, and multi-industry servicing also present 
opportunities to build drought resilience and adaptive capacity. 
Supporting the diversification of the economy through encouraging business development in the region 
was also considered important in enhancing economic and community resilience. In the Southern 
Wheatbelt region, there are opportunities for economic diversification into the population and mining and 
agricultural service sector, tourism, niche value adding agribusinesses, meat processing and renewable 
energy sector. There is also opportunity to develop a framework for business incubation using existing 
infrastructure such as the Community Resource Centre network. 
Theme 4: Resilient Landscapes
There are opportunities for Aboriginal businesses to participate and benefit from initiatives to support 
drought resilience. The Noongar Boodja Ranger program has a strong presence in the Wheatbelt region, 
and is growing its operations, capturing opportunities for decarbonising the economy. This includes 
collection and nursery raising of native seedlings for carbon and biodiversity plantings. The replication of 
this model in a culturally appropriate way with local Noongar groups across the Wheatbelt would assist in 
diversifying employment opportunities for Aboriginal people and supporting landscape restoration. The 
Djarlma Plan developed for the WA forestry industry has been proposed as a model to work towards. 
Healthy ecosystems build resilience to drought, and nature-based solutions can offer cost-effective 
protections while delivering co-benefits such as carbon capture and storage and improved food and water 
security. Sustainable natural resource management, including of soil, water, and biodiversity, must be 
prioritised in the plan for building resilience to drought in the Southern Wheatbelt. Community consultation 
indicate a need to improve the condition of important environmental, tourism and culturally significant sites 
through conservation and wetland and vegetation condition monitoring. 
44          Wheatbelt Development Commission

The Southern Wheatbelt RDRP presents 
for consideration a range of interventions 
and actions to support the preparedness 
and economic, environmental, and social 
resilience to future droughts in the 
Southern Wheatbelt.
Lake Grace wildflowers
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              45

10. The Plan
The actions and priorities presented in this plan are grouped under each of our five drought resilience themes, 
identified through stakeholder engagement, as follows: 
1.	 Resilient Water
2.	 Resilient Communities 
3.	 Resilient Agriculture 
4.	 Resilient Landscapes 
5.	 Resilient Regional Economies 
Building resilience can involve maintaining, modifying, or transforming parts, sectors or whole systems. 
Therefore, each proposed set of actions is identified as either maintain, modify, or transform to indicate which 
pathway is required. 
Interventions identified as part of the formal Transformative Reviews have also been included. Appendix 2 
provides an overview of the high level transformative themes.
The implementation of these resilience building interventions and the proposed action is subject to further 
discussion with Consortia stakeholders and potential delivery partners.  
Dumbleyung sheep
46          Wheatbelt Development Commission

10.1 Resilient Water
Theme Outcome
The region has a water system the community has 
confidence in to sustain industry, agriculture, and the 
community through consecutive decile one rainfall 
years
FDF Strategic Priority
Environmental, Economic and Social Resilience
FDF Objective
Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity 
and profitability) of the agricultural sector; Strengthen 
the wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional, and 
remote communities; Improve the natural capital 
of agricultural landscapes for better environmental 
outcomes
Current Situation
Several localities in the region have experienced 
water deficiencies, with deficiency declarations 
triggering State Government assistance to cart 
water for emergency use. It is observed that water 
infrastructure is unable to keep up with current and 
expected demand. 
The top priorities for a resilient water system 
identified from community engagement are improving 
water infrastructure in relation to increased capacity 
for on farm water capture, treatment, and storage. 
Engagement also identified the need for increasing 
community confidence in available water systems to 
ride out at least two successive drought years. 
Improvement of water supplies have been explored 
through programs such as the Rural Towns-Liquid 
Assets Program in the early 2000s. This program 
was focused on addressing townsite salinity and 
researched desalination technology. In 2022, the DPIRD 
and Grower Group Alliance-led WaterSmart Farms 
initiative is revisiting desalination and on farm water 
supply improvements opportunities in this region. 
Case Study: Water Smart Farms is an initiative of  the State 
Government, focused on  researching on-farm desalination and 
supporting community desalination systems
Lake Grace water tanks - Courtesy of the Countryman
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              47

THEME 1: RESILIENT WATER
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Future looking 
and coordinated 
total water 
management 
planning. 
Modify – water supply planning
•	
Review and update local water supply plans to ensure total water management and 
climate and industry readiness
•	
Develop a regional water strategy for the Wheatbelt, taking into consideration 
supply and demand requirements of non-potable water, and capacity from scheme, 
groundwater, and surface water resources/Water Supply and Risk Assessments 
(Regional Water Security and Investment Plans)*
•	
Review policy Water Deficiency Declarations, including a review policy of cost of 
scheme water for regional communities in drought and cost of scheme water in 
times of drought
Transform – water supply planning
•	
Review capacity of the scheme system to cope during drought events and risks 
associated in delivery of water for agriculture, businesses, farmland, and regional 
communities; make this information available to decision makers and planners
•	
Conduct water source investigations for all new water sources* 
Better water 
data to support 
planning and 
better regional 
development 
outcomes
Modify
•	
Understand regional water development constraints to support business investment 
decisions and consideration of options to address constraints
•	
Track capacity of strategic community water supplies (pre and during drought) - 
develop a monitoring platform for community to access.
Maintain/Modify
•	
Improve the security of strategic community water supplies through swipe card 
access.
Improving the 
uptake of on farm 
and household 
water supply 
improvement
Modify
•	
Support development of on farm planning tools to accelerate water resource 
planning at local scale (e.g., Farm Cat project acceleration)*
•	
Investigate and promote cost effective water quality treatment options to improve 
water quality on farm
•	
Demonstrations of water monitoring technology on farms
•	
Support access to hydrogeological expertise to investigate groundwater 
opportunities
•	
Develop proactive regional water improvement incentive scheme (Farm water 
planning/Farm water rebate scheme/Rainwater tank subsidies)/Incentivise on farm 
water infrastructure investment.#
Alternative 
non potable 
water source 
investigation and 
development
Transform
•	
Regional groundwater investigations to identify sites suitable for non-potable water 
use (including new technologies/desalination)
•	
Detailed hydrogeological surveys in areas at risk of drought to identify potential 
groundwater resources
•	
Identify groundwater resources suitable for use for agriculture and community use; 
consider partnership with DMIRS to access relevant data
•	
Review options to extend scheme and increase/buffer capacity to fill gaps in high-
risk areas – e.g., installation of buffer tanks
•	
Support and expand desalination pilots in communities and on-farm* 
Modify
•	
Implement water re-use schemes for townsites
•	
CBH Bin Water Harvesting Program: Developing community water supplies in 
the region
48          Wheatbelt Development Commission

*Transformative Actions Identified through AgDots Review
#subject to confirmation with local governments and relevant State agencies
THEME 1: RESILIENT WATER
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Optimising 
use of water in 
communities
Maintain
•	
Water efficient irrigation and landscaping across greenspaces in communities
•	
Government agencies leading the way with water wise practices
Southern 
Wheatbelt 
small water 
infrastructure 
projects*
•	
Implement immediate water related projects to address urgent gaps in the water 
supply system – small infrastructure projects identified below:
•	
Kulin double dam
•	
	East Pingaring community bore
•	
Little Italy large scale community dam or bore
•	
West Kulin large scale community dam
•	
Pingaring community bore
•	
Lake Magenta Water Corporation AA Dam catchment upgrade
•	
Purnta Rock Varley water tank
•	
Lake Grace Town Water Harvesting project
•	
South Newdegate water supply - CBH water harvesting
•	
Varley dam desilting and rock catchment repair
•	
Kondinin town site pipeline to water sporting grounds
•	
Bendering dam and catchment improvement
•	
Karlgarin water supply improvement works
•	
Hyden sporting ground watering system
•	
East Hyden water supply improvement
•	
North Hyden water supply improvement
•	
Wagin Airfield tank installation 
•	
Puntapin Rock dam and catchment renovation
•	
Wedgecarrup bore exploration 
•	
Wastewater recycling scheme
•	
Rifle Range Reserve town dam
•	
Dumbleyung Water Supply – CBH water harvesting
•	
	Dumbleyung community dam/horse dam – stage 2 works roaded catchment 
sealing and dam expansion
•	
Kukerin CBH hardstand and dam desilt
•	
	Tarin Rock II – catchment works, and dam desilt
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              49

10.2 Resilient Communities
Theme Outcome
Communities that are resourceful, adaptable and 
supported to mentally and physically bounce back 
from drought. 
FDF Strategic Priority
Social and Economic Resilience
FDF Objective
Strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, 
regional and remote communities
Current Situation
The uncertainty and financial stress associated with 
drought negatively affects mental health in regional 
areas. Drought contributes to failed businesses, 
causing people to move away and, in turn, reducing 
population, access to skills and services and the 
availability of community services and support 
networks in the region. 
The small communities that are a feature of the 
Southern Wheatbelt are particularly exposed as 
drought impacts on the normally high levels of 
volunteerism as people are less able to participate.
The region is home to several large events, including the Wagin 
Woolarama, the Waverock Weekender and the Kulin Bush Races. In 
2022, the Waverock Weekender and Kulin Bush Races 
sold out tickets in minutes. 
Kulin Bush Races
50          Wheatbelt Development Commission

THEME 2: RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Community Health 
and Wellbeing
Transform - wellbeing
•	
Development of regionally and locally focused wellbeing programs
•	
Ensuring capacity of recreation facilities to support active communities
•	
Support wellbeing measures that build resilience including network strengthening 
activities and programs that increase physical well-being and support positive 
health outcomes*
Modify – wellbeing
•	
Complete local community wellness plans based on local needs and risks
•	
Include an in drought community check-in program and funding schemes that are 
targeted and relevant to regional communities
•	
Establish regular regional visiting mental/financial counselling/physical health 
specialist program, with delivery of program visible and considerate of local 
community needs and sensitivities
•	
Support communities in the development of custom fit Public Health Plans as a 
cooperative arrangement between an LGA and local health facility/s that identify 
specific project initiatives
Events and green 
spaces to support 
community 
connection
Maintain – green spaces
•	
	Provision for and maintenance of green spaces in regional towns to support well-
being during drought events
Modify – local events support
•	
	Investigate and facilitate the fast “stand up” of localised community events to 
support volunteers during drought
•	
	Innovative and flexible community events funding program with reduced red tape
Transform – sharing skills across region
•	
	Program developed to support sharing (skills, capacity and infrastructure) 
between large regional community events
Maintain/Modify – sharing skills across region
•	
Build strong links between Shires and volunteer groups to aid communities and  
reduce burden on “droughted communities”
Access to educational 
opportunities closer 
to home
Maintain/Modify/Transform – building local skills 
•	
Build workforce capability through workforce planning, digital activation, recruit 
and train young people for high demand industries, active employer engagement 
and provide childcare*
•	
	Review option of providing Year 7 in smaller regional communities
•	
	Improved online learning options for regional people, increase capacity for 
gaining qualifications online, including the investigation of subsidised online 
learning options
•	
	Enhance visibility of the Regional Universities Centre/TAFE opportunities in the 
regions;
•	
	Support communities that wish to pursue and establish a strategic relationship 
with their local education institutions including action planning around key and 
unique opportunities and projects to differentiate school offerings to potential 
client parents
Resilience in 
vulnerable cohorts
Transform – resilient RRR women
•	
	Conduct research into the true impact of drought and concepts of “resilience” on 
rural, remote and regional women and investigate appropriate responses from a 
policy perspective*
Transform – resilient RRR women
•	
	Match financial counsellor and drought support workers to demand by developing 
rollout triggers, linked with in-drought check in programs
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              51

THEME 2: RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Development of local 
leadership capacity 
and enhancing social 
capital
Maintain/Modify – building leadership capacity
•	
	Develop local leadership capacity by encouraging participation in leadership 
programs, identify mentors in and out of the community and support scholarship 
for leadership opportunities
•	
	Support for inter-regional tours of growers and community leaders
Modify – building regional networks
•	
	Support an active network of arts, culture and community organisations
•	
	Measures in place to support Grower Group and Landcare structures and 
membership numbers to increase and encourage active participation in Grower 
Group Alliance, SWWA Drought Hub, NRM Group initiatives (includes Red Card for 
the Red Fox)
Transform – enhancing cultural connection
•	
	Cultural connections and learning - increase collaboration between Noongar 
organisations, farmers and natural resource management or landcare groups 
in the planning and implementing land restoration projects to increase climate 
resilience
Increasing community 
capacity to 
understand, plan and 
manage for drought
Transform – addressing housing 
•	
	Build housing supply through innovation – encourage start up activity, support 
communities to build housing companies*
•	
	NFP’s provide incentives for building or renovating in rural communities (loans, 
grants or services), and create a seasonal accommodation matching platform*
Modify – cultural heritage planning
•	
	Develop Cultural Heritage Management Plans to include threats from climate 
change, droughts and dry seasons
•	
	Conduct vulnerability assessments of Aboriginal sites and potential risk of 
drought and climate change impacts
Transform – tailored drought information
•	
	Development of a Filtered Drought Platform to enhance visibility of support 
mechanisms of relevance to the region (e.g., apply a regional filter for regionally 
relevant tools, referral agencies, technical information). Platform would include 
case studies about implementation of climate change adaptation; dry season/
drought preparation on farm and profiles of community profiles; and locations 
and access to relevant research, demonstration sites and trials
Modify – drought policy development
•	
	Government led drought responses require better targeting, guided by drought 
indicators and identified vulnerabilities relevant to Western Australian agricultural 
systems
*Transformative options identified through the AgDots Review
52          Wheatbelt Development Commission

10.3 Resilient Agriculture Systems
Theme Outcome
An agriculture sector that is highly engaged in 
innovating farming systems to be resilient to drought
FDF Strategic Priority
Economic Resilience 
FDF Objective
Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity 
and profitability) of the agricultural sector; Improve 
the natural capital of agricultural landscapes for 
better environmental outcomes
Current Situation
Despite high resilience in terms of agricultural 
production capability, the region is highly exposed 
to the impacts of climate change (increasing 
temperatures, decreasing rainfall, changes in the 
timing of rainfall and increasingly frequent drought) 
and faces several general resilience challenges. 
The agriculture sector across the region has made 
major changes to farm management practices to 
limit the impacts of drought on their businesses. 
There are still areas for further investigation to enable 
continued productive capacity and profitability in the 
face of a drying climate. 
The targeting and extension of research and 
development of climate resilient farming systems 
is considered essential.  Historically, improvement 
of agricultural efficiencies, including adoption new 
farming systems has been the dominant strategy in 
this region for mitigating climate and economic risks.
THEME 3: RESILIENT AGRICULTURE
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
WA Drought Indicators 
Platform and longitudinal 
monitoring program
Maintain/Modify – Climate indicators 
•	
	Adapt the National Climate/Drought Indicators platform for WA
•	
	Develop WA specific climate and drought indicators to support early 
detection, reporting, forecasting for seasonal monitoring, include water 
module and integrate water supply monitoring (Smart Dams, DWER 
community supply monitoring)
Transform – Drought criteria and indices for WA
•	
	Develop appropriate drought criteria for WA, taking into consideration use of 
seasonal rainfall versus the meteorological definition using annual rainfall
•	
	Further investigate the application of drought indices and further research 
on ‘hot droughts’ and current and predicted impacts on agricultural 
production
Modify – monitoring and measuring drought resilience
•	
	Undertake longitudinal monitoring of impacts of drought and adaptive 
capacity
•	
	Use the RDRP DVA methodology and update as new information comes on 
board
•	
	Advocate for improved data quality collected by ABS/ABARES
•	
	Evaluate impact of drought support programs on farm businesses*
Tolga Farms, located in Kulin, provides a perspective on building 
resilience through a focus on improving soil health, 
reducing risk in the business, and lowering inputs. 
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              53

THEME 3: RESILIENT AGRICULTURE
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Better understanding of 
risk
Modify – risk management
•	
	Develop a better understanding of the risk and impact of drought on the 
agricultural supply chain
•	
Investigate improved agricultural weather insurance products and facilitate 
access to relevant products
Transform – risk management
•	
	Build capability for usage of on-farm data for insurance index products*
•	
	Support grower education/training for financial risk management tools*
•	
Advocate for ATO Farm Management Deposit maximum cap to be relative to 
the size of the business* 
Connection and 
collaboration for 
identifying, prioritising 
and implementing 
research and 
development needs for 
the region
Maintain/Modify – research and development extension
•	
	Articulate and communicate key research and development priorities for 
the region through targeted grower group research and development forum 
and future farming system workshops, including strong engagement with 
the SWWA Drought Hub, WA Farming Systems Project and key industry 
stakeholders (MLA, GRDC)
•	
	Identify and implement opportunities for ‘small scale innovation 
demonstrations’ relevant to the region, including digital farm demonstrations 
and household innovations
Modify/Transform – agricultural research 
•	
	Advocate for extended field testing of long coleoptile wheat varieties 
(200mm +) in WA’s low-medium rainfall grainbelt and GM drought tolerant 
wheat and frost* 
•	
	Enhance the visibility of State led farming systems research and 
development, including long term farming systems trial at Merredin and 
Katanning pastures and low carbon livestock research and crop and pasture 
modelling across soil types and rainfall zones
•	
	Trial the Australian Agricultural Sustainability Framework in WA in target 
areas for this program*
•	
	Support R&D and industry development for alternative drought tolerant 
crops*
•	
	Support R&D and industry development for livestock feeding options (carbon 
positive feed supply e.g., asparagopsis)*
•	
	Support R&D and adoption in low input cropping options (VRT, alternative 
fuels, electric vehicles, regen farming)*
•	
	Support R&D and industry development for building soil health (greater 
depth soil amelioration, holistic soil management, biochar)*
•	
	Support R&D and catchment management initiatives and build soil and water 
systems health (e.g., landscape ecology and rehydration)* 
54          Wheatbelt Development Commission

THEME 3: RESILIENT AGRICULTURE
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Building drought, climate 
and carbon literacy to 
support risk management 
planning
Maintain/Modify – extension and decision making support
•	
	Extension program to increase knowledge on climate and weather patterns 
and forecasting 
•	
	Develop regionally specific triggers to support decision making (e.g., 
Agtactics)
•	
	Support initiatives to build regional climate monitoring capacity and data 
sharing
•	
	Extension programs to support land managers to use industry approved 
tools to calculate carbon footprint and to support decision making
•	
	Identify local champions implementing climate change adaption and dry 
season/drought preparation on farm, document and share
•	
	Share stories and messages about dealing with difficult seasonal conditions 
for future learning, with links to Drought Support Platform or SWWA Drought 
Hub
•	
	Support delivery of Farm Business Resilience and Small Business Climate 
Resilience planning workshops in the region
•	
	Support Aboriginal landholders to build drought resilience in their enterprises
Modify – on farm water improvement extension
•	
	Improve the adoption of on farm water management improvements through 
integration of water planning modules into existing farm business planning 
decision making tools
•	
	Extend program to support outcomes of Water Smart farms and incentive 
programs
Modify/Transform – alternative energy options
•	
	Roll out of standalone power systems in the region to support energy 
efficiency on farms and improved reliability
•	
	Identify and implement suitable power supply backup infrastructure 
arrangements to the region’s mobile telecommunications network to 
maintain communications in times of emergencies (i.e., fire)
*Transformative options identified through the AgDots Review
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              55

10.4 Resilient Landscapes
20  Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc. 2022. WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning – Targeted Consultation with Aboriginal 
Communities on Drought in the Lower Wheatbelt (Southern Wheatbelt Pilot Area).
Theme Outcome
Healthy landscapes with natural resources able to 
sustain industry and environmental services
FDF Strategic Priority
Environmental Resilience
FDF Objective
Improve the natural capital of agricultural landscapes 
for better environmental outcomes; Strengthen the 
wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and 
remote communities; 
Current Situation
First Nations community members talked about 
environmental repair as their priority . They also spoke 
of improving farming practices to reduce land clearing 
and minimise the damaging effects of chemicals on 
the landscape20.  
Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc’s three-
year plan for 2021-2024 outlines its priorities as soil 
acidity issues, prevention of further salinity, and land 
use planning support, with their 2020/21 Annual Report 
identifying priorities to increase perennial vegetation 
cover across the Wheatbelt, optimise the Mixed 
Farming Fodder Systems Project, and the Living Lakes 
Project that intends to improve water holding capacity 
and water quality of lake systems across the region.
Noongar Boodja Ranger - courtesy of Wheatbelt Development Commission
The Noongar Boodja Ranger Program, supported by Wheatbelt 
NRM, is supporting natural resource management outcomes and 
employing young Noongars to improve the condition of Country. 
56          Wheatbelt Development Commission

THEME 4: RESILIENT LANDSCAPES
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Natural resource 
condition report card and 
natural capital accounting 
for the regions
Modify:
•	
Develop a program to monitor and record impact of drought on natural 
resources and longitudinally monitor and incorporate into DVAs
Transform:
•	
	Enlist support of regional landcare groups and Noongar Boodja Rangers to 
support resource condition monitoring
•	
	Support national natural capital framework development in WA Agriculture to 
enable natural capital on balance sheets* 
•	
	Pilot participation in national biodiversity trading platform* 
Modify:
•	
	Better articulate the economic and social value of natural resources and 
ecosystem services
Building regional capacity 
to manage natural 
resources
Modify
•	
	Explore the expansion of Noongar Boodja Ranger program
Transform
•	
	Develop a framework for action to ensure culturally appropriate engagement 
and participation of Noongar people in land and water management
•	
	Participation in Biodiversity Stewardship Program through the Drought Hub 
nodes;
•	
	Support the establishment of a sub-regional Landcare group to ensure 
targeting and leveraging of NRM grant opportunities
•	
	Evaluate and expand biodiversity stewardship program and trials in WA* 
•	
	Support projects to test market to develop smaller more integrated projects 
(pollination, soil conditions, biodiversity) + create a model to provide co-
benefits and support local communities and businesses.* 
Wheatbelt revegetation 
for carbon plan
Transform:
•	
	Develop a strategy for optimised carbon plantings, including mapping of 
suitable locations that do not compromise agricultural productivity, provide 
biodiversity benefits and economic opportunities for landholders
Maintain/Modify
•	
	Build carbon farming literacy through delivery of workshops and accessible 
information
•	
	Improve carbon and climate literacy and understanding of the carbon 
market* 
Best bet land and 
infrastructure design 
uses to support improved 
natural resource 
functioning
Modify
•	
	Identify productive uses of land not suitable for cropping or livestock and 
identify appropriate management options
•	
	Explore how on farm and in town water structures can support 
environmental functioning (e.g., better dam design to replicate wetland 
functions and filtering or evaporation controls)
•	
	Road design that considers impact on surface water flows to mitigate saline 
groundwater rise.
Quantifying the impacts of 
regenerative agriculture 
practices during and post 
drought
Modify
•	
	Investigate opportunities for uptake of regenerative agriculture practices 
(e.g.,  increasing groundcover, integration of animals and improving soil 
health)
*Transformative options identified through the AgDots Review
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              57

THEME 5:  RESILIENT REGIONAL ECONOMY
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Addressing constraining 
enabling infrastructure to 
support industry growth 
and regional resilience to 
climate change
Modify/Transform – infrastructure planning and improvement
•	
Undertake regional infrastructure/market constraint audit, including 
power, water, transport, telecommunications, land, housing and labour to 
consolidate understanding and focus investment to building economic and 
social resilience, enhancing capacity to articulate priority needs to relevant 
government agencies
•	
Improve connectivity through co-investment in digital infrastructure (includes 
backhaul + wireless networks to farms)* 
Transform – regional water and energy strategies
•	
	Wheatbelt energy supply strategy developed, or made visible, to support 
ongoing resilience of regional communities, including enhancing rollout 
of alternative, grid independent energy sources (e.g., Stand Alone Power 
Systems) and consideration of requirements to electrify the agricultural 
industry
•	
	Wheatbelt water supply plan (refer to water resilience actions)
Modify – worker accommodation strategy 
•	
	Work with relevant organisations to develop and implement a worker 
accommodation strategy to mitigate accommodation shortages in regional 
communities, including short stay accommodation needs
10.5 Resilient Regional Economy
Theme Outcome
A diverse, forward looking, adaptable business sector, 
not dependent on seasonal conditions
FDF Strategic Priority
Grow the self-reliance and performance of the 
agricultural sector
FDF Objective
Grow the self-reliance and performance (productivity 
and profitability) of the agricultural sector; Strengthen 
the wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and 
remote communities
Current Situation
Agriculture is the primary land use in the region and 
Southern Wheatbelt stakeholders report experiencing 
financial stress because of failed production during 
drought. Farming families sell or euthanise livestock, 
liquidate assets or increase their debt to survive, with 
non-agricultural businesses and individuals in regional 
areas impacted through reduced employment 
opportunities and cash flows. 
There has been an observation of a decline 
in permanent worker populations, partly due 
to changing business practices (farmers and 
businesses employing seasonal or casual workers). 
In dry seasons, the “cheque book goes away,” 
with the reduction in spending impacting on cash 
flow to businesses in the region. Supporting the 
diversification of the economy through encouraging 
business development in the region was considered 
important in enhancing economic and community 
resilience. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that farm numbers and 
on-farm based populations are declining, but regional 
‘town’ populations are not - a gap that warrants 
further investigation. 
There is strong potential to capture opportunities 
for decarbonisation of the economy, with growing 
interest and investment in renewable energy and 
biofuels projects, and large-scale carbon farming 
plantings. Niche value adding on farm, off farm 
diversification, and multi-industry servicing also 
present opportunities to build drought resilience and 
adaptive capacity.
Cambinata Yabbies, located in Kukerin, is a pioneer in diversification. 
The Nenke’s run a gourmet food production business 
alongside their broadacre farm and tourism venture.
58          Wheatbelt Development Commission

THEME 5:  RESILIENT REGIONAL ECONOMY
INTERVENTION 
PROPOSED ACTION
Supporting economic 
diversification and 
business development in 
the region to capitalise on 
growing agriculture and 
mining sectors and the 
region’s unique features
Modify/Transform – tourism planning and product development
•	
	Support Tourism planning processes (destination management plans) and 
invest in regional and local tourism projects*
•	
	Regional collaboration to support tourism product development related to 
key experiences the region, including development of pathways to Wave 
Rock, Wooly Way, links to key events and attractions and the development of 
Hyden Visitor Centre, Dumbleyung Lake Activation (bike & walk trail); Donald 
Campbell Artificial Reality/Virtual Reality Experience; Dumbleyung & Kukerin 
Main Street Tourism Masterplan Destination Attractor implementation
Transform – agribusiness diversification
•	
	Identify and share case studies of agribusiness diversification, build on the 
network of businesses who are value adding commodities and developing 
niche, high value products
•	
	Develop more intensive farming opportunities (eg. horticulture through 
water security assessments and identification of land/water/workforce /
infrastructure packages for investors)* 
Transform – business development and tech skills development 
•	
	Community Resource Centre (CRC) Innovation and Incubation centre strategy 
to explore leveraging the existing CRC networks to support business 
incubation in regional communities, including partnerships with networks 
outside the region (e.g., Pollinators, SpaceCubed, Agri-start) and encourage 
sharing of learning from other communities
•	
	Regional tech support built withing regions (CRC flying squads) and develop 
long term plan to build tech capacity in regions*
•	
	Build tech skill and support in ag (connectivity literacy, data management 
capability, farm tech capability of industry)* 
Transform – understanding and building economic diversity
•	
	Quantify and qualify the impact of small and medium enterprises in the 
region and true dependency on agriculture, including an audit of all regional 
businesses indirectly supporting the Agriculture sector (i.e., supermarkets, 
pubs, roadhouses & hotels) and provide resources to develop business 
specific and project costed resilience plans to prepare for and sustain 
business viability during times of drought e.g., innovative & unique ‘customer 
experience’ plans
•	
	Leverage existing Aboriginal based local businesses to develop business 
specific enhancement plans including costed project activities to improve 
viability, performance and service offerings to customers (e.g., Wuddi Cultural 
Tours); look to develop planning template for new potential Aboriginal 
businesses to follow
•	
	Create a revolving loan fund to encourage regional entrepreneurship and 
innovation and support innovation/resilience training for regional businesses 
(eg. WBN program for regional resilience)* 
•	
Develop socio-economic indicators to assess impact of business and industry 
diversity and impact on climate/drought resilience and agricultural industry 
restructuring, and implement findings into the Drought Vulnerability Assessment
•	
Understand extent and plans for mining activity in the region, including using 
main towns as a FIFO base and explore opportunities for mining projects 
to support local economy, local workforce development and encourage 
business expansion or establishment in the region
•	
Support higher level of integration and planning for major mining resource 
projects and develop community structures to capture benefit from investment*
•	
	Facilitate engagement of landholders and local governments in the 
region with Narrogin Biodiesel plant proponents to increase awareness of 
opportunities to participate;
•	
	Develop in drought support programs and encourage genuine local 
expenditure and local content outcomes
*Transformative options identified through the AgDots Review
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              59

11. Investment framework and implementation of the Plan
The Plan’s proposed themes and interventions have 
been developed with the community and technical 
experts, with delivery and impact targeted at the 
local and regional level, with some interventions 
having significance beyond the Consortia region. 
We acknowledge there are many relevant programs 
already underway or being planned that will support 
the delivery of this Plan and, to the best of our 
knowledge, we have engaged with those programs. 
An Implementation Framework supporting the RDRP 
Plans is under development and will identify priority 
program areas and resourcing opportunities. 
This will be subject to further discussion with 
Consortia local governments and potential delivery 
partners, including the South-West WA Drought 
Resilience, Innovation and Adoption Hub and 
the Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal 
Communities Impact Program regional leads. 
This work will consider feasibility and practicality of 
proposed actions and the quantitative and qualitative 
public-good benefits to the region as described in 
Component 8 of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Plans Independent Review Guide. It is vital that the 
momentum created by developing this initial plan is 
carried through the implementation of this Plan and 
the supporting Investment Framework. 
12. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
12.1 Monitoring, evaluation and learning 
(MEL) framework
Program objectives and outcomes for the RDRP 
Program are comprehensively covered in the WA 
RDRP Monitoring Evaluation and Reporting Plan 
(MERP). The program’s objective included the 
development and publication of three Regional 
Drought Resilience (RDR) Plans for priority agricultural 
areas that have current and predicted future impacts 
of a drying climate. 
The following outlines the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Framework to measure the regional level impact of 
the Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan. 
The Vision for the SW RDRP Plan is for the “Southern 
Wheatbelt to build a structural resilience to drought that 
supports a sustainable and thriving community”.
The Plan Goals and outcomes aligned to each theme 
are:
1.	 Resilient Water – a water system that can 
sustain industry, agriculture and the community 
for two consecutive low rainfall years.
2.	 Resilient community – communities that are 
resourceful, adaptable and supported to 
mentally and physically bounce back from 
drought.
3.	 Resilient agriculture systems – an agriculture 
sector that is highly engaged in innovating 
farming systems to be resilient to drought.
4.	 Resilient landscapes - Healthy landscapes with 
natural resources able to sustain industry and 
environmental services.
5.	 Resilient regional economy – a diverse, forward 
looking, adaptable business sector, not wholly 
dependent on seasonal conditions.
Key Evaluation Questions 
The Key Evaluation Questions to support monitoring 
and evaluation of the impact of the Southern 
Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan) 
are: 
KEQ1: To what extent has the Plan been implemented 
and has impacted on the regional stakeholders’ 
capacity and resources to better plan, manage and 
recover from climate challenges? 
A series of sub-KEQs are posed, aligned to each 
theme:
KEQ1a: To what extent has the Plan contributed 
to regional stakeholders planning and developing 
drought resilience water supplies across the region?
KEQ1ab: To what extent has the plan contributed to 
improving regional stakeholders confidence in coping 
with successive dry seasons? 
KEQ1c: To what extent has the plan influenced 
agriculture sector stakeholders in developing farming 
systems better able to cope with drought or dry 
periods?
KEQ1d: To what extent has the plan influenced 
regional stakeholders capacity to manage natural 
resources?
KEQ1e: To what extent has the plan supported 
diversification of the business sector and has this 
reduced reliance on seasonal conditions to ensure 
viability?
KEQ2: What changes or support might be necessary 
to ensure that the Plan provides an effective 
framework for action where stakeholders can 
effectively work together to implementing those 
actions? 
60          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Assumptions underpinning the implementation of 
the Plan 
The FDF MEL plan identified the following 
assumptions for the plan to be effectively 
implemented: 
Key assumptions affecting outputs to 1–4 year 
outcomes 
•	
Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning; 
•	
Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other on regional planning; 
•	
Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs; 
•	
Relevant planning at other scales can be 
aligned; 
•	
Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them; 
•	
Communities are willing to share learnings with 
other regions; 
•	
There are sufficient learnings to inform future 
program design. 
Key assumptions affecting outcomes from 4+ to 
10+ years 
•	
Supporting consortia of local governments/
stakeholders representing a region will result in 
changes in practice through those regions; 
•	
There are sufficient opportunities for regions to 
implement elements of plans; 
•	
Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience across Australia; 
•	
Regions continue to review, update and 
implement their plans. 
These assumptions will need to be monitored during 
the implementation phase to provide feedback and 
highlight areas that require further intervention. 
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              61

Monitoring progress and evaluating outcomes
The following table outlines the KEQs, and approach to monitoring and evaluation. Alignment with the relevant 
FDF MEL framework high level indicator is provided. Horizons for each outcome are indicated, and include 
immediate (1-4 years), medium (4+ years) and longer term (10+ years).
FDF MEL high level indicators
Key evaluation question
Outcome
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities – all indicators
Economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector – all indicators
Environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of agricultural landscapes 
– all indicators
KEQ1: To what extent have 
the action in the Plans been 
implemented and how have 
those actions impacted on 
the regional stakeholders’ 
capacity and resources 
to better plan, manage 
and recover from climate 
challenges? 
The actions identified in the 
Plan are prioritised, funded 
and contribute to increasing 
the ability of industry and 
communities to plan, manage 
and recover from climate 
challenges. 
Economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector 
•	
Farm business drought risk
•	
	R&D investment and impact
Environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of agricultural landscapes
•	
	Ecosystems services
•	
	NRM practices and farming practices
KEQ1a: To what extent 
has the Plan contributed 
to regional stakeholders 
planning and developing 
drought resilience water 
supplies across the region?
The Southern Wheatbelt’s 
water system can sustain 
industry, agriculture and 
the community for two 
consecutive low rainfall years.
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities
•	
Socio-economic status
•	
Population change, migration
•	
Australian natural disaster resilience index
•	
Personal wellbeing
•	
Social capital
•	
Community and human capital and 
partnerships 
KEQ1ab: To what extent 
has the plan contributed to 
improving the confidence 
of community members in 
coping with successive dry 
seasons?
Southern Wheatbelt 
communities are better 
equipped, emotionally, 
mentally, physically and 
financially, to cope with 
successive dry seasons.
62          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Indicator
How monitored and measured
Who and 
how often
Outcome 
horizon
Number of projects or initiatives 
that have been implemented 
that are aligned to the actions 
outlined in the Plan. 
Active or passive scan/check of relevant 
activities and initiatives happening the region 
against the actions in the Plan
Regular interaction with other FDF programs 
and key stakeholders 
Running the Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment MCAS when datasets are 
updated
WDC, 6 
monthly, or 
as required 
(when 
new data 
becomes 
available)
1-4 years
Number of actions taken 
against the water resilience 
theme
Active or passive scan/check of relevant 
activities and initiatives happening in the 
region against the actions in the water theme
Regular engagement with key stakeholders 
including LGAs, DWER, WC, DPIRD 
WaterSmart Farms program
WDC, 6 
monthly
1-4 years
Increase in non-potable water 
supply volumes
Information on water supply volumes 
reported by LGAs and collated in central 
database 
Build on water supply analysis Collection 
WDC/LGAs, 
annually
4+ years
Number of water deficiency 
declarations (in comparison to 
similar rainfall experienced in 
WDD years)
Active monitoring in low rainfall years
LGA/DWER
4+ years
Number of actions taken 
against the resilient 
communities theme
Active or passive scan/check of relevant 
activities and initiatives happening in the 
region against the actions in the communities 
theme
Regular engagement with key stakeholders 
including LGAs, Health providers, financial 
institutions, Rural Financial Counsellors, Non 
for profit groups and Volunteer organisations 
in those communities
WDC/PAG
1-4 years
Community perceptions 
on community capacity to 
understand, plan and manage 
for drought
Qualitative survey of community leaders and 
“drought responders” such as DPIRD and 
NGOs post dry seasons
WDC/PAG
Post dry 
seasons
Communities improve in terms 
of socio-economic outcomes
ABS Population statistics, volunteerism, SEIFA 
index, Future Wellbeing index
WDC
10+ years
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              63

FDF MEL high level indicators
Key evaluation question
Outcome
Economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector 
•	
Rural economies
•	
Sector performance
•	
Farm financial diversification
•	
Farm business drought risk
•	
Total factor productivity
•	
R&D investment and impact
KEQ1c: To what extent 
has the plan influenced 
agriculture sector 
stakeholders in developing 
farming systems better able 
to cope with drought or dry 
periods?
Southern Wheatbelt 
agriculture sector 
stakeholders are highly 
engaged in innovating 
farming systems to be 
resilient to drought.
Environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of agricultural landscapes 
•	
Ecosystems services
•	
Environmental stewardship uptake
•	
Carbon farming uptake
•	
Groundcover
•	
Soil health
•	
NRM practices and farming practices
KEQ1d: To what extent has 
the plan influenced regional 
stakeholders capacity to 
manage natural resources?
The landscapes of the 
southern Wheatbelt region 
are in good condition, with 
programs in place that 
support the long term 
sustainability of natural 
resources in the region. 
Economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector 
•	
Rural economies
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities
•	
Socio-econmoic status
•	
Financial capital
•	
economic diversity index
•	
community capital
•	
services and infrastructure
KEQ1e: To what extent 
has the plan supported 
diversification of the 
business sector and has this 
reduced reliance on seasonal 
conditions to ensure viability?
The Southern Wheatbelt 
economy is diverse, its 
business and community 
leaders have a forward 
looking mindset, with an 
economy that is not wholly 
dependent on seasonal 
conditions.
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities
•	
Social capital
•	
Community and human capital and 
partnerships
KEQ2: What changes/support 
are/is needed to ensure 
that the Plan best provides 
an effective framework for 
action and stakeholders can 
effectively work together 
towards implementing those 
actions?
Regional stakeholders have 
capacity to come together 
and Plan to manage, respond 
and recover to future climate 
challenges.
64          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Indicator
How monitored and measured
Who and 
how often
Outcome 
horizon
Number of actions taken 
against the resilient agriculture 
systems theme
Active or passive scan/check of relevant 
activities and initiatives happening in the 
region against the actions in the agriculture 
systems theme
Regular engagement with key stakeholders 
including Grower Group Alliance, DPIRD 
Primary Industries Development, Wheatbelt 
NRM
WDC
1-4 years
Farming systems developed 
that are appropriate to the 
region and are deemed to 
support long term resilience to 
drought
Engagement with agriculture stakeholders 
including DPIRD, GGA, and innovative farmers 
in the region
DPIRD
4+ years
Land continues to be used 
productively in the region
REMPLAN economic information
WDC/DPIRD
10+ years
Number of actions taken 
against the resilient landscapes 
theme
Active or passive scan/check of relevant 
activities and initiatives happening in the 
region against the actions in the resilient 
landscapes theme
Regular engagement with key stakeholders 
including DPIRD Sustainability and Biosecurity, 
DPIRD Primary Industries Development, 
Wheatbelt NRM, landcare groups and GGA
WDC
1-4 years
Improvement in the condition 
of natural resources (soil 
health, salinity, acidity, water, 
vegetation) has improved 
compared to existing 
benchmarks
State of the environment reporting
DPIRD, 
WNRM, 
DWER
10+ years
Number of actions taken 
against the resilient regional 
economy theme
Active or passive scan/check of relevant 
activities and initiatives happening in the 
region against the actions in the resilient 
regional economy theme
Regular engagement with key stakeholders 
including LGAs, Wheatbelt Business Network, 
CCIs, DPIRD
WDC
Extent of economic 
diversification in the region
REMPLAN economic statistics (Output, GRP, # 
businesses by sector)
WDC
10+ years
Regional stakeholders are 
actively engaged in and 
undertake regularly review of 
the Plan’s governance to ensure 
effective implementation of 
actions within the Plan.
Number of regional consortia engagements 
related to the Plan. 
Review of the regional consortia group 
governance and effectiveness. 
WDC/PAG
1-4 years
Regional stakeholders are 
aware of the program, with 
knowledge of actions and 
results shared publicly, through 
targeted extension and 
communication programs.
Survey of regional stakeholders to ascertain 
awareness of the Plan and actions. 
Ongoing reporting that identifies potential 
for improvements to governance or 
implementation activities.
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              65

MEL Reporting
The primary audience for KEQs includes:
•	
Wheatbelt Development Commission Board
•	
Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development
•	
Fisheries Future Drought Fund program
•	
Southern Wheatbelt Regional Consortia Local 
Governments. 
Other audiences for tailored messaging include: 
•	
Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Inc
•	
other Wheatbelt Local Governments
•	
the WA Ministers for Agriculture and Food and 
Minister for Regional Development
•	
Grower Group Alliance
•	
The South West WA Drought Resilience and 
Adoption Hub. 
Broader communications on RDRP success and 
learning will be shared publicly, with tailored 
communications for Wheatbelt based agribusiness 
and agriculture supply chain businesses. 
It is proposed that reporting occurs 6 monthly initially 
as governance is established and implementation of 
actions commences. Regularly reporting enables a 
cycle of adaptive management to allow continuous 
improvement, align to other reporting and respond to 
stakeholder interests. 
Early reporting on outputs and short to medium term 
outcomes assists in:
•	
identifying intended or unintended changes;
•	
indicate whether the initiatives outcomes will be 
achieved; 
•	
and inform adaptive management and 
corrective actions.
Ongoing reporting could include information on key 
learning, and actions introduced to improve initiative 
design and delivery. 
Reporting will include written reports and updated 
Drought Vulnerability maps developed through 
analysis of economic, social and environmental 
datasets, with the 2022 Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment and the Drought Vulnerability Index 
serving as baselines of Drought Vulnerability. 
The frequency of reporting and measuring against 
this baseline depends on the quality, availability 
and frequency of collection of the data required for 
analysis; and the availability of relevant expertise 
within DPIRD to run the multi criteria analysis tool. 
MEL management
Roles and resourcing
The Wheatbelt Development Commission will be the 
owner of the MEL Framework. Funds allocated to the 
WDC for the Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
program will be utilised to support monitoring and 
evaluation activities. The WDC will oversee the 
planning, coordinating and conducting of monitoring, 
evaluation, learning and reporting for the framework.
The WDC will review the MEL Framework annually to 
ensure its direction and scope remains relevant to 
the priorities of the Plan.
66          Wheatbelt Development Commission

Risk management
Risks relating to the plan will be managed by the WDC, with oversight held with the WDC CEO. Key risks 
identified and mitigation are as follows:
13. Project Contact
To provide feedback or to obtain further information, contact the Wheatbelt Development Commission at 
info@wheatbelt.wa.gov.au
Risk
Mitigation
Data to be used in MEL is not 
available, does not exist or available 
when required
Indicators selected to be measurable using existing, durable data 
sources. Where data is not available, adjustments of measured 
indicators may be required
Expertise not available within 
DPIRD to support annual multi 
criteria analysis and development of 
updated Drought Vulnerability maps.
Engage early with DPIRD to flag request for multi criteria analysis. 
Failing this, ensure methodology if available, including relevant datasets 
used to enable outsourcing to relevant external expert
WDC unable to resource MEL
Internal staff allocated time in workmaps to undertake MEL activities. 
WDC has FDF project funding set aside for external evaluation services 
if required
False or inappropriate assumptions 
lead to an incorrect understanding 
of the Plan’s impact
The framework acknowledges changes in drought resilience will not 
be solely attributable to delivered actions outlined in the Plan. The 
KEQs are designed to understand the impact of the plan on a range 
of stakeholders behaviour as it relates to decisions and action that 
contribute to building drought resilience.
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              67

POLICY/STRATEGY 
ALIGNMENT
Future Drought Fund
The program will support the long-term outcomes of the Drought Resilience 
Funding Plan 2020 to 2024, specifically:
•	
Creating stronger connectedness and greater social capital within 
communities, contributing to wellbeing and security,
•	
Empowering communities to implement transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to drought, and;
•	
Supporting more primary producers to adopt whole-of-system approaches 
to Natural Resource Management to improve the natural resource base, for 
long term productivity and landscape health.
This plan is key to delivering on the FDF’s three strategic priorities which include:
•	
Economic resilience for an innovative and profitable agricultural sector.
•	
Environmental resilience for sustainable and improved functioning of 
agricultural landscapes.
•	
Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable communities.
WA Government: Diversity 
WA - A framework 
to support the WA 
Government’s Our Priorities 
July 2019
Diversify WA is a blueprint for collaboration between government, industry and 
the community, to supports the WA Government’s focus on creating secure, 
quality jobs, growing and diversifying the economy and attracting investment. 
Primary Industries is one of six priority sectors in which Western Australia has a 
competitive advantage significant growth and diversification opportunity. 
Department of Water, 
Strategic priority - Water 
for Growth 2016 plan
Moving to water sources for a drier climate - this project delivers new 
information to support the development of climate-resilient water resource 
support.
Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional 
Development, Strategic 
Intent 2018-2021
Sustainability - this project ensures future generations of agribusinesses will 
have continued access to support social and economic growth. 
Research, Development and Innovation - this project will enable the creation 
of new knowledge and build capacity within WA on alternative resources that 
incorporate innovative and emerging technology. 
Regional Opportunities - this project will help drive the economic growth, 
local capability and social amenity of regional communities. Regional growth 
opportunities will benefit from investment in priority resources to provide 
drought securities.
DPIRD - Primary Industries 
Plan 2020–2024
Supports DPIRD vision of a more sophisticated, diverse and globally competitive 
sector. Growth and expansion into targeted markets remain at the heart of the 
Plan which complements the State’s economic blueprint, Diversify WA.
Water Corporation, Water 
Forever, Towards Climate 
Resilience 50 year plan, 
2009
Develop new water sources - Water Corporation have acknowledged that 
reducing water use and increasing water recycling will not be enough to 
counteract projected reductions in rainfall. As such, it is necessary that new 
water sources be developed to ensure that there is sufficient supply to meet 
water demand over the next 50 years. Increasing desalination to support 
population growth to optimise water use are part of WC strategic vision.
Western Australian Climate 
Policy - November 2020
The WA Climate Policy outlines the state government’s commitment to climate 
change adaptation and achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. 
Several climate resilience initiatives are identified as part of this policy, including 
the Climate Resilience Action Plan 2022-25, Climate Science Initiative, Climate 
Risk Framework and Pilot Sectoral Adaptation Plans. 
The Climate Science Initiative is aimed at understanding how future 
global emissions will affect WA’s climate. As part of this initiative, climate 
projections will be provided along with communications material that support 
agribusinesses and government with interpreting the projections.
14. Appendix 1: Inland Great Southern Policy, Strategy 
and Plan Alignment
68          Wheatbelt Development Commission

POLICY/STRATEGY 
ALIGNMENT
Regional Investment 
Blueprint - 2015
Developed by each of the nine Regional Development Commissions, the 
Blueprints are plans for investment, outlining transformative strategies, priority 
actions and investment opportunities. They are plans for growth. Each Blueprint 
has five key pillars to grow the region.
The Regional Investment Blueprint 2015 for the Wheatbelt outlines a range of 
strategies to achieve an ambitious target of doubling its population by 2050, 
including key economic insights and evidence-based guidance to support 
regional investment and decision making. 
This blueprint highlights key economic opportunities for the Wheatbelt south 
economy as agriculture, livestock and food supply chains and describes the 
region has having ‘comparative climate resilience.’  The Wheatbelt looks to a 
Vibrant Economy for investment in innovative end of grid water solutions is a 
priority action for the and Valued Natural Amenity to contribute to the protection 
of the economic and social value of the Wheatbelt’s natural amenity.
Wheatbelt Development 
Commission Strategic Plan 
2020-2023
The Wheatbelt Development Commission’s Strategic Plan 2020-2023, identifies 
the following strategic priorities that are relevant to drought resilience:
•	
Enabling infrastructure - Goal 1: Advocate for alternative water and energy 
solutions suitable for the Wheatbelt; Goal 2: Improve digital connectivity 
across the region;
•	
Diversify the economic base - Goal 1: Support economic diversification 
opportunities; Goal 2: Support economic diversification opportunities, 
facilitate regional collaboration, skills building and shared learning;
•	
Sustainable landscapes and communities - Goal 1: Facilitate environmental 
entrepreneurship, build environmental social and economic resilience, 
facilitate new industry opportunities; and
•	
Entrepreneurships and innovation: Goal 1: Facilitate future focused economic 
opportunities to support local entrepreneurs, business leaders and key 
industries to collaborate and harness innovation13.
Wheatbelt South Sub-
Regional Economic 
Strategy 2014
The Wheatbelt South Sub-Regional Economic Strategy 2014 provides an overall 
strategy for the region’s economic development, informing sub-regional and 
regional land use and strategic planning activities. It identifies the Wheatbelt 
South as being a diverse economic region with potential growth opportunities 
in Agriculture, Livestock and Supply Chains, Health and Education, Lifestyle 
Amenity and Retirement, and Tourism.
Entrepreneurial Innovation 
in the Wheatbelt (2016) 
– Regional Development 
Australia Wheatbelt
In its report Entrepreneurial Innovation in the Wheatbelt (2016), Regional 
Development Australia Wheatbelt (RDAW) explores the barriers preventing 
innovation and entrepreneurial growth in the Wheatbelt. The report identifies 
innovation and entrepreneurialism as key community strengths in the Wheatbelt 
(with Narrogin and Wandering categorised in the second tier of innovation), this 
report identifies eastern and southern areas of the Wheatbelt are disadvantaged 
from an innovation perspective. 
Wheatbelt Natural 
Resource Management 
three year plan 2021-2024
WNRM’s three-year plan for 2021-2024 outlines its priorities (relevant to this 
report) as soil acidity issues, prevention of further salinity, and land use planning 
support.
Regional Planning and 
Infrastructure Framework
Identifies each region’s vision and provide an important foundation for future 
decision making, outlining key planning initiatives for each region.
LGA Community Strategic 
Community plans
Includes economic growth and diversification and community sustainability, 
quality long term water supply, water security, and water holding infrastructure 
and harvesting.
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              69

Water Resilience
Digital Resilience
Farm Business 
Resilience
Farming Systems Resilience
•	Water Supply and Risk 
•	Assessments 
(Regional Water 
•	Security and 
Investment Plans)
•	Conduct water source 
investigations for all 
new water sources
•	Support and expand 
desalination pilots 
in communities and 
on-farm
•	Support development 
of on farm planning 
tools to accelerate 
water resource 
planning at local scale 
(eg. Farm Cat project 
acceleration)
•	 Incentivise on farm 
water infrastructure 
investment
•	Improve connectivity 
through co-
investment in digital 
infrastructure 
(includes backhaul + 
wireless networks to 
farms)
•	Build tech skill 
and support in ag 
(connectivity literacy, 
data management 
capability, farm tech 
capability of industry)
•	 Regional tech 
support built withing 
regions (CRC flying 
squads) and develop 
long term plan to 
build tech capacity in 
regions
•	Build capability for 
useage of on-farm 
data for insurance 
index products
•	 Support grower 
education and 
training for risk 
management tools to 
support financial risk 
management
•	Advocate FMD 
maximum cap to be 
relative to the size of 
the business
•	 Evaluate impact 
of drought support 
programs on farm 
businesses to inform 
future strategies
•	Support R&D and industry 
development for alternative 
drought tolerant crops (legume, 
GM + long coleoptile wheat, 
alternative oil seed crop, 
bushfoods + cultivate endemic 
species)
•	Support R&D and industry 
development for livestock 
feeding options (carbon positive 
feed supply eg asparagopis)
•	Support R&D and adoption 
in low input cropping options 
(VRT, alternative fuels, electric 
vehicles, regen farming)
•	Support R&D and industry 
development for building 
soil health (greater depth 
soil amelioration, hostile soil 
management, biochar)
•	Support R&D and catchment 
management initiatives and 
build soil and water systems 
health (eg landscape ecology 
and rehydration)
Presented as an overarching framework to suggest no hierarchy in research options, and the areas of 
transformation are linked and impact each other
Natural Capital Resilience
Community Resilience
Regional Economy Resilience
•	Natural Capital Resilience 
Community Resilience Regional 
Economy Resilience
•	Support national natural capital 
framework development in WA 
Ag to enable natural capital on 
balance sheets
•	Evaluate and expand biodiversity 
stewardship program and trials 
in WA
•	Pilot participation in national 
biodiversity trading platform
•	Improve carbon and climate 
literacy and understanding of the 
carbon market
•	Support projects to test market to 
develop smaller more integrated 
projects (pollination, soil 
conditions, biodiversity) + create a 
model to provide co-benefits and 
support local communities and 
businesses
•	Build workforce capability 
through workforce planning, 
digital activation, recruit and train 
young people for high demand 
industries, active employer 
engagement + provide childcare
•	Build housing supply through 
innovation – encourage start up 
activity, support communities to 
build housing companies NFP’s, 
provide incentives for building or 
renovating in rural communities 
(loans, grants or services), and 
create a seasonal accommodation 
matching platform
•	Support well being measures that 
build resilience including network 
strengthening activities and 
programs that increase physical 
well being and support positive 
health outcomes 
•	Support Tourism planning 
processes (destination 
management plans) and invest in 
regional and local tourism projects
•	 Support higher level of 
integration and planning for major 
mining resource projects and 
develop community structures to 
capture benefit from investment
•	Develop more intensive farming 
opportunities eg. horticulture 
through water security 
assessments and identification of 
land/water/workforce/infrastructure 
packages for investors
•	Create a revolving loan 
fund to encourage regional 
entrepreneurship and innovation 
and support innovation/resilience 
training for regional businesses 
eg. WBN program for regional 
resilience
Presented as an overarching framework to suggest no hierarchy in research options, and the areas of 
transformation are linked and impact each other
15. Appendix 2: Transformative Option review
A high level review of potentially transformative options developed as part of a global review of drought 
resilience innovation. Completed by AgDots in 2022.
70          Wheatbelt Development Commission

16. Appendix 3: Supporting Technical Reports
Technical Report
Reference
Socio-economic and literature review 
(Anna Dixon Consulting)
Anna Dixon Consulting, 2022. Regional Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment: Background Research and Analysis. Prepared for 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Drought Indices (CSIRO)
Gladish, D. and Hochman, Z., 2022, Investigating the Application of 
Drought Indices to Western Australia, Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation
Defining Drought in WA (Curtin 
University)
Mastrantonis, S. 2022, Defining drought in Western Australia, 
Centre for Crop and Disease Management, Curtin University, 
Bentley, WA.
Drought Risk Assessment (DPIRD)
Bruce, J., Bourne, A., Guthrie, M., Veljanoski, I., Koh, L. and Parker, K., 
2022. Drought Priority Areas Map for Southwest Western Australia, 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Economic and Environmental Impacts 
of Drought (LA One Economics and 
Consulting)
Anderton, L., 2022. Investigating the environmental impacts of 
drought in regional Western Australia, LA One Consulting, Prepared 
for Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Anderton, L., 2022. The Economic Impacts of Drought, Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning, LA One Consulting, Prepared for 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Social Impacts of Drought (UWA)
Lester, L., Flateau, P., and Kyron, M., 2022, Understanding the Social 
Impacts of Drought, Centre for Social Impact Report, UWA, Perth, 
WA.
Transformative Review (AgDots)
Agdots, 2022. Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program Global 
Literature Review, Key Drivers Report, Prepared for Department of 
Primary Industries and Regional Developmen
Regional Water Issues and Policy 
Analysis Wheatbelt and Great Southern 
(Aurora)
Clifton, P. and Price, M., 2022. Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
– Regional Water Issues and Policy Analysis – not-potable water – 
Southern Wheatbelt and Great Southern, Western Australia, Aurora 
Environmental, Albany, WA
Water Supply and Demand Assessment 
(Murdoch University)
Husbands, B. and Ruprecht, J., 2022. Water Supply Demand 
and Supply Assessment for 13 Shires for the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning Program, Harry Butler Institute, Murdoch 
University, Murdoch, WA
Valuing Noongar People and Practices in 
Drought Resilience (Noongar Landcare 
Enterprises
Noongar Land Enterprise Group, 2022, Valuing Noongar People and 
Practices in Drought Resilience, Perth, WA
WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
Grass Roots Community Consultation, 
Southern Wheatbelt Pilot Area
Wheatbelt NRM Inc, 2022, WA Drought Resilience Planning Grass 
Roots Community Consultation, Southern Wheatbelt Pilot Area
WA Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
– Targeted Consultation with Aboriginal 
Communities on Drought in the Lower 
Wheatbelt
Wheatbelt NRM Inc, 2022, WA Drought Resilience Planning – 
Targeted Consultation with Aboriginal Communities on Drought in 
the Lower Wheatbelt
Southern Wheatbelt Climate Resilience Plan 2022              71

Collgar Wind Farm, Merredin  - Tourism Western Australia

Wheatbelt Development Commission
75 York Road
PO Box 250 Northam WA 6401
(08) 9622 7222
info@wheatbelt.wa.gov.au
wheatbelt.wa.gov.au