Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan 
Southern Tableland Councils 
bordering the ACT
Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional, Snowy Monaro Regional 
and Yass Valley Councils
October 2024

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
ii
Abbreviations 
Term
Definition
ABARES
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences 
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
ACT
Australian Capital Territory
Bureau
Bureau of Meteorology
CDI
Combined Drought Indicator
CoREM
Coalition of Renewable Energy Mayors
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
DAFF
DCCEEW
Department of Climate Change, the Environment, 
Energy & Water New South Wales (see DPE)
DDI
Drought Direction Index 
DPE
Department of Planning and Environment (former DPIE and now DCCEEW)
DRAMP
Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy
DPIRD
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development 
EDI
Economic Diversity Index
EDIS
Enhanced Drought Information System
FDF
Future Drought Fund
FRRR
Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal
GFC
Global Financial Crisis
GRP
Gross Regional Product
GVA
Cross Value Added 
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRSAD
Index of Socio-Economic Advantage and Disadvantage
LGA
Local Government Area
LLS
Local Land Services
MEL
Monitoring, Evaluation Learning
NDA
National Drought Agreement
NPWS
National Park and Wildlife Services
Term
Definition
NSW
New South Wales
PCG
Project Control Group
PDI
Potential drought impact
QPRC
Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council 
RAA
Rural Assistance Authority
RCP
Representative Concentration Pathway
RDC
Rural Research and Development Corporations
RDA
Regional Development Australia
RDRP
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
REDS
Regional Economic Development Strategy
REZ
Renewable Energy Zone
RFCS
Rural Financial Counselling Service
RIC
Regional Investment Corporation 
RIRDC
Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation
SEIFA
Socio-economic Indexes for Australia
SMRC
Snowy Monaro Regional Council 
SPI
Standardised Precipitation Index
SRG
Stakeholder Reference Group
SSMI
Standardised Soil Moisture Index
WTP
Water Treatment Plant
WUE
Water Use Efficiency
YVC
Yass Valley Council

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
iii
Key Terms  
Term
Definition
Absorptive 
capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to continue without adapting or 
changing their behaviour in response to environmental and socioeconomic 
changes (Béné et. al., 2012).
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response 
to actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce 
vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
Adaptive capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental 
and socioeconomic changes.
Adaptive 
governance
Co-ordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between systems 
when designing interventions and for their implementation and evaluation.
Co-design
The process of partnership to develop and formulate project delivery and 
agreed objectives and needs, using participatory methods. A process of 
working together utilising generative and explorative processes.
Climate Change
Global, long-term shifts in average weather conditions, such as becoming 
warmer, wetter, or drier over several decades or longer.
Drought
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, 
abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient to 
meet our normal use (BoM, 2024). Drought is complex and multi-dimensional 
and impacts society, the environment and the economy. There are many 
types of drought including meteorological, agricultural, hydrological and 
socioeconomic. Definitions are provided within the report.
Economic 
resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and 
stressors without changing the economic status or outcomes.
Environmental 
resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of 
shocks and stressors while maintaining natural processes and ecosystem 
services.
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups 
and agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be 
formally institutionalised, or informal.
Intervention 
options
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, 
initiatives and investments that are planned to bring about change in the 
system (Maru et. al., 2018).
Local knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of 
lived experience within a landscape, bearing witness to the operation of 
systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people 
interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
Preparation
Action taken to reduce the impact of an event that occurs and accelerate 
the recovery period.
Term
Definition
Recovery
A return to longer term viability.
Resilience
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to 
maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacks (Walker et. 
al., 2004). Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic 
resilience, environmental resilience, social resilience, adaptation and 
transformation. Resilience may also require a change in structure, 
function and identity to adapt to change.
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, 
recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated with such 
systems (Reisinger et. al, 2020).
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples 
include: major storms, floods, bush fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, 
terrorism and cyber-attacks’ (City of Sydney, 2018).
Social resilience
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks 
and stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions.
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse 
effect, e.g. drought.
Systems
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a 
complex ‘whole’. 
Theory of change
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain 
how and why outcomes and impacts will be achieved through use, 
implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities and outputs 
(Maru et. al., 2018).
Trends
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past 
and are expected to shape change into the future.
Threshold
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable 
causes a system to shift to a qualitatively different regime. Also referred 
to as a tipping point (Folke et. al., 2010).
Transformation
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different 
structure, functions, feedback and identity (Folke et al., 2010).
Trigger point
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management 
intervention. Trigger points are usually defined in the planning phase 
(Wise et. al., 2014).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
iv
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge that Aboriginal Peoples were the First Peoples of this land. We recognise all of the Traditional 
Custodians of the region covering the local government areas within this plan. We pay respect to knowledge 
holders and community members of the land and waters and to Elders past, present and emerging.
In compliance with the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (2007), we wish to ensure 
that, while we continue to support the towns and villages in our region, maintain our communities and build 
viable futures for our next generations, we also ensure the Rights of Indigenous people are respected.
A successful implementation of this project would enable Aboriginal communities to be involved in advocating 
for good cultural, environmental, and economic outcomes.
In making decisions it will be important that we consider and manage impacts on local communities and work in 
partnership with them to create sustainable practices.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) program is one of the four focus areas of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund (FDF). These plans focus on innovative ways to build regional drought resilience, 
taking steps to plan how to stem the impact of future drought on our region.
supporting local governments to work together regionally to plan for drought resilience proactively and pragmatically.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
v
A note from the Mayors
We, as the Mayors of this region, are proud to present 
the Regional Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan). The 
Plan has been developed through the collaboration 
of the Queanbeyan-Palerang, Snowy Monaro, and 
Yass Valley communities. We have worked closely 
with the Department of Regional NSW and the 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO) to deliver this Plan.
The project was jointly funded by the Australian 
and NSW Governments under the Future Drought 
Fund. We thank them for the opportunity that 
funding has provided our communities.
This document highlights the fact our Councils are 
often called upon to help each other in times of 
crisis and that we have developed highly effective 
working relationships. This Plan is part of our 
ongoing commitment to that collaboration.
With recent droughts and floods, we acknowledge 
the need to prepare our communities for our 
changing climate conditions. This Plan outlines 
the work we need to take as a larger community 
to become more resilient to that change and more 
adaptable to the climate conditions we face.
This Plan reflects the desires of our community for us 
to achieve the following, even in the face of drought:
•	 sustainable landscapes
•	 connected people, cultures and improved 
community wellbeing.
•	 diverse and resilient local businesses and 
regional economies
•	 resilient built infrastructure and complementary 
technologies, and
•	 good governance models that share knowledge 
and promote skills development.
We acknowledge that we cannot deliver this Plan 
alone. We will need our communities and all levels of 
government to work together to deliver the outcomes 
presented in the Regional Drought Resilience Plan. It is 
through these strong partnerships and working together 
that we can deliver the results outlined in this Plan.
Kenrick Winchester 
Mayor Queanbeyan Palerang Regional Council
Chris Hanna 
Mayor Snowy Monaro Regional Council
Jasmin Jones 
Mayor Yass Valley Council

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
vi
Canberra
ACT
Victoria
Wollongong
Wagga Wagga
Gundagai
Binalong
Murrumbateman
Goulburn
Boorowa
Batlow
Jindabyne
Cooma
Bombala
Bredbo
Braidwood
Bungendore
Queanbeyan
Kosciuszko
NationalPark
Ulladulla
Batemans Bay
Narooma
Merimbula
Yass
Snowy Monaro Regional
Snowy Monaro Regional
Queanbeyan Palerang Regional
Queanbeyan Palerang Regional
Yass Valley
Yass Valley

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
vii
Quick Guide
Drought 
Resilience 
1
2
Region and 
Communities
6
Conclusion
5
Drought 
Resilience 
Actions
4
Listening 
to Local 
Experience
3
Drought, 
climate and 
impacts

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
viii
Contents
Acknowledgements	
iv
A note from the Mayors	
v
1.	
Drought resilience 	
2
1.1.	
Vision 	
2
1.2.	
Plan background	
 2
1.3.	
Key inputs to the Plan 	
3 
1.4.	
A Plan for drought resilience 	
4
1.5.	
Drought resilience framework 	
4 
1.6.	
Drought Resilience at a glance 	
11 
1.7.	
Development of the Plan 	
3
1.8.	
Region and Communities 	
17
2.	
Region and communities 	
18
2.1.	
Introduction to the region 	
18
2.2.	 Land use 	
25
2.3.	 First Nations Peoples 	
29
2.4.	 Agriculture	
29
2.5.	 The Region’s water 	
31
2.6.	 The region’s infrastructure 	
34
3.	
Drought, climate and impacts 	
38
3.1.	
What is drought 	
38
3.2.	 Historical droughts in Southern 
Tablelands of Eastern NSW 	
41
3.3.	 Regional weather and climate 	
42
3.4.	 Future drought projections 	
44
3.5.	 Future climate scenario 	
48
3.6.	 Future scenarios 	
48
3.7.	 Drought related impacts 	
49
4.	
Listening to local experience 	
52
4.1.	
Local stories of resilience 	
52
4.2.	 What we heard	
 65
4.3.	 Key Themes 	
70
4.4.	 Initiatives refinement	
72
5.	
 Drought Resilience Actions 	
74
5.1.	
What has already been done to build drought resilience	 74
5.2.	 Opportunities identified	
 74
5.3.	 Priority actions	
77
5.4.	 Theory of Change 	
77
5.5.	 Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 	
93
6.	
Conclusion	
108

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
1
Drought resilience
01

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
2
1.	 Drought Resilience
1.1.	 Vision
“The Plan's vision was created via an iterative 
process across the stakeholder workshops that 
were held across the three Local Government 
Areas (LGAs). Where workshop participants 
were asked to provide words that symbolised 
how they would feel if they were more resilient 
through increased strength in their economic, 
environmental and social components of their 
communities. 
Following inputs from the first workshops those 
words most widely recognised were crafted 
into a vision statement and feedback sought 
during the second workshops. The final vision 
statement was tested through the Project 
Control Group which consisted of members from 
each of the Councils.
Our community has the confidence to act and 
address the impacts of drought, empowering us 
to adapt to change and advance our resilience. 
We are nurturing communities that thrive 
through collaboration and proactive planning. 
By fostering a culture of inclusivity, valuing local 
knowledge and embracing diversity, we will 
navigate change, ensuring a sustainable future 
for all generations.”
1.2.	 Plan background
Drought is expected and will continue to impact the 
Southern Tableland Councils bordering the ACT into the 
future. Drought affects all aspects of the community, 
resulting in major social, economic, and environmental 
impacts (Abunyewah, 2023). The National Drought 
Agreement (signed in 2018, with a new agreement 
expected to come into effect in July 2024) commits 
the Australian, State, and Territory Governments to 
prioritise objectives and outcomes that enhance long-
term preparedness, sustainability, resilience, and risk 
management for farming businesses and farming 
communities in Australia (Department of Agricultural, 
Fisheries and Forestry, 2022). 
This includes establishing and operating a Future 
Drought Fund (FDF). 
The FDF was established in 2019 to provide continuous 
funding for drought resilience initiatives (DAFF, 2024)
The FDF seeks to enhance the public good by building 
drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural sector, the 
agricultural landscape and communities. The intent 
is an outcome from the 2009 Inquiry into Government 
Drought Support which advocated for communities and 
farming to become more self-reliant and refocus on 
the broader issue of climate variability (resulting from 
climate change) (Productivity Commission, 2009).
The eight FDF programs include: Climate Services 
for Agriculture Platform, Drought Resilience Self-
Assessment Tool, Farm Business Resilience, Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning, Drought Resilience 
Innovation and Adoption Hubs, four grant programs, 
Drought Resilience Leaders and Networks to Build 
Drought Resilience (DAFF, 2024)
The FDF is intended to deliver against three inter-
connected strategic priorities (DAFF, 2024a):
•	 economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector.
•	 environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscapes.
•	 social resilience for resourceful and 
adaptable communities.
In February 2024, the new Commonwealth Government’s 
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2024 – 2028 came 
into effect. This Funding Plan provides a principles-
based framework to guide all FDF spending. To support 
the Funding Plan, a Future Drought Fund Investment 
Strategy (2024 to 2028) will be released in mid-2024, 
to provide a detailed 4-year plan for drought resilience 
investments under the fund.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program 
is part of the FDF (co-funded by the Commonwealth 
(DAFF) and the Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development (DPIRD)), which has the aim 
of supporting local governments to work together to 
proactively plan for drought resilience (DAFF, 2024) The 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan (this Plan) aims to:
•	 Identify ways for Councils to support their region’s 
resilience to future droughts
•	 Devise actions communities can undertake to build 
their drought resilience across regions
•	 Following development of this Plan, implementation 
funding will be available to the participating 
consortium of Councils across Australia under the 

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
3
1.3.	 Key inputs to the Plan
The following documents were considered through 
the development of this Plan and incorporated into the 
stakeholder engagement activities. Please note this 
is not a comprehensive list of the literature that was 
reviewed to inform the Plan.
Regional documents including: 
•	 Respective council’s strategic planning documents 
(QPRC, SMRC and YVC)
•	 Local economic development strategies
•	 NSW Regional Water Strategies 
•	 Draft Regional Water Strategies:
	– Murrumbidgee River 
	– Murray Darling Basin Authority Plan 
and related documents 
•	 Regional Economic Development Strategies 
(Queanbeyan-Palerang, Snowy Monaro, Southern 
Tablelands)
•	 Resilience Principles - Infrastructure Australia’s 
approach to resilience
•	 Charles Sturt University Southern Innovation 
Hub Baselining Drought - Developing a baseline 
understanding of farmer and community perceptions 
of drought
•	 Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management 
Policy (DRAMP) Framework 2018
•	 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
These regional Councils recognise the importance 
of preparing for and developing a robust community 
in good times to lessen the impact of drought and 
accelerate the recovery period. This Plan looks at how 
the whole of the community can benefit from working 
together to strengthen resilience. 
In November 2022, the NSW Government released 
a refreshed Vision for Regional NSW. ‘Our Vision 
for Regional Communities’ sets out the next wave 
of priorities – and is backed by a targeted plan to 
bring them to life. The Plan focuses on how the NSW 
Government is planning for the next generation and 
beyond, with the intention to build strong communities 
that have the skills, knowledge, infrastructure, and 
quality local services. This also includes building 
resilient communities with the capacity to withstand 
times of economic and social hardship and shocks like 
drought by working with local communities to make life 
better across regional NSW (NSW Government, 2022). 
In February 2024, the new Drought Resilience Funding 
Plan 2024 – 2028 came into effect. This Funding Plan 
provides a principles-based framework to guide all 
FDF spending. To support the Funding Plan, a Future 
Drought Fund Investment Strategy (2024 to 2028) will 
be released in late-2024, to provide a detailed 4-year 
plan for drought resilience investments under the fund. 
Implementation funding will be available for approved 
The purpose of this Southern Tableland Councils 
bordering the ACT Drought Resilience Plan is to help 
support the region to better plan for, and become more 
resilient to, the impacts of drought over time. Resilience 
is important in rural and regional communities. It 
reinforces the connectedness of community members 
and their ability to manage through seasonal conditions 
(that create uncertainty and present a challenge to their 
businesses and way of life). 
The most recent Annual Report for the National Drought 
Agreement recommends that assistance and funding for 
drought resilience should be identified through a greater 
level of community-driven, place-based resilience 
activities. This reflects the growing recognition that 
communities are best able to self-identify what actions 
or skills sets they need to increase their resilience 
to drought (DAFF, 2023). Moreover, it recognises the 
unique challenges communities face from successive 
droughts and a community’s unique demographic, 
social, and economic characteristics – requiring 
governments to design and deliver bespoke approaches 
to service delivery (DPIRD, 2022).In accordance with 
this, this Plan has been co-designed between the 
three Councils and their respective communities in a 
collaborative, partnership approach that has drawn on 
the experience and input of those who live and work in 
the region. 
This Plan provides an opportunity to identify actions 
that will directly assist the region to strengthen social, 
economic and environmental resilience, supporting 
communities in future droughts. It builds on the wealth 
of drought effort, research, and planning across the 
three LGAs - as well as the NSW and Commonwealth’s 
work and investment including the Regional Economic 
Development Strategies, the Regional Water Strategies, 
and the FDF.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
4
The costs of drought are spread across economic, 
social, and environmental factors. The toll taken on 
regions and their communities has been enormous and 
the impacts often linger for decades.
1.5.	 Drought resilience framework
1.5.1.	Defining resilience
Resilience is a broad concept that encompasses a 
range of interconnected factors and conditions. For 
a system to be resilient it must have the ability to 
absorb a disturbance (sometimes referred to as shocks 
and stresses) and reorganise to maintain the existing 
function’s structure (Walker et al., 2004). However, it is 
important that the system maintains options to develop 
and remains open to transformative and non-linear 
change (Nelson, 2011).
1.4.	 A Plan for drought resilience 
Of all climate and weather-related conditions 
affecting Australia, drought is often the most 
challenging, with the Southern Tablelands Councils 
bordering the ACT region being prone to periods 
of persistent drought with downward trends in 
rainfall and streamflow being well documented. 
Drought is a defining feature of the climatic cycle of 
the Australian landscape. In a large part this owes to 
our geography. Our continent spans the latitudes of the 
subtropical high-pressure belt. This is an area of sinking, 
dry, stable air and usually clear skies. The far north 
and south of the country come under the influence of 
reasonably regular rain-bearing systems for at least part 
of the year. The east coast is normally well watered by 
moisture from weather driven by the Tasman and Coral 
Seas. However, over most of the country rainfall is low 
and erratic. Even in the wetter areas, very dry years can 
disrupt normal activities and lead to water shortages 
(BOM, n.d.). 
As such, droughts will come again, and they are 
anticipated to get worse in parts of the country as a 
2019; (Timbal, 2015); (CSIRO and BoM, 2023) Droughts 
are challenging, not just for farming families, but entire 
communities and regions.
Organisation (CSIRO) Drought Resilience mission (2022) 
•	 NSW Government: draft South East and Tablelands 
Regional Plan 2041
•	 Canberra Region Joint Organisation – Statement of 
Strategic Priorities
•	 South East NSW Resilience Blueprint (2022)
•	 Government organisation publications including 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics and Sciences (ABARES), Australian 
Bureau of Statistics (ABS), Bureau of Meteorology 
(BoM), CSIRO, Infrastructure Australia, Productivity 
Commission, Rural Industries Research and 
Development Corporation (RIRDC), Grains Research 
and Development Corporation (GRDC) and others.
•	 Government department publications including DAFF 
•	 Academic publications.
Additionally, contributions from a broad range of 
community and stakeholders – including community 
organisations, First Nations, businesses, service 
industries, producers, and volunteers – were 
instrumental in the co-design of this Plan.
It is intended for this Plan to be a living document and to 
be considered and factored into a range of other plans 
and strategies by local government, state government, 
non-government organisations, not-for-profits, 
businesses, and others.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
5
For radically changing 
the system or building 
a new system if 
maintaining and 
modifying the existing 
system won’t work.
For modifying 
the system 
when needed.
For maintaining of 
key functions and 
structures of a 
system in the face 
of shocks.
Absorptive 
capacity
Adaptive 
capacity
Transformative 
capacity
1.5.2.	 Resilience capacity
This Plan focusses on three types of resilience capacity 
(see Figure 1). Absorptive capacity is often described 
in traditional resilience terms as the ability to absorb 
shocks or to ‘bounce-back’ (Haider & Cleaver, 2023) 
(Haider & Cleaver, 2023). Adaptive capacity is the next 
step on the resilience journey and entails having the 
necessary resources to learn and adapt the system 
(Haider & Cleaver, 2023). However, it is increasingly 
being recognised that adaptation is insufficient to deal 
with large-scale environmental issues like climate 
change. Transformation, which is the shift to a new 
system including change in priorities and leading to 
changes across multiple scales, is sometimes the 
best way to deal with large scale issues. However, 
transformation is not always needed or ‘good’ and in 
certain circumstances adaptation is the best course of 
action (Haider & Cleaver, 2023). These three concepts 
are used in Section 5 to indicate how the proposed 
resilience action may contribute to resilience building 
in the region.
Figure 1  Resilience capacity
Resilience thinking
Resilience thinking incorporates the notions of 
absorption, adaptation, and transformation into a unified 
approach. It investigates how multiple systems, including 
people and environmental systems, can still operate 
when there are disruptions and uncertainty (Stockholm 
Resilience Centre, n.d.). It offers a structured framework 
and principles for developing plans and strategies aimed 
at enhancing resilience across all levels, from national, 
regional, and local (Folke et. al., 2010; Greet et al., 2021). 
These different capacities are vital components 
of building resilience, and this holistic perspective 
acknowledges resilience is not a one-size-fits-all 
concept and tailored approaches are necessary 
to address the diverse and dynamic challenges 
communities, ecosystems, and organisations / 
businesses face. 
Creating a resilient community demands there to be 
an awareness of the nature of disasters in the region, 
acknowledge where the community is vulnerable 
to allow for growth, and not be afraid to probe the 
boundaries of a resilience system (Greet et al., 2021). 
The components integrated in resilience thinking are 
vital if a region, community or business are to thrive, but 
building resilience cannot be achievable if it isn’t an ‘all 
hands-on deck approach’ (Greet et al., 2021).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
6
be a measure of drought vulnerability and resilience, 
describing the degree to which Australian agriculturally 
dependent communities are likely to be adversely 
affected by a drought and their ability to withstand 
those impacts. 
(such as considering the PDI ranking) and how that can 
be minimised, as well as how a community can build in 
adaptive capacity to manage the impact of droughts 
(overall drought vulnerability and resilience). Whether 
the PDI will cause lasting loss or harm depends on the 
community’s adaptive capacity (ABARES, 2022a). 
The project is ongoing, and the next step includes 
developing indicators of potential adaptive capacity 
of communities, to better understand the likely 
resilience of a community to drought (ABARES, 2022a). 
Consequently, the output of the framework would 
Resilience assessment
ABARES developed a national index to rank rural or 
regional communities by their potential to be adversely 
affected by drought (ABARES, 2022a). As shown in 
Figure 2, this index combines drought exposure and 
drought sensitivity (at the farm enterprise level), and 
data representing community sensitivity (agricultural 
dependence of a community), to initially produce an 
index of ‘Potential drought impact’ (PDI). 
Within the Farm Sensitivity measure there is drought 
exposure and drought sensitivity. Drought exposure 
represents the amount of external stress farm 
enterprises experience due to the climate variability 
they are exposed to at their location (ABARES, 2022a). 
Drought sensitivity represents the effects that climate 
variability has on farm outcomes, reflecting the 
responsiveness of farm production systems to short-
term climate variability and short-term management 
responses (ABARES, 2022a). Currently, only broadacre 
farms are represented by this indicator. 
The Community Sensitivity measure represents the 
reliance of a LGA on employment in agricultural 
production industries (broadacre and irrigated) and 
related downstream food and beverage manufacturing 
(for example, meat processing, dairy product 
manufacturing and fruit and vegetable processing) 
(ABARES, 2022a). Community sensitivity is measured as 
the proportion of people employed in those agricultural 
industries compared to total employment in the LGA. 
This PDI index can be applied consistently across LGAs 
and together with an understanding of their adaptive 
capacity provides comparison of the community’s 
resilience and vulnerability to drought. The PDI index 
highlights the need for drought resilience plans to 
consider the risk and exposure of a region to drought 
Farm sensitivity
Potential drought impact
Change in farm outcomes 
(e.g. proﬁt, household income) 
and community sensitivity
Drought vulnerability and resilience
Ability to absorb, respond and recover from drought
Drought exposure
• Rainfall volume
• Soil moisture
• Min and max temperature
Drought sensitivity
• Technology
• Management practices
• Farm ﬁxed inputs (e.g. 
land, livestock, 
equipment
• Farm and farmer 
characteristics
Community sensitivity
• Agricultural employment
• % working in agriculture
• Ratio of agriculture and 
agri-industry downstream 
employment to total 
employment
Adaptive capacity
• Physical capital
• Natural capital
• Finacial capital
• Human capital
• Social capital
• Economic diversity
Figure 2 Drought Indicator Framework (Source: ABARES 2022)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
7
A Tableau© dashboard generates an ordinal (0 to 1) 
Potential Drought Impact (PDI) ranking of agriculturally 
dependent communities based on their potential to 
be impacted by drought. The most sensitive LGAs 
(with both high farm sensitivity and high community 
sensitivity) receive a ranking near 1 and the least (with 
both low farm sensitivity and low community sensitivity) 
receive a rating near 0 (ABARES, 2022a). 
Table 1 provides the data contained in the Tableau© 
dashboard as well as including the Index of Socio-
Economic Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD). 
The IRSAD is one of the socio-economic indexes for 
Australia (SEIFA). The IRSAD summarises information 
about the economic and social conditions of people 
The ABARES technical report (2022a) lists five forms 
of capital, or resources, which are positively related to 
the community’s ability to manage or cope with impacts. 
These are:
•	 human capital—labour and influences on the 
productivity of labour, including education, skills 
and health
•	 social capital—claims on others by virtue of 
social relationship
•	 natural capital—land, water, and biological resources
•	 physical capital—produced by economic activity, 
including infrastructure, equipment and technology
•	 financial capital— savings and credit
While the adaptive capacity measure is yet to be 
fully developed, the economic diversity index (EDI), 
which is a sub-component of adaptive capacity, has 
been calculated for all LGAs. “The EDI reflects the 
composition of the local economy across all industry 
of employment sectors compared to the Australian 
economy” (ABARES, 2022a). The EDI scale ranges 
from zero (0) to one (1) and a score closer to one (1) 
indicates that the LGA has an employment composition 
resembling that of Australia (ABARES, 2022a). A 
low EDI score, therefore, represents a less diverse 
economy (ABARES, 2022a). This index also correlates 
with population density and access to services, as 
communities that exhibit the highest levels of economic 
diversity are usually the larger population centres 
(ABARES, 2022a). The EDI of each of the three LGAs is 
summarised in Table 1. All three LGAs demonstrate a 
medium-high economic diversity. 
Local Government Area 
(LGA)
Economic Diversity Index 
(Ranges from 0-1)*
Socio-economic 
advantage / disadvantage 
(SEIFA decile) (Ranges 
from 0-10)**
Farm Sensitivity (FS) 
(Ranges from 0-1)*
Community Sensitivity 
CS (Ranges from 0-1)*
Potential Drought Impact 
(Ranges from 0-1)*
Queanbeyan-Palerang
0.59
9
N/A
0.03
0.02
Snowy Monaro 
0.67
8
0.16
0.13
0.19
Yass Valley 
0.68
10
0.00
0.12
0.08
* Source: ABARES, 2022b  **Source: ABS, 2021b
Table 1  ABARES drought indicator framework outputs by LGA

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
8
Shocks and stresses 
Shocks and stressors need to be considered in resilience assessment. Figure 3 describes episodic and chronic stressors.
Episodic shocks 
are sudden, large-scale disasters that disrupt and threaten communities. In the context of 
drought, some significant shocks may include:
•	 Sudden water shortages 
•	 Extreme weather events (storms, bushfires, landslides, earthquakes, heatwaves)
•	 Infrastructure failure
Chronic stressors 
can be thought of as slow-moving disasters that affect the community. In the context of 
drought, stressors may include:
•	 Food and water shortages 
•	 Climate change
•	 Drought
•	 Aging infrastructure
Figure 3  Shocks and stressors
and households. SEIFA indexes orders areas from 
lowest to highest, with decile 1 representing the most 
disadvantaged areas relative to other areas, and 10 
representing the most advantaged areas. Table 1 shows 
that all three LGAs in this study feature as strong socio-
economic regions, being placed in the 8-10 SEIFA decile. 
Table 1 also summarises the farm sensitivity (FS) and 
community sensitivity (CS) for each LGA. All three LGAs 
have a very low farm sensitivity and low community 
sensitivity in comparison with other regions across 
NSW and Australia. As mentioned above, the PDI is 
determined as a function of farm sensitivity (drought 
exposure and drought sensitivity at farm enterprise 
level) and community sensitivity. The PDI does not 
capture the actual degree or level of potential drought 
impact, but rather an LGAs relative ranking of potential 
drought impact against other LGAs. When considering 
these factors, each of the three LGAs have a low PDI 
in comparison with other regions across NSW and 
Australia. The Snowy Monaro Regional Council has 
the highest score of 0.19 and Queanbeyan-Palerang 
Regional Council has the lowest score of 0.02 of very 
limited potential drought impact. Yass Valley is placed 
between the two other regions with 0.08. Based on these 
PDI’s – and in conjunction with additional vulnerability 
indicators such as EDI, SEIFA, climate vulnerability and 
other demographic characteristics - the region already 
has a strong degree of resilience for drought and can 
further maintain and further strengthen its resilience.
Further information relating to climate 
vulnerability is provided in Section 3.5.2 and 
further information relating demographic 
characteristics is discussed in section 2.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
9
Drought has significant environmental consequences, 
impacting ecosystems and biodiversity. Water scarcity 
can lead to habitat degradation, reduced agricultural 
productivity, and increased susceptibility to wildfires, 
which can further exacerbate environmental stress and 
lead to loss of biodiversity. The degradation of natural 
resources not only affects the environment but also 
diminishes the livelihoods of communities that depend 
on these resources for their survival.
The relationship between environmental factors 
and drought is cyclical; for instance, environmental 
degradation can increase the severity of drought 
impacts, while drought can lead to further 
environmental degradation, such as desertification 
and loss of arable land. This creates a feedback loop 
where each factor exacerbates the others, complicating 
recovery efforts and increasing the overall vulnerability 
of affected communities.
The interplay between economic, social, and 
environmental factors creates cascading impacts that 
can be devastating. For instance, a drought that reduces 
agricultural output can lead to economic decline, which 
in turn can increase social tensions and health issues, 
further straining community resilience. These cascading 
effects highlight the need for integrated approaches 
that consider the interconnectedness of these factors.
Drought significantly impacts economic activities, 
particularly in agriculture, which is often the most 
affected sector. Reduced precipitation leads to lower 
crop yields and livestock productivity, which in turn 
affects food security and income for farming families. 
This economic strain can lead to unemployment, 
decreased local business revenues, and increased 
costs for food and water, exacerbating poverty 
levels in vulnerable communities.
Moreover, the economic consequences of drought 
extend beyond immediate agricultural losses. 
They can trigger a series of indirect effects, such 
as increased migration as families leave drought-
stricken areas in search of better opportunities, 
which can destabilise local economies and social 
structures. The interconnectedness of the food-water-
energy nexus means that economic impacts can 
ripple through various sectors, affecting everything 
from energy prices to urban development.
The social impacts of drought are profound and 
multifaceted. Drought can lead to significant health 
issues, including mental health challenges due to 
stress and anxiety related to economic instability 
and food insecurity. Vulnerable populations, 
particularly women and children, often bear the 
brunt of these social impacts, as they are typically 
assuming greater responsibilities for on and off-
farm labour. This burden can limit their access 
to education and economic opportunities.
Social cohesion within communities can also be 
affected. Drought may foster mistrust in government 
and institutions, particularly if responses to the crisis are 
perceived as inadequate. This erosion of trust can hinder 
community resilience and complicate recovery efforts. 
Furthermore, social networks that provide support 
during crises can be strained, leading to increased 
isolation and vulnerability among affected individuals.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
10
Types of resilience
To establish a holistic approach towards resilience, a broad range of systems must be considered, including social resilience, economic resilience and environmental resilience. 
Each of these dimensions is relevant in its own way and they are all strongly interconnected, allowing there to be coordinated adaption in building resilience.
Economic 
focuses on the ability of local economies to adapt to and recover from the economic shocks caused by drought. This may include diversifying the 
local economy, supporting businesses that are drought-resistant, and providing financial resources to mitigate economic losses during drought events 
(DPIE, 2021).
Social 
the ability of individuals and communities to withstand the psychological and social impacts of drought. It involves fostering strong social networks, 
community cohesion, and mental health support systems to help people cope with the stress and challenges associated with water scarcity.
Environment 
centres on the capacity of natural ecosystems and water resources to endure and recover from the ecological impacts of drought. This may involve 
protecting and restoring habitats, improving water conservation practices, and preserving biodiversity to maintain ecosystem services during and 
after drought.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
11
1.6.	 Drought resilience at a glance 
The journey for developing this Plan for the Southern 
Tablelands Councils bordering the ACT is illustrated 
in Figure 4. The process recognises communities of 
the three LGAs have been consulted about drought 
previously; this Plan builds on this work.
 When it comes to drought, “our best defence against 
the shocks of drought is to prepare. Planning for greater 
drought resilience across all aspects of regional and 
remote communities, not just for primary producers, will 
have the greatest impact. Resilience can be achieved by 
Project Inception
Project Control Group
Engagement Planning
2
4
3
Literature Review
and data collection
Demographics
Historical droughts
Weather
Future droughts
Climate change
Community and
Stakeholder
engagement
Survey
In person
Interviews
Stakeholder Reference
Group Workshops
Reporting
Regional Drought
Resilience Plan
Action Plan
1
Figure 4  The Drought Resilience Journey
building sustainable and diverse regional economies, 
reducing the vulnerability of communities to changing 
economic conditions, accelerating recovery, and 
enhancing the natural environment” (DRNSW, 2022).
The impact of multiple events such as the Black Summer 
bushfires, floods of 2021 and 2022, mice plagues, 
and COVID-19 related supply chain and labour force 
disruptions, are likely to compound drought recovery 
challenges in the short term (DRNSW, 2022). 
The process recognises communities in the Southern 
Tableland Councils bordering the ACT have been 
consulted about drought previously; this Plan builds on 
this work. Figure 5 provides a graphical representation 
of the insights gathered on the topics of drought and 
enhancing resilience in the Southern Tableland Councils 
bordering the ACT. It captures the voices, ideas, and 
aspirations expressed by the residents and stakeholders 
who live, work, and form these communities.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
12
1
Secure water supply
Water management and 
infrastructure
Water efﬁciency – water 
restrictions
Priority of drinking water 
versus other uses
Governance
Clear leadership e.g. 
understanding drought 
response and being prepared
Clear messaging around 
drought signal e.g. translating 
climate change/weather
Tracking of effectiveness
of drought measures
Agriculture
Resilient farm and agriculture 
businesses i.e. production 
ﬂexibility
Mental resilience to stressors of 
drought e.g. decision making, 
deteriorating landscape
Are ﬁnancial drought measures 
and grants effective? i.e. farm 
household allowance
Prosperous economy
Diversity of income outside
of agriculture
Industry within LGA that is less 
reliant on agriculture e.g. 
manufacturing
Maintaining diverse skills 
within the community
Connected and
resilient community
Communities that pull together 
in times of hardship e.g. festivals
Fatigue from living through 
disasters e.g. bush ﬁres to
drought to ﬂood
First Nations communities
food sources impacted
Reliable assets
and infrastructure
Reliable and available 
facilities when required 
e.g. emerge Maintenance 
of roads from increased 
trafﬁc (stock, fodder, 
water, freight)
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 5  What was previously heard – at a glance

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
13
Phase 2: Community and stakeholder engagement to identify, 
test and understand the regional opportunities
Phase 2 comprised the delivery of the engagement approach. A review of Councils’ 
Community Strategic Plans resulted in the development of five initial common 
themes. These themes were tested with the stakeholders through the workshops and 
with the PCG to make sure they were a sound representation of the region’s key areas 
of focus. These themes were then used for categorising and analysing the actions 
and initiatives identified during the Phase 1 review and in the series of resilience 
workshops (Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) meetings). 
Originally, two in-person workshops per LGA alongside a series of targeted interviews 
with other agencies and community members were proposed. Due to challenges with 
availability and distance, alternative arrangements were required for Queanbeyan 
Palerang LGA and Snowy Monaro LGA. For these LGAs, one-on-one interviews and 
small group online workshops were held alongside the initial workshop. This reduced 
the richness of the information gleaned as there was little ability to interact with each 
other and build and/or test ideas. Given the time restraints of the project, adequate 
engagement with a broad section of the community was not necessarily obtained. An 
in-depth stakeholder mapping exercise that identifies the small and hard to engage 
with segments of the community such that inputs from these community members 
could be pursued would be beneficial for the future update of the plan. Learning from 
this plan and Councils regarding constraints to engagement is required. 
1.7.	 Development of the Plan 
Through the development of the Plan, five key themes emerged (Figure 6). Each of 
these themes was expanded and used as a basis for the Plan. The development of this 
Plan has been guided by a Project Control Group (PCG) comprising representatives 
from Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, Snowy Monaro Regional Council, 
Yass Valley Council, Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development 
and consultants. A three phased approach was used, focussed on community-led 
development of themes, vision and actions. 
Phase 1: Understanding the community profile, what is 
known about drought in the region, the lessons learnt 
and the region’s greatest risks
Phase 1 involved the formation of a Project Control Group (PCG) which consisted 
of members of the three Councils, Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development, stakeholders. The PCG provided inputs and guided the development 
of the Plan. They also assisted with arrangements for community and stakeholder 
engagement activities. This phase of the project also included a review of literature 
to better understand the community profile, what we currently know about drought in 
the region, the lessons learnt from previous droughts and where the greatest risks lie. 
Some of the sources utilised are outlined in Section 1.3. The literature review informed 
future phases of the project including identification of Plan themes and ensures the 
Plan is built on past work and programs.
Economy – Robust and 
resilient local economies and 
agricultural businesses
Environment – Maintain 
and protect the natural 
environment
Governance – Strong 
leadership and collaboration
Community – Vibrant, 
connected and sustained 
communities
Infrastructure – Build assets 
and climate adapted design
Figure 6  Five key themes of the Plan

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
14
Community engagement was designed with the 
communities’ diverse needs and perspectives in mind. 
The engagement activities were designed to encourage 
meaningful conversations and insights from the broad 
range of community. Engagement allowed people to 
express information in their own words so that local 
voices and needs were highlighted. The engagement 
combined the use of in-person and digital methods, 
ensuring inclusivity and transparency throughout the 
process. An overview of the engagement activities is 
provided in Figure 7. 
The SRGs were held with targeted regional stakeholders 
to test the findings from Phase 1 and identify strategic 
opportunities. A range of community members were 
invited to participate. These included but are not limited to:
•	 Local businesses/ business chambers
•	 Manufacturers
•	 Primary producers/agribusinesses and 
agricultural suppliers
•	 Progress associations/ community committees 
•	 Educational providers (schools)
•	 Tourism operators/corporations
•	 Sporting clubs/associations
•	 Councillors
•	 Agencies (Local Land Service (LLS))
The Local Aboriginal groups and/or Elders or 
representatives were engaged in one-on-one 
settings rather than workshops as it was expressed 
this was more comfortable for them. A first nations 
representative from Queanbeyan Palerang was 
engaged and provided input to the plan.
During the first workshop, key drought related 
impacts (Section 4.3) were discussed and identified 
for each of the themes, with major impacts rated as 
low, medium or high. Initial ideas for actions were 
encouraged from the stakeholders and developed 
through discussion within the group. The second 
workshop focussed on further developing the 
actions and starting the process of prioritisation. 
Simultaneous to the workshops, targeted interviews 
were conducted with a number of organisations and 
agencies. These included:
•	 NSW Department of Climate Change, Energy, the 
Environment and Water (DCCEEW)
•	 Destination NSW
•	 Local Land Services (LLS)
Additional to the workshops and targeted interviews, 
a community survey was promoted by each of the 
Councils to ensure those who were unable to attend 
workshops or be invited to interviews were able to 
express their views and input into the plan.
Figure 7  Summary of engagement
Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) Meetings
9 SRG sessions were held between May 2024 and June 2024. They comprised of representatives from the local government areas, 
community subject matter experts, project team members, and other stakeholders. Over 65 stakeholders were invited to participate in 
the SRG’s. 34 members provided ideas, insights and feedback.
Targeted interviews with stakeholders
Targeted interviews with 12 industry and community members to obtain more detailed input on the drought work already 
undertaken in the region. 
Online Survey
Using digital tools and publishing a survey enabled engagement of a broader audience and made participation more 
convenient for community members. 114 survey responses were received and formed part of the feedback that informed the 
recommendations included within this Plan. 
Online Meetings and phone calls
Phone calls and hosting online meetings provided the opportunity to bridge geographical gaps, ensuring a wider array of 
stakeholders could provide insights without the constraints of location. This method enabled in-depth discussions, capturing 
the communities’ perspectives, and concerns. A total of 7 PCG meetings were held.
Email Communication
Employing email outreach provided an additional channel for engaging with stakeholders. It enabled targeted stakeholders, in 
remote areas, to share their insights in a convenient manner. This approach not only facilitated the collection of valuable data 
but also allowed for a thoughtful, well-documented exchange of ideas and feedback.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
15
Phase 3: Prioritise and develop the Plan
Phase 3 consisted of prioritising the opportunities (through the SRG and PCG) and 
documenting each in this Plan. The investment logic framework (Section 4.4) was 
applied to the long list of actions to better identify priority actions. These opportunities 
are organised using the thematic framework shown in Figure 8. The themes highlight 
the public sentiment that improving drought resilience in the broader community 
and region, along with diversifying and value-adding to the agricultural industry, 
will benefit the region’s response to drought. Figure 9 identifies how actions can be 
progressed now, that align with the Councils' ability to influence and will improve 
outcomes for the community. 
Figure 8  Detailed five key themes of the Plan
The communities of the Southern Tableland Councils bordering the ACT have initiated 
several actions within their communities, developed through successive droughts. 
Those actions have been built on in this Plan in an effort to improve the region’s 
drought resilience. These actions include innovative farming and production practices, 
advocating for improved water security and reliability, community health and well-
being, protecting landscape health and natural resource management, investing in 
the region’s people in various sectors, and sharing information and knowledge for the 
benefit of all. Building and extending this work is the foundation of this Plan. The PCG 
provided final review of the Plan before it was sent to CSIRO for review. The PCG was 
also involved in the final updates before the Plan was published and publicly available.
Economy – Robust and 
resilient local economies and 
agricultural businesses
Environment – Maintain 
and protect the natural 
environment
Governance – Strong 
leadership and collaboration
Community – Vibrant, 
connected and sustained 
communities
Infrastructure – Build assets 
and climate adapted design
A strong and innovative 
economy will be cultivated 
by diversifying industries, 
promoting tourism, and 
encouraging investment in new 
economic opportunities.
The region's environment 
will be protected and 
enhanced through sustainable 
practices and improved water 
management systems.
Transparent and inclusive 
leadership will be promoted 
through knowledge sharing, 
robust connectivity, and 
coordinated efforts to ensure 
effective disaster responses 
and resilient community 
support systems.
Empowered and resilient 
communities will be supported 
by promoting community 
cohesion, improving access 
to essential services, and 
enhancing local capacity to 
respond to drought.
Robust and adaptive 
infrastructure will improve the 
regions connectivity, support 
infrastructure development, 
promote effective water 
management, and elevate 
the region’s attractiveness as 
a destination to visit, live or 
operate business from.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
16
Economy – Robust and 
resilient local economies 
and agricultural 
businesses
Environment – Maintain 
and protect the natural 
environment
Adaptive
Absorptive
Transformative
Governance – Strong 
leadership and 
collaboration
DROUGHT 
IMPACTS
Resilience is reliant on 
the partnerships created 
between the three councils 
and other agencies to ensure 
systems and functions are 
developed and maintained. 
The interconnectedness 
of the identified capacities 
is fundamental to building 
resilience, highlighting 
the need for tailored 
approaches to address the 
diverse challenges faced by 
communities, ecosystems, and 
organisations/businesses.
VISION 
STATEMENT
Community – Vibrant, 
connected and sustained 
communities
Infrastructure – Build 
assets and climate 
adapted design
Figure 9  Process used for building drought resilience

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
17
02
Region and communities

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
18
2.	Region and 
Communities 
2.1.	 Introduction to the region
This Plan for the Southern Tableland Councils bordering 
the ACT region comprises the Local Government Areas 
(LGAs) of Snowy-Monaro, Queanbeyan-Palerang and 
Yass Valley. The three LGAs cover approximately 2.4 
million hectares and are home to over 102,251 people 
(ABS, 2021b). Queanbeyan is the largest city within 
the region, followed by Cooma and Yass. Due to their 
proximity to the ACT, Canberra provides employment 
opportunities in public service and health care which 
are important to the region. 
Water security is a key objective for the region. Water 
from the region is critical for First Nations People, the 
natural environment, agriculture, recreation and tourism. 
Important rivers in the region include the Murrumbidgee 
River, Snowy River, Goodradigbee River and Yass River, 
which work in conjunction with the local dams in the 
area to meet the water usage needs of the region in 
line with expected population growth, but also 
Sydney through the Greater Sydney Water Strategy 
(NSW Government, 2022). 
Local economy 
The average unemployment rate across the three 
LGAs in December 2023 was 2.9% which is lower than 
the unemployment rate for NSW (4.9%) (Australian 
Government, 2023). Figure 10 illustrates a shift in the 
diversity of industries, livelihoods and employment 
opportunities across the three LGAs. Using a time series 
analysis from the 2016 and 2021 Census’ (due to Council 
mergers in 2016, the 2011 Census data was unable to be 
used), it shows the incline in non-agricultural industries 
such as ‘public administration and safety’, ‘health care 
and social assistance’. There was a large increase in 
‘construction’ across all LGAs, with each growing in 
the 5-year period by over 30%. The diversity in the 
industries and indicators shows a future ability for 
LGAs to weather droughts in the future. 
The agriculture, forestry and fishing industry, which 
would have traditionally been dominant in these LGAs 
has decreased. Figure 11 shows that involvement in the 
industry did grow in the Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA and 
the Yass Valley LGA by 11% and 3% respectively, while 
involvement dropped in the Snowy Monaro LGA by 2%.
 Figure 10  Time series data by Top 3 industry per LGA 2016 and 2021.
Figure 11  Time series data for Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing. Both (Source: ABS 2021)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
19
2.1.1.	Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA
The QPRC covers an area of 531,901 hectares and 
hosting a population of 63,304 (ABS, 2021b) Figure 12 
shows that QPRC boasts a diverse range of industries, 
with the largest industry being public administration 
and safety (26.2%), followed by construction 
(11.6%) and health care and social assistance (9.7%). 
Queanbeyan’s proximity to Canberra means many 
Queanbeyan residents are able to take up employment 
opportunities in the federal public service and defence. 
The NSW Government has been investing in economic 
diversification for the region, aiming to strengthen the 
industries of construction, manufacturing, tourism, and 
agriculture (NSW Government, 2023a). 
The construction sector in QPRC is emerging as a key 
industry for the region. Construction services provided 
62.5% of gross value added (GVA) to the region, 
indicating its important role in QPRC’s economic future. 
Additionally, Queanbeyan’s construction industry 
provides housing construction to the ACT, which further 
supports the region and provides income to local 
businesses (NSW Government, 2023a). 
Heritage values in the QPRC are a key driver of tourism. 
Historic towns, such as Braidwood, Araluen, and 
Captains Flat, provide important rest stops for travellers 
to the coast. This, combined with the historic heritage 
value of the towns, provides a unique tourist attraction 
for the region. Additionally, the region benefits from 
events in Canberra, which can provide opportunities 
for “satellite events” that support the region’s tourism 
economy (NSW Government, 2023a). The launch of the 
Treasure Trail campaign in 2020 has sought to lift the 
tourism industry in the region post-COVID (Queanbeyan-
Palerang Regional Council, n.d.).  
The Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA’s population 
represents 0.7% of the total population of NSW. 
The median household income per week for the 
Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA is $2,295, which is 25% 
greater than the NSW median household income 
per week of $1,829. Additionally, the unemployment 
rate (as of December 2023) is 3.1% in Queanbeyan-
Palerang, which is well below the NSW rate of 
4.9%. Labour force participation is 11.7% greater 
than NSW, at 70.4% compared to NSW’s 58.7%. 
Key industry takeaways:
•	 Accommodation and food services are the region’s 
largest employer however, the main engine 
industries for the region are construction and public 
administration and safety. 
•	 $23 million investment into the South Jerrabomberra 
Regional Job Precinct aims to transform the 
employment opportunities in the public service 
and defence. This investment targets sectors 
like defence, space exploration, cybersecurity, 
information technology, and scientific research (NSW 
Government , 2023d). Infrastructure improvements 
follow such investment with a particular focus on 
roads, utilities and communication network.
•	 6.1 % growth in the healthcare and social assistance 
industry between 2011 to 2020 (NSW Government, 
2023a). 
•	 Aim to focus on working with ACT government to 
better utilise health services. The region’s main 
hospital is the Queanbeyan District Hospital 
which contains an extensive Mental Health team 
including, psychologists, mental health nurses, and 
occupational therapists provide case management, 
assessment, referral, and counselling services.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
20
Figure 12  Socio-economic summary of the Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
21
Key industry takeaways: 
•	 Tourism is the largest industry in the Snowy Monaro 
Region, adding $418 million to the local economy in 
2021 (NSW Government, 2023b).
•	 Snowy Mountains Special Activation Precinct 
aims to uplift yearlong tourism opportunities with 
development of this precinct being carried out over a 
40-year period (NSW Government, 2022). 
•	 Accommodation and food services is the largest 
employer of the region while there is a potential 
growth spurt in the construction industry (economy.
id, 2024).
•	 The two key production industries for this region 
are the renewable energy generation industry and 
the forestry industry, with the forestry industry 
more sensitive to climatic conditions, making it 
more vulnerable to the impacts of drought (NSW 
Government, 2023b).  
Figure 13 shows displays details from the 2021 census 
that identifies the accommodation and food services 
industry as the highest proportion of jobs in the region, 
at 13.3%. Construction (9.9%) and retail trade (8.8%) 
are the second and third largest industries in the region 
(ABS, 2021a) Additionally, SMRC has identified four core 
economic drivers: tourism, agriculture, timber and water, 
which are further supported by emerging environment 
and education sectors (SMRC, 2024a). 
The Snowy-Monaro LGA’s population represents 
0.2% of the total population of NSW. The median 
household income per week for the Snowy-Monaro 
LGA is $1,593, which is 13% less than the NSW median 
household income per week of $1,829. Additionally, the 
unemployment rate (as of December 2023) is 2.8% in 
Snowy-Monaro, which is well below the NSW rate of 
4.9%. Labour force participation is 4.8% greater than 
NSW, at 62.8% compared to NSW’s 58.7%. 
2.1.2.	 Snowy-Monaro LGA
The Snowy-Monaro Regional Council (SMRC) covers an 
area of approximately 1,516,419 hectares and had an 
estimated resident population of 22,132 in 2023 (ABS, 
2024). The Snowy-Monaro region has a rich history 
marked by significant events that continue to shape its 
character today. The Ngarigo people have called the 
Monaro region home for generations. A gold rush in the 
1850s saw a wave of migration into the region but had 
finished by the 1900s. Historic gold mining villages, 
including Kiandra and Cowra Creek, continue to be 
critical to the identity of the region. The construction of 
the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Scheme between 
1949 and 1974 has had an enduring impact on the 
region, providing major infrastructure for the entire 
nation, employment opportunities for the local area 
with over 100,000 people working on the Scheme, 65% 
of which were migrant workers into Australia (National 
Archives Australia, 2024). The Snowy 2.0 project is 
the next chapter of nation building infrastructure and 
will generate low carbon energy and employment for 
approximately 4,000 people in the region throughout 
the life of the project (Snowy Hydro, n.d. ). 
The area is popular for snow sports during the winter, 
and mountain biking, hiking and camping during the 
non-winter months. Mount Kosciuszko is located in the 
Snowy-Monaro, which attracts large amounts of tourists 
interested in snow sports each year. The Snowy Hydro 
Scheme provides cultural heritage which supports 
local tourism. Additionally, a range of events are run 
throughout the calendar year, including the National 
Busking Championships (Busking, 2022).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
22
Figure 13  Socio-economic summary of the Snowy-Monaro LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
23
Key industry takeaways: 
•	 The foundation of the economy is tourism and 
agriculture, with the tourist appeal stemming 
from the food, wine, nature, outdoors and heritage 
industries (ABS, 2021a)
•	 Public administration, safety, construction, and 
education saw increases in employment in the 2021 
census (ABS, 2021a)
•	 The region aims to seek leverage in its advantageous 
position by removing barriers between the ACT and 
Yass Valley by removing local transport infrastructure 
barriers to support the movement of labour and 
tourists through the region.
•	 Upgrade in digital infrastructure and COVID-19 
pandemic has improved capacity for residents to 
access telehealth services, though the region is still 
facing challenges in delivering healthcare services 
(NSW Government, 2023b).
The YVC continues to innovate agricultural practices 
to be more climate resilient. The Yass Area Network 
Ready Revegetation Project (YAN) aims to improve 
genetic diversity of the region’s natural resources. By 
using a 2.5- degree temperature increase projection, 
the region has been able to identify appropriate, native 
vegetation that will thrive under the conditions and 
provide ecosystem services that underpin the region’s 
environment (YANoLG, 2021). 
The Yass Valley LGA’s population represents 0.2% of the 
total population of NSW. The median household income 
per week for the Yass Valley LGA is $2,289, which is 
25% greater than the NSW median household income 
per week of $1,829. Additionally, the unemployment 
rate (as of December 2023) is 2.7% in Yass Valley, 
which is well below the NSW rate of 4.9%. Labour 
force participation is 8.1% greater than NSW, at 66.8% 
compared to NSW’s 58.7%.
2.1.3.	 Yass Valley LGA
The Yass Valley Council (YVC) covers 399,202 
hectares and has a population of 17,281 people 
(refer Figure 14); the smallest (in terms of size and 
population) of the three LGAs (ABS, 2021a). The Yass 
Valley consists of eight towns: Binalong, Bookham, 
Bowning, Gundaroo, Murrumbateman, Sutton, Wee 
Jasper, and Yass. The surrounding cool climate wine 
region of Murrumbateman, Gundaroo and Wallaroo 
offers significant attraction to visitors with over 60 
wineries offering award-winning vintages. This, with 
the rural lifestyle, proximity to Canberra and housing 
opportunities makes the Yass Valley a desirable place to 
live (YVC, 2024).
The Yass Valley was “born off of the sheep’s back” 
as early European settlers to the region established 
an economic base through the fine wool trade. In 
modern times, the Yass Valley continues to diversify 
its economic pillars, and enjoys unique opportunities 
for work, education, and entertainment due to 
sharing a border with the ACT (YVC, 2024). The public 
administration and safety industry employs the highest 
percentage of people in the region (19.5%), which is 
followed by construction (12.2%) and health care and 
social assistance (9.9%) (ABS, 2021a). Transgrid and 
Yass Valley Council are the two largest employers in 
the region, and local organisations such as the Yass 
Valley Business Chamber and Canberra Region Joint 
Organisation aim to promote economic growth in the 
region (YVC, 2024).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
24
Figure 14  Socio-economic summary of the Yass Valley LGA (ABS, 2023), (ABS, 2022)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
25
2.2.	Land use
Land use is largely determined by climate and 
geography. The mountainous SMRC experiences a 
cooler climate with uniform rainfall throughout the 
year and winter snowfall (BoM, 2022). QPRC and YVC 
are slightly warmer, with occasional frosts and light 
snowfall in elevated areas during winter (BoM, 2022) 
Section 3.5.1 expands on the regional weather and 
climate across the three LGAs. The diversity of climate 
and geography in the region leads to diverse land use. 
Figures 15 to 17 show the main land uses within each of  
the three LGA’s of Queanbeyan Palerang, Snowy Monaro 
and Yass Valley. 
As the largest LGA by land area in this plan the land 
use information above shows majority of land in the 
Snowy Monaro is used for livestock production with 
the southern side of the LGA taking in a portion of 
the Kosciuszko National Park and being primarily 
nature conservation area with most of the forests and 
plantations being located in the south of the LGA. 
Agricultural land use makes up approximately 64% of 
land use in the LGA with 35.14% being non-agriculture 
and including land used for water supplies as well as 
urban and other infrastructure (NSW Government, 2021). 
Figure 15  Snowy Monaro LGA types of land use  (NSW Government, 2021)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
26
The land use information above shows majority of land 
in the Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA is used for livestock 
production with pockets of nature conservation area 
across the LGA. Agricultural land use makes up 
approximately 61.6% of the LGA area and 38.4% for 
non-agriculture land use which includes a higher portion 
of urban and infrastructure which is expected given 
the proximity of the LGA to the Canberra region (NSW 
Government, 2021).  
Figure 16  Queanbeyan Palerang LGA types of land use

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
27
The land use information above shows majority of land 
in the Yass Valley is used for livestock production with 
pockets on the southern and western sides being nature 
conservation areas of the LGA. Yass has the largest 
cropping area of the three LGA’s at 15,000 hectares, 
most of which is based in the northern part of the LGA.   
The LGA of Yass utilises 81% of its land for agricultural 
related purposes and 19% for non-agricultural purposes 
which includes land uses such as rivers, lakes and 
residential infrastructure. 
The region contains protected lands that are used for 
recreation, cultural heritage, tourism, and ecological 
conservation. In 2022, QPRC had a total of 62 protected 
land areas, (10 national parks, 14 nature reserves, and 
38 protected land areas) covering a total of 87,263 ha. 
SMRC has a total of 97 protected land areas, including 
six national parks and 29 nature reserves, with a total 
protected area of 417,735 ha. Yass Valley has 1 national 
park, nine nature reserves, and six other protected 
land areas, covering a total of 28,418 hectares (ABS, 
2021a) Popular National Parks within the region include 
the Deua, Kosciuszko, Morton, Monga, South East and 
Wadbilliga National Parks (SMRC, 2024a).
Figure 17  Yass Valley LGA types of land use

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
28
2.4.	Agriculture 
The region has a long history of agriculture, with the 
region’s gross agricultural production valued at $270 
million for 2020-21 (ABS, 2022) The ‘sheep farming 
(specialised)’ industry accounts for 2.7% of employment 
within the Snowy-Monaro region, and 2.6% of 
employment within the Yass Valley region (ABS, 2021a). 
The three LGA’s lie within the Murry Darling Basin. The 
topography is diverse and characterised by farmland, 
national parks, mountain ranges, and numerous 
Murrumbidgee River tributaries. The rain profiles vary 
per region, where Queanbeyan-Palerang experiences a 
steady amount of rainfall throughout the year, the Yass 
Valley and Snowy-Monaro regions are characterised by 
winter-dominated rainfall and late winter to early spring 
rainfall respectively.
Figure 18 shows the region’s agriculture is dominated 
by sheep farming, with sheep and lamb slaughter 
accounting for 32% of the region’s gross value of 
agricultural commodities, and wool accounting for 22% 
(ABS, 2022). Cattle and calf slaughter also constitutes 
a significant portion (29%) of gross agricultural 
production value within the region. The majority of the 
region’s agricultural land is used for livestock grazing 
(811,757 ha), 468,324 hectares of that includes improved 
grazing. As of 2020-21, Snowy-Monaro had a total of 
926,078 sheep and lambs and 61,199 cattle (around 488 
of those were used for dairy); Queanbeyan-Palerang 
region had 128,210 sheep and lambs and 25,048 cattle; 
and Yass Valley had 666,655 sheep and lambs and 
25,742 cattle (ABS, 2022). 
Early European settlers mistakenly believed that 
Aboriginal people only used the Monaro high country 
during warmer months (SMRC, 2024b)However, we now 
understand that some groups, likely the Ngarigo, resided 
there year-round (SMRC, 2024b) This highlights their 
deep adaptation to the region's unique environment.
Similarly, the Yass Valley served as a significant meeting 
place for numerous Aboriginal ‘groups’: the Mulwaree, 
Wollondilly, Wiradjuri, Gundungurra, Dharrook, 
Tharawal, Tarlo, Pajong, Parramarragoo, Cookmal, 
Burra Burra, Lachlan, and Ngunnawal people all have 
connections to this region (Rivers of Carbon, 2023) The 
valley's geography, offering plentiful resources and 
acting as a natural crossroads, likely explains this rich 
tapestry of cultures.
One particularly significant site within the Yass 
Valley is the Aboriginal "Riverside Camp" located 
near the Yass Weir. Used by local Indigenous people 
in the early 1900s, it functioned as a camp closer 
to town (Rivers of Carbon, 2023) Evidence of their 
presence remains in the form of rock arrangements 
and remnants of what might have been fruit trees 
planted by them (Rivers of Carbon, 2023) Protecting 
these sites is crucial. They not only honour the past 
but also act as repositories of cultural knowledge that 
needs to be safeguarded for future generations.
Thankfully, there are ongoing efforts to preserve this 
heritage. The Rivers of Carbon Yass River Linkages 
Project, for instance, has undertaken habitat restoration 
work at the Riverside Camp site. This commitment 
to restoring the land where these communities once 
thrived demonstrates respect for their connection to the 
environment and their enduring legacy.
2.3.	First Nations Peoples 
The regions around Queanbeyan-Palerang, Monaro, 
and the Yass Valley weren't solely the territory of single 
Aboriginal groups. Traditional Custodians across the 
area now known as Queanbeyan-Palerang include the 
Ngunnawal, Ngambri, Ngarigo and Yuin. The Ngarigo 
people have a deep connection to the Monaro region 
and surrounding areas (SMRC, 2024b). Further, in the 
Yass Valley region, the Ngunnawal and Wiradjuri people 
inhabit the Yass Valley locality. This highlights the 
interconnectedness of Aboriginal cultures across 
vast distances. 
One factor that brought many groups together was 
the seasonal abundance of the Bogong Moth (Rivers 
of Carbon, 2023). Across the Queanbeyan-Palerang 
and Snowy Monaro regions, this area was a seasonal 
gathering place for many groups. Groups like the Brinja, 
Wallendgar, and Walbunja, who originated from the far 
south coast, would travel through the region on their 
way to the high-country during Bogong moth season 
(SMRC, 2024b) This seasonal movement demonstrates 
the interconnectedness of Aboriginal cultures across 
vast distances.
Along with the Ngarigo people, several other Aboriginal 
groups have ancestral links to different parts of Monaro 
(SMRC, 2024b) The Walgalu people inhabited the 
northwestern regions, while the Ngunnawal people had 
ties to the northeast (SMRC, 2024b). In the south, the 
Bidhawal people held their own cultural significance 
within the area (SMRC, 2024b).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
29
Agricultural commodity prices and profit can affect 
drought sensitivity. In years of high crop prices, drought 
risk tends to increase as farmers plant more crops and 
apply more inputs in order to maximise potential profits. 
This can however expose farms to higher drought risk.
Previous research has shown that larger agricultural 
farms tend to be less sensitive to drought than smaller 
farmers, and farms with managers less than 50 years 
of age are also generally less sensitive to drought 
(ABARES, 2022b). 
Agricultural production in the region is largely 
unirrigated. QPRC has 141,694 hectares of agricultural 
land almost exclusively unirrigated - with only 127 
hectares of irrigated agricultural land using 194 ML 
(ABS, 2021b). Only 381 hectares of agricultural land in 
YVC utilises irrigation, with a volume of 977 ML applied. 
SMRC had the highest use of irrigation on agricultural 
land, with 912 hectares using 3,371 ML of irrigated 
water (ABS, 2021b). 
The diversity of production includes hay, wheat, canola, 
and other broadacre crops such as barley and oats, 
as well as fruit, nuts, wine, and nursery production 
(ABS, 2022). Hay production accounted for 5% of the 
value of agricultural commodities produced within the 
region ($13.3 million). Cereal crops including wheat and 
canola are the dominant crops produced in the region, 
accounting for a gross value $3.9 million and $4 million 
respectively (ABS, 2022).
Figure 18  Gross value of agricultural commodities produced within the LGAs of Snowy-Monaro, Queanbeyan-Palerang, and Yass Valley, 2020-21 (ABS, 2022a)
$269.7
m
Wheat 
3.9m  
Canola 
4m 
Other crops 
4.2m 
Other 
7.9m 
Hay 
13.3m 
Vegetables 
12.4m 
Livestock products (wool) 
58.6m 
Cattle and Calves slaughtered 
78.3m 
Sheep and lambs slaughtered 
87.1m 
Total 
269.7m 
32%
1% 1%2%3%
5%
5%
22%
29%

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
30
Farm drought risk varies significantly across agricultural 
commodities, with cropping farms more sensitive to 
drought than livestock farms (ABARES, 2020). This 
is because crop yields are directly linked to weather 
conditions, whereas livestock producers can smooth 
impacts over multiple years through increased turn-off 
(sales) of livestock in drought years (ABARES, 2020) 
As a result, the percentage of land devoted to crops is 
a key driver of drought sensitivity and risk. Cropping 
constitutes small areas of land across the three LGAs. 
This smaller allocation of land to cropping overall 
reduces the drought sensitivity and risk for the region 
(ABARES, 2020)
2.5.	The Region’s water
Water resources within the Queanbeyan Palerang, 
Snowy Monaro, and Yass Valley region are supplied from 
a range of sources including regulated and unregulated 
rivers (including the Murrumbidgee River, the Murray 
River and the Goodradigbee River), unregulated 
surface water, groundwater, and private systems 
(Figure 19). Water flow is managed through the Snowy 
Hydro Scheme, regional pipelines, and water storage 
infrastructure (Snowy Hydro, 2024). The larger water 
storage infrastructure in the region includes Eucumbene 
Dam (capacity 4,798 GL) Burrinjuck Dam (1,026 GL), 
Talbingo (920.6 GL) Jindabyne (689.9 GL), Tantangara 
(254 GL), and Googong Dam (125 GL) (Snowy Hydro, 
2024). The main water suppliers in the region are Snowy 
Hydro, Icon Water and each of the three Local Councils 
who supply water to their communities. These sources 
and management practices serve the needs of the 
community, industry, environment, 
and agriculture. 
ACT
Yass
Cootamundra
Tumut
Queanbeyan
Tantangara Dam
Bungendore
From
Icon
Water
Cooma
Gundagai
Yaouk Swamp
Blowering Dam
Burrinjuck Dam
Lake George
Wetlands
Australian Capital Territory
Unregulated surface water
Regulated surface water
Groundwater
Private systems (rainwater tanks,
private bores)
Existing regional pipelines
Existing inter-regional pipelines
Sydney
Figure 19  Map of water infrastructure pipelines (DCCEEW, 2024)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
31
Queanbeyan-Palerang
In Queanbeyan, the water is supplied by Icon Water and 
is sourced from a number of surrounding dams in NSW 
and the ACT (Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, 
n.d.). Other towns within the LGA, namely Braidwood, 
Bungendore, and Captains Flat, source their water from 
a several bores, rivers, and dam water. These towns/
villages have their own water treatment facilities to 
provide residents with potable water. 
For example, Braidwood’s town water is serviced by 
the Braidwood Water Supply Scheme (Queanbeyan-
Palerang Regional Council, 2021). The Braidwood 
Water Treatment Plant (WTP) sources its water from a 
72 ML off-stream storage dam (that is filled from the 
Shoalhaven River). The WTP has a capacity to treat 2 
ML/day and is stored in three reservoirs with a combined 
capacity of 2.6 ML (Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional 
Council, 2021). In 2019, the estimated secure yield for 
the Braidwood off-river storage was 394 ML/year and 
water restrictions increased up to Stage 4 (the highest 
level (Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council, 2021). 
Modelling under a 1-degree Celsius climate warming 
scenario, unrestricted future extraction will exceed 
the secure yield levels in 2042/43. Therefore, the local 
council has proposed a restriction scheme with trigger 
levels for restrictions (Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional 
Council, 2021). 
2.5.2.	 Ground Water
Groundwater is also an important water source in the 
region. During droughts, reliance on groundwater can 
increase significantly to support regional industries and 
some town water needs (DPIE, 2022) Some parts of the 
region have been affected by concentrated groundwater 
extraction, with declining groundwater levels and 
increasing salinity posing a risk to future groundwater 
access (DPIE, 2022).
In the Murrumbidgee catchment, groundwater sources 
are extensively used and are an important water source 
for towns, industries, and the environment. These 
groundwater sources include: 
•	 Bungendore Alluvial Groundwater Source (also 
sometimes referred to as Lake George Alluvium). This 
supplies the town of Bungendore, stock and domestic 
uses, and irrigation (DCCEEW, 2022).
•	 Yass Catchment Groundwater Source. This supplies 
town water in the Yass Valley and for stock and 
domestic uses (DCCEEW, 2022). 
Surface water and groundwater systems within the 
Murray Catchment range from highly connected — 
particularly in the mountainous regions of Snowy-
Monaro — to disconnected (MDBA, 2023c). Upland 
streams — those that typically originate in mountainous 
areas — receive flow from fractured granite and 
sedimentary rock aquifers (MDBA, 2023c). 
2.5.1.	 Rivers
The three LGAs lie within to large parts the Upper 
Murrumbidgee Catchment and the Upper Murray 
Catchment (MDBA, 2023a) The Murrumbidgee River 
begins in the high Australian Alps, where snowmelt in 
the mountains feeds the water supply (MDBA, 2023b). 
The river winds its way through Kosciuszko National 
Park, Monaro High Plains, and passes through Cooma, 
Queanbeyan, Canberra, and Yass, before heading west 
to Hay (MDBA, 2023b). 
Unregulated rivers and creeks are vital for some 
towns’ water supplies, industries, and the environment. 
Cooma relies entirely on unregulated water supply. The 
main unregulated rivers and creeks include the upper 
Murrumbidgee, Yass, Bredbo, and Molonglo Rivers, 
further the Numeralla River (DCCEEW, 2022b). 
The Murray River begins when three springs in alpine 
grassland – 40 kilometres south of Mount Kosciuszko – 
forms a small stream and other small mountain creeks 
and rivers join (MDBA, 2023c). Salinity continues to 
be an issue across the NSW Murray-Darling Basin 
(NSW Government, 2024d) Salt occurs naturally in 
the environment, however changes in water and land 
use and climate change can cause increased levels 
of salt, impacting ecosystems, water safety, and 
agricultural production (NSW Government, 2024d). 
The Murray Darling Basin authority and Basin states 
are collaborating to reduce salinity through the Water 
Group’s Basin Salinity Management Program. The 
program outlines salinity management and monitoring 
activities (NSW Government, 2024d).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
32
To address these challenges, several actions have been 
proposed, including: 
•	 Improve strategic water management and decision-
making frameworks by incorporating new climate and 
modelled data. 
	– The water sharing plans in the Murrumbdigee 
region are due for renewal, providing an 
opportunity to review the drought rules and 
incorporate new climate data (DCCEEW, 2024b).
	– Consider an enduring level of supply to support 
regional towns and centers. 
	»
The enduring supply concept involves 
determining the amount of water needed 
to meet the minimum needs of the 
community during periods of prolonged 
and extreme drought, irrespective 
of how long the drought lasts. 
	– Improve public access to climate information and 
water availability forecasts. 
	»
These aids informed discussions and decisions 
for drought management. 
	– Addressing sustainable population growth 
pressures in the upper Murrumbidgee catchment 
(DCCEEW, 2024b). 
	»
Intergovernmental dialogue is currently 
occurring to understand the feasibility of the 
supply of water from the ACT (cross-border 
water supplies) to improve water security. The 
ACT Government, NSW Government, QPRC, and 
YVC agreed to establish the ACT-NSW Urban 
Water Issues Steering Committee to support 
these strategic discussions around water supply 
and security. 
2.5.3.	 Regional Water Strategies 
The Regional Water Strategies (the Strategies) are 
designed to create a plan and roadmap of actions to 
manage the regions water needs for the next 20-40 
years with the aim of improving water security and better 
preparing regions for droughts. The three LGAs within 
this plan are covered largely by two regional water 
strategies: the (draft) Murray Regional Water Strategy 
(DCCEEW, 2024a) and the (draft) Murrumbidgee Regional 
Water Strategy (DCCEEW, 2024b). 
Future climate projections suggest that, if the worst-
case dry future climate scenario eventuates, by 2079, 
total volume of water flow in rivers could decrease 
(DCCEEW, 2024b). For example, the Mittagong Crossing 
(near Cooma) modelled a decrease of flow from 50ML/
day to 30ML/day. These changes in water flow (coupled 
with changes in rainfall and evapotranspiration) could 
increase water-related risks to the environment and 
water users and may affect agricultural output. 
The Strategies model future town’s water supply and 
demand. For Queanbeyan and Yass, under all climate 
scenarios, there were no shortfalls of town water supply 
(DCCEEW, 2024b). For Cooma — under the dry future 
climate scenario — it was modelled to experience a 49-day 
shortfall of 10% of the required daily demand with a low 
probability (0.1%) chances of occurring in any given year. 
However, the Strategies also highlighted that projected 
population growth posed a key challenge for maintaining 
water security within the region. In addition to population 
growth, the Strategies identify four key challenges:
•	 Balancing competing interests for water
•	 Improving the health and resilience of ecosystems
•	 Addressing barriers to Aboriginal peoples’ 
water rights
•	 Supporting existing and emerging industries 
and livelihoods
Snowy-Monaro 
A number of water sources including Lake Jindabyne, 
Lake Eucumbene, Coolumbooka River, Murrumbidgee 
River, and a number of bores across the Snowy-Monaro 
LGA are used to provide the various townships with 
potable water. There are three (3) water treatment 
plants that reticulate water through 330 kilometres of 
piping infrastructure reaching 9442 homes throughout 
the region (Snowy Monaro Regional Council, 2022). 
The region has several upgrade works planned, 
including the construction of two (2) new water 
treatment plants at Bombala and Delegate 
(Snowy Monaro Regional Council, 2022).
Yass Valley
Yass Dam has a current capacity of 2460ML and 
services 15,000 people in the region. The town of Yass 
and the villages of Bowning, Binalong, Murrumbateman 
are connected to the Yass Dam water supply. Though 
the Dam was raised in 2013 to increase capacity, it is 
anticipated that the additional supply will soon fall short 
of demand and will do so at a faster rate due to the 
potential impacts of climate change (GHD, 2022). Yass 
Water Treatment Plant (WTP) underwent upgrade works 
in 2019 and has the capacity to process up to 13ML of 
water per day (Yass Valley Council, n.d.). Burrinjuck Dam 
— on the Murrumbidgee River — is located in Yass and 
has a storage capacity of 1,026 GL.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
33
Road Name
LGA
Description
Monaro Highway
SMRC
Key road into and out of the region. Begins in the ACT and passes through Cooma, 
Nimmitabel, and Bombala. It crosses into Victoria where it connects to the Princes 
Highway – a key road freight route. 
Snowy Mountains Highway
SMRC
Key road artery that begins in Bega and travels west. It joins the Monaro Highway 
between Nimmitabel and Cooma, before continuing west towards Tumut. 
Kosciusko Road
SMRC
Spans between Cooma and Charlottes Pass. It provides access to the recreational 
snowfields.
Barry Way and Alpine Way
SMRC
Links Jindabyne to the South with Victoria.
Captains Flat Road 
and Cooma Road
QPRC
Joins Braidwood to Queanbeyan.
Federal Highway
QPRC
The Federal Highway runs from the ACT and connects to Sydney, passing through 
the QPRC area and adjacent to YVC area. The town of Queanbeyan is connected to 
the Federal Highway via the Sutton Road. This is a main freight route. 
Kings Highway
QPRC
Connects Queanbeyan, Bungendore, Braidwood, and Batemans Bay.
Barton Highway
YVC
Connects Yass and the ACT. This is a main freight route. 
Wee Jasper Road
YVC
Connects Yass to Tumut via Wee Jasper.
Hume Highway
YVC
Connects Yass to Gundagai.
Table 2  Summary of major road infrastructure in QPRC, SMRC, and YVC (NSW Government, 2023a; NSW Government, 2023c)
2.6.	The region’s infrastructure 
Infrastructure including road, rail, air, and 
telecommunications can influence a community’s ability 
to thrive. Infrastructure contributes to the liveability, 
2.6.1.	 Road, rail, and air 
Across the three LGAs, road infrastructure is of 
of freight and passengers relies heavily on the road 
network. Table 2 provides a summary of the major 
roads network across the three LGAs. Table 3 displays 
the major investment in road upgrades across the 
three LGAs, highlighting the regions’ reliance on road 
infrastructure. While these upgrades are critical, the 
Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Economic Development 
Strategy also recommends that the QPRC should focus 
on collaboration with the ACT Government to investigate 
a coordinated approach to cross-border infrastructure 
and road connectivity to strengthen the region’s 

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
34
Chakola, Bunyan, Cooma, Nimmitabel, and Bombala. The 
line south of Cooma was closed in 1986, and the rest of 
the line south of Queanbeyan was terminated by 1989. 
Today, these stations are no longer in use. Recently, 
the Cooma and Monaro Progress Association have 
advocated for fixing the railway line between Canberra 
and Bombala and extending it to Eden. A Government-
funded feasibility study in 2020 found the cost benefits 
of the line were negligible, however advocation still 
continues (McDonald & Bevan , 2023). Today, parts of 
the railway line are used as historical tourist attractions 
(Cooma Monaro Railway, 2024), and in 2022, the NSW 
Government provided $273,000 to complete the 
Development Plan for a rail trail between Queanbeyan 
and Cooma. (Business Queanbeyan Palerang, 2024).
Rail infrastructure varies between the three LGAs. The 
YVC’s current railway infrastructure includes the Main 
Southern Railway from Sydney that passes through 
Yass (Yass Junction Railway Station). The Main Southern 
Railway connects to Melbourne via the North East 
railway line and this serves as the key rail freight route 
between Sydney and Melbourne. Thus, industry in YVC 
benefit from rail infrastructure that allows access to 
major markets including Sydney and Melbourne. 
QPRC benefits from the Goulburn Bombala Railway. The 
northern part of the line forms the main railway network 
between Sydney and Canberra, with stations in Tarago, 
Bungendore, and Queanbeyan. The NSW TrainLink 
Xplorer provides three passenger trains daily in both 
directions. Many of the towns in SMRC were previously 
part of the southern section of the Goulburn Bombala 
Railway line, with stations at Michelago, Bredbo, 
Project 
Estimated project value (m)
Monaro Highway upgrade
$230
Parsonage Creek bridge upgrade
$1.8 
Bobeyan Road Upgrade Project
$20
Ellerton Drive extension
$86 
Nerriga Road upgrade 
$34
Timber Bridge upgrades
N/A
Barton Highway Stage 1 and 2 upgrades (Transport NSW, 2024)
$200
Table 3  Summary of major road infrastructure investment (NSW Government, 2023b; NSW Government, 2023a)
Additionally, the SMRC has the Bullocks Flat Skitube 
that carries passengers on a short 8.5 kilometre journey 
from Bullocks Flat into Kosciusko National Park to 
the popular ski fields of Perisher Valley and Blue Cow 
Mountain. 6.3 kilometres of the line is underground, 
making it one of the longest underground train tunnels 
in Australia. (Department of Customer Service, 2024).
The region is less accessible via air. In the neighbouring 
ACT, the Canberra Airport offers both domestic and 
international flights for passengers and caters to the 
movement of domestic freight (Canberra Airport, 2024).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council
35
2.6.2.	 Telecommunications
Digital connectivity and mobile coverage within the 
three LGAs rely on telecommunications infrastructure. 
Geographic features such as hills or mountains can 
also affect coverage (Telstra, 2024) In recognition of 
the importance of digital connectivity, the Federal 
Government’s Mobile Black Spot Program was 
launched in 2015 (Telstra, 2024). The Program’s goal 
was to expand mobile coverage in regional and remote 
Australia. Across the three LGAs, between 2016 and 
2020, 18 Black Spot Programs were completed (nine 
in SMRC, six in QPRC, and three in YVC) (NationalMap, 
2024) A further two are still in progress in QPRC under 
Round 6 and 7, and two in progress in SMRC through 
Round 4 and Round 5A (NationalMap, 2024). 
Telstra is the main mobile network service provider 
across the region, with Figure 20 and Figure 21 
displaying the predicted likely areas of outdoor 
coverage (Telstra, 2024)They show that Telstra’s 4G 
mobile network covers a decent portion of the three 
LGAs, however there are still some areas with large 
gaps. Telstra’s newest mobile network technology 
‘5G’, covers the towns of Jindabyne, Berridale, Cooma, 
Bombala, Queanbeyan, Bungendore, Gundaroo, and Yass 
(Telstra, 2024) Their older mobile network technology 
‘3G’ is set to be discontinued mid-2024 (Telstra, 2024). 
Figure 21  YVC and QPRC Telstra 4G mobile 
network coverage (Telstra, n.d.a)
Figure 20  SMRC Telstra 4G mobile network 
coverage (Telstra, n.d.a)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
36
History of Drought Impacts
03

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
37
3.	Drought, climate and 
impacts
Australia is the driest inhabited continent on Earth with one of the world’s 
most variable rainfall climates (DCCEEW, 2021). This makes drought a 
defining feature of our history, with Australia experiencing severe drought 
on average once every 18 years (NSW Government, 2024d). Around 90% 
of the rain that falls in Australia evaporates back into the atmosphere, and 
around 2% soaks into the ground to re-fill groundwater reserves (NSW 
Government, 2024d) That results in less than 10% as runoff which is NSW’s 
most important source of water for agriculture, urban water supplies and 
ecosystems (NSW Government, 2024d) Drought is set to have an increasing 
effect on the country as a result of climate change, with the frequency, 
intensity and duration of severe droughts expected to increase, particularly 
in inland areas of NSW (DAFF, 2024a).
3.1.	 What is drought
Drought is defined as “a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the 
amount of available water is insufficient to meet our normal use” (BoM, 
n.d.). Australia has highly variable rainfall records and in contrast also has 
highly variable periods of low rainfall. Both the Bureau of Meteorology and 
(Kirono et al., n.d.)define four types of drought (Figure 22), meteorological, 
agricultural, hydrological and socio-economic.
Drought affects all parts of the community; from agricultural producers 
and suppliers, to industry, First Nations people, and the broader community. 
Droughts are challenging times, with water intensive industries affected 
by a reduction in output and increased costs. The economic, social, and 
environmental impacts are not limited to these industries but extend to 
entire communities and regions. Local loss of production has flow on effects 
to the regional economy. Drought can also impact human and environmental 
health including impacts on nutrition, exacerbation of mental health issues, 
and ecological decline for flora and fauna.  
Figure 22  Types of drought (BoM, 2023 )
1
Meteorological drought
A period of months to years of low rainfall. 
2
Agricultural drought
Short-term dryness in the surface soil layers
(root-zone) at a critical time in the growing season.
3
Hydrological drought
Prolonged moisture deﬁcits that affect surface or
subsurface water supply, reducing streamﬂow,
dam and lake levels.
4
Socio-economic drought
The effect of elements of the above droughts on supply
and demand of economic goods and human well-being.
5
Town water supply drought
A town water supply drought occurs when the supply
of water coming out of the taps is threatened or stops.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
38
3.1.1.	Drought monitoring in NSW
Drought monitoring over the years has become increasingly complex. 
The most common means of currently monitoring drought is 
through the Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS) which is 
a publicly available drought monitoring tool that monitors seasonal 
conditions across NSW. The EDIS was launched in March 2018 
and is used across government and farming stakeholders to build 
drought risk awareness, emphasise drought preparedness and 
improve confidence in drought monitoring and early warning. 
A key feature of EDIS is the development of the NSW Department of 
Primary Industries (DPI) Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) (DPIRD, 2024). 
The CDI combines meteorological, hydrological, and agronomic definitions 
of drought (above) using indexes for rainfall, soil and water, and plant 
growth (DPIRD, 2024). From these, a fourth index, drought direction (DDI), 
is developed. EDIS is undergoing redevelopment to provide farmers with 
world-leading weather and climate data to enable better business decisions. 
It is important to recognise the CDI provides an aggregated view of NSW, 
and that on-ground conditions can be different to those displayed in the 
maps. They provide an 'on average' view of a particular region only.
3.1.2.	 Stages of drought
Used together, the indexes of the EDIS indicate the stage of drought. 
The six stages progress from a non-drought category where all indicators 
suggest good conditions for production to recovery, through to a Drought 
Affected (weakening or intensifying) category, a Drought category and into 
Intense Drought. The five stages are shown in Figure 23 below. 
Figure 24 shows the current (May 2024) CDI across the three LGAs covered 
by this Plan. As can be seen, only the southern end of the Snowy Monaro 
LGA is currently experiencing drought. Each of the three LGAs have an area 
that is currently drought affected. In addition, Figure 24 provides additional 
detail on the drought affected stage (phase 3). The southern part of the 
Snowy-Monaro Region and the southwestern part of the Yass Valley region 
are considered drought affected (intensifying), whereas the remaining 
drought affected zones are in a weakening phase.
Figure 23  Stages of drought in NSW (adapted from DPIRD, 2023 ) 
Non drought phase
At least one indicator is above the 50th percentile.
1
Recovering phase
All indicators are below the 50th percentile but above
the 30th percentile.
2
Drought affected phases
Drought Affected Phases: one indicator is below the 30th
percentile and the rainfall is either negative or positive
over the past 90 days.
3
Drought phase
At least one indicator is below the 5th percentile.
4
Intense drought phase
All three indicators (rainfall, soil water, plant growth)
are below the 5th percentile.
5

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
39
Canberra
ACT
Victoria
Wollongong
Wagga Wagga
Gundagai
Binalong
Murrumbateman
Goulburn
Boorowa
Batlow
Jindabyne
Cooma
Bombala
Bredbo
Braidwood
Bungendore
Queanbeyan
Kosciuszko
NationalPark
Ulladulla
Batemans Bay
Narooma
Merimbula
Yass
Snowy Monaro Regional
Snowy Monaro Regional
Queanbeyan Palerang Regional
Queanbeyan Palerang Regional
Yass Valley
Yass Valley
Legend
 Non Drought
 Recovering
 Drought affected
 Drought
 Intense Drought
Figure 24  The Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) for the Quenbeyan-Palerang Regional, 
Snowy Monaro Regional and Yass Valley LGAs in May 2024 (plus surrounding region) (DPIRD, 2024)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
40
3.2.	Historical droughts in Southern Tablelands of Eastern NSW
Climate anomalies, such as drought, are regularly observed occurrences in inland Australia and the Southern Tablelands of eastern NSW is no exception. Throughout the years, 
the area has experienced a range of droughts with differing durations and intensities, as outlined in Table 4 below.
Drought Period
Duration
Characteristics
The Federation Drought
1895–1902
One of Australia's worst droughts, with far-reaching implications for agriculture, transport systems, and the economy. The period saw below 
average rainfall across much of central to eastern Australia.
World War I Drought
1914–1915
Although relatively short, the World War I drought had a hugely damaging impact on the national wheat industry and is considered significant 
given the rare occurrence of severe drought conditions in both the southeast and southwest of Australia. 
World War II Drought
1937–1945
A series of frequent and intense dry spells occurring between the years of 1937 and 1945. Whilst dry periods were more broken up than those 
seen in the Federation drought, they were of greater intensity. These conditions were a major driver of the Black Friday bushfires in January 
of 1939.
1965–1968 Drought
1965–1968
Widespread dry conditions across central, northern, and eastern Australia. This impact was pronounced in NSW with the Canberra region 
experiencing rainfall just 9% of the annual average in 1965. 
1982–1983 Drought
1982–1983
One of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th century for single year rainfall deficiency. The short, though intense, drought event strongly 
impacted eastern and central Australia, and was associated with a strong El Nino system. In the southeast, the upper Murrumbidgee River 
became a chain of waterholes.
The Millennium Drought
1997–2009
Between 1997 and 2009 much of southern Australia experienced prolonged dry conditions, which were most severe in the densely populated 
southeast and southwest. The Murray-Darling Basin and all southern cropping zones were severely affected. Temperatures were much hotter 
than previous droughts which drove several record-breaking fire seasons throughout this period, including the Canberra bushfires in 2003 
and Black Saturday in Central Victoria in 2009.
This may have been the first major Australian drought to be substantially influenced by the effects of climate change. The Millennium Drought 
ended with two of the wettest years on record for Australia in 2010–11 (Beard et al., 2011, Bureau of Meteorology, 2012). 
The 2017–2020 Drought
2017–2020
Following a wet period in 2016, three years of prolonged dry conditions saw regions in southeastern Australia facing rainfall of record lows. 
The Murray-Darling Basin was amongst the most heavily impacted regions. Consecutive dry cool seasons and the influence of climate systems 
in the Pacific generated record high fire weather danger across all states and territories as measured by the Forest Fire Danger Index. 
Table 4	 Historical droughts which effected the QPRC, SMRC and YVC areas (BoM, n.d)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
41
3.3.	Regional weather and climate
The climate across the Snowy-Monaro Regional Council, Queanbeyan-
Palerang Regional Council, and Yass Valley Council areas varies 
due to their geographical features. In the Snowy-Monaro region, 
encompassing the Snowy Mountains, a cooler climate prevails, with 
cool to cold winters and mild to warm summers (BoM, 2022). 
This Region experiences snowfall in winter months and relatively 
even rainfall throughout the year, with temperatures influenced by 
its mountainous terrain. The eastern half of the SMRC – the Monaro 
– experiences a rain shadow effect, leading to lower and irregular 
annual rainfall. In contrast, the Queanbeyan-Palerang area, situated 
northwest, features warmer, humid summers and mild winters (BoM, 
2022). Here, rainfall is spread evenly throughout the year (BoM, 2022) 
Further northwest, the Yass Valley region experiences slightly warmer 
temperatures (BoM, 2022). Summers are warm, while winters are cool, 
with occasional frosts and light snowfall in elevated areas. Overall, 
each area exhibits unique climate patterns shaped by elevation, 
proximity to mountain ranges, and regional weather phenomena. 
Droughts in the region are not isolated incidents, being a significant part of 
the region’s history. As discussed in Section 3.2, DPIRD have established 
three (3) CDIs to aid in defining the various stages of drought. However, 
there are some meteorological trends that can be observed which can 
indicate drought. Lower than average rainfall couples with higher-than-
average maximum temperatures often over a prolonged period of time 
can result in drought. Figure 25, Figure 26, and Figure 27 demonstrate 
this trends for some of the historical droughts that have occurred in the 
Southern Tablelands Region. The figures have been prepared using data 
for Bombala, Burrinjuck Dam, and Braidwood to represent the Snowy-
Monaro, Yass Valley, and Queanbeyan-Palerang LGAs respectively (the 
most complete data set). Each of these weather stations were selected as 
they had the most comprehensive set of meteorological data available. 
Given the direct influence of drought on cropping activities and 
crop productivity many farms are financially impacted. Farm 
profitability for the Tablelands Region is linked to the impact and 
severity of drought, the greatest reduction in profitability happens 
towards the tail end of a drought period (ABARES, 2020).
Figure 25 	Historical 
trends in rainfall and 
temperature data 
from 1912 to 2023 for 
Bombala (BoM, 2022).
Note: where there were gaps 
in available data, information 
was interpolated and 
graphed.
Figure 26	 Historical 
trends in rainfall and 
temperature data 
from 1996 to 2023 for 
Burrinjuck Dam. 
(BoM, 2022)
Note: where there were gaps 
in available data, information 
was interpolated and 
graphed.
Figure 27 	Historical 
trends in rainfall and 
temperature data 
from 1995 to 2023 for 
Braidwood Racecourse 
(BoM, 2022).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
42
3.3.1.	 Climate change impacts
Climate change refers to global, long-term shifts in average weather 
conditions, such as becoming warmer, wetter, or drier over several 
decades or longer. There is a growing body of evidence that shows 
Australia’s climate has changed and continues to change significantly, 
particularly driven by the work of the CSIRO, BoM, DCCEEW; formerly DPE. 
Temperatures in Australia have risen by about 0.9 °C since 1910 and there 
is a high level of scientific confidence that anthropogenic greenhouse gas 
emissions are a major driver of this increase in temperature (BoM, 2018). 
Drought projections in Australia are developed using climate simulations 
which are used to estimate the response of regional climates to 
anthropogenic change. The latest national drought projections (CSIRO and 
BoM, 2023) are based on the Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI) with 
input of monthly rainfall simulated by 21 CMIP5 GCMs and Standardised 
Soil Moisture Index (SSMI), a key indicator of agricultural drought. 
Future median projections suggest that the time spent in meteorological 
drought, and the frequency of extreme drought will increase over the 
course of century under RCP8.5 (medium confidence). Additionally, 
a substantial increase in the temperature reached on the hottest 
days, the frequency of hot days and the duration of warm spells are 
projected with very high confidence, coupled with decreasing soil 
moisture projections (Timbal et al. 2015). The projected change in mean 
rainfall for the Murray Basin Cluster report is shown in Figure 28.  
The CSIRO's My Climate View tool was used to analyse the impact of 
worsening climate change on temperature and rainfall for the Southeastern 
NSW region. Through this tool, we can see how the region’s climate 
is predicted to evolve over time using the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) representative concentration pathway (RCP) 
8.5. Under this climate change scenario, the Queanbeyan region is 
predicted to have an increase in the number of hot days from 9 (between 
1994 and 2023) to 17 in 2050 and up to an expected 22 days in 2070 
under RCP8.5, illustrated in Figure 29. This figures also present two 
historical 30-year periods (in purple) to allow comparison across time.
Figure 28  Seasonal changes (%) for rainfall under RCP 8.5 (Timbal et al. 2015)
Figure 29  Change in number of hot days (maximum temperature greater than or equal to 35 °C) in Queanbeyan. 
Future scenario represents RCP8.5 (CSIRO and BoM. 2023).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
43
3.4.	Future drought projections
Climate change is making drought conditions in 
southwest and southeast Australia worse. Climate 
change has contributed to a southward shift in weather 
systems that typically bring cool season rainfall to 
southern Australia. In addition to decreasing rainfall, 
climate change is driving an increase in the average 
temperature and in the intensity and frequency of hot 
days and heatwaves, leading to increased water losses 
and thus exacerbating drought conditions (Whetton et 
al., 2015). The region has varied landscapes and thus 
a range of industries from agriculture and tourism 
to public administration (AdaptNSW, 2024). Thus, 
some areas more than others in the region will be 
more sensitive to the images of changing climate. The 
Australian agricultural industries is effected by climate 
variability through variations in commodity prices, with 
trends of lower rainfall and drought related to lower 
farm profits (Hughes et al., 2019) Figure 30.
ABARES (2020) has assessed the drought risk by 
region. They found that that the NSW Tablelands 
region was at risk of a 52% (compared to the 
average of 51.3%) change in cropping farm profits 
between normal years to drought years (ABARES, 
2020). The South East and Tablelands regions 
are experiencing the impacts of climate change, 
most notably through rising temperatures. Future 
projections indicate that temperatures will continue 
to increase, rainfall patterns will shift, and the 
frequency and intensity of hot days, heatwaves, and 
fire weather will also rise (AdaptNSW, 2024) .
Figure 30  Estimated drought risk by region- farm profits. (Source: ABARES, 2020)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
44
within the Murray Basin (Climate Change in Australia, 
n.d.). Future climate change projections suggest that 
Murray Basin will experience more time in drought and 
more intense drought, especially in the east (Kirono et 
al., 2020). In the Murray Basin there is high confidence 
that soil moisture will decline as drought in the area 
becomes more apparent, with less rain and higher 
evaporation rates, especially during the winter and 
spring months (Timbal et al., 2015). 
There is high confidence that global temperatures 
will continue to rise for many decades, mainly due to 
greenhouse gases produced by human activities (NASA, 
2024). This will exacerbate climate extremes already 
experienced and worsen the duration and effects of 
drought in Australia. A reduction in winter rainfall leads 
to a proportionately greater (1.5 to 4 times) reduction in 
surface water runoff and groundwater recharge (Walker 
et al., 2021). 
Time spent in drought is projected to increase in the 
future across Southern and Southeast Australia (Climate 
Council, 2018). The three LGAs are part of two climate 
clusters, Sothern Slopes and Murray Basin, the majority 
Given the direct influence of drought on cropping 
activities and crop productivity many farms are 
financially impacted. Figure 31 shows farm profitability 
for the Tablelands region from 1990 to the present. As 
can be seen the compounding impact of drought results 
in the greatest reduction in profitability towards the 
tail end of the drought period followed by a significant 
spike in profit. It will be critical to monitor the trends in 
farm profitability and the changing climate such that 
existing systems and services, including individual 
farmers, are financially prepared for the next drought. 
Furthermore, given the regions diversity in industries it 
is necessary to identify key aspects of the region that 
are vulnerable to climate impacts, along with challenges 
and opportunities to adapt (AdaptNSW, 2024). 
Figure 31	 Historical trends in farm profitability for the Tablelands (ABARES, n.d.a).  
-$250,000
-$200,000
-$150,000
-$100,000
-$50,000
 $-
 $50,000
 $100,000
 $150,000
 $200,000
 $250,000
Farm Business Profit ($)
Farm Profit ($)
1997-2009
Drought 
2017-2020 
Drought

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
45
Utilising projections from CSIROs and BoMs Murray Basin Cluster report (Timbal et al. 2015), the following findings in Table 5 relating to critical drought indices are presented.
Critical variables 
Details 
Average temperature 
Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons (very high confidence). By late in the century (2090), for a high emission 
scenario (RCP8.5) the projected range of warming is 2.7 to 4.5°C (Timbal, 2015)
Extreme temperature
More hot days and warm spells are projected with very high confidence. In some regions, the number of days above 35 °C by 2090 
more than doubles under the RCP4.5, and the number of days over 40 °C more than triples (Timbal, 2015)
Average rainfall
By 2090 under both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, there is high confidence that cool season rainfall will continue to decline. Snowfall 
and maximum snow depth have declined significantly since 1960 and are projected to continue to decline for all RCPs with high 
confidence, particularly under RCP8.5 (Timbal, 2015)
Intense rainfall events
High confidence that the intensity of heavy rainfall events will increase (Timbal, 2015)
Evapotranspiration
Projections for potential evapotranspiration indicate increases in all seasons, with largest absolute rates projected with high 
confidence in summer by 2090 (CSIRO and BoM, 2023)
Standardised Soil Moisture Index (SSMI)
Soil moisture projections suggest overall seasonal decreases by 2090 (medium confidence (Timbal, 2015)
Drought and extreme drought (Standardised 
Precipitation Index (SPI) is less than -1) 
For all scenarios, the model ensemble median indicates an increase in the percentage time spent in drought and the frequency of 
extreme drought for 2090 (Timbal et al. 2015). Percent of time in drought, duration of time in drought and frequency of extreme 
drought all show increases for the Murray Basin Cluster.
Table 5  Summary of climate projections

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
46
The changes in key climate variables outlined above were considered in the context of impacts on cropping by the Grains Research and Development Corporation (GRDC) to 
develop understanding of the vulnerabilities of the industry (Hayman, Impact of climate change on southern farming systems, 2020). Table 6 outlines the impacts climate change 
may have on crops in the grain belt, a region inclusive of more westerly parts of the study area. Whilst this is a general reference, the grain belt is considered to represent a similar 
productive agricultural region to that seen in broader Southeastern NSW. Key findings for the residual vulnerability after feasible management changes are considered are 
included in Table 6 below. 
Change
Vulnerability
Increased mean temperature
Low vulnerability to warming over coming decades provided that grain growers have access to crops with appropriate development. 
Vulnerability to warmer seasons will be greatly increased if growing season rainfall was to decline, and warming is associated with 
heat waves.
Changes to heatwave frequency and intensity
High vulnerability to an increase in spring heat events for all dryland winter crops but especially pulse crops. Spring heat events are 
more damaging when combined with low soil moisture. In cooler than normal Springs, water use efficiency (WUE) tends to be higher 
than expected. This suggests moderate heat events might be imposing a cost in most years.
Changes to frost frequency and intensity
Although there is less confidence on the likelihood, there is high vulnerability to any increase in frost severity and frequency for many 
parts of the grains belt. Agronomists working with frost affected farmers refer to both a direct cost of frost damage and an indirect 
psychological impact on decision making.
Changes to seasonal rainfall
Very high vulnerability. Although grain growers are highly skilled at managing low rainfall environments, the ongoing profitability 
of enterprises relies on capturing good seasons and are strongly affected by drier seasons. In medium to higher rainfall parts of the 
grains belt, a substantial increase in drier than average growing seasons would greatly reduce confidence in management of input 
levels. Drier conditions would also reduce the amount of higher return and higher risk broadleaf crops.
Changes in the intensity of rainfall
Low vulnerability. A modest increase in the intensity of rainfall will be beneficial. There are risks of water erosion but these can 
be managed with stubble retention which has high levels of adoption and co-benefits of reducing wind and water erosion risk and 
increasing productivity.
Elevated levels of carbon dioxide
Changes in CO2 cannot be considered separately from temperature and water supply, and plant breeding advances cultivars suitable 
to present day conditions by default. In the future there is likely to be deliberate selection of varieties that respond more positively to 
elevated CO2. Monitoring of changes to pests and disease and revising nutrition will be essential.
Table 6  Components of climate change and commentary regarding increased mean temperature, exposure and changes to heatwaves, frost, rainfall, and carbon dioxide in the Australian grain belt (2020).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
47
These megatrends create the potential for 4 major 
scenarios in regional Australia in 2040 that can create 
either positive or negative impacts 
1. Global Niche 
Economic Impact: Communities may experience 
economic growth due to specialisation in high-demand 
industries. However, this could lead to job losses in 
traditional sectors due to automation.
Social Dynamics: Wealth may concentrate among 
industry leaders, leading to increased inequality. 
Communities could face challenges in retaining youth as 
they migrate to urban centres for diverse opportunities.
Infrastructure and Services: There may be heightened 
demand for advanced infrastructure and services to 
support the specialised industries, potentially straining 
local resources.
2. Fast and Flexible
Innovation and Employment: This scenario fosters 
a vibrant economy with diverse job opportunities, 
particularly in technology and services. Communities 
could become hubs of innovation, attracting talent and 
investment.
Cultural Vibrancy: Increased population and economic 
activity may enhance cultural and social life, leading to 
stronger community ties and engagement.
Challenges of Rapid Change: The fast pace of change 
could result in displacement of traditional industries and 
create challenges for those unable to adapt, leading to 
social tensions.
•	 Decrease in water inflows in the region, increasing the 
risk of dam levels falling below critical levels (DPE, 
2023a; DPE, 2023b). This has significant impacts on 
water security. 
This information is combined with the resilience 
framework and helps to inform the actions included 
in this plan, to ensure they are building resilience in 
the region.
3.6.	Future scenarios
Aside from future climate scenarios the strategic 
foresight for regional Australia: Megatrends, scenarios 
and implications illustrates 5 megatrends that are 
anticipated to impact regional communities in Australia. 
Aside from future climate scenarios the strategic 
foresight for regional Australia: Megatrends, scenarios 
and implications illustrates 5 megatrends that are 
anticipated to impact regional communities in Australia 
(Taylor, 2017) These include: 
•	 Disruptive automation which has the potential to alter 
job landscapes
•	 Growing significance of the Asia-Pacific market which 
influences trade and investment opportunities
•	 Increased demand for cleaner energy reflecting 
changing global priorities
•	 Higher educational attainment which is driving the 
growth or knowledge-based economies and 
•	 Technical advancements in communication 
and transportation. 
3.5.	Future climate scenario
The previous sections have highlighted the main factors 
that may affect the region, in terms of a changing 
climate, in the coming years, and some of the impacts 
of these challenges. To enable a more focussed 
approach to drought resilience planning, a summary 
of the predictions and the impacts these may have are 
provided below:
•	 An increase in the average temperature and in the 
intensity and frequency of hot days and heatwaves, 
leading to increased water losses and thus 
exacerbating drought conditions (Whetton et al., 
2015). Warmer temperatures also contribute to longer 
droughts and harsher fire weather as well as increase 
animal stress. This can make land unsuitable for 
agriculture, lead to crop stress and attract new pests.
•	 Changing rainfall patterns; by 2070 a reduction in 
average annual rainfall between 10-15% but with more 
intense rainfall events, with a decrease in winter and 
spring rainfall and an increase in summer and autumn 
rainfall (DPE, 2023a; DPE, 2023b). This may impact 
growth, ability to plant/harvest and increase erosion. 
•	 Increased rate, length and severity of droughts; 
there is increased potential for droughts that 
persist for more than 10 years and increased 
chance of events similar to the 2017-2020 drought 
going from a 1 in 1,000-year event to a 1 in 50-
year event (DPE, 2023b). Primary producers are 
usually able to weather a drought for 2-3 years, 
however long-term droughts and increased 
frequency will likely push more off the land.
•	 Higher evapotranspiration, an increase of around 5% 
by 2070 (DPE, 2023a; DPE, 2023b). This has impacts 
on soil moisture, water availability and therefore 
crop growth.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
48
3.7.	 Drought related impacts 
The impact of droughts and the magnitude of such 
impacts is a function of exposure to drought, the 
sensitivity of the community, and the adaptive capacity 
of the community (ABARES, 2022a). Due to the 
interconnection and interaction between the community, 
economy, and environment, the impacts of drought can 
be both direct and indirect, with wide-reaching effects. 
Drought impacts were identified through the drought 
literature reviewed as a part of the Plan development. 
This long list of drought impacts was then tested with 
members of the stakeholder reference group who 
were asked to add to this list and then rate each of the 
impacts in relation to the effect on their community 
which produced a priority ranking for each. This 
provided a customised view of the impacts that most 
greatly affect the communities within which the Plan 
operates. Some of this prioritisation is provided in 
Section 5.2. These impacts were then categorised 
into three components of social, economic, and 
environmental. When considered together, these 
components form the foundations of drought resilience 
as they highlight vulnerabilities. It is important when 
considering impacts to note that droughts are difficult 
to predict in their duration and severity and due to 
these differences, impacts differ between drought 
events. Below are the details of impacts identified either 
through literature (and confirmed as relevant to the 
region by the stakeholders) or by the stakeholders. A 
key document for gaining an understanding of drought 
impacts in the region and generally was the 2022 
Southern NSW Innovation Hub ‘Baselining Drought’ 
report. Other specific references are provided. 
3. Natural Advantage
Resource Utilisation: Communities may benefit from 
sustainable practices that leverage local resources, 
potentially improving resilience against climate change.
Community Cohesion: A focus on local strengths can 
foster community pride and cohesion, as residents 
engage in sustainable practices and local governance.
Economic Vulnerability: Despite the advantages, 
communities might struggle with competitiveness and 
productivity, risking long-term economic viability if they 
cannot adapt to changing market demands.
4. Holding Ground
Stagnation and Decline: Communities may face 
economic stagnation as traditional industries decline, 
leading to job losses and reduced investment.
Population Challenges: Outmigration of youth could 
exacerbate demographic challenges, resulting in an 
aging population and reduced community vitality.
Social Issues: The lack of growth may lead to increased 
rural poverty and social isolation, with communities 
becoming more vulnerable to external shocks like 
climate change and economic downturns.
These megatrends will significantly impact the regions 
resilience to drought through economic, social and 
environmental factors. Understanding these interactions 
is key in developing effective actions to improve 
resilience to drought and will shape the capacity 
of each community to withstand and recover from 
drought. Suggesting that resilience measures should 
be considered not just alongside drought but also in the 
context of the potential future state.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
49
The key impacts to the region as advised through community consultation have been summarised below. 
Social
Economic
Environment
•	 Increased burden on mental health services.
•	 Increased isolation within communities.
•	 Impacts on children having lived through 
drought and being involved with agricultural 
activities including death of livestock.
•	 Reduced access to recreational space for 
exercise and activities, especially associated 
with water e.g. water skiing.
•	 Some towns with reduced access to drinking 
water, leading to increased anxiety and mental 
health impacts.
•	 Changing demographics due to sub-
urbanisation due to proximity to Canberra
•	 Increased wear on roads and other assets.
•	 Seeing countryside in poor health is a source of 
distress for First Nations Peoples.
•	 On-going decision-making fatigue and paralysis.
•	 Mental stress on the farming community 
from rising financial pressure and increasing 
debt levels.
•	 Reduced numbers of tourists visiting the region.
•	 Greater strain on the local economy due to 
lower levels of spending.
•	 Reduced demand for some services and lack of 
business confidence.
•	 Increasing fodder prices.
•	 Increased need for loans, increased farm and 
small business debt.
•	 High water prices and cost of water carting.
•	 Reduced access to water for agricultural 
production and industry.
•	 Reductions in skilled labour in the region.
•	 Loss of skills, knowledge, and business from 
the region.
•	 Reduced on-farm income and increased costs.
•	 Many small businesses in the area require 
significant support when resources are scarce, 
and a loss of personal income leading to 
business failure and family financial stress with 
flow-on effects. 
•	 Rainfall deficit leading to loss of crops, fodder 
supplies, shelter belts and native vegetation 
(resulting in loss of biodiversity).
•	 Drying of the regional landscape.
•	 Increased presence of local wildlife and 
invasive species in regional communities, 
aggravating the impact of drought.
•	 Additional pressure on water resources 
including increased pressure on wetlands and 
stream beds leading to riparian damage.
•	 Reduced maintenance on Council assets such 
as parks and gardens (due to water constraints).
•	 Decline in locations of cultural importance.
•	 Decreased river health.
•	 Increased frequency of fires and associated 
negative impacts on ecosystems, community 
health and wellbeing and water quality.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
50
04
Listening to local experience

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
51
4.	Listening to local experience
The outcomes of this Plan are born from community voice, which will support locals in their 
journey towards drought resilience. As drought impacts every facet of regional communities, 
extending far beyond the farm gate.
4.1.	 Local stories of resilience

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
52
Heart of the Storm A Communities Resilience in the Face of Disaster
The Black Summer bushfires left a trail of devastation across Australia, and the Braidwood region 
was no exception. In the wake of this tragedy, residents Clare Young and Rosie Ricketson sought 
to transform collective grief into hope and build a more sustainable future. Partnering with the 
Queanbeyan Palerang Regional Council Bushfire Recovery Centre, they embarked on a powerful 
storytelling project: the "Heart of the Storm" podcast.
"Heart of the Storm" is a six-part audio documentary series that delves deep into the experiences 
of over 200 Braidwood residents who lived through the Black Summer. Through raw and unfiltered 
interviews, the podcast unveils a narrative of resilience, community spirit, and the unwavering will 
to overcome adversity.
A recurring theme throughout the series is the power of community. The residents of Braidwood 
came together in the face of unimaginable hardship, supporting one another and demonstrating 
the strength that emerges during shared struggles. This theme of unity serves as a beacon of hope, 
highlighting the human capacity for collaboration and compassion even in the darkest of times.
The podcast doesn't shy away from the underlying cause of the devastating fires - climate change. 
By peeling back the layers of individual stories, "Heart of the Storm" exposes the critical link 
between environmental health and future bushfire risk. This awareness serves as a call to action, 
urging listeners to consider the relationship between humanity and the land we inhabit.
Rose Ricketson emphasizes the importance of remembering the hardships endured, not only to honour the past but also to learn from it. The podcast aims to foster open 
dialogue about future preparedness and collaboration within the community. By acknowledging past challenges, the 
"Heart of the Storm" delves into specific stories of heroism and resilience. One such example is the tale of Phil and Sarah, proprietors of the Nerriga Hotel. When disaster 
struck, they transformed their establishment into a refuge for the community, offering emotional and physical shelter during a time of immense fear and uncertainty. Their 
selfless actions illustrate the potential for crisis to catalyse resilience and strengthen social bonds.
The Black Summer fires pushed the Braidwood community to its limits, but it also served as a catalyst for positive change. "Heart of the Storm" sheds light on the 
importance of shared experience, preparedness, and collaboration in the face of adversity. The stories within the podcast offer invaluable lessons for building a more 
resilient future, not just for Braidwood, but for communities everywhere.
Source: Heart of the storm podcast — Mona Farm

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
53
Treasure Trail Campaign  
In response to the 2019 20 bushfire season, the Queanbeyan Palerang Regional Council developed 
the Treasure Trail campaign. This initiative aimed to increase destination awareness, boost tourist 
visitation and expenditure, enhance industry capacity and support business resilience planning. 
It takes visitors on a picturesque trail through Braidwood, Bungendore and Queanbeyan. This 
treasure trail was designed in such a way that it acts as a window into the resilience of local 
communities. The creation of the Treasure Trail required the collaboration between different 
members of the community. Local businesses have gotten involved by offering stops along the 
trail, providing an opportunity to display their unique products as well as share their experiences in 
navigating the obstacles of the past years including the droughts of 2019/20. 
This initiative by Visit Queanbeyan Palerang, provides a marketing tool for local businesses, 
particularly in under visited areas. It leads participants to forgotten historical sites or hidden gems 
within the town. This renewed interest brought about a much needed boost to local businesses in 
these areas and encouraged further revitalisation efforts.
This collaborative spirit of this Treasure Trail showcases the community's ability to work together 
towards a shared goal while also creating a sense of belonging and connection which are crucial 
aspects of a resilient community. 
Source: Blog | Visit Queanbeyan Palerang | Fastest Growing City in NSW

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
54
Mulloon Rehydration Initiative 
The Mulloon Institute is a not-for-profit focused on sustainable agriculture and environmental 
regeneration, aiming to hydrate and restore landscapes using science, education and 
demonstration sites. The Mulloon Rehydration Initiative is one of those sites. The MRI is a long-
term project run by the Institute, with a primary goal is to rehydrate and regenerate the Mulloon 
catchment to improve agricultural productivity, enhance biodiversity and increase resilience to 
climatic extremes like droughts and floods. 
Historically, deep erosion has resulted in depleted water resources, harming the ecosystem 
of Mulloon Creek. This land degradation has lowered the water-table, dried up wetlands and 
dramatically reduced the water holding capacity of the soil, with the groundwater of the region 
reduced. This initiative aims to rebuild the natural landscape and function of the Mulloon catchment 
to create a more reliable water resource.
In the Mulloon catchment, the Institute is working with 23 landowners to reverse the creeks’ 
degradation through the restoration of the waterway and regeneration of the vegetation of aquatic 
and terrestrial areas. By slowing down the flow through the installation of 50+ leaky weirs, there 
are now prolonged water levels in the creek, resulting in increased soil moisture and improved 
ecosystem function. Combined with managing grazing approaches, this is leading to increased soil 
carbon levels. This, combined with the reinstatement of wetlands (traditional carbon sinks), can 
assist in sequestering carbon from the atmosphere and contribute to addressing climate change. 
Catchment-scale projects are inherently social projects that begin with the education and capacity building of communities on the process of landscape rehydration and 
associated regenerative land management approaches. The Mulloon Rehydration Initiative has developed a ‘bringing the community along’ approach 
to ensure that all stakeholders, including landholders, regulators, researchers, and the broader community, can engage with the project.
Recognising the interconnectedness of environmental, social, and economic aspects, the Mulloon Institute, and its partners, are conducting a suite of baseline studies in the 
catchment. This comprehensive data collection goes beyond just biophysical factors, encompassing social and economic aspects as well. The integrated monitoring studies 
allow researchers to assess the project's long-term impact on the entire landscape, demonstrating the crucial link between a healthy environment, thriving communities, and 
a more robust agricultural sector. Working alongside partners is pivotal to the success of the Initiative. 
The Mulloon Rehydration Initiative is an example of a proactive measure in building resilience through the restoration of waterways and wetlands. By rebuilding natural 
landscape function, the project has increased water availability during droughts and improved water quality, while promoting healthy soils. The holistic approach ensures the 
project addresses the community's overall well-being, fostering a more resilient social and economic environment while revitalising the water system. 
Source: https://themullooninstitute.org/s/2024-Case-study-MRI.pdf

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
55
Monaro Farming Systems   
Monaro Farming Systems (MFS) was established in 2007 by a progressive group of local 
agricultural producers with industry support who aim to build capacity and continuous 
improvement in the Monaro grazing industry. With strong and professional leadership MFS have 
managed to secure significant project funding, including the Monaro Seasonal Outlooks Project. 
The project commenced in 2022 aimed at providing seasonal outlook information for local 
producers in the Monaro region that would allow for engagement and discussion in a group setting 
so producers can share and reflect on disaster management and mitigation strategies going 
forward. The project was funded by the Department of Industry’s Black Summer Recovery Grant. 
This initiative ran from March 2022 to March 2024, with a budget of just over $50,000. It was a 
strategic initiative focused on building the long-term resilience of Monaro's agricultural sector in 
the face of a changing climate and increasingly volatile weather patterns.
The seasonal outlooks offered short-term tactical projections (usually covering a 3-month period) 
based on the Farming Forecaster tool (developed by a consortium comprised of Monaro Farming 
Systems, Tablelands Farming Systems and Bookham Ag Bureau as well as LLS) and decision 
support tools. These systems consider native and improved pasture enterprises. By understanding 
projected pasture growth and animal performance, producers can proactively manage their 
farm businesses. Producers gain confidence and understanding of season outlooks and trigger 
points. The presentations provided data on soil moisture, projected green herbage mass, pasture and ground-cover details, historical rainfall and trends, precited seasonal 
conditions for the following three months. It also provided an opportunity to network and interact with fellow producers on the Monaro.
A series of workshops across 2022 and 2023 introduced and educated producers on the Farming Forecaster tool. This platform integrates data on weather, soil moisture, 
pasture growth, and livestock performance, providing a holistic view of farm conditions. Workshops, with a total attendance exceeding 600, were held across various 
locations like Delegate Station, Cooma Showground, Kybeyan Station, Woburn Station, Hazeldean, and Springvale. The Farming Forecaster tool allows producers to access 
data from a wider geographic area surrounding their property, leading to more precise and localised pasture forecasts. This empowers them to make informed decisions 
tailored to the specific microclimates within their farms.
By equipping producers with the knowledge and tools needed to navigate seasonal challenges, the Monaro Seasonal Outlooks Project has significantly contributed to 
building resilience within the region's agricultural sector. This project empowers producers to make informed decisions, optimise resource use, and adapt to changing 
conditions, ensuring the long-term sustainability of their farms.
Source: Monaro Seasonal Outlooks, Preparing for the Upcoming Season - Monaro Farming Systems

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
56
Garage Sale Trail
Residents of the Snowy Monaro region participated enthusiastically in the annual Garage Sale Trail 
held in November 2023 in addition to a market day on the first weekend with 30 stalls and 500 
people in attendance. This community driven event fostered a spirit of environmental responsibility 
and economic revitalisation. Over $30,000 in local sales diverted an impressive 36.5 tonnes of pre 
loved goods from landfills, representing a significant contribution to waste reduction efforts. This 
translates to approximately 40% of the items finding new homes, a testament to the success of the 
event in promoting resourcefulness and sustainability within the community.
The Snowy Monaro region embraced sustainability and community spirit during the recent 
Garage Sale Trail, fostering resilience in a fun and eco friendly way. Over 3,841 residents 
participated across two weekends, turning unwanted items into cash and forging connections with 
neighbours. This event aimed to reduce waste by giving pre loved goods a second life, promoting 
resourcefulness – a key aspect of building resilient communities.
 A newly released report by Garage Sale Trail and Taverner Research highlights the success of 
this initiative. On average, garage sale organisers earned $456, while shoppers benefitted from 
finding affordable, second hand products. By encouraging responsible consumption and fostering 
a collaborative spirit, the Garage Sale Trail strengthens the social fabric of the Snowy Monaro 
community, making it more adaptable in the face of future challenges.
Garage sale trails offer a unique opportunity to cultivate resilience in communities. These events not only encourage decluttering and responsible waste disposal, but 
also foster a sense of connection and resourcefulness. By finding new homes for unwanted items, participants breathe new life into pre loved goods, reducing reliance on 
constant consumption. This fosters a more sustainable mindset and promotes the value of resourcefulness, both key aspects of building resilient communities. 
Additionally, the social interactions that occur during garage sales create a sense of belonging and shared purpose, strengthening community bonds. This social support 
network proves invaluable in the face of unforeseen challenges, making communities more resilient.
Source: Snowy Monaro Locals Salvage Tonnes of Treasure from Landfill | Mirage News

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
57
Snowy Monaro Seed Savers 
The Snowy Monaro region implemented the Seed Savers initiative, designed to bolster community 
resilience. This program centres around the establishment of a network of seed libraries that 
transcend their role as mere repositories for seeds.
Seed libraries function as sanctuaries for biodiversity, safeguarding a diverse array of seeds. An 
aim of this initiative is to fortify the community's food security in the face of environmental flux. 
With a broader selection available, residents are better equipped to identify plant life that thrives 
under unforeseen weather patterns or pest outbreaks, thereby promoting a more resilient food 
system.
Furthermore, Seed Savers champions the principles of seed sovereignty and self sufficiency. The 
program actively encourages residents to engage in seed swapping and participate in seed saving 
practices, thereby mitigating reliance on commercial seed sources. By envisioning a scenario 
where access to commercially produced seeds is disrupted, it becomes evident that a community 
imbued with a robust seed saving culture would be better positioned to weather such a challenge. 
This fosters self sufficiency and reduces vulnerability to disruptions within global supply chains, 
ultimately strengthening the community's capacity to adapt to unforeseen circumstances.
However, the purview of Seed Savers extends beyond the realm of seeds themselves. These 
libraries are envisioned as hubs for the dissemination of knowledge. Through a series of workshops 
and educational events, residents gain valuable insights into seed saving and sustainable gardening practices. This empowers individuals to take control of their food 
production and adapt to future challenges. By equipping themselves with the requisite knowledge and skills to cultivate their own food, residents become less dependent on 
external sources and more adaptable in the face of change, further contributing to the overall resilience of the community.
Source: Snowy Monaro planting seeds of community growth  Inside Local Government

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
58
Drought Adoption Officer
Hub and Southern Queensland and Northern New South Wales Innovation Hub, the Local Land 
Services Drought Adoption Officer Program bridges the gap between the state government and 
regional landholders. This Program specifically focuses on bolstering drought preparedness and 
planning through extension services, ensuring landholders have the tools they need to be more 
drought resilient.
The Program's effectiveness lies in its multifaceted approach. Drought Adoption Officers function 
on multiple levels, ensuring on-the-ground support reaches landholders where they need it most. 
This includes providing direct access to expert advice on drought resilience and preparedness 
strategies. These personalised consultations allow officers to tailor guidance to the specific needs 
and circumstances of each landholder.
Beyond one-on-one support, Drought Adoption Officers actively reach out to the broader 
community. They participate in local events such as field days, raising general awareness about 
drought preparedness measures and fostering connections with a wider audience of landholders. 
This proactive approach ensures that valuable information reaches a broader range of individuals.
Furthermore, Drought Adoption Officers take the initiative to organise and host workshops on 
critical drought preparedness topics equipping landholders with the necessary knowledge and 
skills. Subjects include, confinement feeding techniques to mitigate the impact of drought on 
livestock, utilising decision-making tools for informed farm management during dry periods, 
and developing comprehensive farm plans that incorporate drought resilience principles.
Drought Adoption Officers contribute to state-wide knowledge-sharing initiatives. This includes participation in webinars and workshops, fostering the dissemination of 
valuable information across a wider geographical area. By combining on-site support, community outreach, workshop facilitation, and participation in knowledge-sharing 
platforms, Local Land Services Drought Adoption Officers play a crucial role in empowering landholders to become more drought-resilient. This comprehensive approach 
strengthens NSW's agricultural sector, ensuring its long-term sustainability in the face of recurring droughts.
The utilisation of the Drought Adoption Officer role has been instrumental in the planning and hosting of seminars and the extension and awareness of raising events 
for landholders on drought preparedness. However, the South East region has specific areas of focus within these broader themes. Educational events and workshops 
focus specifically on weed management, grazing management practices, and emergency response strategies. By focusing on these areas, the program not only educates 
landholders on best practices but also identifies existing practices and any gaps in effective strategies. This targeted approach ensures landholders in the South East region 
have the necessary tools and knowledge to be best prepared for droughts. 
Source: Local Land Services

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
59
Four Winds Vineyard
Four Winds Vineyard, established in 1998, has a rich history marked by both growth and adaptation. 
In 2013 the Vineyard completed the construction of a dedicated cellar door enabled by a federal 
government grant. The cellar door represented a strategic step forward for the vineyard as it not 
only improved customer engagement but also opened doors for business expansion by creating 
a platform for direct sales, tastings, and potentially hosting events or workshops. The cellar door 
marked a turning point for Four Winds Vineyard, solidifying its presence within the local wine 
tourism industry.
The 2019/2020 summer bushfires were a devastating set back to Four Winds Vineyard and the 
surrounding community. The unusable grapes cast a shadow over not just the vineyard's livelihood, 
but also the morale of the local community heavily reliant on the wine industry. However, Four 
Winds Vineyard's response highlighted the power of community and resilience in overcoming 
adversity.
Their innovative use of the smoke-tainted grapes for a Riesling gin wasn't just a business decision; 
it became a beacon of hope. The success of the gin provided a much-needed "small win" for the 
community, a tangible symbol of their collective ability to adapt and bounce back from disaster. 
Four Winds Vineyard, through their ingenuity, became a rallying point, reminding everyone that 
even in the hardest times, there's always the potential for creative solutions and a brighter future, 
achieved together.
Four Winds Vineyard's commitment to community extends far beyond their immediate surroundings. In a powerful example of social responsibility, they collaborated with 
neighbouring businesses on a unique four-tonne project. By partnering with their neighbours, Four Winds Vineyard transformed surplus Shiraz grapes into a vehicle for 
positive change. This collaborative effort resulted in raising a remarkable $40,000 to support refugees living in Canberra. This act of generosity transcended the realm of 
business and highlighted the profound impact a community can have when it unites for a common cause.
The wine industry presents a unique challenge: it's intricately linked to the volatility of tourism. A successful vineyard thrives not just on the quality of its grapes but also on 
its ability to attract visitors. Recognising this vulnerability, Four Winds Vineyard has fostered resilience through internal diversification.
Commitment to community was on display during the 2022 floods when heavy rain and a partially closed Murrumbateman Road threatened to isolate businesses and Four 
Winds Vineyard spearheaded a collaborative effort, uniting five neighbouring businesses in a unique initiative. Together, they launched the "Quick Fix for Flooding" six-pack. 
This campaign went beyond promoting individual businesses and displayed a symbol of solidarity and a beacon of hope for the entire community. 
Four Winds Vineyard's story highlights the importance of adaptation, community focus, and collaboration in overcoming challenges. They are a model for businesses seeking 
to thrive in a dynamic environment.
Source: About Us - Four Winds Vineyard; Sarah Collingwood

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
60
Talaheni 
Talaheni, a testament to best practices in regenerative agriculture, showcases the remarkable 
transformation achievable in Australia. Bought by Robyn and John in 1980, Talaheni was 
significantly affected by overgrazing, salinity, erosion, and acidic soils. Undeterred by the 
property’s drawbacks, they saw potential and embraced the challenge with unwavering resilience. 
John’s background in farming and agricultural sciences, allowed them to strip back the property 
and take a fresh look at the potential of Talaheni, weighing both its established benefits and any 
newly emerged drawbacks. 
John and Robyn conducted extensive mapping, including topography, geology and water flow and 
completely changed the fencing layout to smaller paddocks that recognised soil type, slope, and 
aspect. Rainfall infiltration was identified and in response specific flora was planted. Fast growing 
acacia and slower growing eucalypts were planted in rocky areas to help combat against the 
deeper drainage which is the primary cause of dryland salinity that affects the Yass region. These 
plantings have protected the land from the elements and reduced the deep drainage entering the 
groundwater, resulting in fallen ground water levels and thus reduced salinity. 
John's decades of groundwater monitoring (his secret weapon) fuel his resilience against 
climate shifts. The key to the Ives success in the face of a changing climate lies in adaptation, by 
strategically capitalising on the new seasonal conditions and identifying the crops that now thrive 
in his growing season. He capitalises on new seasons, planting crops that thrive and using sheep to 
manage native tree regeneration by controlling competing plants.
Even on rocky, nutrient poor ridges, strategically placed trees act as resilience warriors. They improve soil structure and carbon storage, fortifying the land against future 
challenges. And by excluding stock from remnant woodlands, the Ives fosters biodiversity and creates healthy ecosystems – a win win that strengthens the overall resilience 
of the property, even leading to a surprising increase in overall stock carrying capacity. 
In response to fluctuating precipitation patterns, the Ives implemented a robust land management strategy, prioritising soil health and biodiversity to cultivate a resilient 
ecosystem. This not only ensures the continued prosperity of their property in the face of climatic uncertainty but has also demonstrably improved the land's economic 
viability. Through regenerative practices, Talaheni has transformed from a degraded property into a thriving example of sustainable land management.
Source: Yass farmers lead by example | Blog | Bank Australia

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
61
NSW Farmers Drought Dinner
In a positive development for the Yass local farming community, the NSW Farmers Yass Branch secured funding to host a dinner specifically designed to foster connections 
within the Yass farming community.
To maximise participation, the Yass Branch collaborated with local stock and station agents, this partnership ensured the tables, seating ten guests each, were filled, 
creating an environment conducive to both social interaction and a sense of community. To further enhance the atmosphere, each table was invited to contribute a donation 
for a lucky door prize, promoting a spirit of camaraderie and shared experience.
The evening's program included a three-course meal and offered a welcome respite from the ongoing challenges of the drought. It allowed farmers to gather and talk about 
how the drought was impacting them, finding solidarity in shared struggles and the camaraderie that comes from facing hardship together. 
The dinner broke down the isolation barrier often faced by farmers during hardship, supporting an atmosphere where many farmers felt comfortable opening about their 
struggles, even admitting to experiencing depression. Recognising the potential need for further assistance, the event organisers ensured the presence of mental health 
services and other local agencies. Representatives were available throughout the evening and attendees were encouraged to 
connect with them for support, either during the dinner or later. 
The dinner itself served as a testament to the enduring spirit of the Yass farming community. It provided a platform for connection, shared experiences, and a much-needed 
respite from the ongoing drought. This gathering fostered a sense of solidarity and reminded everyone of the inherent strength that lies at the heart of regional Australia.
Source: Carolina Merriman, Chair – NSW Farmers I Yass Branch

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
62
Yass Area Network Ready Revegetation Project
The YAN Climate Ready Revegetation Project tackled a critical challenge: fostering resilient 
landscapes in the Yass Area Network Landcare Region as the climate changes. It empowered 
natural resource managers with the tools to make informed decisions for successful revegetation.
The project focused on resilience, recognising that increased genetic diversity aids species 
adaptation through natural selection. The first step involved understanding the projected 2.5 
degree temperature increase for the Yass area. This knowledge allowed for proactive preparation.
A comprehensive inventory identified 80 native plant species and mapped their current distribution. 
This established a baseline for the site's existing resilience. This was followed by meticulously 
mapping the distribution of each existing plant species, identifying their preferred locations within 
the site. This detailed knowledge allows for a nuanced understanding of the existing ecosystem's 
strengths and weaknesses. 
The project then assessed long term viability by overlaying climate envelope maps for each plant 
species on the revegetation site. This compared suitable climates with future projections. The 
project didn't shy away from challenges. If local plants seemed unlikely to survive, alternative 
species from regions with similar projected climates were explored, ensuring adaptability.
For critically important species, advanced modelling techniques predicted where they might 
establish themselves in the future. This proactive approach demonstrates the project's 
commitment to building long term resilience by assisting species in adapting to a new environment.
By providing a roadmap for informed and adaptable revegetation, the YAN project ensures a healthy and resilient future for our natural landscapes, even in the face of 
climate change.
Source: yan_climatereadyreveg_summary_20210531.pdf (nsw.gov.au)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
63
4.2.	 What we heard
The communities of Queanbeyan-Palerang, Snowy 
Monaro and Yass Valley LGAs are committed to 
building a resilient and prosperous future. Water and 
communication were some of the key topics articulated 
in the survey and were consistent with the SRG themes 
of interests. 
4.2.1.	 Survey Outcomes 
The survey was open until the 26 July 2024, there 
were 114 responses , 67 responses from Queanbeyan-
Palerang LGA, 18 responses from Snowy Monaro LGA, 
26 responses from Yass Valley LGA, with the remainder 
from surrounding LGAs. The current findings align with 
stakeholder group discussions and are explored in the 
LGA snapshots (see 4.2.2, 4.2.3 and 4.2.4). To delve 
deeper, four key questions have been identified and are 
presented in the graphs. 
The results of question 4 in the survey demonstrate 
that drought resilience extends beyond the farm gate 
where our communities need to be resilient to survive 
and thrive, even during times of drought. Items were 
ranked in the order of priority, by respondents that 
believe should receive investment to enhance drought 
resilience in the community. Figure 32 shows that a 
secure water supply was the most important aspect 
of the survey according to respondents, followed by 
skills in agriculture, connected and resilient community, 
reliable assets and infrastructure, prosperous economy 
and management and administration.
Question 7 of the survey requested respondents rank six 
outcomes in terms of effectiveness of local resilience 
building, Figure 33 shows that the respondents ranked 
‘investing in water conservation and efficiency’ the 
highest. The top three align closely with the outcomes 
in Figure 32 above. 
Figure 32  Survey question 4: Drought resilience extends beyond the farm gate where our communities need 
to be resilient to survive and thrive, even during times of drought. Items ranked in order of priority
Figure 33  Survey question 7: Ranked from highest to lowest the outcomes respondents 
believed would be effective in building drought resilience for our region

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
64
Question 11 of the survey asked respondents which other 
economic areas should be considered when looking at a 
diversified economy. Renewable energy and technology 
and innovation were chosen as the most popular, as seen 
in Figure 34.  
Effectiveness of current communication and 
engagement during drought was rated in question 
12. Figure 35 captured the responses rate and 
overwhelming respondents rated no for all options. This 
is reflective of the information gathered in consultation 
and written up in the LGA snapshots.
Figure 34  Survey question 11: Specific industries or sectors which respondents 
considered best to investing in to diversify income sources
Figure 35  Survey question 12: In your opinion, is the current communication and engagement 
during drought sufficient and effective in keeping the community informed and engaged?

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
65
4.2.2.	 Queanbeyan Palerang LGA 
Snapshots
In Queanbeyan-Palerang, a deep sense of community 
fosters a shared determination to build resilience in 
the face of drought. Stakeholders highlighted the 
importance of better water management, to better 
prepare for natural disasters. Discussions highlighted 
a clear desire for a more coordinated approach to 
drought preparedness, with a need for clearer and more 
accessible information and support services required. 
Stakeholders stressed the need to address the current 
way of thinking about water through educational 
initiatives focusing on drought and water conservation. 
Stakeholders emphasised the proactive approach 
individuals took in the community to create informal 
social support opportunities for residents. Including 
extending the opening hours of pubs. However, 
stakeholders identified shortcomings in existing 
infrastructure and called for investments to improve it, 
ensuring better access to resources and services 
during droughts.
What we heard
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA include:
•	 Less discretionary spending in the region, reduced 
tourism, resulting in impacts on businesses and 
the local economy. 
•	 Reduction in the level of groundcover and pasture 
increasing erosion to the invasion of weed species. 
•	 Decrease in mental health due to isolation, 
stress, reduced social gatherings and recreation 
opportunities. Increased alcohol and substance 
abuse. 
•	 Increased threat of other natural disasters due to 
drought e.g Bushfires.
•	 Additional pressure is placed on local 
infrastructure accompanied with reduction in 
maintenance of local assets due to lack of water. 
•	 Increase pressure on youth due to the awareness 
of financial stresses on their families and they are 
less able to be involved in their usual activities. 
•	 Water demand and cost increase. 
•	 Loss of skilled workers who move away to seek 
alternate employment opportunities.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
66
4.2.3.	 Snowy-Monaro LGA Snapshot
Stakeholders identified a diverse range of impacts, 
including economic, environmental, community and 
governance. The community identified that increases in 
city to country engagement and lifts in the community 
spirit were net positives from the drought, but also 
raised that a lack of support for mental health, 
fragmented engagement methods and initiatives 
lacking cohesion were significant issues for the 
Snowy-Monaro LGA. 
There was a clear need for a coordinated response to 
drought that provides targeted solutions to the various 
facets of drought, such as improving coordination 
between levels of government, diversifying the 
economic profile of the region and supporting the 
Buy from the Bush campaigns.
What we heard
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Snowy-Monaro LGA include:
•	 Economic impacts, including:
	– A reduction in tourism, the value of tourism 
assets and the visitor economy. 
	– A loss of skilled workers into the region. 
	– Small businesses relying on support, resulting 
in losses of personal incomes leading to 
business failures and family financial stresses. 
•	 Environmental impacts, including:
	– Reduction of water availability, fauna and flora 
in the region and groundcover and pasture, 
leading to an increase in erosion. 
	– Increased threat of natural disasters; and
	– Increase of invasive flora species. 
•	 Governance impacts, including:
	– A challenge of how to allocate limited 
resources during periods of high pressure. 
	– A lack of coordination between three levels of 
government and NGOs during droughts creates 
a “noisy environment”.
	– Council expected to help and direct 
support worker
	– A decrease in volunteers and a lack 
of leadership.
•	 Community impacts, including:
	– Impacts on mental health from isolation, 
decrease in social gatherings, decrease in 
recreational opportunities, distress at seeing 
a decline in the natural environment. 
	– Impact on young people, including a reduced 
access to sport and financial resources.
	– Financial stresses on businesses from 
reduced spending.
•	 Infrastructure impacts, including:
	– Deterioration of road assets due to increased 
frequency of heavy vehicles and extreme 
dry periods, increasing the difficulty of 
truck access.
	– Asset maintenance delays due to a lack 
of access to water.
	– Unable to store bulk grain during 
drought, putting a significant strain 
on primary producers.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
67
4.2.4.	 Yass Valley LGA Snapshot
The Yass Valley stakeholders identified numerous 
complex impacts that resulted from the drought, 
including the impacts of social isolation on communities 
and young people, reduced incomes from destocking 
and business closures and difficulties in resource 
management and allocation. Technological and 
agricultural improvements, and grassroots initiatives 
were seen as successes, however the region struggled 
with insufficient drought funding and financial support 
and unreliable climate forecasting. 
Stakeholders raised a number of ideas that would 
support the region, such as ensuring funding exceeds 
political cycles, implementing preparation strategies for 
health services. 
What we heard
Impacts of drought can be felt across many communities. Some of these impacts, confirmed through the 
stakeholder consultation, relevant to the Yass Valley LGA include:
•	 Communities become disconnected and isolated 
due a lack of social activities.
•	 Children and young people are left isolated 
without social opportunities to meet, connect 
and empathise. 
•	 There is an increase in the workload of many 
within the community. In particular agriculture 
and agricultural support businesses. The active 
management required within businesses increases 
during drought and in many instances the financial 
stress also means that employees may be let go.
•	 Sourcing and accessing feed for livestock is 
more challenging, price fluctuations for feed and 
livestock also introduce pressure to farmers. 
•	 Reduced income from downgrading of crops, 
livestock and increased input costs
•	 Closure of businesses, which leads 
to underemployment.
•	 Media portrayal is often unfavourable during 
drought and can create unnecessary pressure 
and stress.
•	 Family upheaval and the pressure of constant 
decision making during extensive periods of 
uncertainty can impact general health and 
mental health. 
•	 Wildlife often moves closer to roads, grazing land 
and communities in search of food and water. 
Creating a hazard and further exacerbating the 
impacts on loss of groundcover and 
water resources. 
•	 Reductions in income impacts education options 
for children.
•	 Water allocations and restrictions increased the 
need to buy and cart water, introducing additional 
financial pressures. 
•	 Increased cost of weed and pest controls.
•	 Longer timeframe of droughts means they “creep 
up on you” in comparison to fire and flooding. 
•	 Government change and centralisation cause a 
loss of regional knowledge and lack of local input 
to solutions.
•	 Livestock impacted by a decrease in yard sales, 
restocking at the end of the drought and recovery.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
68
4.3.	Key Themes 
Consultation was undertaken in Queanbeyan-Palerang, Snowy Monaro and Yass Valley LGA’s which provided clear insights into how previous droughts have impacted the 
community and the issues faced. The main comments are presented in alignment with the key themes in Table 7 below.
Key themes
Responses
Economy
Robust and resilient 
local economies and 
agricultural businesses
•	
Investment in industries beyond agriculture and support for local markets is a priority for growing the local economy and building resilience into the system. 
Economic initiatives aimed at countering the slow decline of smaller townships and villages by investing in smaller communities appropriately are valued by 
community.
•	
Infrastructure, educational facilities, and tourism development are important components of a resilient regional economy. 
•	
Partnerships with educational institutions and businesses are deemed essential for building diverse and resilient local businesses and regional economies. 
•	
Adoption of circular economy focusing on closing resource loops, ensuring long term availability of materials, and reducing vulnerabilities to external shocks. 
•	
Encouraging diversity in jobs and the economy based on the unique locations and assets. 
Environment 
Maintain and protect the 
natural environment 
•	
The balance between environmental flows and agricultural water is critical concern for many of these communities. Access to water and maintaining water 
security is essential for continued agricultural success. There are significant concerns centred around transmission losses of water and the potential 
degradation of the water sources, emphasising the importance of responsible water usage and management. 
•	
Clear funding processes and long-term planning are seen as critical for maintaining agricultural prosperity. There was continued backing for support 
mechanisms during drought periods, including tax relief, low-interest loans for infrastructure, and containment areas, reflecting a determination to bolster the 
local agricultural sector.
•	
Weed and pest management support, including better regulation and increased staffing was seen as critical. 
•	
Better promotion of existing agriculture initiatives and programs, including Monaro Farming Systems initiatives including the workshops on drought preparation 
and the use of the Farming Forecaster. 
•	
Water management during droughts but in preparation water wise education campaign within the community. Aimed to encourage sustainable water practices 
and foster shared responsibility for their water source. 
•	
Expansion and promotion of Landcare work throughout the region. 
Governance
Strong leadership and 
collaboration
•	
Simplifying funding applications and better community engagement are seen as ways to make support more accessible during droughts.
•	
Active involvement from the local Council and clearer communication processes are essential during drought and is viewed as an essential step to building 
better trust between local government and the community. This includes building drought preparation Plans and opportunities for information sharing. 
•	
The community recognises the importance of working together, both among themselves and with local government and across agencies and businesses. This 
collaboration can lead to transformative changes and improved access to resources, which is crucial to build resilience. 
•	
Improved and clearer access and information regarding drought information and assistance services available. It was highlighted that there are numerous 
services available, but it isn’t easy to navigate to which is appropriate for the individual’s circumstances. 
•	
Loss of regional knowledge and thus input into local solutions.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
69
Key themes
Responses
Community
Vibrant, connected and 
sustained communities
•	
Accessible mental health services are vital for community wellbeing. During drought many people become isolated, and socialising becomes a very low priority. 
•	
Understanding and planning for future community needs identifying those most vulnerable to challenging times.  
•	
Education campaigns focused on water wise education, suitable plants for gardens and efficient and effective watering, water use practices and alternative 
agricultural practices. In addition to education on importance of native vegetation and awareness of innovative management practices and importance of 
retention. 
•	
A collaborative approach to building community resilience which requires everyone’s active participation. This stems from council leadership and initiating 
various partnerships with active agencies all working together towards a common goal. 
Infrastructure 
Build assets and climate 
adapted design
•	
Support for the rebuilding of the natural landscape and learning how to manage and make better use of water during droughts. 
•	
Trucking access is more difficult due to deterioration of assets and increased frequency of heavy vehicles. 
•	
Need for climate-resilient infrastructure including roads, buildings, water management is critical for business and liveability in the region. 
•	
Adoption of environment standards for future housing developments and buildings for community, including the planted flora. 
Table 7  Key themes and findings from community engagement
Considering these insights, the Queanbeyan-Palerang, Snowy Monaro and Yass Valley communities’ vision for the future revolves around improving water management, 
a diversified, resilient economy, improving and promoting the regions tourism opportunities, additional educational initiatives, and building stronger community bonds. 
By addressing these key areas, the region can work toward securing its agricultural prosperity, nurturing community wellbeing, and fostering economic resilience, 
ultimately creating a more sustainable and vibrant future for all residents. 
This feedback collectively conveys a community working to secure its agricultural prosperity, deepen social bonds, and broaden economic horizons to ensure its long-term 
resilience in the face of drought and other challenges.
The feedback also highlights a forward-looking community that desires improvements in built infrastructure and technology. The shift towards online engagement following 
COVID-19 was acknowledged, suggesting an openness to technological advancements.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
70
Figure 36  Assessment Matrix
4.4.4.	 Validation
Following initial assessment, several questions were 
considered to further refine the initiatives and prioritise 
them.
•	 Does the identified action align with Councils’ general 
strategic direction?
•	 Beneficiaries – what are, and who receives, the 
expected benefits of the action?
•	 Ease of implementation – is there a need for 
significant regulatory, political or legal changes?
•	 Timeliness – How long will the action take 
to complete?
•	 Financial – Is there funding available and what is 
the cost, including transactional costs? What is the 
source of funding and who will pay?
The SRG was involved in validating the assessment 
and prioritising actions.
4.4.2.	 Key Questions
•	 Impact: How is the region impacted by Drought? 
Which impacts are most acute?
•	 Actions: What actions or initiatives can provide 
support to build the region’s drought resilience? 
Which of the actions deliver the greatest benefit to 
the region? 
•	 Concept: What is the anticipated scope of the 
identified action?
•	 Benefit: How will the region benefit? 
•	 Prioritise: How well do the actions address the three 
pillars of resilience? How feasible is the action and is 
there a level of shovel-readiness? Do Councils’ have 
the capacity and influence to undertake the action?
4.4.3.	 Assessment
Through the SRG, the topmost severe drought impacts 
under each theme were confirmed and rated as low, 
medium or high impact to their respective LGAs. Each 
idea and initiative (potential actions) were coded with 
this information. A score relating to the relative level 
of Council influence, benefit to the community and the 
feasibility of implementation (how shovel-ready the idea 
was) was given. In this way, each initiative had a score 
which enabled the prioritisation of ideas. 
Initiatives were considered a priority where the benefit 
of the action was high and Councils have the greatest 
level of influence (Figure 36). 
4.4.	Initiatives refinement
Following community consultation, the ideas and 
initiatives from both the literature and consultation 
were collated into a long list. 
The investment logic used included a:
1.	
problem statement
2.	
key questions
3.	
assessment
4.	
validation. 
4.4.1.	 Problem Statement
Regional economies will continue to be impacted by 
droughts, which are predicted to become more frequent 
and severe into the future. Drought Resilience Plans are 
required to identify the steps which communities should 
take to mitigate these impacts.
Drought Resilience Plans should be developed by Local 
Governments working together so they are actionable 
and relevant to individual communities.
LOW
LOW
HIGH
PURSUE
Expected
benefits
Council/regional
Influence
HIGH

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
71
Drought Resilience Actions
05

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
72
The following sections describe the actions to progress, 
arranged by the five themes. The need, the action, 
and the expected outcomes are provided, along with 
how these contribute to building resilience and the 
responsible parties involved. The metrics to measure 
action progress are provided in Section 5.4.
5.2.	Opportunities identified
From the consultation process a long list of ideas was 
compiled from the community on how impacts of past 
droughts had been lessened and what had potential to 
lessen impacts in future droughts. The long list includes 
of absorptive, adaptive and transformational resilience 
actions, tested through the co-design process, is 
presented in Table 8 below.
5.	Drought Resilience 
Actions
5.1.	 What has already been done to 
build drought resilience
Throughout the years extreme climate events, including 
droughts, have driven the Southern Tablelands 
communities to take action to improve resilience to 
these events. Communities have sought to solve their 
own problems and find solutions from within their own 
regional capacity. This has resulted in programs and 
initiatives orchestrated by a number of organisations 
which support the pillars of social, economic and 
environmental resilience to drought. Much of the effort 
has come from individuals who are community minded 
and have sought to implement action to help themselves 
and their communities during these challenging times. 
The case studies in Section 4.1 of this Plan highlight how 
the region has responded to drought.
In addition to this, the NSW and Commonwealth 
Governments have undertaken significant effort to 
increase resilience to drought. A sample of the programs 
and plans in place are listed as follows:
•	 Commonwealth Drought Resilience Research and 
Adoption Program which has five components that 
focus on farmers and rural and regional communities 
to prepare for drought (DAFF 2024a).
•	 Rural Assistance Authority (RAA) offering a range of 
loans, grants, advice, and assistance to support both 
preparedness and crisis.
•	 Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) provides 
free and independent financial counselling to eligible 
businesses experiencing, or those at risk of, financial 
hardship (DAFF, 2024b).
•	 The Department of Primary Industries (DPIRD) is 
home to the Drought Hub which contains a range of 
information applicable to primary producers to assist 
with drought along with providing extension and 
adoption services. 
•	 Local Land Services (LLS) Drought Adoption Officers 
have been strategically located across the state 
to assist landholders with drought planning and 
preparedness extension services.
•	 DPIRD has supported local Councils and communities 
to develop Regional Economic Development 
Strategies, which include information on strategies 
and enabling actions to guide and support economic 
development priorities for each region. 
•	 NSW DCCEEW – Regional water strategies are being 
prepared across the State. The three LGAs fall under 
the Murrumbidgee, NSW Murray and Greater Sydney 
Regional Water Strategy areas which have identified 
focus areas for improvements to water security in 
town water supplies. DCCEEW offer a range of other 
supports and programs such as Safe and Secure 
Water and Town Water Risk Reduction Program which 
are aimed at addressing the main risks to regional 
water safety and security.
•	 Rural Development Corporations exist for the 
agricultural commodities and house experience in 
research, development, and extension activities to 
innovative agriculture e.g. Soils RDC.
Actions
Increase 
resilience
to increasing 
drought risk
Transformation 
of governance 
and policy 
systems
Transfer and 
share drought 
risks
Reduce 
exposure to 
drought
Reduce 
vulnerability
to drought
Prepare, 
respond and 
recover from 
drought

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
73
Theme
Opportunities identified during engagement
Economy
•	
Proactive education of alternative agriculture technologies
•	
Diversify jobs and the economy based on unique location and assets of each location, including diversity within business where there is more than one stream of income. 
•	
Help small businesses to diversify and build resilience through a range of measures including education and training. 
•	
Reinvigorating Buy from the Bush and similar campaigns that promote and encourage buying locally. 
•	
Investigating options to create and promote First Nations tourism products and employment opportunities.
•	
Diversity in the economy that recognises restricted labour capacity. 
•	
Develop a Circular Economy to assist diversification for the region. 
•	
Increase the training in financial literacy and business education.
•	
Promotion of education and awareness that shows farmers new methods of production and ag-tech.
•	
Increasing access to farming succession planning so that new entrants understand what they are getting themselves in for. 
Environment 
•	
Increase the support for pest control and weed management. 
•	
Expansion and promotion of Landcare work.
•	
Promotion of the work of the Eurobodalla Botanic Gardens as an innovative organisation that is creating benefit in soil health, threatened species, ecology and tourism. 
•	
Promotion of Monaro Farming System as a model of innovation formed to create benefit for local agricultural producers.  
•	
Increasing the knowledge of groundwater and the linkages and interaction with surface water.
•	
Increased promotion and uptake of activities that hydrate and restore the landscape. 
•	
Increase the implementation and funding for local climate strategies such as Urban cooling strategy focused on planting strategy to cool the urban landscape. 
•	
Grow crops that are less water intensive.
•	
Increase the education and awareness of water licence conditions so people are not taking water they are not entitled too. E.g. overuse of bores.
Governance 
•	
Create a drought preparation strategy for the community that details how communities can access resources (education and agencies) that help in drought preparedness.
•	
Communication channels across community need strengthening. E.g. better access to information including drought, what’s on in the community and who is doing what. 
•	
Reducing the amount of red tape associated with accessing emergency support measures e.g. freight subsidies. 
•	
Having a preparation/management/business plan that incorporates drought, fire and flood and links to basic resources and gives hope for businesses and communities. 
•	
Communication about early warning signs, water conservation and financial preparedness associated with drought. 
•	
Improve the Communication and messaging system across the community not just in response to drought but also to improve social connectedness and two-way 
messaging between the Council and community. 
•	
Better use of existing resources such as buddies/mentors/councils to prepare for drought, transfer of knowledge and alignment with other events such as fires, floods etc.
•	
There needs to be better integration amongst drought agencies.
•	
There needs to be less disturbance to how we deal with droughts from the political cycles.
•	
Improving knowledge of drought, its impact and what to do to prepare.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
74
Theme
Opportunities identified during engagement
Community
•	
•	
Be more responsive and adapt to the changing demographics of the community and the expectations of new residents.
•	
Do not reinvent the wheel when it comes to drought initiatives. Revaluate what already exists to find new ways to adapt this to changing needs.
•	
Coping with change assistance – resilience training and support that helps with adapting to change.
•	
Increased need for accessible mental health plans. 
•	
Communication, specifically greater dialogue across industries affected by drought. Improve communications between producer groups and other stakeholders 
e.g. LLS, DPIRD and council. 
•	
Better understand the impacts of drought on at risk groups and assets within the community. 
•	
Ensure that business and liveability are retained in the region.
•	
Improved access to grant writing support for the community that allows organisations greater opportunity to seek funding to support local initiatives.
Infrastructure 
•	
Infrastructure is suitable for feed and stock transport during droughts. 
•	
Ensure that infrastructure is suitable given the changes in climate and improving the asset sustainability. 
•	
Improved water management and input to water sharing plans in consultation with DCCEEW and WaterNSW.
•	
Water access during droughts is a key issue for our region. Some of the smaller towns and villages in our area do not have access to reliable water for their household 
or farm/livestock. Better access to water and reliable supplies are needed.
•	
Water trucking needs increased equity/access and policing.
Table 8  Long list of opportunities identified during the co-design process with SRGs

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
75
5.3.	Priority actions
To meet the objectives of the Plan, actions have been 
developed under the five themes (with accompanying 
sub-themes) identified throughout this Plan.
Through the SRG’s and one to one meeting with 
stakeholders’ data was gathered on: 
1. What was working well to respond to drought, 
2. What was not working well, and 
3. What needed to change. 
This process helped to identify and focus the idea 
development on existing measures that the community 
valued, those interventions that didn’t support resilience 
and those that existed and either needed to be changed 
because a component of the system wasn’t working or 
there is a need that isn’t being met e.g. there is drought 
information available however the gap/missing element 
is that there was a lack of awareness about where to 
find this information therefore how can the plan address 
this gap. 
The pathways to increasing resilience are based on 
the community response in identifying their highest 
vulnerabilities to drought, their greatest source of ‘pain’ 
or where they have identified that the market is failing. 
This community voice is echoed in the regional data 
highlighted in section 2 of this Plan.
The actions have been characterised as absorptive, 
adaptive and transformative. Achieving a level of 
resilience will be determined by many factors including 
the ability to influence behaviour change and participate 
in resilience initiatives. Meaning that actions can have 
differing levels of impact depending on the level of 
uptake by the individual. 
A range of resilience levels are indicated across several 
actions where they level of uptake of the activity can be 
variable an example of this could be extension focused 
on improving soil quality and pest management. 
Participants will learn practical skills to implement 
adaptive change in their businesses, preparing them 
for future droughts. Some will integrate these skills 
directly, while others may benefit more from broader 
extension programs or complementary initiatives that 
offer a transformative impact. Much of this variance in 
resilience levels is down to addressing the barriers 
to change. 
Actions have been categorised as 
absorptive where an intervention is likely 
to reduce the impact of drought. This 
assumes that current resilience levels 
are maintained and through extension 
of the activity a greater number of 
community members can participate.
Actions are classified as adaptive 
where the activity supports system 
modification or change that if adopted 
will increase overall responsiveness to 
drought through better preparedness 
and planning. 
Transformative change is identified 
where there is a complete redesign of 
the system. 
Each theme provides a detailed need for the resilience 
action, specific and prioritised actions, the resilience 
frameworks that applies to each theme or sub-theme 
and the delivery model that includes a lead agency and 
potential partners. 
The Plan actions have been discussed with some 
delivery partners to canvas their willingness to lead 
and support the implementation of this Plan. Many of 
these responses were provided on a local level and 
signified a real desire to make changes for the benefit 
of the region’s communities. Further acceptance 
testing would be required to gain complete consensus 
with the State and Commonwealth Government and 
delivery partners where significant resources and 
funding are identified. 
5.4.	Theory of Change 
The FDF aims to enhance the public good by building 
drought resilience in Australia's agricultural sector, 
the agricultural landscape, and communities 
(DAWE, 2020). This RDRP has incorporated the 
three types of resilience (environment, social and 
economic) into each of the drought resilience 
actions considered as part of the process. 
The theory of change used in this RDRP to investigate 
the ways in which economic, environmental and social 
resilience can contribute to the Southern Tablelands 
Councils bordering the ACT vision for drought resilience 
is outlined in Table 14 below. Using the FDF model 
(DAWE, 2020), the table provides a more explicit theory 
of change demonstrating the link between each step in 
the process.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
76
To recap, the Plan’s vision is “Our community has the confidence to act and address the impacts of drought, empowering us to adapt to change and advance our resilience. We 
are nurturing communities that thrive through collaboration and proactive planning. By fostering a culture of inclusivity, valuing local knowledge and embracing diversity, we 
will navigate change, ensuring a sustainable future for all generations.” and defines the current state of the Region’s resilience and what needs to change. 
 If (you do this)
Then
Has the impact of
To create 
transformational change 
Contributes to the vision
Economic Resilience
If there is more drought resilient 
Research, Development, Extension 
and Adoption and new technologies 
are developed and made more 
accessible 
Then more primary producers 
will adopt new technologies and 
production techniques that allow 
them to better respond to drought. 
Then there is increased ability to 
businesses to prepare, plan for 
drought. 
Promoting regional businesses that 
are self-reliant, productive, innovative 
and profitable. 
Healthy diversified businesses 
and industry that interact with and 
contribute to a complex and wider 
economy.
Communities who have the 
confidence to act and address the 
impacts of drought. While nurturing 
resilience through collaboration and 
proactive planning. 
If there is greater access and 
awareness of data information 
and early warning indicators for 
businesses and communities 
Then there is an increased ability 
for businesses and communities to 
manage and assess risk and install 
timely interventions. 
Providing varied regional employment 
opportunities that meet the needs of 
the region and its residents.
That fosters a culture of inclusivity, 
valuing local knowledge and 
embracing diversity to navigate 
change and ensure a sustainable 
future. 
If businesses within the community 
have increased awareness and 
access to business planning and risk 
management expertise 
The businesses will be better 
prepared to manage, respond and 
recover from drought reducing the 
financial exposure to drought. 
If communities can diversify their 
economies to include industries that 
provide greater sources of income.
Then there will be less reliance on 
agriculture, providing more diverse 
employment opportunities, filling 
labour shortages, creating more 
diverse communities that are more 
able to withstand the economic 
pressures of drought.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
77
 If (you do this)
Then
Has the impact of
To create 
transformational change 
Contributes to the vision
Environmental resilience
If local governments, businesses 
and communities are better able to 
understand their natural capital and 
increased awareness of best practice 
techniques 
Then they will better manage 
natural resources through improved 
landscapes which produce better 
environmental outcomes
Regional landscapes that are healthy, 
sustainable and functioning. 
Environmental management is 
connected across landscapes with 
communities, governments, primary 
producers and other stakeholders 
creating diverse systems that are 
responsive.
If governments are better able to 
manage water resources through new 
and innovative practices, appropriate 
infrastructure and increased 
collaboration and information sharing.
Then they can reduce the impacts 
of drought and produce better 
environmental outcomes. 
Regional infrastructure that is reliable 
and fit for future community needs.
If governments are better able 
to manage and develop reliable 
and appropriate climate adapted 
infrastructure through new and 
innovative practices, increased 
collaboration and information sharing.
Then councils can reduce climate 
vulnerable assets and provide better 
environmental outcomes.
If governments and communities 
are better able to share information 
and gain knowledge on innovative 
environmental practices.
Then communities will be more self-
empowered to manage their own 
natural resources.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
78
 If (you do this)
Then
Has the impact of
To create 
transformational change 
Contributes to the vision
Social Resilience
If community leaders exercise their 
leadership skills confidently and if 
community members participate in 
social and professional community 
networks and interagency 
partnerships.
Then there will be greater 
connectedness, purpose and stronger 
social capital that supports drought 
planning and efforts to increase 
resilience. 
Communities that are resourceful, 
adaptable and thriving. 
Communities that respond to 
drought cohesively and effectively 
drawing on the social capital, 
collective preparedness and inclusive 
community networks.
If information and knowledge on 
drought preparation and planning 
is shared in communities and led by 
community leaders.
Then there will be greater planning 
and preparedness for drought in new 
and innovative ways.
If community leaders understand who 
forms the basis of their communities 
and can incorporate this knowledge 
into their development of services and 
infrastructure.
Then services and infrastructure are 
adapted to suit those most vulnerable 
to drought and changing climate 
conditions 
Communities that are inclusive and 
whose needs are understood. 
If community leaders can improve 
the access to mental health services 
and communities can improve their 
awareness of the importance of good 
mental health.
Then there can better management of 
the risk factors of mental health and 
increased utilisation of services which 
can produce better health outcomes. 
Communities that are connected 
and healthy.
If communities can improve 
collaboration, knowledge sharing 
education and training opportunities.
Then there will be greater 
connectedness, purpose and stronger 
social capital that supports drought 
planning and efforts to increase 
resilience.
Table 9  Theory of change

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
79
Theme 1: Economy – Robust and resilient local economies and agricultural businesses 
The LGA’s within this plan identified the need to have economies that were robust and diverse. Each region has differing levels of reliance on agriculture, tourism, construction 
and public administration. The proximity to major centres such as Canberra can have varying impacts on the region’s resilience. The regional stakeholders engaged in the 
development of this Plan identified the need to attract investment that support development of the economy and creates sustainable employment opportunities that recognise 
local knowledge. The desire for a robust economy is underpinned by having the appropriate infrastructure in place to support this occurring.
Sub-theme: Business
Each of the LGA’s highlighted the importance of developing and maintaining strong regional businesses that enhance the economy and community experience.
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Increase the support for smaller regional businesses by: 
•	 Increasing access to and promoting the awareness of business management 
programs that build financial knowledge, budgeting, gross margins, cashflow 
along with developing digital skills and how to start a new business e.g. Agri-
tourism. This could include hosting training to build digital skills to allow business 
owners to develop online platforms for their businesses. This will provide 
opportunities to better prepare and manage risks of drought, through skill building 
and utilisation of technology.  
•	 Increasing the utilisation of Business Chambers to create opportunities for 
likeminded people in business to meet, discuss opportunities, solve problems 
and build capacity and skills. This will reduce the likelihood of families leaving 
communities and builds skill that will enable the transition to other industries.
•	 Fast-track and sponsoring retraining opportunities for those within the region who 
are displaced due to drought.
•	 Reinstating initiatives such as the Snowy Business and Recovery Hub were viewed 
as positive local initiatives that assisted with bushfire recovery and provided 
individual and tailored support.
Local Councils
Business Chambers, Business NSW, Service 
NSW, Business Education Program providers, 
State Government (including Department of 
Regional NSW), Business owners, Canberra JO, 
Regional Development Australia, not for profit 
providers such as TAFE
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
•	 Continue to investigate opportunities to diversification in the economy through the 
Local and Regional Economic Development Strategies and local planning processes 
that seek to capitalise on the unique skills, knowledge and features of each LGA. 
Implementation of these strategies will deliver enabling infrastructure that further 
enhances the opportunity. This may include opportunities to attract new industry to 
the region, leveraging the rail or road networks or capitalise on a community's location 
within each region. The consortia of Local Councils may wish to undertake further 
individual investigations including business surveys and workshops to inform the 
future needs of their communities economic development opportunities.
•	 Some of the main macroeconomic trends identified in shaping the Plan area 
include digital transformation, changing migration patterns and rising uncertainty 
predominantly from changing climates.
Local Councils
DPIRD, Business Chambers, business owners, 
Canberra JO, RDA, NSW Government
Adaptive to 
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
80
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Increase the promotion and awareness of the distinctive tourist attractions of each 
of the LGA’s
•	 Investigate opportunities to recreate the impact of the Buy from the Bush 
campaign on a regional scale. 
•	 Investigate the formation of strategic partnerships where local businesses work 
together to support local and benefit the community e.g. businesses stocking and 
promoting local produce and each other. 
•	 Increase collaboration with First Nations Peoples in the region to develop and 
promote bespoke tourism and employment opportunities.
•	 Efforts such as those listed above foster the communities adaptability and 
encourage empowerment and resourcefulness.
Local Councils/
Business Chambers
Destination NSW, DPIRD, Regional Development 
Australia, Business owners, Canberra JO, 
tourism operators/providers, First Nations 
Peoples, existing business networks
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
Key Outcomes
•	 This will provide education and training to develop new skills that can be incorporated into business management. Increasing the toolkit of information available for business 
owners to manage and adapt their businesses to better prepare for and respond to drought, with reduced reliance on absorptive support measure.
•	 Creates diversification in industry and employment opportunities where there is less reliance on agriculture.
•	 Increases employment participation rates amongst the community groups impacted by drought increasing the mobility and retention of the local workforce.   
•	 Increases business literacy providing greater knowledge to plan for and adapt businesses for a changing climate to assist in preparing for drought and mitigation risk. 
•	 Provides an opportunity for participants to improve evidence based decision making through learning of new skills.
•	 Provides opportunities for likeminded people to learn from each other, work together and create social connection. 
•	 Localised and engaged community resources encourages and promotes collective action.
•	 Improves social cohesion as communities work together for a common goal.
•	 Diversified economy through consideration of new opportunities, industries, services and infrastructure which grows the regions economy and supports the local workforce 
and community.
•	 Learn from First Nations Peoples’ knowledge and skills and provides a diverse source of employment and stimulates the economy.
•	 Increases social connectedness as communities form partnerships to support and promote each other.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
81
Sub-theme: Agriculture
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Increase the available education and training on new agricultural practices and 
technologies e.g. carbon farming, ag-tech, farming forecaster tool and stock 
management techniques such as containment feeding and drought
•	 Through strengthening and increasing support for local resourcing for extension 
and adoption activities.
•	 Investigate how to best utilise and engage the existing service providers and 
resource and incentivise other potential partners such as Monaro Farming Systems 
to undertake greater levels of extension and adoption.
LLS/RDC’s
DPIRD, NSW Farmers Association, public, 
private and not-for-profit researchers (e.g. 
Mulloon Institute) and extension and adoption 
providers (FarmLink) Monaro Farming Systems
Adaptive to 
Transformative
•	 Increase the awareness of farm succession planning for agricultural businesses. 
So, there is a clear pathway of transition for new farmers taking over the 
responsibility and management of an agricultural business. This will enable better 
management of risk and drought preparedness.
DPIRD
Private providers of farm succession planning, 
LLS, NSW Farmers Association, financial 
institutions, Rural Financial Counsellors, local 
solicitors and accountants
Adaptive
Key Outcomes
•	 This will provide education and training to develop new skills that can be incorporated into business management. 
•	 Builds on trusted local relationships which is key to support the education and awareness of new methods of primary production.
•	 Considers alternate delivery models for delivery of R&D, which tailor the delivery of services to regional needs. 
•	 Increases the awareness and education for primary producers on new production techniques which provides opportunity to adapt and transform business models. 
•	 Improves environmental and economic resilience through new learning opportunities.
•	 Provides clear pathways via farming succession that reduce the impact of business disruption. This will enable better management of risk.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
82
Sub-theme: Circular Economy
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
Investigate the opportunity to: 
•	 Create a circular economy hub in the region similar to that of Bega Circular Valley. 
or 
•	 Investigate Partnerships with the existing Circular hub to enable the region to 
participate in the benefits of a circular economy. 
•	 Execution of this opportunity creates diversity within the region's economy, 
employment opportunities and seek to reduce and minimise waste.
The regions industry/ 
Local Councils
Canberra JO, Researchers, universities, DPIRD, 
existing businesses that operate in the circular 
economy, RDC's, private investors, advisors 
(eg consultants specialising in the circular 
economy), NSW Government (NSW EPA), The 
Australian Circular Economy (ACE) Hub,
Transformative where 
implemented
Key Outcomes
The creation of a circular economy hub will provide: 
•	 Improved social outcomes that align to greater product choice and quality, improved health from reduced pesticide use in food production, improved quality 
and longevity of products. 
•	 Increased income. 
•	 Stimulates innovation and employment as new local employment opportunities are identified. 
•	 Increased business collaboration between like-minded businesses.. 
•	 Improves cost efficiency through the promotion of efficient use of resources, waste minimisation and enhances supply chain efficiency. 
•	 Increases economic diversity through the creation of new innovative businesses and employment opportunities.
•	 Improved environmental outcomes through reducing emissions. 
•	 Making better use of resources and reducing waste.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
83
Theme 2: Environment – Maintain and protect the natural environment
The LGA’s within this Plan identified the need to have economies that were robust and diverse. Each region has differing levels of reliance on agriculture, tourism, construction 
Protection of the natural environment, adapting to climate change and management of natural hazards are key components to the promoting resilience in the region. The LGA’s 
within this plan recognise that the management, access and reliability of water in the region are one of the key factors to improving resilience within this theme, along with 
understanding innovative research such as rehydration of the landscape and environmental repair.
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
Advocate for: 
•	 Increased education, awareness and compliance for both water licence holders 
and the broader community on water management, groundwater and surface 
water. This will allow businesses and communities to be engaged and empowered 
through new knowledge. 
Local Councils, 
Canberra JO
NRAR/NSW DCCEEW, WaterNSW
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
•	 Increasing the level of research and resources available to programs that Hydrate 
the Landscape Initiatives (such as the Mulloon Institute). 
•	 Increasing the education and awareness on how to achieve these outcomes 
(rebuild the landscape, boost environmental resilience, improve ecosystems and 
enhanced agricultural productivity via a catchment scale approach) through 
improved land management techniques.
Mulloon Institute
RDC’s, Landcare network, LLS, researchers, 
Local Councils, universities, communities, 
DPIRD, NSW and Commonwealth Governments, 
Innovation Hubs
Adaptive to 
Transformative
•	 Increasing the resources available for pest control and weed management in both 
farming businesses and the broader environment to leverage the most upto date 
and innovative management approaches and technology.
LLS/DPIRD
Extension and adoption providers, RDC’s, 
researchers, Landcare network, regional 
environmental groups
Adaptive. 
Transformative 
•	 Investigate opportunities within the local region to improve the co-ordination, 
information sharing, and collaboration of work in the environmental and 
agricultural production being conducted by various agencies including but 
limited to: Landcare network, LLS, DPIRD, RDC’s, Local Councils, not for profit 
organisations across the region such as Monaro Farming Systems to ensure 
outcomes are aligned and not duplicated and resources are appropriately 
allocated to where they are best suited LLS would be best placed to coordinate 
and facilitate the development of these relationships on a local/regional level.. 
•	 Develop an enduring relationship/framework that provides regular opportunities for 
agencies to meet and discuss prospects to work together, share information, consider 
programs, policies and projects to ensure consistency and alignment with actions. 
•	 Showcasing projects and organisations such as (but not limited to) Monaro 
Farming Systems and Upper Shoalhaven Landcare Council (USLC) that have been 
identified through the consultation as innovative organisations in the region. 
•	 Investigating opportunities to build the role of existing innovative organisations 
that are delivering environmental and production outcomes for the region. 
Organisations such as Monaro Farming Systems and Eurobodalla Botanic Gardens 
models of operation could be expanded or replicated to benefit other regions. 
LLS/RDC’s
Landcare network, DPIRD, RDC’s, Local 
Councils, not for profit organisations, 
environmental groups, Researchers, extension 
and adoption providers, NSW Farmers 
Association, NSW Climate and Energy Action, 
NSW DCCEEW, 
Adaptive, 
Tranformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
84
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Increase and provide regular education and awareness through the creation and 
delivery of a local climate awareness plan that includes:
•	 Planting of drought tolerant trees, plants and lawns on a regular and 
reoccurring basis. 
•	 Climate education e.g ‘Being Heatwave Ready’ Upper Shoalhaven Landcare Council
•	 Councils could consider a dedicated area to demonstrate initiatives 
e.g. community garden
•	 Waterwise messages should be year-round and targeted across the community 
including schools. 
•	 Consider how best to engage local organisations such as Landcare to deliver 
this education.
Local Council 
Landcare Network, LLS, DPIRD, First Nations 
People, local gardening groups and nurseries
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
Key Outcomes
•	 Improved environmental outcomes as new research is undertaken. Communities are educated on new ways to rehydrate the landscape soils are improved and 
groundcover is protected. 
•	 Increased connectedness of likeminded people in the region to work together on related environmental challenges.
•	 Improved allocation of environmental resources and activities across local environment groups to be best placed to achieve environmental outcomes. 
•	 Improved management and monitoring of water on a catchment scale. 
•	 Rehabilitation of agricultural land 
•	 Increased education and awareness provide opportunities for communities to adapt their water use, gardens and behaviours to more sustainable levels. 
•	 Improved agricultural productivity. 
•	 Active pest and weed management helps to preserve ecosystems and ecological balance. 
•	 Reduced costs from lost production.
•	 Helps preserve recreational benefits, waterways, and long-term sustainability.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
85
Theme 3: Governance – Strong leadership and collaboration
The theme of governance seeks to act to support strong, transparent and accountable leadership. Communities that are involved and engaged in the decision-making process, 
that invest in the development of the next generation of leaders and youth and improve community ownership and cohesion. Many of the stakeholders involved in the Plan 
development sighted the need for improved communication to be embedded amongst all the plan actions as it was a key component of what was missing in many instances. 
Local Councils are often also looked to for messaging and information in times of hardship and there is an expectation that Councils respond to and deliver outcomes for 
their communities. 
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Investigate the opportunity to engage a Drought Resilience Officer within the 
region that holds responsibility as follows: 
•	 Acts as councils point of contact to disseminate drought information to the 
broader community.
•	 This would include maintaining a directory on councils’ website of organisations 
that provide information relating to drought e.g. Bureau of Meteorology, DPIRD. 
•	 Acts as a connector of people and information and provides reference to agencies 
that provide drought services. 
•	 Develops a Drought Management and Drought Communications Plan which details:
•	 The when, what, where, how and who Council will respond under drought conditions.
•	 The agencies that have responsibility for certain areas in drought (disaster). 
•	 Add dot point: how to engage with all sectors of the community on the regions 
drought response.
•	 What council is responsible for a how it will go about communicating these messages. 
•	 What options/assistance council can offer during drought.
•	 Any changes to services and infrastructure that will impact the community.
•	 Where to go if you need assistance or more information.
Local Councils
Canberra JO, DPIRD, LLS, Rural Financial 
Counselling, Not for Profits e.g., Salvation 
Army, Local Health District and Primary Health 
Network
Adaptive

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
86
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Formalisation of agency networks that hold responsibilities for drought.
•	 The Drought Resilience Officer could be council’s representative at this forum..
•	 This will enable early monitoring of changing climatic and resilience conditions to 
be regularly discussed.
•	 Ability to share information/products and services offered by each agency.
•	 Ability to stand up resources or discuss reallocation of resources to areas 
preparing/approaching/ enduring and recovering from drought e.g. a pop-up shop 
in Yass for a week where you can see LLS and the DPIRD and the rural financial 
counselor at one time.
LLS
the Bureau, DPIRD, Local Councils, Climate, 
Local Health District, DRNSW, NSW DCCEEW, 
WaterNSW, RFCS
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
•	 Advocate for a simplification in the approval process to access drought funding. 
To ensure critical assistance is timelier.
NSW Farmers 
Association
DPIRD, LLS, DRNSW, Local Councils, RFCS
Absorptive
Key Outcomes
•	 Supports drought preparedness and timely response through the formation of local networks that understand the community and need and influence resource allocation. 
•	 Improve the effectiveness of communication by utilising non-traditional channels such as meals on wheels, salvation army and local organisations to deliver 
communication and messaging.
•	 Provides timely and effective information to the community on drought (and disaster).
•	 Connects people with resources that can assist them to prepare for and endure drought. 
•	 Provides a local view of drought information and application. 
•	 Connects people and groups to work together to learn from each other and solve problems together. 
•	 Allows resources and support to be identified and implemented in a timely manner to support communities during drought.
•	 Provides opportunity to establish and maintain important relationships. 
•	 Creates understanding of and connection to resources (organisations) that provide both economic and social resilience support.
•	 Improved allocation of resources and funding to organisations that are best placed to lead, partner and implement environmental and climate strategies 
that impact the local region.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
87
Theme 4: Community – vibrant, connected and sustained communities 
Through the development of this plan there was a clear acknowledgment that community health and wellbeing is critical in developing resilience to disaster and that there are 
fundamental challenges in delivering these services to communities. 
Sub-theme: Health and Mental Health services
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Advocate for improved access to mental health and health services that are: 
•	 Suitable for regional, rural and remote communities, 
•	 Easily accessible and in a timely manner e.g. outside usual hours, without detailed 
referral processes 
•	 include support to develop youth resilience and leadership skills delivery through 
educational services throughout all stages of life.
•	 Includes mental health first aid training. 
•	 Includes education on resilience training and behaviour change management 
•	 That have a greater focus on preventative health care.
•	 Working with local groups such as Salvation Army and through local organisation 
Monaro Farming Systems to provide mental health support. 
•	 The consortia of local council can assist in connecting local organisations with 
funding (grant opportunities) to support education and delivery.
Local Councils, 
Canberra JO
Primary Health Network and Local Health 
District local health providers, not for profits 
e.g., Rural Doctors Network, universities/
researchers, schools, mental health service 
providers e.g. Headspace
Absorptive, Adaptive, 
Transformative
Key Outcomes
•	 Provides more appropriate, timely and accessible services that deliver better health and mental health outcomes for the community 
•	 Focused on promoting good general health prior to crisis, allowing individuals to operate to their full potential and opening from a more resilient starting point. 
•	 Uses existing local networks to deliver mental health support through increased education and awareness. 
•	 Provides greater awareness of the health resources available for communities. 
•	 Reduces the economic cost of lost productivity associated with time spent away from work. 
•	 Reduced instance of suicide.
•	 Focuses on pre-emptive measures and building resilience and leadership from a young age. 
•	 Provides critical support where needed
•	 Is suitable for the needs of the communities in which they operate including isolated and vulnerable groups.. 
•	 Increases the likelihood of community groups being able to secure funding for initiatives that will support resilience on the local level 
and produce better environmental, economic and social outcomes for communities.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
88
Sub-theme: Understanding and planning for the community
The communities reflected in the development of this plan identified that it was important for all members of the region to be able to build resilience and participate in activities 
that support the response to drought. It was observed throughout the consultation how important it is to address issues of inequity and vulnerability to improve the overall level 
of resilience towards droughts. Improving the understanding of who makes up our communities and responding to that need through more informed planning and delivery of 
services will produce better local outcomes.
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
Increase the understanding of populations within the region and their needs by:
•	 Reviewing the governance, socioeconomic factors, demographics, language, 
health and disability status, housing and transport, social networks and community 
belonging, geographic location, environment factors and infrastructure and 
services. 
•	 Mapping the populations within each of the regions and using this information 
to inform future local planning processes and communications e.g. Drought 
Communication Plan.
Local Councils, 
Canberra JO
Community, DPIRD, universities, ABARES, 
consultants/advisors
Adaptive to 
Transformative
•	 Accessible and equitable access to grant writing assistance across each of 
the LGA's. That considers formation of partnerships with local student such as 
utilisation of ANU business students or existing local grant writing services.
Local Councils, 
Canberra JO 
Business chambers, Communities, universities, 
RDA Southern NSW and ACT
Absorptive, Adaptive
•	 Continue to plan and prepare for the changing climate by continuing to develop 
climate adaptation strategies, resilience frameworks that will support Council 
working with its communities to adapt for the future. E.g. Implementation of 
the QPRC veg strategy, Resilience Blueprint for South East NSW and Batlow 
preparedness plan.
Local Councils
Landcare, LLS, local environmental groups, 
NSW Government, consultants and adaptation 
specialists, community, researchers and 
scientists
Adaptive
Key Outcomes
•	 Better understanding of the demographics of each community and region so that strategies, programs and planning are more effective and inclusive. 
•	 Improved utilisation of existing local skills to support delivery of grant writing programs which support community investment. 
•	 Increases the opportunities for investment (via grants) in local projects that benefit the community.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
89
Theme 5: Infrastructure – build assets and climate adapted design
The infrastructure and facilities to support communities are vital to ensuring the regions remain a place to live, work and invest. Water infrastructure has been identified as a key 
enabler within this Plan. Along with ensuring the future assets are fit for the community need and adapted to the climate. 
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
•	 Continue to maintain and develop appropriate infrastructure to support the 
region’s communities and economy. This includes: 
•	 Asset planning to ensure council owned infrastructure and services are suitable 
for future climate impacts. 
•	 From the early mapping of communities and asset vulnerabilities incorporate this 
information into the planning process to focus on investing in vulnerable assets 
and communities.
Local Councils
Canberra Joint Organisation, DPIRD
Adaptive, 
Transformative
•	 Continue to work with partners to improve housing design and landscape 
requirements that includes energy and water efficiency design with respect to new 
housing developments, 
•	 Council seeks to incorporate efficient designs into planning eg heat refuges, 
landscaping guidelines, minimum energy standards.
Local Councils, 
Canberra JO
Developers, Architects and building designers, 
NSW Government, consultants and adaptation 
specialists, community, researchers and 
scientists, 
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
90
Action 
Suggested Lead 
Potential Partners
Resilience capacity
Continue to work with state agencies on the investigations and implementation of: 
•	 The regional water strategies for the Murrumbidgee, Greater Sydney and NSW 
Murray that focus on improved water security for town water supplies, increased 
reliability and provide water security solutions for smaller regional centres such as 
Braidwood and Bungendore. 
The local Councils are also conducting their own investigations in water security 
as follows:
•	 Yass Valley are investigating new water supplies from Burrunjuck Dam, off-river 
storages and ACT Water
•	 Braidwood Water Supply Water Security Assessment which considers a range 
of short and long term measures including restrictions implementation to target 
reductions in demand.
Some of the key areas that apply to this Plan include: 
•	 Local (town) water security and enduring levels of water supply along with 
addressing sustainable population growth pressures. 
•	 Continue to improve water management.
•	 Public information on water availability.
•	 Understanding of groundwater.
•	 Natural resource management activities and river restoration.
Local Councils
NSW DCCEEW, ACT Government, 
Commonwealth Government, Snowy Hydro, 
water supply authorities WaterNSW and Icon 
Water
Adaptive, 
Transformative
Key Outcomes
•	 Infrastructure in place that meets current and plans for future community needs and climate impacts. 
•	 Future design of infrastructure that recognises climate impacts.
•	 Increasing water security within the region will support economic development with the region and contribute to improved social and environmental outcomes.
•	 Identify the assets within each region that leave communities vulnerable to drought (and other disaster) 
if they fail/underperform and how these risks can be mitigated

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
91
5.5.	Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning 
To drive improved drought resilience in the region, 
this Plan has identified the steps required for change 
to meet the needs of the region. These include 
the identified priority and related actions to be 
implemented; the outcomes that could be achieved as a 
result and specifically how each would relate to building 
resilience. The Plan also includes steps required to 
implement the change and identifies a delivery model to 
do so. 
To ensure this Plan delivers on the actions identified, 
a Monitoring, Evaluation Learning (MEL) Framework 
should be adopted. The FDF MEL Framework listed in 
Figure 37 will be used to assess the effectiveness of 
implementing this Plan (DAWE, 2020). 
•	 Impact – Do the drought impacts identified in 
the Plan represent those of greatest impact 
to the region? 
•	 Rationale – Do the current actions and those 
proposed in this Plan align to the strategic 
priorities of Social, Economic and Environmental?
•	 Outputs – Does the implementation of the Plan 
deliver the outputs detailed in this Plan?
•	 Outcomes – Do the benefits of implementing the 
actions improve resilience across the three strategic 
prioritises for the Southern Tablelands Councils 
Bordering the ACT? If not, what can be adjusted to 
improve the outcomes? 
Figure 37  FDF Monitoring, Evaluation Learning Framework
The drought impacts have been identified in Section 
1.7 and LGA-specific impacts are presented in the 
LGA snapshots. These drove the development of the 
actions (Section 5.2). Appendix A outlines, for each 
action, what strategic priorities they align to (Social, 
Economic, Environmental), how they build resilience, the 
intended outcomes, the implementation steps, parties 
involved, estimated magnitude of cost, timeframe for 
implementation, and suggested evaluation metrics. 
The three Councils working together with the delivery 
partners including NSW State Government, not-for 
profit organisations, industry and community 
organisations will need to collaborate on the 
implementation of this Plan. 
The Councils are the vehicle for the development of the 
Plans and have been nominated as the lead agency for 
the delivery of several actions within this Plan. This is 
due to both the allocation of implementation funding via 
the FDF and the ability of Councils to lead and advocate 
for the resilience needs of their communities. However, 
many of the initiatives will need to be delivered by other 
agencies as a collaborative effort. 
Initial Plan measures of success have been identified 
for the first year of the Plan (Section 5). This establishes 
a starting point to measure the effectiveness and 
progress of each of the actions. 
Where possible, metrics have been adopted from 
existing data and systems such as the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, census data and existing reporting 
that could be obtained through Council. The metrics 
would need to be monitored and reported to establish 
a baseline level with future years measures of success 
and metrics to be identified. 
Critical to regional-level monitoring of, and improvement 
to, the Plan, an on-going project control group 
comprising of the three Councils with external 
stakeholders as needed will be required. This group 
would have the role of initiating actions in line with the 
plan, reviewing progress against the plan objectives 
and overseeing implementation. The action within the 
plan which discusses formalising regional networks with 
agencies that hold drought responsibilities would also 
provide a good and regular opportunity to discuss the 
progress of this Plan. 
MONITORING
EVALUATION
LEARNING
I
M
P
A
C
T
O
U
T
C
O
M
E
S
O
U
T
P
U
T
S
R
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
E

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
92
•	 The ability to record and share plan outcomes. 
•	 The integration of this Plan with other local 
planning activities. 
•	 Stakeholders’ willingness to share knowledge 
and work with each other. 
•	 On-going funding to support implementation 
of plan actions.
•	 The remit of delivery partners/stakeholders will not 
fundamentally change. 
•	 Implementation targets past the short-term can be 
defined and agreed.
•	 That the region is not moving directly into another 
drought and has some lead time to commence plan 
activities.
•	 Other agencies continue to deliver drought work that 
is being developed as a part of this plan.
•	 Some of the longer-term factors that may impact plan 
outcomes include:
•	 The ability to effect meaningful and longer-term 
behaviour change.
•	 On-going funding to support larger more critical 
actions that traverse across political cycles.
•	 Legislative and regulatory change required to 
implement the actions.
•	 Regular review and update of the plan.
The Plan is a snapshot in time and requires regular update 
to ensure the overall actions still align with the region’s 
requirements. A short progress review should be published 
annually as part of the individual Councils Annual Report 
(as part of their Integrated Planning and Reporting 
processes), highlighting any issues in implementation, 
and reporting using the metrics described. A review 
and update of plan should be scheduled every 4 years. 
This should include community consultation to ensure 
the needs, actions and outcomes are still relevant and 
to support this Plan remaining current, embedding the 
plan to ensure local ownership within the communities 
and progressing implementation. The three Councils will 
continue to meet bi-annually to assess plan progress, this 
will provide an opportunity to reflect on how the Plan is 
being implemented and make any potential adjustments 
and refinements that need to be made. This may include 
inviting other stakeholders and delivery partners to provide 
progress updates. Aside from this, the three Councils 
would be involved in other implementation groups for 
specific actions. 
Some of the key parameters assumed in the 
implementation of the plan include: 
•	 Effective cooperation between delivery partners. 
•	 Capacity of three local Councils to lead and 
coordinate other stakeholders. 
•	 Capacity and engagement of other stakeholders 
to lead and coordinate actions where required.
•	 Capacity of other stakeholders and the community 
to participate and actively engage in 
implementation activities.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
93
5.5.1.	 Monitoring progress and plan outcomes 
Table 10 below outlines the actions alignment to the FDF MEL Framework. Additional details regarding lead agency, partners and measures of success can be found in Appendix C. 
Theme
Outcome / priority
High-level indicator / metric
Timing
Theme 1 – Robust 
and resilient 
local economy 
and agricultural 
businesses
Business
•	 Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security.
•	 Businesses have improved access to new and existing knowledge and technology to 
enable more effective responses to risks such as drought.
•	 Businesses engage in strategic business planning and risk assessment.
•	 Businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
•	 Businesses have built skills in business planning, financial and risk management.
•	 Businesses identify and adopt innovative and transformative ways to build drought 
resilience.
Data from service providers 
that captures council/business 
chamber as a referral partner. 
Metrics and KPI’s within REDS 
and local economic development 
plans are met. 
Short term to increase the promotion and 
awareness of programs. On-going and regular 
deliver of education to continue to embed and 
upskill. 
Medium to long term to implement REDS and 
refined over time as populations and needs 
change. 
Theme 1 – Robust 
and resilient 
local economy 
and agricultural 
businesses
Agriculture
•	 More primary producers adopt transformative strategies and technologies to reduce 
financial exposure to drought.
•	 More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving productivity and 
profitability.
•	 More primary producers adopt whole-of-system approaches to natural resource 
management (NRM) to improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and 
landscape health.
•	 New partnerships are formed to fund and undertake drought resilience RD&E.
•	 The volume and adoption of relevant drought resilience RD&E increases.
•	 Primary producers and businesses have improved access to new and existing knowledge 
and technology to enable more effective responses to risks such as drought. 
•	 More primary producers incorporate NRM philosophies and approaches in business 
planning and risk assessment to better manage their natural resources through drought. 
•	 More primary producers and businesses make greater use of data to better understand 
their farm business’ level of drought resilience and make business decisions.
Metrics from extension and 
adoption service providers.
Attendance at workshops and 
engagement with drought 
adoption officers and R&D 
services increases.
Longer-term ABARES data 
demonstrate changing trends in 
markets and climate. 
RDC’s research information 
that demonstrates improved 
environmental and productivity 
outcomes
Short-term to initiate and longer-term to 
deliver wider benefits.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
94
Theme
Outcome / priority
High-level indicator / metric
Timing
Theme 1 – Robust 
and resilient 
local economy 
and agricultural 
businesses
Circular Economy
•	 Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	 Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to drought.
•	 Businesses better understand their resilience to drought
•	 Businesses identify and adopt innovative and transformative ways to build drought 
resilience.
Short-term expression of 
interest for circular hub/
opportunity to partner with 
existing hub. 
Medium investigate 
partnerships/funding 
Longer-term establishment 
of hub that contributes to 
economic diversification 
(regional economic data/
ABARES) and improved 
environmental outcomes. 
Long term and on-going. 
Theme 2 – 
Maintain 
and protect 
the natural 
environment
•	 Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to drought.
•	 More primary producers adopt transformative strategies and technologies to reduce 
financial exposure to drought.
•	 More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving productivity and 
profitability.
•	 More primary producers adopt whole-of-system approaches to natural resource 
management (NRM) to improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and 
landscape health.
•	 New partnerships are formed to fund and undertake drought resilience RD&E.
•	 The volume and adoption of relevant drought resilience RD&E increases.
•	 Primary producers and businesses have improved access to new and existing knowledge 
and technology to enable more effective responses to risks such as drought. 
•	 More primary producers incorporate NRM philosophies and approaches in business 
planning and risk assessment to better manage their natural resources through drought. 
•	 More primary producers and businesses make greater use of data to better understand 
their farm business’ level of drought resilience and make business decisions.
Attendance at workshops/
education. 
Number of new collaborations 
that have been established.
New projects that have been 
implemented. 
Measured improvements in 
environmental and economic 
outcomes. 
Short to medium term (and ongoing)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
95
Theme
Outcome / priority
High-level indicator / metric
Timing
Theme 3 – 
Governance: 
Strong leadership 
and collaboration
•	 Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	 Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to drought.
•	 Relevant and reliable climate data are available and used for decision-making.
•	 Partnerships and engagement is built between stakeholders managing natural resources.
•	 The number of, and participation in, local networks and programs to enhance drought 
resilience increases.
•	 Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often to 
build drought resilience.
•	 Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
•	 Communities proactively plan and prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
•	 Community leaders and networks have stronger capability to undertake strategic 
drought resilience planning.
Formalisation of meetings, 
Engagement of Drought 
Resilience Officer, 
Establish KPI’s for role
Developments of plans
Visits to Councils website
Council surveys/feedback
Short-term to initiate and on-going 
Theme 4 – 
Communities 
that are vibrant, 
connected and 
sustained
Health and Mental 
Health services.  
•	 Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	 Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Initial consultation with delivery 
partners and scoping of service 
needs.
Data from health providers 
supports effectiveness of new 
service 
Medium term to scope and longer-term to 
establish and then on-going (adapted)
Theme 4 – 
Communities 
that are vibrant, 
connected and 
sustained.  
Understanding 
and planning for 
the future
•	 Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	 Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
•	 Communities use best practice data and information to better understand their resilience 
to drought, and plan for resilience to drought.
Complete mapping/investigation 
into population/asset mapping. 
Synthesis outcomes across 
other planning functions. Embed 
continuous improvement. 
Existing plan metric and 
implementation strategies
Short-medium term to define new information 
and long (and ongoing) to implement and 
embed

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
96
Theme
Outcome / priority
High-level indicator / metric
Timing
Theme 5: 
Infrastructure – 
Built assets and 
climate adapted 
design
•	 Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
•	 Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to drought.
•	 Improved access to, and greater utilisation of community infrastructure.
•	 Communities share knowledge, collaborate and partner with government more often to 
build drought resilience.
•	 Community leaders and networks have stronger capability to undertake strategic 
drought resilience planning.
Progress against existing 
strategies.
On-going and longer term to implement. 
Table  10	 Initial Monitoring, Evaluation Learning (MEL) framework

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
97
06
Conclusion

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
98
6.	Conclusion
This Plan was co-designed with the communities within 
the region. This Plan builds on earlier efforts made 
by the community to improve its response to drought. 
Innovative and grass roots examples are showcased as 
to how the community has worked together to adapt 
and drive improved resilience. 
This Plan has been designed with the three Councils 
being the main leader of actions to ensure the plan is 
actionable. The delivery of the plan will require other 
agencies including state government, industry, not for 
profit organisations and the community to be partners 
in the delivery of the plan. 
This Plan has identified a parcel of actions that can 
be funded through the FDF Implementation Funding 
and those that will require further investigation into 
alternate funding options. 
This Plan illustrates the key areas for the region at this 
point in time. These areas are not static and will require 
review and update continuously.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
99
07
Appendices

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
100
Appendix A	
References
ABARES. (2020). Measuring drought risk - The exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms 
to drought. Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences. 
daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/search/asset/1030903/0
ABARES. (2020). Measuring drought risk - the exposure and sensitivity of Australian 
https://daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/search/asset/1030903/0
ABARES. (2022). Community Vulnerability and resilience to drought index - stage 1. 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences. Canberra: 
officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fdaff.ent.sirsidynix.net.
au%2Fclient%2Fen_AU%2Fsearch%2Fasset%2F1034241%2F1&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK
ABARES. (2022a). Community Vulnerability and Reilience to Drought Index - Stage 
officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fdaff.ent.sirsidynix.net.
au%2Fclient%2Fen_AU%2Fsearch%2Fasset%2F1034241%2F1&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK
ABARES. (2022b). Indicators of potential drought impact. Australian Bureau of 
Fisheries and Forestiry. Retrieved from https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/australian.
bureau.of.agricultural.and.resource.economics.and.sci/viz/DroughtindicatorsbyLGA21/
Indicators-Dash
ABS. (2021). Data by region. Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved from 
Australian Bureau of Statistics : https://dbr.abs.gov.au/index.html 
ABS. (2021). Search Census Data - Quick Stats. Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics. 
Retrieved from https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area
ABS. (2021). Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA), Australia. Canberra: Australian 
Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/people-
and-communities/socio-economic-indexes-areas-seifa-australia/latest-release
ABS. (2021a). Census Data . Retrieved from Australian Bureau of Statistics : https://www.
abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area
ABS. (2021b). Data by Region. Retrieved from Australian Bureau of Statistics: https://dbr.
abs.gov.au/index.html
ABS. (2022). Agricultural Commodities, Australia, 2020-21. Canberra: Australian Bureau 
of Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/
agricultural-commodities-australia/2020-21 
ABS. (2022). Value of Agricultural Commodities Produced, Australia, 2020-21. Australian 
Bureau of Statistics. Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved from https://www.
abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/value-agricultural-commodities-produced-
australia/2020-21#data-downloads 
ABS. (2024). Population estimates and components by LGA, 2022 to 2023 . 
Abunyewah, M. B. (2023). Developing psychological resilience to the impact of drought. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 3465.
AIHW. (2024). My Hospitals: My Local Area. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 
myhospitals/my-local-area 
Beard, C. W. (2011). How does the 2010–11 La Niña compare with past La Niña events. 
Bulletin of the Australian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society, 17-20.
Beard, G., Chandler, E., Watkins, A., & Jones, D. (2011, Feburary 1). How does the 2010-11 
La Nina compare with past La Nina events? Bulletin of the Asutralian Meteorological and 
Oceanographic Society, pp. 17-20.
BoM. (2006). Drought Statement - Issued 3rd November 2006. Bureau of Meteorology. 
BoM. (2012). Australia's wettest two-year period on record; 2010-11. Special Climate 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs38.pdf 
BoM. (2018). State of the Climate 2018. Bureau of Meteorology. Canberra: Australian 
Government. Retrieved from http://www.bom.gov.au/state-of-the-climate/State-of-the-
Climate-2018.pdf
BoM. (2022). Climate statistics for Australian locations. Bureau of Meteorology. Canberra: 
averages/tables/cw_074106.shtml
BoM. (2022). Climate statistics for Australian locations . Retrieved from Bureau of 
Meteorology : http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/cw_074106.shtml

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
101
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledgecentre/previous-
droughts.shtml
BOM. (n.d.). Previous droughts. Retrieved from Bureau of Meteorology: http://www.bom.
gov.au/climate/drought/knowledgecentre/previous-droughts.shtml
BoM. (n.d.). Understanding drought. Retrieved from Bureau of Meteorology : http://www.
bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml
Bureau of Meteorology. (2006). Drought Statement - Issued 3rd November 2006.
Bureau of Meteorology. (2012). Australia’s wettest two-year period on record; 2010-11. 
Special Climate Statement. National Climate Centre, Bureau of Meteorology, http://www.
bom. gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs38.pdf.
Business Queanbeyan Palerang. (2024). Monaro Rail Trail. Retrieved from Queanbeyan-
Palerang: https://www.queanbeyanpalerang.com.au/industry/monaro-rail-trail/
Busking. (2022). Australian National Busking Championships. Retrieved from Busking: 
https://www.busking.com.au/about/
Canberra Airport. (2024). Welcome to Canberra Airport. Retrieved from Canberra Airport: 
https://www.canberraairport.com.au/
Cooma Monaro Railway. (2024). About CMR . Retrieved from Cooma Monaro Railway: 
https://cmrailway.org.au/about/
CSIRO. (2010). Climate variability and change in. South Eastern Australia Climate Initiative.
CSIRO and BoM. (2023). About . Retrieved from My Climate View : https://myclimateview.
com.au/about
CSIRO; BoM. (2024, March 1). My Climate View. Retrieved from My Climate View: https://
myclimateview.com.au/about
and 
Forestry: 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/
drought/future-drought-fund?utm_campaign=website&utm_medium=email&utm_
source=ehq_newsletter#drought-resilience-funding-plan
DCCEEW. (2021). Outback Australia - the rangelands. Retrieved from Department of 
Climate CHnage, Engery, the Environment and Water : https://www.dcceew.gov.au/
environment/land/rangelands
DCCEEW. (2024a). Draft Regional Water Startegy NSW Murray: Shortlisted Actions – 
Executive Summary. 
DCCEEW. (2024b). Draft Regional Water Strategy: Murrumbidgee Shortlisted Actions - 
Consultation Paper. 
Department of Agricultural, Fisheries and Forestry. (2022). National Drought Agreement. 
Retrieved from Agriculture: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/drought/drought-policy/national-drought-agreement
Department of Customer Service. (2024). Skitube. Retrieved from NSW Government: 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/visiting-and-exploring-nsw/locations-and-attractions/skitube
(2024, June 17). Combined Drought Indicator (CDI). Retrieved from CDI website: https://
www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/climate_applications/state-seasonal-update/monthly-indicators/
seasonal-conditions-and-drought-assessment/combined-drought-indicator-cdi
DPIRD. (2024, June 17). Drought Direction Index (DDI). Retrieved from DDI website: https://
www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/climate_applications/state-seasonal-update/monthly-indicators/
seasonal-conditions-and-drought-assessment/drought-direction-index
DPIRD. (2024, June 17). Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS): Combined Drought 
Indicator. Retrieved from EDIS : https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/
DPIE. (2022). Draft Regional Water Strategy - Murrumbidgee: Regional Challenges 
Discussion Paper. Sydney: NSW Department of Planning and Environment. Retrieved 
from https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/548347/murrumbidgee-
discussion-paper-draft-regional-challenges.pdf
DRNSW. (2022). Our Visions for Regional Community . Retrieved from Department of 
Regional NSW : https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-11/Liveability%20Vision.
pdf
economy.id. (2024, June 17). Employment by industry | Snowy Monaro | economy.id. 
Retrieved from economy.id : https://economy.id.com.au/snowy-monaro/employment-
census
economy.id. (2024). Employment by Industry, Snowy Monaro Regional Council . Retrieved 
from economy.id: https://economy.id.com.au/snowy-monaro/employment-by-industry
GHD. (2022). Yass Valley Water Source Strategy. Yass Valley Council.
Government, N. (2023). Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Economic Development Strategy 
– 2023 Update. NSW Government.
Government, N. (2023c).
Haider, & Cleaver. (2023). Capacities for resilience: persisting, adapting and transforming 
through bricolage. Ecosystems and People, 19(1), 2240434.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
102
Hayman, P. (2020). Impact of climate change on southern farming systems. Grains 
Research & Development Corporation.
Hayman, P. (2020). Impact of climate change on southern farming systems. GRDC Update 
Papers, n.a.
Jobs and Skills Australia. (2023). Small Area Labour Markets, September Quarter 2023. 
small-area-labour-markets 
Kirono et al. (n.d.). Drought Projections for Australia: Updated results and analysisis of 
model simulations. Weather and Climate Extremes.
Kirono, D., Round, V., Heady, C., Chiew, F., & Osbrough, S. (2020). Drought projections 
for Australia: Updated results and analysis of moedl simulations. Weather and Climate 
Extremes, n.a.
Macdonald-Smith, A. (2018, August 28). Drought hit on Snowy Hydro leaves Vic prone to 
summer blackouts. Financial Review.
Macdonald-Smith, A. (2018). Drought hit on Snowy Hydro leaves Vic prone to summer 
blackouts. Financial Review, n.a.
McDonald, A., & Bevan , S. (2023). NSW transport minister pledges 'fresh look' at Canberra 
to Eden rail proposal. Retrieved from ABC: https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-06-22/
canberra-to-eden-railway-proposal-considered-again/102509202
MDBA. (2023a). Catchments . Retrieved from Murrary-Darling Basin Authority : https://
www.mdba.gov.au/basin/catchments
MDBA. (2023b). Murrumbidgee Catchment. Retrieved from Murray-Sarling Basin 
Authority: 
https://www.mdba.gov.au/basin/catchments/southern-basin-catchments/
murrumbidgee-catchment
MDBA. (2023c). Upper Murray catchment. Retrieved from Murrary Darling Basin Authority 
: https://www.mdba.gov.au/basin/catchments/southern-basin-catchments/upper-murray-
catchment
National Archives Australia. (2024). Snowy Mountains Hyrdo. Retrieved from National 
Museum 
Australia: 
https://www.nma.gov.au/defining-moments/resources/snowy-
mountains-hydro
NationalMap. (2024, June 17). NationalMap. Retrieved from NationalMap: https://
nationalmap.gov.au/
NSW Government . (2023d). South Jerrabomberra Regional Job Precinct. Retrieved 
from NSW Government : https://www.nsw.gov.au/regional-nsw/regional-business-and-
economy-nsw/regional-job-precincts/jerrabomberra-job-precinct
NSW Government. (2021). AgTrack - Agricultural and Land Use Dashboard. Retrieved from 
DPI: https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/agriculture/lup/agriculture-data-for-planning/dashboard
NSW Government. (2022). Snowy Mountains Special Activation Precinct. Sydney: NSW 
Government. Retrieved from https://shared-drupal-s3fs.s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.
com/master-test/fapub_pdf/Lisa+Drupal+Documents/Snowy_SAP_Masterplan_FINAL_
digital3.pdf
NSW Government. (2022). Snowy Mountains Special Activation Precinct. Retrieved 
from NSW Government: https://www.nsw.gov.au/regional-nsw/regional-business-and-
economy-nsw/special-activation-precincts/snowy-activation-precinct
NSW Government. (2023a). Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Economic Development 
Strategy. Retrieved from NSW Government: https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/
files/2023-02/Queanbeyan-Palerang-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2023a). Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Economic Development 
Strategy – 2023 Update. NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2023-02/Queanbeyan-Palerang-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2023a). Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Reeconomic Development 
Strategy - 2023 Update. Sydney: NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.nsw.gov.
au/sites/default/files/2023-02/Queanbeyan-Palerang-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2023b). Snowy Monaro Regional Economic Development Strategy – 
2023 Update. NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/
files/2023-02/Snowy-Monaro-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2023b). Snowy-Monaro Regional Economic Development Strategy - 
2023 Update. Canberra: NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2023-02/Snowy-Monaro-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2023c). Southern Tablelands Regional Economic Development 
Strategy - 2023 Update. NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2023-03/Southern-Tablelands-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2023c). Southern Tablelands Regional Economic Development 
Strategy - 2023 Update. Canberra: NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.nsw.
gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-03/Southern-Tablelands-REDS-2023-Update.pdf
NSW Government. (2024, June 17). South Jerrabomberra Regional Job Precinct | NSW 
Government. Retrieved from NSW Government: https://www.nsw.gov.au/regional-nsw/
regional-business-and-economy-nsw/regional-job-precincts/jerrabomberra-job-precinct

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
103
NSW Government. (2024, May 20). Spatial Collaboration Portal: NSW Base Map Topographic. 
Retrieved from NSW Spatial Portal : https://portal.spatial.nsw.gov.au/portal/home/
webmap/viewer.html?useExisting=1&layers=42e12fe999354e2d992423a608a6a21f
NSW Government. (2024d). Basin Salinity Management Program. Retrieved from 
Department of Planning and Environment: https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/water/our-work/
water-infrastructure-nsw/regional-projects/river-murray-joint-programs/basin-salinity-
management-program
NSW Government. (2024d). Welcome to AdaptNSW. Retrieved from Adapt NSW: https://
www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/home
NSW Small Business Commissioner. (2024). Queanbeyan-Regional Council - Treasure Trail 
Campaign for Economic Recovery. Sydney: NSW Government. Retrieved from https://www.
smallbusiness.nsw.gov.au/resources-for-councils/case-studies/treasure-trail-campaign-
economic-recovery
Productivity Commission. (2009). Inquiry into Government drought support. Retrieved 
drought-support-draft.pdf 
QPRC. (2021). Braidwood Water Supply – Water Security. NSW Government Public Works 
Advisory.
Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council. (2021). Braidwood Water Supply - Water Security. 
Sydney: NSW Government.
Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council. (n.d.). Welcome to Queanbeyan-Palerang. 
Retrieved from Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council: https://www.queanbeyanpalerang.
com.au/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/New-_resident_guide_-_2024_Update.pdf
Queanbeyan-Palerang Regional Council. (n.d.). Treausre Trail Campaign for Economic 
Recovery. Retrieved from NSW Small Business Commissioner: https://www.smallbusiness.
nsw.gov.au/resources-for-councils/case-studies/treasure-trail-campaign-economic-
recovery
Rivers of Carbon. (2023). Aboriginal ‘Riverside camp’ in Yass, a significant site for lots 
of reasons. Retrieved from Rivers of Carbon: https://riversofcarbon.org.au/aboriginal-
riverside-camp-in-yass-a-significant-site-for-lots-of-reasons/
Rivers of Carbon. (2023, June 17). Aboriginal ‘Riverside camp’ in Yass, a significant site for 
lots of reasons. Retrieved from Rivers of Carbon: https://riversofcarbon.org.au/aboriginal-
riverside-camp-in-yass-a-significant-site-for-lots-of-reasons/
Rivers of Carbon. (2024, June 17). About the Source Water Linkages Project. Retrieved 
from Rivers of Carbon: https://riversofcarbon.org.au/source-water-linkages
SMRC. (2020). 2019-20 Annual Report.
SMRC. (2024a). About the Snowy Monaro . Retrieved from Snowy Monaro : https://www.
snowymonaro.nsw.gov.au/Community/Welcome-to-the-Snowy-Monaro-Region/About-
the-Snowy-Monaro
SMRC. (2024b, June 17). Aboriginal Communities. Retrieved from Snowy Monaro 
Regional 
Council 
: 
https://www.snowymonaro.nsw.gov.au/Community/Aboriginal-
Communities#section-3
Snowy Hydro. (2024). The Snowy Scheme . Retrieved from Snowy Hyrdo : https://www.
snowyhydro.com.au/generation/the-snowy-scheme/
Snowy Hydro. (n.d. ). About. Retrieved from Snowy Hydro: https://www.nma.gov.au/
defining-moments/resources/snowy-mountains-hydro
Snowy Monaro Regional Council. (2022). Water & Wastewater Stats and Facts . 
Retrieved from Snowy Monaro Regional Council: https://ehq-production-australia.s3.ap-
southeast-2.amazonaws.com/b023c8ce5048ce694be54072c0c185bca4048450/
original/1653614305/ca29c575615fb7351d7556047665a88d_SMRC_22_Water_
Stats_Facts_jd_edit_1.pdf?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-
Credential=AKIA4K
Snowy-Monaro Regional Council. (2020). 2019-20 Annual Report. Cooma: SMRC.
Snowy-Monaro Regional Council. (2024, June 17). Home | Snowy-Monaro Regional Council. 
Retrieved from SMRC website: https://www.snowymonaro.nsw.gov.au/Home
Snowy-Monaro Regional Council. (2024, June 17). Welcome to the Snowy Monaro Region. 
Retrieved from SMRC website: https://www.snowymonaro.nsw.gov.au/Community/
Welcome-to-the-Snowy-Monaro-Region
TAFE NSW. (2024, June 17). Locations. Retrieved from TAFE NSW website: https://www.
tafensw.edu.au/locations
Telstra. (2024, June 17). Mobile Black Spot Program. Retrieved from Telstra: https://www.
telstra.com.au/coverage-networks/mobile-black-spot-program 
Telstra. (2024, June 17). Our coverage maps. Retrieved from Telstra: https://www.telstra.
com.au/coverage-networks/our-coverage

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
104
Timbal. (2015). Murrary Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia: Projections 
for Australia's NRM regions. Retrieved from Climate Change in Australia: https://www.
climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/MURRAY_
BASIN_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf
Timbal, B. (2015). Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia: Projections for 
Australia's NRM regions. Canberra: CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology.
Transport NSW. (2024). Barton Highway upgrade package - Stage 1 - Barton Highway. 
Retrieved from NSW Government: https://www.transport.nsw.gov.au/projects/current-
projects/barton-highway-upgrade-package-stage-1-barton-highway
Warren, T. (2022, November). ‘WATER FROM CANBERRA’ – YASS VALLEY COUNCIL 
ADOPTS WATER SOURCE STRATEGY. Yass Valley Times.
Warren, T. (2022). Water from Canberra - Yass Valley Council Adopts Water Source 
Strategy. Yass Valley Times.
Yass Area Network of Landcare Groups. (2021). Climate-Ready Revegetation In the Yass 
Area Network Landcare Region. Syndey: NSW Government. Retrieved from https://
landcare.nsw.gov.au/groups/murrumbateman-landcare-group/climate-change-in-our-
region/yan_climatereadyreveg_summary_20210531.pdf
Yass Valley Council. (2024, June 17). Home Yass Valley Council. Retrieved from YVC 
website: https://www.yassvalley.nsw.gov.au/Home
Yass Valley Council. (n.d.). About our Water Supply . Retrieved from Yass Valley Council: 
https://www.yassvalley.nsw.gov.au/Our-Services/Water-and-Wastewater/About-our-
water-supply#:~:text=Yass%20water%20supply%20sources%20water%20from%20
the%20Yass%20Dam.
YVC. (2024). About Yass Valley. Retrieved from Yass Valley Council : https://www.yassvalley.
nsw.gov.au/Home

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
105
Appendix B
What we heard
B-1 Queanbeyan Palerang LGA
What worked well
The stakeholder engagement confirmed that some of the following initiatives have 
supported Queanbeyan-Palerang’s ability to absorb the shock of drought. 
•	 Informal social support to support the community. This included pubs and clubs 
staying open for longer hours and the effective use of the community radio. Locals 
who took a proactive approach in looking out for neighbours and those struggling. 
•	 The use of Braidwood Showground as a delivery station for feed. Farmers could 
bring livestock to the showground and the community used the location as an 
emergency community place.
•	 Local Land Services waived stock rates.
•	 Truck convoys were organised for stockfeed and clothes. 
•	 Water restrictions were effective in residential areas.
What hasn’t worked well 
•	 There were insufficient mental health services available to meet the demand. 
•	 The management of dam releases was not efficient. 
•	 Water restrictions were too late and there needs to be better management of water 
trucking. 
•	 There was a lack of communication which was enhanced by significant black spots 
in the region. 
•	 Information from council was limited and not targeted. 
•	 There were delays in government support announcements. 
•	 There wasn’t enough support for community centres to help support social 
connectedness. 
•	 Water infrastructure include dams, pipelines, and water availability is not sufficient 
to meet the regions needs during drought.  
What needs to happen / ideas?
The Queanbeyan-Palerang LGA highlighted that resilience could be improved though:
•	 Braidwood needs a more secure and reliable water supply that supports them 
through all seasonal conditions.
•	 Increased education campaigns on water use, native vegetation and resilience 
during difficult times. 
•	 Development of a water sharing plans, which are accessible to the community and 
focuses on the management of water during critical events. 
•	 A more effective communication and messaging system focused on what legislation 
applies and where information can be found. 
•	 Increase local input in decision-making during droughts.
•	 Clear information regarding local flora that thrives in the areas.
•	 Greater support and education for children to become resilient to drought via 
schools. 
•	 Improved water wise education programs
•	 Emphasis of out of the box thinking and changing the mentality to moving forward
•	 Empowering people to be self-reliant

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
106
B-2 Snowy-Monaro LGA
What worked well
•	 Businesses were able to pivot to manage reduced farm production.
•	 Increase in city to country engagement and farm visits.
•	 There was a lift in community spirit, brought on by truck convoys 
delivering livestock feed
•	 ‘For a cause’ marketing, such as the “buying from the bush” campaign. Made 
communities feel like their city counterparts cared and brought income to 
the region. 
What hasn’t worked well 
•	 Drought initiative had a lack of cohesion across agencies.
•	 A lack of support for mental health.
•	 Engagement and consultation across the board were generally viewed as 
uncoordinated and fragmented.
What needs to happen / ideas?
The Snowy-Monaro LGA highlighted that resilience could be improved though:
•	 Improving weed management, through control and prevention. 
•	 Implementing initiatives from Monaro Farming Systems
•	 Constructing a local botanic garden that would showcase how to improve soil health, 
support threatened species conservation and ecology, Lessons can be learnt from 
the Eurobodalla gardens. 
•	 Expanding and promoting the work of Landcare
•	 Having a drought plan that links to basic resources and gives hope to communities.
•	 Increasing collaboration between drought response agencies to ensure a timely 
response to drought, provide resources and improve access to drought information. 
•	 Having synergy in farming strategies in drought, aiming for increased efficiency. 
•	 Better dialogue across industries affected by drought.
•	 Implementing resilience training and support that helps with adapting to change
•	 Developing a hub for drought and disaster assistance that provides a place to 
turn in drought.
•	 Developing mental health plans before disasters are happening.
•	 Implementing financial literacy training.
•	 Developing road infrastructure for feed and stock transport. 
•	 Diversifying the economy to maximise labour efficiency and assisting small 
businesses to build diversity.
•	 Being adaptable in resource use.
•	 Reinvigorating Buy from the Bush and other similar campaigns. 
•	 Providing financial support for subject matter experts (including DPIRD Ag, LLS) to 
invest in drought resilience.
•	 Providing workshops and education from trusted community organisations, 
including Landcare and Rural Fire Service. 
•	 Promoting First Nations tourism products, including stargazing and bush 
tucker trails.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
107
farmer’s schedules.
•	 Building capacity and skills in agriculturally based businesses
•	 Diversifying jobs and opportunities based on the region’s unique location, 
such as energy and information services.
•	 Establishing relationships with agencies and people before drought and 
emergencies are occurring. 
•	 Revaluating what programs/interventions/assistance already exists to find 
new ways and be adaptive.
•	 Acknowledging the need for drought resilience trained people 
•	 Strengthening the communication channels across the community, such as  
better access to information including drought.
•	 Increasing diversity among and within businesses
•	 Better recognition of how drought impacts cross LGA boundaries.
•	 Adapting to the changing demographics and expectations of people within 
each community. 
•	 Expanding bulk billing to better support access to health services.
B-3 Yass Valley LGA Snapshot
What worked well
•	 Technological improvements, such as moisture probes and LLS farming forecaster 
•	 Rural Financial Counselling Service worked well and provided great support for 
eligible people
•	 Pest control
•	 Alternate methods to manage stock that protect pasture and the environment, 
such as drought lots.
•	 Grassroots and local initiatives provide benefit during drought.
•	 Business owners are more present in their businesses.
What hasn’t worked well 
•	 Realignment of salaries in agricultural services such as LLS, and DPIRD sends the 
message that there is less value in the contribution these roles bring to their clients.
•	 Climate forecasting is not always accurate and can distort the signals it sends to 
livestock markets about impending events. 
•	 Access to credit and finance can be more difficult for businesses during this 
time when many are looking for additional finance. 
•	 Drought funding and support runs out or is discontinued before drought 
was finished.
What needs to happen / ideas?
The Yass Valley LGA highlighted that resilience could be improved though:
•	 Aligning political and funding cycles to increase resilience and move beyond politics. 
•	 Implementing a Drought Preparation Strategy that devotes more resources to 
preparing for drought prior to it arriving. 
•	 Reducing red tape associated with accessing emergency support measures, 
such as freight subsidies or infrastructure. 
•	 Proactive education on alternate agricultural technologies and practices.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
108
Priority 1 
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 1
Economic, 
Social
Adaptive to 
Transformative
•	 Continue to investigate diversification 
in the economy through the Local 
and Regional Economic Development 
Strategies and local planning processes 
that seek to capitalise on the unique 
skills, knowledge and features of each 
LGA. This may include opportunities 
to attract new industry to the region, 
leveraging the rail or road networks or 
capitalise on a community’s location 
within each region.
•	 Continue to work thorough established 
channels with local council economic 
development officers and DRNSW on 
broader regional strategies. 
•	 Councils may choose to undertake 
bespoke activities such as surveys and 
workshops with the members of the 
community and local businesses to 
inform future development activities. 
Local Councils
$$$
Theme 1
Economic, 
Social, 
Environmental
Transformative
•	 Investigate the opportunity to create a 
circular economy hub in the region like 
that of the Bega Circular Valley.
•	 Expression of interest within the region 
for businesses who have an interest in 
participating in the establishment of a 
circular business hub.
•	 Depending on interest consider the 
formation of a circular business hub 
within the region. 
•	 Investigate the formation of a 
partnership to join the Bega circular 
valley or learn from them as to how to 
create/develop a new regional hub. 
•	 Investigate opportunities to engage 
existing businesses within the circular 
economy to share and present within 
the region. 
•	 This can include funding support 
to assist local investigation of 
opportunities. 
The regions 
industry/ Local 
Councils
$$$
Appendix C

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
109
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 1
Economic, 
Environmental
Adaptive to 
Transformative
•	 Increase the level of education and 
training on new agricultural practices 
and technologies and environmental 
projects e.g. carbon farming, ag-tech. 
•	 Investigate/map existing extension 
services for the region and identify 
new potential partners such as Monaro 
Farming Systems or Landcare to 
undertake greater levels of extension 
and adoption. 
•	 Consider engaging organisations such 
as these to deliver community education 
on water awareness, endangered 
species, drought tolerant and regionally 
suitable plantings, development of 
community projects such as native 
nurseries and community gardens.
•	 Utilise these existing local and regional 
groups to deliver mental health training 
too.
•	 Conduct a review of existing extension 
providers with a view of increasing  
services across the region that tailor 
the education to a region/LGA level 
(e.g. utilise of local services e.g. Monaro 
Farming Systems, LLS, RDC's, private 
extensions and adoption providers) 
to be able to provide greater levels of 
extension from trusted relationships. 
LLS/RDC’s
$$
Theme 2
Environmental, 
Economic 
Adaptive to 
Transformative
•	 Increasing the level of research and 
resources available to programs that 
Hydrate the Landscape Initiatives (such 
as the Mulloon Institute). 
•	 Increasing the resources to education 
on how to achieve these outcomes 
(rebuild the landscape, boost 
environmental resilience, improve 
ecosystems and enhanced agricultural 
productivity via a catchment scale 
approach)
•	 Allocation of additional resources to the 
Mulloon Institute to expand the level of 
project work they are currently able to 
undertake on a regional level. 
•	 This may include project partners 
assisting with grant funding 
opportunities, local resourcing and 
project ideas, utilisation of local 
networks to expand the reach of such 
programs. 
Mulloon Institute
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
110
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 4
Social, 
Economic
Absorptive, Adaptive, 
Transformative
Improved access to mental health and 
health services that are: 
•	 Suitable for regional, rural and remote 
communities 
•	 Easily accessible and in a timely manner 
e.g. outside usual hours, without 
detailed referral processes 
•	 Include support to develop youth 
resilience and leadership skills 
delivery through educational services 
throughout all stages of life
•	 Includes mental health first aid training
•	 Includes education on resilience training 
and behaviour change management
•	 That have a greater focus on 
preventative care
•	 Utilise various delivery models and 
provide education/training for volunteer 
groups such as Salvation Army.
•	 Consultation and engagement with 
delivery partners would be required in 
conjunction with reviewing literature 
on what is already known about the 
needs of regional, rural and remote 
communities. 
This should identify the health and 
mental health services required that 
meet the needs of the community. 
The service package would then require 
additional funding to implement. 
•	 As a shorter-term opportunity local 
councils can assist community groups 
to access resilience, leadership and 
mental health training through support 
with accessing grant opportunities. 
Primary Health 
Network and 
Local Health 
District 
$$$
Theme 4
Social, 
Economic
Adaptive to 
Transformative
Increase the understanding of populations 
within the region and their needs by:
•	 Reviewing the governance, 
socioeconomic factors, demographics, 
language, health and disability status, 
housing and transport, social networks 
and community belonging, geographic 
location, environment factors and 
infrastructure and services. 
•	 Mapping the populations within each of 
the regions.
•	 Using this information to inform 
future local planning processes and 
communications e.g. Drought (Disaster) 
Communication Plan.
•	 Councils should consider engaging 
support to help map and understand the 
demographics of their communities. 
•	 This would be undertaken via a range 
of activities from reviewing existing 
literature, surveys, workshops, ABARES 
data. 
•	 These outputs should then be 
used to input and inform all other 
planning processes and engagement/ 
communication conducted by Councils 
to ensure information is reaching 
all parts of the community and is 
addressing the areas of greatest need. 
Local Councils, 
Canberra Region 
JO
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
111
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 4
Environmental
Adaptive
•	 Continue to plan and prepare for the 
changing climate by continuing to 
develop climate adaptation strategies, 
resilience frameworks that will support 
Council working with its communities 
to adapt. E.g. Implementation of the 
QPRC veg strategy and NSW Resilience 
Blueprint for Southern NSW.
•	 Continue to develop and implement 
strategies that assist both Local 
Councils and the community to adapt to 
changing climate conditions and build 
resilience. 
•	 Assessing risks to population and 
assets
•	 Identify options as to how to mitigate 
these risks
•	 Consider including sustainable 
initiatives, local planning controls, 
collaboration with other organisations 
and education and demonstration along 
with capacity building to embed this 
thinking in councils. 
Local Councils/
Canberra Region 
JO
$$
Theme 5
Environmental, 
Social, 
Economic
Adaptive, 
Transformative
Maintain and develop appropriate 
infrastructure to support the region’s 
communities and economy. This includes: 
•	 Asset planning to ensure council owned 
infrastructure and services are suitable 
for future climate impacts. 
•	 From the early mapping of communities 
and asset vulnerabilities incorporate 
this information into the planning 
process.
•	 Complimentary to the earlier action that 
details the mapping and understanding 
of groups within the community. Is the 
assessment of the vulnerability of the 
regions infrastructure. To define which 
assets make the communities more 
prone to the impacts of disaster. Upon 
assessment of the regions assets, 
assessment should be made as to how 
to mitigate these risks in the current 
infrastructure and a roadmap for how 
to transition/plan improved climate 
adapted infrastructure.  
Local Councils
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
112
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action
Implementation steps
Suggested 
Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 5
Environmental, 
Social, 
Economic
Adaptive, 
Transformative
Continue the investigations and 
implementation of: 
•	 The regional water strategies for the 
Murrumbidgee, Greater Sydney and 
NSW Murray that focus on improved 
water security for town water supplies, 
increased reliability and provide water 
security solutions for smaller regional 
centres such as Braidwood that factor 
in regional population and industry 
growth. 
Some of the key areas that apply to this 
plan include: 
•	 Local (town) water security and 
enduring levels of water supply along 
with addressing sustainable population 
growth pressures. 
•	 Continue to improve water management.
•	 Public information on water availability.
•	 Understanding of groundwater.
•	 Natural resource management activities 
and river restoration.
•	 NSW DCCEEW continue to implement 
regional water strategies with partner 
agencies.  
•	 This may include local councils 
undertaking bespoke investigations 
that more directly inform their individual 
water security needs. 
Canberra Region 
JO/Local Councils
$$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
113
Priority 2
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action 
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 1
Economic, 
Social
Adaptive
•	 Increase the awareness of farm 
succession planning for agricultural 
businesses. So, there is a clear pathway 
of transition for new farmers taking over 
the responsibility and management of 
an agricultural business
•	 Existing service providers already exist 
to deliver such advice and assistance. 
•	 Increasing the promotion and 
awareness of these resources and 
advocate for subsidisation. 
•	 Discuss with local financial institutions/
accountants and RFCS how to embed 
these requirements into financial 
approvals.
DPIRD
$
Theme 1
Economic 
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
Increase the support for smaller regional 
businesses by: 
•	 Increasing access to and promoting the 
awareness of business management 
programs that build skills in financial 
understanding, budgets, gross margins, 
cashflow along with developing digital 
skills and how to start a new business 
e.g. Agri-tourism. This could include 
hosting training to build digital skills to 
allow business owners to develop online 
platforms for their businesses.  
•	 Increasing the utilisation of Business 
Chambers to create opportunities 
for likeminded people in business to 
meet, discuss opportunities and build 
capacity and skills. 
•	 Fast-track and sponsor retraining 
opportunities for those within the region 
who are displaced due to drought.
•	 Local councils and the Business 
Chambers to promote the training and 
education opportunities available, 
through engagement with local service 
providers. 
•	 Advocate for subsidies to training to 
improve uptake and highlight grant 
opportunities for local businesses to 
obtain funding to support program 
delivery. 
•	 Consider a variety of methods to deliver 
the training that meet the needs of 
participants e.g. online, afterhours, 
group workshops etc
•	 This may include council hosting a 
series of digital skills workshops for 
small business. 
•	 Local Councils and Business 
Chambers can work together to 
identify opportunities to collaborate 
to sponsor and deliver local retraining 
opportunities. 
Local Councils 
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
114
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action 
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 1
Economic, 
Social
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
•	 Increase the promotion and awareness 
of the distinctive tourist attractions of 
each of the LGA’s
•	 Investigating opportunities to recreate 
the impact of the Buy from the Bush 
campaign on a regional scale. 
•	 Investigate the formation of strategic 
partnerships where local businesses 
work together to support local and 
benefit the community e.g. businesses 
stocking and promoting local produce 
and each other. 
•	 Increase collaboration with First 
Nations Peoples in the region to develop 
and promote bespoke tourism and 
employment opportunities.
•	 Developing a tourism progress plan that 
documents the key tourism and retail 
opportunities in each of the LGA's.  
This plan should seek inputs from 
the local business, tourism and First 
Nations communities on potential 
collaborators and interested parties.  
Documents the key actions and 
activities and discuss local resources 
that will support and deliver the plans 
actions. 
•	 Local Councils may look to engage 
assistance to develop and document 
the plan.  
Local Councils/
Business Chambers
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
115
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action 
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 2
Environmental, 
Economic, 
Social
Adaptive
Investigate opportunities within the local 
region to improve the co-ordination, 
information sharing, and collaboration of 
work being conducted by various agencies 
including but limited to: Landcare 
network, LLS, DPI, RDC’s, Local Councils, 
not for profit organisations across the 
region such as Monaro Farming Systems. 
•	 Develop an enduring relationship that 
provides regular opportunities for 
agencies to meet and discuss prospects 
to work together, share information, 
consider programs, policies and 
projects to ensure consistency and 
alignment with actions. 
•	 Showcasing projects and organisations 
such as (but not limited to) Monaro 
Farming Systems that act as a model 
for innovative primary producers that 
could be adopted in other regions and 
the Botanic Gardens at Eurobodalla 
as a conservation organisation that 
has focused on soil health, threatened 
species, ecology and tourism. Upper 
Shoalhaven Landcare Council (USLC) 
has funded a study of the district which 
identifies the species of flora required 
and alerts the district to the need for 
action. 
•	 Support improved collaboration 
between agencies and organisations 
to ensure strategies and plans that 
focus on environmental and climate 
change outcomes are aligned and 
not duplicated and resources are 
appropriately allocated to where 
they are best used e.g. How does the 
QPRC: Keeping it Cool Vegetation and 
Heat Adaptation Strategy align with 
other work being conducted by NSW 
Government agencies, Landcare.
•	 Utilise independent party to review 
the roles/responsibilities of various 
organisations in conjunction with 
resources and funding to determine 
where capacity and skills are allocated 
and can be best utilised to deliver 
complimentary projects. 
•	 Formalise a regular meeting of 
identified agencies on a local/
regional level to discuss collaboration 
opportunities. These meetings may 
include field trips/showcases and 
demonstrations to present new and 
innovative projects. 
LLS
$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
116
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action 
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 2
Environmental, 
Economic 
Adaptive
•	 Increasing the support and resources 
for pest control and weed management 
in both farming businesses and the 
broader environment.
•	 Review of existing local extension and 
adoption providers to identify capacity 
to increase local service offering 
agricultural businesses.
•	 Consideration for alternate workforces 
such as those undertaking community 
service obligations who may be able 
to support broader weed and pest 
management activities within the 
region. 
LLS/DPIRD
$$
Theme 2
Environmental, 
Social
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
Increase and provide regular education 
and awareness on: 
•	 Planting of drought tolerant trees, 
plants and lawns on a regular and 
reoccurring basis. 
•	 Climate education e.g. ‘Being Heatwave 
Ready’ Upper Shoalhaven Landcare 
Council.
•	 Councils could consider a dedicated 
area to demonstrate initiatives.
•	 Waterwise messages should be 
year-round and targeted across the 
community including schools. 
•	 Seek local partnerships to deliver this 
training and education.
•	 Local Councils to identify to plan 
for annual opportunities to deliver 
education and awareness around 
initiatives such as National Water Week 
and Biodiversity month, this plan should 
also include information on strategies 
for climate change and adaptation. 
•	 Run an expression of interest locally 
to see what organisations may be able 
to support Council's delivery of these 
actions. 
•	 In forming these partnerships consider 
the most engaging ways to deliver the 
education e.g. demonstrate what a 
drought tolerant garden looks like and 
how to best promote the offerings. 
Local Council 
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
117
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action 
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 3
Social, 
Economic
Adaptive
Investigate opportunities to engage a 
Disaster (Drought) Officer within each 
council that holds responsibility as 
follows: 
•	 Acts as councils point of contact to 
disseminate drought information to the 
broader community.
•	 This would include maintaining a 
directory on councils’ website of 
organisations that provide information 
relating to drought e.g. Bureau of 
Meteorology, DPI Agriculture. 
•	 Acts as a connector of people and 
information and provides reference to 
agencies that provide drought services. 
•	 Develops a Drought Management and 
Drought (Disaster) Communications 
Plan which details:
•	 The when, what, where, how and who 
Council will respond under drought 
conditions.
•	 The agencies that have responsibility 
for certain areas in drought (disaster). 
•	 What council is responsible for a how 
it will go about communicating these 
messages. 
•	 What options/assistance council can 
offer during drought 
•	 Any changes to services and 
infrastructure that will impact the 
community.
•	 How water resources are managed.
•	 Where to go if you need assistance or 
more information.
•	 Investigate and advocate for additional 
local resources that can act a Councils 
point of contact for disaster and other 
events. 
•	 This role be best resourced by a local 
person within the community who can 
build relationships, connect people and 
translate and promote climate data 
through a local lens to help improve 
drought preparedness. 
•	 Work with agencies such as the 
Australian Climate Service to obtain 
up to date data and predictions and 
interpret these for local conditions.
•	 Work with other agencies to bring the 
council/community voice to drought and 
disaster. 
Local Councils
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
118
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience capacity 
building
Action 
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 3
Social, 
Economic
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
•	 Formalisation of agency networks that 
hold responsibilities for drought (and 
disaster management). 
•	 This will enable early warning of 
changing climatic and changes in 
resilience conditions e.g. declining 
spending
•	 Key agencies meet regularly to discuss 
roles and responsibilities and any 
changes or new information that may 
indicate emerging or early warning of 
drought, and other natural disasters.
•	 Formalisation of the structure will 
enhance the effectiveness of the 
network and allow resources to be 
directed to areas of emerging need.
LLS
$$
Theme 5
Environmental, 
Social, 
Economic
Transformative
•	 Advocate for improved housing design 
and landscape requirements that 
includes energy and water efficiency 
design with respect to new housing 
developments, 
•	 Council seeks to incorporate efficient 
designs into planning e.g. heat refuges, 
landscaping guidelines, minimum 
energy standards.
•	 Advocate for improved water and 
energy efficient design in housing 
through existing channels to state and 
commonwealth governments. 
•	 Work with developers to instil more 
climate resilient infrastructure in new 
housing estates. 
•	 Consider how Local Environmental 
Plans and Development Control Plans 
can be amended to require improved 
standards.
•	 Showcasing council demonstrations of 
energy efficient/sustainably designed 
projects. 
Local Councils
$$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
119
Priority 3
RDRP 
Themes
System
Resilience 
capacity building
Action
Implementation steps
Suggested Lead
Cost
Timeframe
Theme 2
Environmental, 
Economic 
Absorptive to 
Adaptive
•	 Increased education and, awareness 
for both water licence holders and 
the broader community on water 
management, groundwater and 
surface water.
•	 Local Councils to collaborate with NSW 
water agencies to consider additional 
education activities in the region where 
appropriate. This may include NRAR 
hosting local information/education 
sessions when they are in the area.  
Local Councils 
$
Theme 3
Economic, 
Social
Absorptive
•	 Advocate for a simplification in the 
approval process to access drought 
funding. To ensure critical assistance 
is timelier.
•	 Use existing advocacy channels to 
support and promote the needs for 
easier access to drought services.
NSW Farmers 
Association
$
Theme 4
Social, 
Economic
Absorptive, 
Adaptive
•	 Accessible and equitable access to 
grant writing assistance across each 
of the LGA's. That considers alternate 
workforce models to deliver such 
support such as utilisation of ANU 
business students and other local 
professionals.
•	 Local council and business chambers 
to work together to identify alternate 
workforce options that could be 
considered to address the grant writing 
inequity. This could include forming a 
partnership with Universities to utilise 
business students to assist with grant 
writing, working with business chambers 
to secure grant funding for a grant writer 
that sits within the business chamber and 
provides local support. 
Local Councils 
$

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
120
Key: 
Themes:
Cost:
Timeframe:
Theme 1 Economy: 
Robust and resilient local economies and agricultural businesses
$
Can be supported by existing resources 
from Stakeholders and Partners
Short term: 1-2 years
Theme 2 Environment: 
Protection of the Natural Environment 
$$
Additional Resources Required 
(resources and financial)
Medium term: 3-4 years
Theme 3 Governance: 
Strong leadership and Collaboration 
$$$
Significant additional financial support 
required to deliver
Long term: 5-10 years 
Theme 4 Community: 
Vibrant, connected, and sustained communities 
Theme 5 Infrastructure: 
Built assets and climate adapted design

Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Southern Tablelands Councils Bordering the ACT
121
Produced by GHD
Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program is being 
Drought Fund and the NSW Government.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program provides support 
to identified Local Government Areas in NSW to develop drought 
resilience plans that can be implemented by councils and their 
communities.
October 2024