Temora and Bland Shire Councils
Temora and
Bland Shires
Drought Resilience 
Plan
Image: Ariah Park silos, Temora Shire
Temora Logo
Bland Shire Logo

Acknowledgement of Country
We pay respect to the Wiradjuri people as the Traditional Custodians and First Peoples of the Temora and 
Bland Shire lands, and we acknowledge their continued connection to their country and culture. 
Contact
Temora Logo
Bland Shire Logo
Temora Shire Council
105 Loftus Street
PO Box 262
TEMORA NSW 2666
Phone (02) 6980 1100
Fax (02) 6980 1138
Email temshire@temora.nsw.gov.au
www.temora.nsw.gov.au
Bland Shire Council
6 Shire Street
PO Box 21
WEST WYALONG NSW 2671
Phone (02) 6972 2266
After hours / SMS 0418 402 350
Email council@blandshire.nsw.gov.au
www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au
Contents
Acknowledgement of Country
2
Glossary
4
Key abbreviations
6
01
Introduction
7 
Temora and Bland Shire Regional Map
8
Visions, Goals and Outcomes
9
02
Drought Resilience at a Glance
10
The Process Overview
12
03
A Plan for Drought Resilience
14
Objectives
15
Expected Benefits
16
Strategic Alignment
17
04
About this RDR Plan
18
Purpose of the Plan
19
The Process in Detail
20
Key Inputs
24
Our Partners
25
05
System Analysis
28
History of Drought Impacts
31
Future Drought Projections and Impacts
36
Resilience Challenges
40
Resilience Opportunities
42
06
Our Drought Resilience Journey
44
Action Pathway
46
Action Strategic Alignment
47
Action Themes
49
Enable Economic Growth and Diversification 
By Bringing Vacant Houses onto the Rental 
Market
50
Enable the Provision of Targeted Drought Relief 
Through Spend Data Analysis and Associated 
Communications 
52
Enable Economic Growth and Diversification 
Through Scoping the Provision of Human 
Resource Management Support to Local 
Businesses
54
Strengthen the Capacity of Community Groups 
to Deliver Social Connection Activities
56
Improve Community-Wide Well-Being Through 
The Resilience Project
58
Maintaining Open Green Space Amenity 
Through Improved Water Efficiency
60
07
Monitoring / Evaluation / Learning
62
08
References
68
All photography included in this document provided by Temora and Bland Shire Councils except pages 7, 13, 34, 42, 43 (supplied by WSP Australia)
2

Glossary of Key Terms
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human 
systems in response to actual or expected shocks and 
stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or 
exploit beneficial opportunities.1
Adaptive capacity	
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond 
to environmental and socioeconomic changes.2
Adaptive governance
Coordinating iterative, flexible, and responsive interactions 
between systems when designing interventions and for 
their implementation and evaluation.
Co-design
The process of partnership to develop and formulate 
project delivery and agreed objectives and needs, using 
participatory methods. A process of working together 
utilising generative and explorative processes.
Drought
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought 
is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.3
Economic resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact 
of shocks and stressors without changing the economic 
status or outcomes.4
Environmental resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a 
diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
natural processes and ecosystem service.5
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which 
individuals, groups and agencies in a society share power 
and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or 
informal.6
Intervention options
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, 
policies, initiatives and investments that are planned to 
bring about change in the system.
Local knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates 
elements of lived experience within a landscape, bearing 
witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects 
of people, landscape, culture – how people interact with 
surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
Resilience
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and 
reorganise so as to maintain the existing functions, 
structure, and feedback.7 Also see general resilience, 
specified resilience, economic resilience, environmental 
resilience, and social resilience.
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or 
ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values and 
objectives associated with such systems.8
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or 
region). Examples include major storms, floods, bush 
fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism, and cyber-
attacks’.9 
Social resilience
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse 
range of shocks and stressors while maintaining existing 
social and community functions.10
Standard Precipitation Index
A simple measure of drought (and also of very wet 
conditions) and is based solely on the accumulated 
precipitation for a given time period (e.g. over the last 
30 or 60 days), compared with the long-term average 
precipitation for that period.
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes 
an adverse effect, e.g. drought.11
Systems
The interaction of processes, networks, and inter-
dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
Trends
Major global or regional influences that have driven change 
in the past and are expected to shape change into the 
future.12 
Image of sheep grazing 
Image: Sheep grazing, Bland Shire
4
5

Key Abbreviations
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
BoM
Bureau of Meteorology
BSC
Bland Shire Council
CDI
Combined Drought Indicator
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation
DDI
Drought Direction Index
DPI
Department of Primary Industries
FDF
Future Drought Fund
FFDI
Forest Fire Danger Index
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
HR
Human Resource
IAP2
International Association of Public 
Participation
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LALC
Local Aboriginal Land Council
LGA
Local Government Area
MEL
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning
MIS
Management Information System
NSW
New South Wales
PCG
Project Control Group
RAPTA
Resilience, Adaptation Pathways, 
and Transformation Assessment
RCP
Representative Concentration 
Pathway
RDA
Regional Development Australia
RDR Plan
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
REDS
Regional Economic Development 
Strategy
RFQ
Request For Quote
SEIFA
Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas
SDG
 Sustainable Development Goal
TEC
Threatened Ecological Community
TSC
Temora Shire Council
°C
Degrees Celsius
%
Percentage
01
Introduction
Drought is omnipresent and affects a larger proportion of the world-wide population than any other 
natural disaster. The difficulty in predicting future droughts results from the lack of understanding around 
the contributing physical factors, including those of climate change. 
A key differentiator in predicting a drought hazard, 
compared to another natural hazard, is the lack of warning 
as to the duration, severity, and extent of a drought event. 
Droughts are chronic stress with no distinct beginning or set 
tipping point, meaning the opportunity for implementing 
mitigation and adaptation is often missed.
Over the years, the frequency and intensity of drought 
events have significantly increased, affecting communities 
and economies in ways that extend far beyond the 
immediate impact on major industries, such as agriculture. 
While drought may traditionally be viewed as an issue 
removed from wider society, largely as an “on-farm” issue, 
its ripple effects span across various sectors—from water 
supply to energy production, and from public health to 
local businesses. Given this broad scope, an inclusive, 
cross-sectoral approach is essential for enhancing a 
community’s  resilience against the increasing threat of 
drought.
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan) aims to 
shift the focus and paradigm to encapsulate a ‘whole-of-
community’ and ‘whole-of-economy’ perspective. The 
objective is to encourage behavioural and cultural shifts to 
foster a collective awareness and understanding of shared 
responsibility surrounding drought resilience. By adopting 
this community-led inclusive strategy, the RDR Plan 
positions itself as a comprehensive roadmap that outlines 
context and community-driven strategies, and actionable 
plans to equip regions with the tools they need to plan for, 
respond to and recover from drought impacts effectively. 
This document serves as part of a suite of guidance 
documents that aim to provide stakeholders with the 
knowledge and tools to support the building of drought-
resilient communities and economies.
Image of canola fields 
Image: Canola Fields (supplied by WSP)
6
7

Temora and Bland Shire Regional Map
Map of the Temora and Bland Shire local government area showing major roads, townships, and railway lines. 
The map also provides key statistics on the two LGAs covered in this plan. 
Bland Shire’s traditional owners are the Wiradjuri group. Main townships include Barmedman, Mirrool, Naradhan, Tallimba, Ungarie, Weethalle, West Wyalong, and Wyalong. The area is 8,560 kilometres squared, with a population of 5,547 people. That is 2,790 males and 2,758 females.  
Temora Shire’s traditional owners are also the Wiradjuri group. Townships include Temora, Ariah Park, and Springdale. The area is 2,802 kilometres squared, with a population of 6,034 people (that is, 2,948 male and 3,085 females).
Bland Shire13

Traditional Owners:
Wiradjuri
Townships:
Barmedman, Mirrool, Naradhan, Tallimba, Ungarie, Weethalle, 
West Wyalong, Wyalong
Area:
8,560 km2
Population:
5,547 people
(2,790 male, 2,758 female)
Temora Shire14

Traditional Owners:
Wiradjuri
Townships:
Temora, Ariah Park, Springdale
Area:
2,802 km2
Population:
6,034 people
(2,948 male, 3,085 female) Background image of old gold mine workings. 
Vision, Goals, and Outcomes

Vision
In Temora and Bland, we envision a vibrant community, fortified by resilience, compassion, and unity.
Our journey towards drought resilience is a product of our strong community spirit. By embodying our 
unwavering investment and commitment to each other, we will leverage existing social connections and 
strengths to adapt to future changes.
We will be a region that fosters data-driven economic diversity, becoming a thriving destination of choice for new 
skilled residents. By embedding physical and mental resilience across generations now and in the future, we will 
cultivate a sense of comradery to sustain us through each new challenge we face. By planning for the dry times 
ahead, we will remain a viable local economy. By embracing these values, we strive to economically, socially and 
environmentally prosper amidst adversity and droughts. Together, we will forge a more resilient future.
Economic
Strategic Priorities 
Generating economic diversification 
and strengthening existing businesses 
and industry to bolster economic 
stability in times of drought.
Resilience Goals
•	 Diversify our local economy.
•	 Embed resilience-driven decision 
making in existing industries.
•	 Improve cooperation between 
residents, businesses, and 
industries.
•	 Provide financial tools that help 
meet needs in a changing world.
•	 Encourage community-based 
initiatives that contribute to 
economic prosperity. 
•	 Improve the look and feel of 
our region to attract workforce, 
visitation and spending.
Environmental
Strategic Priorities 
Improving awareness of the processes 
that underpin our unique landscapes 
and implementing initiatives to ensure 
they remain healthy and resilient.
Resilience Goals 
•	 Improve environmental resilience 
through grass roots initiatives.
•	 Foster awareness of the water cycle 
and climate impacts across all age 
groups.
•	 More efficient water use through 
improved irrigation infrastructure.
•	 Invest in sustainable and innovative 
farming and agribusiness practices.
•	 Protect, preserve, and enhance 
our region’s unique landscape and 
green spaces.
Social
Strategic Priorities 
Create equitable and accessible 
resources that leverage our strong 
community spirit, so we are mentally 
and socially resilient through times of 
hardship.
Resilience Goals
•	 Invest in our strengths as a small 
and connected community. 
•	 Build capacity amongst community 
groups and organisations, enabling 
ownership across drought 
resilience.
•	 Improve understanding of services 
available and how to access them.
•	 Support a prosperous and secure 
community that hosts a diverse 
range of people.
•	 Ensure a diverse range of support 
services that cater to all genders, 
ages and cultural backgrounds.
Image: Old Gold Mine Workings, Bland Shire

Long Term 
Outcomes
•	 There is a common understanding and a shared vision in the region to manage drought risks and build 
community drought resilience.
•	 The region works collectively and in partnerships to build drought resilience across three main pillars.
•	 Measures are implemented to limit impacts of drought and better respond to drought.
•	 Stakeholders and communities actively share knowledge and take actions contributing towards drought 
resilience.
8
9

02
Drought Resilience
at a Glance 
Simply, drought means acute water shortage. According to the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), drought is a 
prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient to meet our normal 
use.15
However, no universal definition of drought exists, meaning 
it is difficult to understand drought characteristics across 
time and space (Figure 2.1). Droughts can be exacerbated 
by low soil moisture, a low water table and high rates 
of evaporation. They can be as short as a single season; 
however ‘megadroughts’ can persist for decades (more 
than 30 years).16
Droughts are a feature of all climates and are defined 
based on the long-term average climate of a given region. 
Droughts have different prevailing effects depending on 
the system being analysed including social, environmental, 
meteorological, and hydrological.
Figure 2.1: Types of droughts and their definitions17 
Type of 
Drought
Description

Meteorological
A period of months or years with a no precipitation or climatological water balance rain. It is often 
accompanied by above average temperatures and precedes and causes other types of droughts. 
The climate change projections for droughts in Australia are based on a measure of meteorological 
drought - the Standardised Precipitation Index. 
Meteorological drought is caused by persistent changes in weather patterns, often triggered by 
irregular sea surface temperatures. Localised conditions such as reduced evaporation and low 
humidity due to dry soils and high air temperatures often enhance atmospheric conditions.

Soil moisture 
(agricultural)
A period of reduced soil moisture resulting from below average rainfall, less frequent rain events or 
above normal evaporation, impacting particularly on agricultural systems.

Hydrological
When river flows and water storages in aquifers, lakes or reservoirs fall below long-term levels. 
Hydrological drought develops more slowly because it involves stored water that is depleted but 
not replenished.

Socio-economic
A measure of drought that considers the supply and demand of economic goods (e.g., water, 
lucerne hay) with elements of meteorological, hydrological, and agricultural drought. This is 
different from the three other drought types as it measures the implications of drought on the 
supply and demand of goods and the associated impacts to society. 
Droughts have always been part of the region’s history. In 
fact, severe drought affects some parts of Australia on 
average, once every 18 years.18 This is expected to worsen 
according to the current climate change trajectory with 
drought expected to increase in frequency,intensity and 
duration.19 Climate projections suggest that Temora and 
Bland Local Government Areas (LGAs) will not avoid the 
drought predictions (see Figure 2.2). 
Persistent drought is likely to cause a shift in the 
relationship between communities and the land on which 
they live, forcing them to re-configure their living standards 
to accommodate the reality of lower water availability. The 
economic, social, and environmental impacts of drought 
can be far reaching and interconnected. Water intensive 
industries like agriculture – a primary industry for the 
region – may see drastic shifts in productivity and even face 
the prospect of relocating or closing down entirely. Drought 
can also impact human and environmental health in many 
ways including decreased drinking water quality, which is 
an indicator of poor river health, in turn causing increased 
rates of illness in residents. Similarly, economic decline 
from drought impacted industries can cause financial stress 
and negative mental health outcomes. 
Drought Fund (FDF) to provide secure, continuous funding 
for drought resilience initiatives. Through the FDF, the 
governments to support regions in developing RDR Plans to 
prepare for and manage future drought risks.
This RDR Plan uses desktop research and community 
feedback gained through a series of engagement sessions, 
to set out six actions to strengthen the region’s drought 
resilience. The actions within this RDR Plan  are intended 
to support the community to prepare for and mange 
future drought risks, responding to the challenges and 
opportunities within the region, as highlighted by the 
community. 
Figure 2.2: Climate Projections for Temora and
Bland for 2090 timeline
Temperature over 35˚C
+81.73 days
Rainfall below 10th percentile
+1.70 days
Severe Fire Danger
+7.6 days
Image of crop harvesting 
Image: Crop harvesting, Bland Shire
10
11

The Process Overview
Figure 2.3 Temora Bland Shires RDR Plan Process at a glance
Image: Rural Scene, Bland Shire 
12
13

03
A Plan for
Drought Resilience
Of all of the climate and weather-related conditions that affect Australia, drought is often the most 
challenging. New South Wales (NSW) is prone to periods of persistent drought, with downward trends in 
rainfall and streamflow documented. 
Drought is a defining feature of the climatic cycle of the 
Australian landscape with a large part of this owing to 
our geography. Our continent spans the latitudes of the 
subtropical high-pressure belt. This is an area of sinking, dry, 
stable air, and usually clear skies. The far north and south of 
the country come under the influence of reasonably regular 
rain-bearing systems for at least part of the year. The east 
coast is normally well watered by moisture from weather 
driven by the Tasman and Coral seas. However, over most of 
the country rainfall is low and erratic. As such, droughts will 
come again, and they are anticipated to get worse in parts 
of the country as a result of a changing climate. Droughts 
are challenging times, not just at the farm gate but for entire 
communities and regions.  
The costs of drought are spread across economic, social, 
and environmental factors. The toll taken on regions and 
their communities has been enormous and the impacts 
often linger for decades.
The most effective response to rising uncertainty is to 
plan for greater drought resilience. This can be achieved 
by building sustainable and diverse regional economies, 
reducing the vulnerability of communities to changing 
economic conditions and accelerating recovery, as well as 
enhancing thriving natural environments.
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program is one 
of the five focus areas of the Commonwealth Government’s 
Future Drought Fund. These plans focus on innovative ways 
to build regional drought resilience, taking steps to plan 
now to stem the impact of future drought on our region.
The NSW Regional Drought Resilience Planning program is 
Drought Fund and the NSW Government, supporting local 
governments to work together regionally to plan for drought 
resilience proactively and pragmatically.

Image of wool classing at Ariah Park Agricultural Show 
Image: Wool classing, Ariah Park Agricultural Show, Temora Shire
Objectives
The objectives of the FDF Agreement on which this Plan is built, are to grow self-reliance and performance of the agricultural 
sector, improve the natural capital of agricultural landscapes for better environmental outcomes, and strengthen the wellbeing 
and social capital of rural, regional and remote communities. As such, the objectives of this RDR Plan will reflect the intent of 
the FDF Agreement, address the needs of our own community in the face of drought, leveraging the opportunities available to 
improve community resilience to drought (Figure 3.1 ).
Figure 3.1: What we heard
Challenges
Health services and hospital capacity. 
1
Industry and economic dependency.
2
Substantial stigma around mental health.
3
Housing rental market challenges.
4
Degradation of regional land and water 
value.
5
Lack of historic and current data 
collection practice.
6
Skills shortages across social and health 
care, and agriculture.
7
Ageing population and increasing 
isolation.
8
Water supply redundancy.
9
Opportunities
Track spend data to evaluate and inform 
future decision-making.
1
Build on strong sense of community 
spirit to improve social capacity and 
connection.
2
Prioritise green spaces to provide visual 
and mental reprieve.
3
Strengthen volunteer groups to continue 
community support.
4
Empowering the ageing population.
5
Utilise transport connections to improve 
access and regional spending.
6
Leverage The Resilience Project for wide-
scale school-based education.
7
Image of a sunrise 
Image: Sunrise (supplied by WSP)
15
14

Expected Benefits 
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan focuses on providing 
specific actions to help communities become more 
prepared for, and resilient to, the impacts of drought. The 
expected benefits of these actions are underpinned by the 
ability to absorb, adapt to, or transform, to deal with the 
stresses of drought.
The actions outlined in this Plan provide a blueprint for our 
region to continue to improve drought resilience for years 
to come. Further implementation funding will become 
available across Australia under the Commonwealth 
Government’s FDF, ensuring these actions can be brought 
to fruition. 
Figure 3.2: Improving our prosperity through resilience (adapted from Joseph Fiksel) 
A diagram explaining two pathways to resilience. Actions can limit the impact or shorten recover from shocks or stresses. Actions adapting to or transforming socio-economic and settlement systems to avoid or resist an impact provide a pathway to resilience, building community performance with time. Without such actions, ongoing shock or chronic stress events lead to reduced community performance over time. 
Strategic Alignment
The FDF seeks to enhance the public good by building 
drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural sector 
including the landscapes and surrounding communities 
on which they are built. The intent of its eight interrelated 
foundational programs is to have an innovative and 
persevering farming sector, a sustainable natural 
environment, and adaptable rural, regional, and remote 
communities, all with increased resilience to the impacts of 
drought and climate change. 
The FDF is intended to deliver against three inter-connected 
strategic priorities:
•	 Economic resilience for an innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector.
•	 Environmental resilience for sustainable and improved 
functioning of farming landscapes.
•	 Social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities. 
The RDR Plans focus on the community as a system where 
economic, built, environmental and social capacity to 
endure, respond and evolve through drought are enhanced.
The 20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW was released 
in 2018. This strategy sets out the NSW Government’s 
priorities and plans to achieve long-term social and 
economic success for regional communities across the 
state. 
Other key strategies with strong linkages and relationships 
to matters of drought resilience include the Regional 
Economic Development Strategies (REDS) and NSW State 
and Regional Water Strategies. Key tools which support the 
delivery of the NSW Government’s vision for drought ready 
regions include:
Adoption and Innovation Hubs (including Charles Sturt 
University) in southern NSW.
•	 NSW Government Department of Primary Industries 
DroughtHub, an online drought assistance and 
information portal for NSW primary producers.
•	 NSW Government AdaptNSW website, to inform and 
empower communities, businesses, households, and 
government to adapt to climate change.
Image showing that the Future Drought Fund is intended to deliver against three inter-connected strategic priorities, building functioning economies, healthy country, and connected communities. 
With a focus on drought readiness and economic diversity, 
the strategy provides a framework to help regional 
communities prepare for drought. The RDR Plan promotes 
strong, diversified regional economies, future-ready primary 
industries, and stronger communities.
The strategy includes 14 specific actions across 
three key areas of commitment: 
•	 Sustainable, secure, and healthy water resources 
through six actions for more efficient and coordinated 
water resources which support the NSW Water Strategy.
•	 Stronger primary industries prepared for drought 
through five actions for accelerated innovation, 
information systems and diversification.
•	 Stronger communities and diverse regional economies 
through three actions supporting community resilience 
which include this RDR Plan.

16
17

Aerial image of Temora CBD 
04
About this Regional
Drought Resilience Plan
This Temora and Bland RDR Plan is a collaboration between Temora Shire Council (TSC) and Bland Shire 
Council (BSC). 
This Temora and Bland RDR Plan is a collaboration between 
TSC and BSC. The RDR Plan is designed to strengthen 
the capacities of residents, communities, institutions, 
businesses, and systems to better withstand the economic, 
environmental, and social challenges stemming from 
droughts. Creating a resilient region will help us not only 
prepare for drought but also enable us to grow, thrive, and 
prosper during drought and beyond.
By investing in resilience now, the region stands to benefit 
in good times as well as bad.
Most crucially, the RDR Plan is community owned and 
driven, co-designed with community leaders, community 
members, local businesses, and organisations. This 
provides a foundation for the RDR Plan targeted at 
minimising future impacts while leveraging opportunities to 
strengthen community resilience. 
Image of a FarmLink employee checking crop trials 
Image: FarmLink employee checking crop trials, Temora Shire
Purpose of the Plan   
The Temora and Bland RDR Plan provides guidance to help our region better plan for and become more resilient to the impacts 
of drought over time. It has been developed in a collaborative, partnership approach, drawing on locally led inputs drawn from 
those who live and work in the region. 
The purpose and aims of this Plan are outlined in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Purpose and Aims of the RDR Plan
Purpose of the RDR Plan Program
Create opportunities for the community to 
connect and build social capital to improve 
mental resilience and community well-being. 
Diversify the regional economy to improve 
economic resilience before, during, and after 
drought. 
Improve data access and transparency so the 
community can make the right decisions on 
water. 
Leverage the existing microcosm of systems and 
services to build better social, economic, and 
environmental resilience to drought. 
Empower the community with the right 
knowledge to access the services they need, 
when they need it. 
Aims of this RDR Plan
Create stronger community networks, 
connections, and relationships so we can lean 
on each other in times of need.
Improve our understanding of the region’s 
water systems and what that means for drought 
resilience.
Facilitate a mentally and emotionally resilient 
community with skills to face challenges such as 
drought. 
Provide clear pathways and opportunities 
for the community to improve their financial 
prospects during times of economic downturn. 
Implement tangible steps towards a more 
diverse, connected, vibrant, and prosperous 
community. 
Image: Temora CBD, Temora Shire
18
19

The Process in Detail

Figure 4.1: The Drought Resilience Planning Process in DetailThe drought resilience planning process consisted of several steps
1.	Pre-Planning
2.	Round 1 Engagement
3.	Themes 
4.	Round 2 engagement 
5.	Outcomes 
6.	Round 3 engagement 
7.	Synthesis  
The pre-planning phase involved setting the project foundations. Steps included 
•	Establishing the Project Control Group which included representatives from Temora and Bland Shire Councils, and Regional NSW)
•	Engaging with Subject Matter Experts
•	Developing a Resilience Assessment (looking at the local strategic context, environmental, social, and economic drought impacts, drought projections, challenges and opportunities) 
•	Developing a Stakeholder & Engagement Plan (which looks at key stakeholders and demographics, examining how to involve them)
•	And the development of the Have Your Say Survey (generating project interest and ground-truthing the desktop study). 
Round 1 engagement focuses on the challenges and opportunities across the Region. 
Engagement was conducted at Temora, West Wyalong, Ariah Park, and Ungarie. We spoke to community members, stakeholders, and representatives from key organisations. Engagement included workshops, street talks, and phone interviews. This was conducted by facilitated group discussions on drought impacts, community strengths, existing services and ideas for action. 
From this engagement, key themes arose, showing us where to focus our efforts. These themes were a diversified economy, mental health, social connectedness, financial planning, water access and supply, environment and land management, and workforce and traineeships. 
Round two engagements then focused on solutions for the future. This engagement was conducted at West Wyalong and Temora. Key stakeholders able to deliver or support actions were involved in workshops with fellow stakeholders clustered by theme. Facilitated discussions reviewing the ideas from round one, canvassing additional ideas, and idea evaluation occurred. To evaluate ideas considerations around effectiveness, feasibility, value for money, whether the idea addressed the root cause, capacity to deliver, and avoidance of duplication of efforts. 
This led to several outcomes showing us how to get there. Next we had to plan objectives, create the action shortlist, determine supporting actions, and next steps. 
This informed round 3 engagement where actions were detailed. During this round of engagement action rationales, implementation steps, high-level cost estimates, action lead and stakeholders, action KPIs and evaluation, and supporting actions and next steps were considered. 
This informed the final phase, synthesis of the RDR Plan. This involved development of the vision, goals, and objectives, actions under economic, social, and environmental pillars, and monitoring, evaluation, and learning. 
The RDR Plan is designed to be an ongoing, live document. As actions are implemented, monitored and evaluated, and engagement continues with the community, this information will improve our understanding of the system, identifying fresh actions to continue our journey to drought resilience.

20
21
Image: Rural Scene, Bland Shire

Describing the system 
Through desktop research, the key features of the region 
have been identified and described. Using available 
information from the BoM, ID Community, Census and ABS 
data, Council data, and pertinent local plans, a synthesised 
Resilience Diagnostic Assessment, was developed, 
highlighting key characteristics of our economy, social, 
and environmental sectors. This technical study fleshed 
out our existing baseline from which we can build drought 
resilience.  
Exploring scenarios
To understand what drought holds for our region in the 
future, the climate modelling was undertaken to build 
upon thea Resilience Diagnostic Assessment. Using high 
emission climate scenarios (particularly Representative 
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5), data was analysed to 
explore climate projections for of our region. Existing and 
projected (for 2050 and 2090) conditions for temperature, 
rainfall, and bushfire danger allowed us to paint a picture of 
possible drought situations ahead of us. Regionally specific 
data was drawn upon to provide locally relevant impacts 
and understanding for Temora and Bland, seeking to see 
events through the eyes of our community.   
Analysing the system
Using these climate scenarios, each system within our 
region was explored, examining how it could be impacted 
by drought. We didn’t just rely on numbers and datasets, 
but leaned on local stories and research to uncover 
historic impacts across social, cultural, economic, and 
environmental spheres. This took a broad view, considering 
how different stressors could interact and amplify each 
other and defined a number of feedback loops within the 
landscape of the region. This information was used to 
develop a preliminary understanding of the challenges 
facing the region, and opportunities available surrounding 
drought resilience.
Scoping and goal setting
Using community and stakeholder engagement, this step 
involved building upon the challenges and opportunities 
identified, in addition to understand what a drought 
resilient region might look like. This involved three rounds 
of community and stakeholder engagement, in addition 
to a ‘Have Your Say Survey’, further detailed in Our Partners 
(page 25). Using the ‘Have Your Say’ survey, insight on key 
visions for a drought resilient region helped to capture the 
region’s goals in three to four words. Integrating ideas from 
community and Council enabled the crafting of a vision and 
goals aligning with values and characteristics of the region. 
Community input was sought in the first round of 
engagement to refine the understanding of past drought 
impacts, capture all current actions, supports, services and 
the challenges from a community’s perspective. These were 
captured within the Resilience Diagnostic Assessment.
Stakeholder mapping and engagement
Our community was critical in the development of this RDR 
Plan. To obtain a diverse range of stakeholders across the 
community to inform better preparation, response, and 
recovery in a collaborative manner, mapping exercises were 
undertaken. 
Using databases and research provided by council, 
stakeholders were contacted and recruited across key 
industries including (but not exhaustive): 
•	 Education (Primary and High schools including 
Principals, careers advisers and counsellors). 
•	 Agriculture (local farmers, farm equipment suppliers and 
service agents, research organisations). 
•	 Environment (Landcare, Goldenfields Water).
•	 Health (State and Federal health service providers, aged 
care, community services and mental health advocates). 
•	 Businesses (retailers, professional advisors, and main 
street businesses).
•	 Community groups (sporting, philanthropic, hobbies).
Gathered in workshops, the community took the lead, 
making sure all voices were heard. Following the principles 
and transparency, building stakeholder influence and 
relationships to the RDR Plan, this facilitated community 
buy-in. Using the IAP2 Framework, workshops were 
collaborative in nature, with individuals empowered to lead 
and own actions fleshed out (further detailed in Section 4.4). 
This made sure that everyone contributed to shaping our 
plan.
Key Areas of Concern
Social Connectiveness
Economic Diversification
Environment and Land Management
Mental Health
Workforce / Traineeships
Water
Financial Planning
Imagining change
This plan went beyond the collection of data and required 
the community to imagine a better future. Round one 
of community engagement was used to encourage 
community ideation as a basis for action identification and 
‘blue-sky’ thinking. This was done through their expression 
of opportunities and possible actions in the future. Key 
themes and ideas were continuously raised across the 
region, with themes naturally falling into several areas 
including business resilience, community connection, 
economic diversification, and mental health.
Generating options
Based on the outcomes of first round of community 
engagement, ideas were vast and broad, creating significant 
opportunities for potential change. Actions were evaluated 
and condensed into a long list, ranging from creating 
easier access to drought subsidies and activities to reduce 
social isolation and promote social interaction.  These 
were sorted into themes of social connection, economic 
diversification, environment and land management, water, 
financial planning, workforce development, and mental 
health.
Sequencing pathways
To move forward, a clear path had to be set. To maintain 
trust and transparency across the development of the RDR 
Plan, actions and ideas generated from the first round of 
engagement were presented back to collaborators and 
community members in the second round of engagement. 
Engagement workshops were structured around the key 
themes listed in Our Partners (page 25). Stakeholders from a 
broad cross section of backgrounds were invited to specific 
workshops based on their area of expertise or community 
involvement. 
The intended outcome of this engagement was to review 
the ideas already generated and identify additional options. 
In some instances, ideas suggested during round one 
was identified as already being undertaken by entities 
or agencies. This prompted discussions to explore the 
disconnect between service provision, and awareness and 
uptake by the intended audience. Options were discussed 
in a round-table forum, exploring considerations such as 
effectiveness, feasibility, cost, need, likely action owner, 
implementation steps and applicability across both LGAs. 
The result was a short-list of actions to be detailed within 
the plan, alongside the identification of owners for each 
action.  
Implementing pathways
Finally, goals and actions must be implemented to achieve 
benefits. Applying lessons learned, the final round of 
engagement involved workshops which were held with 
self-identified action owners and relevant stakeholders 
to flesh out and develop implementation steps for each 
action. These workshops were designed to encourage 
conversations around practical implementation steps, and 
to encourage buy-in. By prioritising the effectiveness of 
actions in addressing the resilience challenges identified 
in prior workshops, each action was set up for success, 
creating a level of accountability.
Monitoring and evaluation processes were developed in 
alignment with actions to foster continuous innovation 
and learning through intentional capacity building and 
education, equipping ourselves with knowledge and 
drought awareness for the future.
22
23

Key Inputs
Table 4.2 is a summary of the key inputs for the RDR Plan which are based on existing bodies of work spanning governance and 
leadership, primary production, economic, social, demographics, infrastructure, land use, climate change and other scientific 
studies and research. 
Table 4.2: Regional Drought Resilience Plan Key Inputs
Level
Plan
National
•	 National Drought Agreement 2018.
•	 CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission – progress update 2022.
State
•	 NSW Water Strategy 2021.
•	 NSW Extreme Events Policy 2018.
•	 20-year Economic Vision for Regional NSW 2018.
•	 Department of Primary Industries (DPI) Managing Drought Plan 2019.
Regional
•	 Riverina Murray Regional Plan.
•	 Murray Darling Basin Plan.
•	 Southwest Slopes Regional Economic Development Strategy 2023 Update.
•	 Farming Systems Group Alliance (FGSA) Community Engagement Report, Southern NSW Drought 
Innovation Hub.
Local
•	 Bland Shire Council Adverse Event Plan.
•	 Bland Shire Council Combined Delivery Program and Operational Plan.
•	 Bland Shire Council Community Strategic Plan.
•	 Bland Shire Council Housing Strategy.
•	 Confidential Draft Temora Local Housing.
•	 Draft Temora Shire Council Economic Development Strategy. 
•	 Goldenfields Water - Business Activity Strategic Plan. 
•	 Goldenfields Water Deliver Program and Operational Plan (2022-2026).
•	 Temora Shire Adverse Events Plan Final.
•	 Temora Shire Council Community Strategic Plan Towards.
•	 Temora Shire Local Strategic Planning Statement 2020.
•	 Temora Workforce Futures Study 2018-2019.
•	 Housing and Planning for Expansion Temora Shire
(presentation dated 1st August 2023).
Our Partners 
This RDR Plan was developed by the Bland and Temora 
Shire Councils through an understanding of the unique 
challenges facing our region and gathering input from a 
wide range of key stakeholders from our community. A 
dedicated and thoughtful engagement approach was 
undertaken to connect with the community including 
interviews, phone calls, surveys, workshops, and one-on-
one meetings. From our engagement, we understand that 
our existing community resilience rests upon strong primary 
industries, established agricultural supply chain sectors, 
local businesses, relevant local governments, as well as 
community organisations and service providers. However, 
we also understand there is still much to be done in the 
eyes if the community, and as such, the intent of this RDR 
Plan is to be led and driven by our communities. 
More than 150  community members were engaged 
to make sure this RDR Plan was community-lead and 
focussed. From the flat plains of West Wyalong to the 
fertile agricultural plains and expansive skies of Temora, 
we spoke with graziers, health providers, support services, 
local business owners, community organisations and more 
about their drought journey, and the drought journey of 
the region Many of them shared their stories of hardship, 
community spirit and perseverance in the face of drought 
and how, as a community, we can plan for a more resilient 
future. 
While the focal point of this engagement was targeted 
workshops and surveys, we also conducted informal 
engagement with a broad cross-section of the community, 
which provided critical insight into local challenges, 
opportunities, and potential solutions for drought resilience. 
Figure 4.2 provides an overview of the community and 
stakeholder engagement undertaken, with the Stakeholder 
and Community Engagement Outcomes Report providing a 
more detailed overview of the engagement outcomes.
The four main principles that underpinned our 
engagement strategy for the RDR Plan are:
1.	 Inclusivity: consult with a diverse range of stakeholders 
and c ommunity representatives to capture a range 
of local needs, interests, capacity and co-design 
recommendations for opportunities and actions.
susceptible communities, including those living with 
disabilities, women, youth, and the elderly
3.	 Long-term horizon planning: facilitate community 
discussions that focus on sustainable actions that can 
deliver long-term enduring outcomes.
4.	 Transparency: use engagement techniques and 
reporting frameworks that foster openness and trust.
The objectives of our engagement from the outset 
were:
•	 Foster co-designed, community-led planning and 
collective ownership of the resulting plan to leverage 
existing strategic planning and avoid duplication of 
effort,
•	 Recognise the diversity of people, businesses and 
landscapes involved in agricultural production, 
including Indigenous groups and landholders, and,
•	 Harness diverse region-specific knowledge and skills 
for a triple-bottom-line approach.20  
Our engagement strategy for the RDR Plan was also 
informed by the internationally recognised approach 
developed by the International Association of Public 
Participation (IAP2), depicted in Figure 4.1. As far as 
reasonably practicable, this process sought to engage 
with community and stakeholders at the collaborate and 
empower end of the spectrum. 
Image of a long road. 
Image: Long road, Bland Shire
24
25

Figure 4.2: IAP2 FrameworkThe international association for public participation framework for stakeholder engagement involves five levels, increasing in the level of public or stakeholder impact on decisions. 
Level 1 is inform. This involves providing information to improve understanding of issues and opportunities. 
Level 2 is consult. Seek feedback on alternatives or decisions. 
Level 3 is involve: directly engage the public to incorporate their issues and concerns, and to understand aspirations. 
Level 4 is collaborate. Partner with the public in the development of strategies and actions. 
The final level, level 5 is empower. This means final decision-making rests with the public.
Source: International Association for Public Participation
Image of Mirrool at sunset. 
Image: Mirool sunset, Bland Shire Background image of spitfire parked at Temora Airport – Temora Aviation Museum 
Figure 4.3: Engagement outcomes
Workshops
11 workshops
67 participants
Locations: Ariah Park, 
Temora, Ungarie,
West Wyalong
•	 Aged Care Service Provider
•	 Agricultural Products and Service 
providers
•	 Allied Health Professionals
•	 Business Concierge NSW
•	 Community Health Nurse
•	 Council Staff*
•	 Councillors
•	 Department of Education
•	 FarmLink Research
•	 Goldenfields Water
•	 Landcare
•	 Mental Health Advocate
•	 Murrumbidgee Local Health District.
•	 NSW Health Temora Mental Health & 
Drug and Alcohol Service
•	 Open Minds Brighter Futures
•	 Pinnacle Community Services
•	 Primary Health Network 
•	 Real Estate
•	 Regional Development Australia 
(Riverina)
•	 Retired Professionals (teachers, nurses, 
retailers)
•	 Rotary Club
•	 Salvation Army / Rural Chaplains
•	 Services Australia
•	 Small Business Owners
•	 Temora Anzac Motor Club
•	 Temora Aviation Museum
•	 Temora Community Healthcare Centre 
•	 Temora Golf Club 
•	 Temora High School
•	 Temora Public School
•	 Temora Youth Careers Network
•	 Training Services Australia
•	 University of the Third Age
•	 Workforce Australia
* Town planner, youth development officer, parks and gardens, water, community development, economic development)

Surveys
36 participants
Temora and Bland 
Shire residents
Interviews
26 participants
•	 Livestock and Property Agent
•	 Motelier
•	 Real Estate Agent
•	 Retail Workers
•	 Retired Farmers
•	 Retired Professionals
•	 RFS Volunteers and Paid Staff
•	 Rotary Members
•	 Self-Employed Residents
•	 Small Business Owners
•	 Tradespersons (Mechanic and Electrician)
Phone
Conversations
19 participants
•	 Accountant
•	 Agricultural Farming Machinery
•	 Allied Health Professional
•	 Bank Manager
•	 Charles Sturt University Drought Hub
•	 FarmLink (Farming Services Group)
•	 Farmers
•	 Financial Planner
•	 Lions Club
•	 Mental Health Advocate
•	 NSW Health Temora Mental Health & 
Drug and Alcohol Service
•	 Pinnacle Community Services
•	 Solicitor
•	 Small Business Owners
•	 Temora Aviation Museum
•	 Temora Community Centre
•	 Temora High School
•	 Temora Primary School
•	 Volunteers
Image: Spitfire parked at Temora Airport - Temora Aviation Museum Temora Shire
26
27

05
System 
Analysis
Regional Profile

Our region rests on the traditional lands of the Wiradjuri 
people, the largest language group in NSW and largest 
Aboriginal group in central NSW.21 Wiradjuri means 
“people of the three rivers” (Lachlan, Macquarie, and 
Murrumbidgee).22  Across the two LGAs, our region spans a 
total area of approximately 11,3062 km2 (see Figure 5.1) and 
is home to 11,581 people. 
Although our region is primarily known for agriculture, 
located within the southwestern slope’s bioregion, a sub-
humid climate with hot summers and distributed rainfall 
(with higher rainfall in the east, and less rainfall in the west), 
the LGAs of Temora and Bland lend themselves to nature-
based visitor economies.23 This is particularly accentuated 
by their presence within proximity to large floodplains and 
river valleys like the Lachlan, Murray, and Murrumbidgee. 
Environmental Profile
Bland Shire contains several threatened ecological 
communities, over 40 threatened species and 13 migratory 
species crucial for preserving biodiversity, including the 
Grey Box Grassy Woodlands, Derived Native Grasslands of 
South-eastern Australia, the critically endangered Regent 
Honeyeater, Malleefowl, and the Swift Parrot. Alongside 
our national parks and nature reserves, these values 
create critical refuges conserving our local environment. 
Lake Cowal/Wilbertroy Wetlands and Yarran Swamp are 
nationally important wetlands found within the LGA.24 
Our waterways also offer important homes to many 
fish communities and recreational benefits such as bird 
watching and fishing.
Temora is characterised by rolling landscapes, hills, and 
rural farmland. With a number of unique environmental 
assets, we boast a mix of farming practices, cropping and 
livestock grazing, alongside native vegetation protected 
within nature reserves. Although we have no significant 
water bodies or major rivers, we support 42 threatened 
within the area (including the Growling Grass Frog and 
Major Mitchell’s Cockatoo) and 11 migratory species adding 
to our ecological diversity. 
Figure 5.1: Our Region
11,581 people
11,362 km2
Approximate
total area
Temora Shire

Area:
2,802 km2 
Townships:
Temora, Ariah Park,
Springdale
Bland Shire

Area:
8,560 km2 
Townships:
Barmedman, Mirrool, 
Naradhan, Tallimba, Ungarie, 
Weethalle, West Wyalong, 
Wyalong
Figure 5.2: Industry and Employment statisticsBar chart depicting the top 5 major industry sectors and number of jobs

Gold Ore Mining - 270 jobs / 10.6% (Bland Shire)
Grain-sheep or Grain-beef cattle farming - 139 jobs / 5.2% (Temora Shire), 209 jobs / 8.2% (Bland Shire)
Other grain growing - 156 jobs / 5.8% (Temora Shire), 164 jobs / 6.4% (Bland Shire)
Local Government Administration* - 92 jobs / 3.4% (Temora Shire), 101 jobs / 4.0% (Bland Shire)
Sheep Farming - 75 jobs / 2.9% (Temora Shire)
Aged Care Residential Services - 96 jobs / 3.6% (Bland Shire)
Supermarket and Grocery Stores - 93 jobs / 3.5% (Bland Shire)

* Including Goldenfields Water
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2021 Census Data
* including Goldenfields Water
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2021 Census Data
Economic Profile
Our region is strongly reliant on agriculture and related 
manufacturing for economic development.25 Sheep, beef 
cattle, grain farming, meat and meat manufacturing, metal 
ore mining, and tourism are key industries in the region. 
Health care and social assistance are the second largest 
employing sector, largely due to the ageing population 
of both LGAs. Although we have lower than average 
unemployment rates (~2.9% compared to the NSW 
average, 4.9%), ageing populations will likely contribute 
to employment and skills shortages in the future.26 These 
sectors are both an asset and a vulnerability during periods 
of drought. 
Bland is the highest self-contained employment LGA 
within the southwest slopes.27  Whilst providing significant 
economic advantages to the LGA, this can create 
vulnerabilities during drought due to an overreliance on 
local economic, agricultural, and social output. The Gross 
Regional Product of Bland Shire is $433.09 million,28  with 
major employers including Evolution Mining, Pace Farm, 
AWB, and Bland Shire Council.29
The Gross Regional Product of Temora Shire is $410.81 
million,30 employing 2,764 people (as of 2021),31 Major 
employers include Temora Shire Council, Woolworths 
Temora, Whiddon Group, Altora Ag, Goldenfields 
Water, Teyes Australia, Intersales, Department of Health, 
Department of Education and Access Recycling. Despite 
limited economic diversification, these major employers 
are likely to withstand drought-events, creating a level of 
employment certainty and income during times of stress.
Social Profile
Figure 5.3 provides an overview of demographic statistics 
for Temora and Bland. Across the region, key vulnerabilities 
which may exacerbate the impacts of drought include socio-
economic status, population age and income. The region 
has disproportionately high retirement-aged individuals 
compared to the NSW state average. This correlates with a 
lower proportion of working-aged individuals (15–49 year 
olds), also contributing to generalised drought-vulnerability 
For Temora, a lower socio-economic index than NSW is 
reported due to the proportion of people over the age of 75 
years, a high proportion of the LGA with an income lower 
than $1,000/week, a high number of pension concession 
card holders, and several people without access to internet 
compared to the state and region.  
Conversely, the Bland LGA is an area of comparative 
advantage. The higher income, and mining presence within 
the community provides some assurance and economic 
stability during drought.  This allows for agricultural-
diversification and portfolio assets for farmers etc as crop/
livestock yields lower. To note, the average income within 
Bland remains $10,000 below the median income for wider 
NSW. 
These factors were a key considering in developing a 
collaborative and interconnected regional approach to 
build drought resilience. 
28
29

Figure 5.3: Population Demographics
Demographic / Statistic
Temora 32 
Bland 33 
NSW Average
Population
6,034 
people
5,547 
people
-
Indigenous
status
3.4 %
6.6 %
3.4 %
Median age
47 years
43 years
39 years
Indigenous
Median age
22 years
22 years
23 years
Population
15–49 year-
olds 
34.4 %
37.3 %
46.1 %

Socio-Economic 
Indexes for 
Areas
(IRSAD scale 1-5) 34 
2
(1 is most 
disadvantaged)
4
(1 is most 
disadvantaged)
-
(1 is most 
disadvantaged)
Median weekly 
income
(household) 
$ 1,165
$ 1,326
$ 1,829
Indigenous
median 
weekly income 
(household)
$ 1,199
$ 1,327
$ 1,558

Unemployment 
rate
2.9 %
2.9 %
4.9 %
Indigenous
unemployment 
rate 35 
9.4 %
9.4 %
9.8 %
Population 
with long-term 
health
condition
39.4 %
33.2 %
30.9 %
Volunteers 
25.2 %
24.2 %
13.0 %
Our History of
Drought Impacts 
Drought as a natural hazard is pervasive, recurring, and 
distressing. It is difficult to determine a start or end, and 
when the landscape has recovered. As for other disasters, 
they are difficult to predict or compare with differences 
in seasonality, extent, duration, severity, among other 
variables all contributing to the drought experience. 
Australia has highly variable rainfall records and in contrast 
also has highly variable periods of low rainfall. The BoM 
has four definitions of drought, which are meteorological, 
agricultural, hydrological, and socio-economic (Figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4: Types of droughtsThere are four types of drought: 
Type 1: Meteorological drought is a period of months to years with low rainfall. 
Type 2: Agricultural drought is a short-term dryness in the surface soil layers (root-zone) at a critical time in the growing season. 
Type 3: Hydrological drought is prolonged moisture deficits that affect surface or subsurface water supply, reducing streamflow, groundwater, dam and lake levels and 
Type 4: Socio-economic drought: other effect of elements of the above droughts on supply and demand of economic goods and human well-being.
Source: Bureau of Meteorology
Drought Monitoring in NSW 
The Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS) is a 
publicly available drought monitoring tool that monitors 
seasonal conditions across NSW. EDIS was launched in 
March 2018 and is used across government and farming 
stakeholders to build drought risk awareness, emphasise 
drought preparedness and improve confidence in drought 
monitoring and early warning. A key feature of EDIS is the 
development of the NSW DPI Combined Drought Indicator 
(CDI).
The CDI integrates a range of data and model outputs in a 
framework that is useful for decision makers. It combines 
meteorological, hydrological, and agronomic definitions 
of drought (above) using indexes for rainfall, soil and 
water and plant growth. From these, a fourth index, 
drought direction (DDI), is developed. EDIS is undergoing 
redevelopment to provide farmers with world-leading 
weather and climate data to enable better business 
decisions.
30
31

Stages of Drought
Used together, the indexes of the EDIS indicate the stage of 
drought.
The six stages progress from a Non-Drought category where 
all indicators suggest good conditions for production to 
recovery, through to a Drought Affected (weakening or 
intensifying) category, a Drought category and into Intense 
Drought (Figure 5.5). 
Complementing the stages is detailed
information on: 
1.	
A technical and on-the-ground description of typical 
field conditions.
2.	
A suggested on-farm response.
3.	
A suggested advisory or policy response.
Figure 5.5: Stages of drought in NSWThere are 6 stages of drought in NSW. 
Stage 1: Non-Drought Phase: At least one indicator is above the 50th percentile.
Stage 2: Recovering Phase: All indicators are below the 50th percentile but above the 30th percentile.
Stage 3: Drought Affected (weakening) Phase: At least one indicator is below the 30th percentile and the rainfall trend is positive over the past 90 days.
Stage 4: Drought Phase: At least one indicator is below the 5th percentile.
Stage 5: Drought Affected (intensifying) Phase: At least one indicator is below the 30th percentile and the rainfall trend is negative over the past 90 days, and 
Stage 6: Intense Drought Phase: All three indicators (rainfall, soil water, plant growth)  are below the 5th percentile.
Source: EDIS
The Regional Drought Context
The geological landscape of Australia makes it prone to 
experiencing extreme weather events including extended 
periods of meteorological and hydrological drought.36 
Historically, Australia has experienced drought about once 
every 18 years with periods in between ranging from four 
to 38 years.37  Impacts from the two most recent and severe 
droughts are listed below. 
For Temora and Bland Shire Council areas, there is 
limited statistical information on the specific impacts of 
droughts experienced, particularly surrounding economic, 
environmental, and social reporting on impacts during 
these periods. 
The occurrence of historic drought events and the impacts 
they have had in Australia, and more specifically the 
NSW region, has been discussed below. Where available, 
reported impacts to Temora and Bland LGAs have been 
documented. There is considerable variation in how 
drought impacts and affects residents of the region. For 
those grazing livestock, the impacts could be immediate. 
A lack of feed may prompt graziers to consider selling off 
livestock. At other times, livestock retain their prices. This 
variability is difficult to predict and plan for. 
Figure 5.6: NSW Combined Drought Indicator to 31 December 2019 (Temora and Bland LGAs)
Map produced by the Department of Primary Industries as a combined drought indicator for the 12 month period leading up to the 31st of December 2019. The map shows drought impacting the Temora and Bland LGAs. Bland was experiencing intense drought, whilst Temora predominantly experienced intensifying drought affects, with areas to the north west in the next highest category (drought). This is below intense drought. Ariah Park sits within the drought category. 
Source: DPI, 2023
Image of West Wyalong mural.
Image: West Wyalong mural, Bland Shire (supplied by WSP Australia)
32
33

Historic Droughts in NSW
Mid 2017-2020 
Australia experienced a severe drought from 2017 to 2020, 
affecting the entirety of NSW. This drought was the driest 
period on record for any 36-month period, with rainfall 
170mm less than the next driest period recorded during 
the Federation Drought (1895-1903).38  Regionally, average 
yearly rainfall (544.3mm) dropped to between 332 and 
480mm/year.39 The drought and subsequent bushfires had 
substantial economic losses, with NSW’s GDP declining by 
1.1% (~$6.9 billion) in 2018-19 and a further 1.6% (~$10.2 
billion) in 2019-20, particularly impacting the agricultural 
sector.40
Nationally, over 3 million hectares of conservation land 
and over 820,000 ha of agricultural land in south-eastern 
Australia was impacted. This resulted in tree dieback 
and plant resources, with negative effects on kangaroo 
populations. Many towns and industries faced water 
shortages, and in some areas of the South West Slopes, 
people needed support.
Millennium Drought (1997-2009)
The Millennium Drought severely affected southeast and 
southwestern Australia, including the Murray-Darling Basin 
and southern cropping zones. All of NSW experienced 
below average rainfall from 2002 to 2003. This was the first 
drought considered to be aggravated by climate change, 
with higher-than-average annual temperatures recorded 
across the Murray Darling Basin between 2005 and 2009. 
Poor cropping and harvest outputs cost the Temora 
economy at least $100 million.41  Ariah Park faced losing 
essential services (petrol and ATM outlet). In Bland, seven 
years of negative cash-flows occurred due to crop failures, 
stock maintenance, and increased input costs. Prolonged 
drought led to a decline in employment and population, 
with corporate farming practices reducing economic 
activity in affected areas.
Drought over the years
1997-2009
• 
$100 million lost from Temora’s 
economy
• 
7 years negative cash-flows for Bland
2017-2020
• 
3 million ha conservation land 
impacted (nationally)
• 
820,000 ha agricultural land impacted 
(nationally)
2018-19
• 
$6.9 billion lost (nationally)
2019-20
• 
$10.2 billion lost (nationally)
[Corporates] bought up 100 
farms in the Millennium 
Drought  … we lost both our 
Catholic High Schools, although 
Temora fought really hard to 
get theirs back.
Ariah Park has 150 kids in the 
local school, but in Ardlethan 
where the corporates bought up 
many farms, there are just 50 
kids, yet the district is the same 
size.
Local stories
Livestock prices have dropped, making it costly to maintain or sell animals, leaving 
graziers in a no-win situation. Many could not afford to pay for feed, nor sell them off. 
In these circumstances, some opt to shoot and bury their stock, a ‘heartbreaking and 
demoralising’ thing to do. Stock impacts were seen as particularly impactful on children 
as ‘kids don’t like seeing stock die’.

For those in mixed enterprises, there is an opportunity to retain some of their grain 
harvest to buffer their operation against drought. The effectiveness was dependent on 
the length of drought, the storage infrastructure on farm, associated opportunity costs 
(sell or store) and personal preferences.
One tradesperson explained their strategy as this:
“when the next drought hits, we will leave town and go to the coast. Whilst there will be 
more competition, we will still get work to keep us going. Then when the drought breaks, we 
will return, as the housing is cheaper, and the work out here is guaranteed [due to limited 
competition]”.
As financial constraints worsen, farmers reduce their travel, to activities such as 
children’s sporting events, visiting elderly relatives, attending social functions or other 
activities which would otherwise provide an opportunity to get off farm, socialise and 
relax. “People can’t afford the $20 in fuel.”
Image of Temora community in the street. 
Image: Community in the street, Temora
35
34

Future Drought 
Projections and Impacts
Drought and climate change 
Climate change has increased temperatures, resulting 
in drier conditions and intensified droughts.42  Global 
temperatures have increased by 1.15°C since pre-industrial 
levels at a rate of 0.2°C per decade.43,44 Regions experiencing 
increased temperatures and aridity often experience 
intensified drought conditions. It is predicted drought days 
will increase by more than 20% by 2080 and the proportion 
of exposure to drought will increase by 9-17% by 2030 and 
50-90% by 2080 (globally).45  Winter and spring rainfall is 
projected to decrease by approximately 15% by 2030, and a 
further 20-30% by 2100, depending on the RCP scenario.46  
In Australia, climate change has shifted weather patterns 
southward, causing a 15% decrease in late autumn and 
early winter rainfall since the 1970s.47
By the late 21st century there could be a 50% reduction 
in autumn and winter precipitation.48 These changes have 
intensified recent droughts, notably the Millennium Drought 
in the late 20th and 21st century, which have been severe 
compared to those experienced in the preceding 400 years.49 
Weather projections using an RCP 8.5 pathway predict 
average Australian temperatures will increase. The BoM 
have also declared El Nino underway, expected to continue 
until at least the end of the summer 2023-24.50
This means warmer, drier conditions will over spring and 
summer. This also increases fire danger in south-eastern 
Australia. As of October 2023, 31.7% of NSW is drought 
affected, in drought, or experiencing intense drought 
conditions.51
Table 5.1: 50th Percentile Climate Projections for West Wyalong52 
Temperature 
Baseline
2050
(RCP 8.5)
2090
(RCP 8.5)
Number of days per year over 35˚C (days)
29.90
53.74
81.73
Number of days per year over 40˚C (days)
3.90
12.63
27.03
Rainfall
Baseline
2050
(RCP 8.5)
2090
(RCP 8.5)
Average rainfall days above the 99.9th percentile*
0.72
w0.80
1.02
Average days per year below the 10th percentile**
1.41
1.59
1.70
Extreme Weather
Baseline
(1995)
2030
(RCP 8.5)
2090
(RCP 8.5)
Number of Severe Fire Danger Days (FFDI>50)
3.6
4.6
7.6
Cumulative FFDI (for one year) (ΣFFDI)53 ***
3599
3896
4948
* “The number of days where the total rainfall is greater than the historic 99.9th percentile were tallied in both the historic and projected future 30-year daily time-series.” 
** “The number of months falling below the historic 10th percentile (sometimes referred to as “decile 1”) rainfall total was counted in both the historic and projected future 30-year 
monthly time-series.” 
*** Data extracted from Murray Basin CSIRO Cluster Report, based on Wagga Wagga data (the closest available data set) and the CESM model.  
Table 5.2: Impacts of Drought
Image of a truck driving on a dusty road 
Economic
•	 Impacts to successful farming 
practices.
•	 Financial losses through 
landscape destruction.
•	 Annual production losses.
•	 Impacts to region’s GDP. 
•	 Increased infrastructure 
maintenance and service 
costs.
•	 Increased animal care costs.
•	 Increased unemployment 
across agricultural and mining 
sectors.
•	 Flow on impacts to increased 
product and commodity 
prices.
•	 Impacts to family income.
•	 Reduced visitation and 
impacts to tourism industry.
•	 Reduced property value 
(private and public).
•	 Reduced community 
spending.
Social
•	 Adverse physical health 
impacts.
•	 Increased risk of mental 
health issues (including 
suicide).
•	 Potential increase in 
substance abuse.
•	 Lower levels of service (health 
care, education etc.).
•	 Decline in service quality. 
•	 Reduced social connection.
•	 Isolation.
•	 Trauma.
•	 Cultural stress.
•	 Compromised water quality.
•	 Dust inhalation risk.
•	 Strain on healthcare system.
•	 Disproportionate impacts 
to lower socio-economic 
population.
•	 Forced migration.
Environmental
•	 Reduced soil quality.
•	 Vegetation deterioration and 
death.
•	 Accelerated land degradation
•	 Reduced land fertility.
•	 Dry landscape and 
desertification.
•	 Intense heat.
•	 Increased bushfire risk.
•	 Reduced soil moisture.
•	 Impacts to animal health.
•	 Reduced rainfall .
•	 Reduced food and water 
supplies .
•	 Reduced habitat availability .
•	 Species loss and extinction.
•	 Altered species migration 
patterns.
•	 Reduced freshwater quality 
(surface and subsurface).
•	 Amenity loss.
Image: Truck driving on dusty road, Bland Shire
36
37

Figure 5.1 shows the cause and effects associated with drought, within multiple systems and sub-systems, such as agriculture, 
business, and community. For simplicity, a selection of drought impacts and how they propagate through the region is shown, 
starting from the upper left of the image. The interaction with underlying stressors such as a lack of skilled workers, limited local 
training, and low rental vacancies are shown on the right-hand side. The feedback loops shown here highlight the complexity 
and interconnectedness of drought across multiple sectors and systems. This systems analysis informed intervention 
development and action pathways to build resilience benefits in the region.
Figure 5.1: Drought: Impacts, Interactions and FeedbacksA graphical representation of how drought impacts propagate from the farm into the region's townships, affecting social, economic and environmental aspects. And how drought impacts are exacerbated by other challenges facing the region such as insufficient day care availability, very low rental availability, land being purchased by corporations, big brands closing their shopfronts in our towns, and some town businesses having lower levels of financial preparedness.
38
39

Resilience
Challenges
Mental Health

Whilst the situation is improving, with more 
people, more willing to speak publicly about 
their mental health struggles, there is still a 
substantial ‘stoicism’ barrier. “It’s acceptable 
to put your [bank] loan on hold but not ask for 
help with your mental health”. Younger farmers, 
carrying higher debt loads, face more severe mental health 
risks, particularly in maintaining a ‘positive’ appearance on 
social media. 
To add to this, drought impacts are occurring in the context 
of compounding or consecutive disasters. The region has 
experienced drought, mouse-plagues, dust-storms, covid 
and floods in recent years. These events reduce the ability 
of certain businesses or sectors to offset drought impacts. 
Further, mechanisms to mitigate drought are becoming less 
effective, with rising costs for crop insurance and the need 
to insure a larger proportion of the farming enterprise due 
to longer droughts and fewer good years.
Industry and
Economic Dependency

The region heavily relies on 
agriculture and related services, 
which are sensitive to drought. For 
livestock grazing, a lack of feed may 
prompt graziers to consider selling 
off livestock. In previous droughts, 
there has been significant variability 
in livestock prices which is difficult to 
predict or plan for.
This can create financial distress and impacts to mental 
health and wellbeing. Once farmers experience a loss 
in income, the impacts start to propagate through the 
wider community and regional economy. Non-essential 
machinery or vehicle maintenance may be put on 
hold, investment in new infrastructure may cease and 
other discretionary spending will be wound back. Local 
businesses providing these services will then experience 
a decline in their trade. It was often noted, that whilst 
farmers have access to drought assistance packages, local 
businesses, who are solely or heavily dependent upon 
agriculture, do not. 
Image of an illuminated sign spelling out ‘HOPE’ 
Water supply 
Redundancy 
Unlike other regional NSW towns 
which have experienced stringent 
water restrictions or faced Day Zero 
predictions, our region primarily 
relies on water supplied by 
Goldenfields Water Authority. This has created two vastly 
different daily experiences of water supply during 
drought. For those residents connected to the reticulated 
system, water is available and requires little behavioural 
change. Meanwhile droughts often last longer than on-farm 
water storage provides, with no local potable water storage 
infrastructure available.54
Water must be carted for use within the home, as well 
as for stock watering, crop spraying and other activities. 
Challenges include compounding hire costs of the tanker 
and fuel and difficulty securing a tanker for deliveries. To 
add to this, the region does not have access to a compliant 
potable water tanker which can meet the regulatory health 
and safety requirements for delivering potable water.  
Lack of Historic Data 
Our region lacks historic impacts 
across social, economic, and 
environmental systems. This creates 
planning challenges. Without a clear 
understanding of financial loss (at 
scale), the behavioural response 
to drought, a measurable indication of the impact on the 
community, and documented evidence of environmental 
degradation, it is difficult to identify critical sensitivities. The 
quality of long-range forecasts also affects farm decisions. 
For example, drought conditions for Temora and Bland 
Shires are typically based on the rain data recorded at the 
Temora Airport, in comparison to long-term averages. This 
is unlikely to be representative of the whole LGA and the 
assumption that rainfall at Temora Airport is indicative of 
drought conditions across the Shire may not be true (the 
western most boundary of Temora LGA is 39km from the 
Temora Airport).
Ageing Population 
The mean age of Temora and 
Bland is increasing and is expected 
to continue. This is particularly 
expected within town centres where 
migration from retired farmers 
and elderly from rural properties 
occurs.55 For a variety of reasons, young people 
are moving away from the region. Some find 
droughts a reality check and decide to seek 
employment elsewhere. For others, a lack of education, 
training or employment opportunities see them moving 
elsewhere, which is further exacerbated during drought. 
This factor adds to the strain on the healthcare systems with 
an increasing population utilising medical support. 
A Lack of Available 
Housing 
With limited rental properties, or 
places to buy was constraining the 
ability of the region to attract new 
people. It was observed that there 
were very few places for sale in 
Temora, but plenty of homes sitting vacant.  
Skills Shortage 
Limitations to education and 
employment opportunities add to 
skills shortages in the region.
These have been particularly noted 
in healthcare, which is a concern 
given the ageing population within 
the region. Skills shortages are likely 
linked to the constraint within the 
region surrounding housing availability and vacancies, 
particularly in West Wyalong due to lack of development 
and other pressures. 
Image: ‘HOPE’ illuminated sign, Bland Shire
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted by the United Nations in 2015 as a universal framework and blueprint to achieve a resilient and sustainability future for all, 
have been widely adopted within the global community to guide the sustainable development process across all pillars environment, social, and economic. SDGs have been utilised 
throughout this RDR Plan to demonstrate the linkages between the region challenges, opportunities, actions, and the resilience and sustainable future pathways.
Read more: https://sdgs.un.org/goals 
41
40

Resilience
Opportunities
Transport Connectivity
Temora and Bland both have well 
connected transport networks 
with the surrounding region. The 
network of highways intersecting 
West Wyalong strengthened by the 
implementation of Inland Rail will provide 
diversification and additional support for 
freight, potentially improving outcomes for 
certain sectors or businesses within the region. Alongside 
the airports within the region, the transport network 
provides connectivity for both industry growth and support 
for critical healthcare and disaster response services. 
Service Availability
Building regional drought resilience 
can be realised by ensuring that 
those dealing with drought related 
financial stress are able to access 
assistance with minimal barriers to 
entry. The Have your say survey found that the majority of 
respondents experienced barriers in accessing support due 
to a lack of awareness of the services available.56 Priorities 
with Temora and Bland include promote the availability of 
government support, in addition to connecting community 
members to local services through community centres and 
Council websites.57
Empower Ageing 
Population
To support an ageing population, it 
is critical that they connected with 
others in the community and feel 
confident to ask for assistance during 
period of drought related hardship. Improving 
the involvement of community in decision 
making may help strengthen this connection, 
in addition to connecting locals to services through the 
community centre and Council websites.58 Further, priorities 
mental health services, including for the elderly, can help 
support the adaptive capacity and economic health of the 
region.59,60 
Green Spaces
The region has a focus on rivers and riverine 
corridors as places for cultural connection, 
recreation, conservation, and economic 
activity.61 The Temora Shire Council 
Community Strategic Plan details actions to 
improve environmental conditions to support 
agriculture, conserving water resources, 
creating more open spaces for leisure and 
leaning on the benefits of tourism.62
Community Connection
As a region that has had significant droughts 
in the past, the community has the means to 
prepare and adapt for drought in a number 
of ways. The region has as strong community 
spirit and a shared sense of hardship which 
means everyone knows what everyone is 
going through. There is an opportunity to 
leverage this strong sense to community spirit 
through the presence of multiple social ‘groups’, volunteer 
community and a solid baseline of cultural activities. 
Actions to build support community connection involves 
identifying funding opportunities to achieve community 
goals and supporting groups that build social inclusion 
will help build a sense of connectedness, not only for the 
elderly, but the wider region.63 
Build Social Capacity
Improving the understanding of the 
impacts of drought and the capacity 
of the community to respond to 
this impact has been noted as a 
priority in the Temora Shire Adverse 
Events Plan in addition to the Bland 
Shire Council Combined Delivery 
Program and Operational Plan.64,65 
Temora’s Resilience Project which is providing embedded 
and wrap around personal resilience training and support, 
so students and the community can have the tools to be 
resilient all the time. Project is delivering concrete results. 
With a $20 per child, and $3500 licence fee, some external 
support (grant funding) is necessary.
Upskilling and Attracting New Residents
To address the noted skills shortage, Temora and Bland have set out a number of priorities, including 
providing opportunities for local education, as detailed in the Temora Shire Council Community 
Strategic Plan.66 The plan includes actions such as supporting scholarships for education, promoting 
training opportunities for on and off farm skills, provision of affordable housing, more open spaces for 
leisure, and sustainable planning to support business and industry growth, to attract more people and 
improve the availability of skills. The Temora Shire Council Economic Development Strategy also seeks 
to retain services in town and help to upskill local businesses to attract new residents.67 The Bland Shire 
Council Delivery Program and Operational Plan is in alignment with this, prioritising the identification 
of businesses to relocate to the Shire, implementing land zoning to support business and industry growth and fostering 
opportunities for education.68
Image of the Embrace Festival, Multicultural Event, an Aboriginal smoking ceremony at Temora Railway Precinct
Image: Embrace Festival - Multicultural event - Aboriginal smoking ceremony - Temora Railway Precinct, Temora Shire
43
42

06
Our Drought
Resilience Journey
The Program Logic in Figure 6.1 describes our drought resilience journey. This starts from a shared vision 
and strategic objectives and goals to arriving at specific actions and the desired short-term and long-term 
outcomes.
Figure 6.1: RDR Plan Program Logic
Vision
In Temora and Bland, we envision a vibrant community, fortified by resilience, compassion, and unity. Our journey towards 
drought resilience is a product of our strong community spirit. By embodying our unwavering investment and commitment to 
each other, we will leverage existing social connections and strengths to adapt to future changes. We will be a region that fosters 
data -driven economic diversity, becoming a thriving destinat ion of choice for new skilled res.idents. By embedding physical and 
mental resi lience across generations now and in the future, we will cultivate a sense of comradery to sustain us through each new 
challenge we face. By planning for the dry times ahead, we will remain a viable loca l economy. By embrilcing these values, we strive 
to economically, socially and environmentally prosper amidst adversity and droughts. Together, we will forge a more resilient future.
To bridge our vision with actionable steps, three strategic areas across the
 economic, environmental, and social spheres of influence were prioritised:
Strategic
Priorities
Economic
Environmental
Social
Generating economic diversification 
and strengthening existing businesses 
andindustry to bolster economic 
stability in times of drought.
Improving awareness of the processes 
that underpin our unique landscapes 
and implementing initiatives to ensure 
they remain healthy and resilient.
Create equitable and accessible re 
sources that leverage our strong 
community spirit, so we are mentally 
and socially resil ient through times of 
hardship.
In order to achieve strategic priorities, specific goals were co-identified with regional community:
Goals
Economic
Resilience
Environmental
Resilience
Social
Resilience
•	
Embed resilience-driven decision 
making in existi ng industries.
•	
Improve cooperation between res 
idents, bus inesses, and industries.
•	
Provide financial tools that help 
meet needs in a changing world.
•	
Encourage community-based 
initiatives that contribute to 
economic prosperity.
•	
Diversify our local economy th 
rough attracting new talents, 
visitors and new type of incomes.
•	
Improve environmental re silience 
through grass roots initiatives.
•	
Foster awareness of the water 
cycle and climate impacts across 
all age groups.
•	
More efficient water use through 
improved irrigation infrastructure.
•	
Invest in sustainable and 
innovative farming and 
agribusiness practices.
•	
Protect, preserve and enhance 
our region’s unique landscape and 
green spaces
•	
Invest in our strengths as a small 
and connected community.
•	
Build capacity amongst community 
groups and organisations, enabling 
owners hip across drought 
resilience.
•	
Improve understanding of services 
available and how to access them.
•	
Support a prosperous and secu 
re community that hosts a diverse 
range of people.
•	
Ensure a diverse range of support 
services that cater to all genders, 
ages and cultural backgrounds
Priority actions were co-designed with key stakeholder and community to ensure the region achieve above identified goals:
Actions
•	
Enable economic growth and diversification by bringing 
vacant houses onto the rental market.
•	
Enable the provision of targeted drought relief through 
spend data analysis and associated communications.
•	
Strengthen the capacity of community groups to deliver 
social connection activities.
•	
Improve community-wide well-being through the 
resilience project.
•	
Enabling economic growth and diversification through 
scoping the provision of human resource management 
support to local bus inesses.
•	
Maintaining open green space amenity through 
improved water efficiency.
Through the implementation of each action, it is expected that the RDR Plan will generate short•term outcomes that demonstrate 
progress towards our vision, strategic priorities, and goals. It is anticipated that the above actions will produce the following
economic, environmental, and social resilience outcomes within our community:
Short 
Term 
Outcomes 
(≤ 4 years)
Economic
Resilience
Environmental 
Resilience
Social
Resilience
•	
Increased money flowing through 
the local economy from the rental 
income and from new residents 
who live local and buy local.
•	
Increased capacity for existing 
and new businesses & major 
infrastructure projects to attract 
skilled workers, strengthening and 
diversifying the economy.
•	
Thriving businesses who are well 
supported will have improved 
capacity to adapt to economic 
changes brought about by 
drought cond itions, floods, or 
other events. This paves the way 
for diversification of the economy 
through the attraction of non-
agriculture-based businesses.
•	
Business owners actively pursue 
opponunities to increase financial 
security of their business pre-, 
during, and post-drought.
•	
Maintaining the amenity and 
performance of recreational and 
public open space will enable 
residents to undertake activities 
which are beneficial for their 
physical and mental wellbeing.
•	
Improving water efficiency will 
reduce the reliance on non-
potable and potable water 
supplies from the regions’ water 
storage dams and aquifers.
•	
Maintaining the visual appearance 
of towns and villages, particularly 
during drought, Is a key element 
in sustaining tourism spend within 
the region.
•	
More people and families living in 
the area add ing numbers to local 
schools, sporting teams and clubs.
•	
Greater capacity to attract staff for 
community support roles such 
as aged care, healthcare, and 
childcare.
•	
Maximal use of current housing 
stock and improved visual amenity 
with once vacant homes now being 
actively cared for.
•	
Building individual resilience has 
improved the resilience of families, 
school communities and the wider 
community.
•	
Community groups have achieved 
their potential to support and 
deliver social connection activities:, 
thus reducing social isolation and 
opportunities for people to improve 
their physical, mental, and spiritual 
wellbeing.
Attaining our long-term outcomes hinges on the successful execution of each action, accumulating our short-term outcome success, 
and thereby achieving our strategic priorities and goals:
Long 
Term 
Outcomes 
(> 4 years)
•	
There is a common understanding and a shared vision in 
the region to manage drought risks and build community 
drought resilience.
•	
The region works collectively and in partnerships to build 
drought resilience across three main pillars.
•	
Measures are implemented to limit impacts of drought 
and better respond to drought. 
•	
Stakeho lders and communities actively share knowledge 
and take actions contributing towards drought resilience.
•	
Diversify our local economy.
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
To ensure our journey towards long-term outcomes remains on track, adaptable, and achievable, we 
will employ robust monitori ng, evaluation, and learning mechanisms. This will provide valuable insights 
to refine our strategy and approaches to best suit our community and needs as required.
45
Image: Canola Fields (supplied by WSP)

Action Pathway
Figure 6.2 demonstrates how the priority actions of this RDR 
Plan locate on the impact pathway spectrum.
The impact pathway spectrum represents different activities 
that may help build resilience to drought in the region 
and range from supporting or underpinning activities, 
enhancing adaptive capacity, improving performance and 
reducing exposure. The actions developed in this Plan 
seek to provide a comprehensive approach to address 
drought vulnerabilities and reduce drought impacts. These 
actions were developed, evaluated and prioritised during 
stakeholder and community engagement program using 
the approaches discussed in sequencing pathways and 
implementing pathways (page 23).
In subsequent sections, action plans for the six actions 
developed, are documented and include information 
to support funding endeavours, and recommendations 
for implementation. This includes action rationale, high-
level estimated costs and implementation timeframes, 
implementation steps, potential benefits and supporting 
actions. Note that the information provided within action 
plans, particularly timeframes and costs, are intended 
as preliminary estimates, to be further developed in 
subsequent phases following the completion of this RDR 
Plan. Implementation of the actions outlined within this 
plan are dependent on Council’s available resources and 
external funding support. Additional external funding 
support is critical prior to the implementation of many of 
the initiatives defined within this RDR Plan.
Figure 6.2 Temora and Bland response to Drought Resilience (Impact Pathway Spectrum)
Adapted from the National Environmental Science Program, Climate Systems, Interventions for Biodiversity Conservation
This figure shows the potential points of intervention. To reduce our exposure to drought, we can use initiatives such as land management decision-making, insurance and risk transfer mechanisms, augmentation of water supply via water recycling or reuse, or business contingency planning. These can reduce the impacts of drought. 
We can improve the performance of the region, by reducing sensitivity and addressing vulnerability. Examples include regenerative agriculture, rainwater harvesting, water efficiency measures, and fodder and water storage.
We can reduce other threats which make the system vulnerable to drought impacts. Actions to enhance adaptive capacity include diversifying business or landholder incomes, or improving management of pests and weeds.
Another point of intervention is to invest in activities which enable improved decision making or policy interventions. These include improvements to data, research, policies, strategies, collaboration with stakeholders or community engagement.
The maintaining open green space through improved water efficiency, and strengthen the capacity of community groups to deliver social connection activities actions sit within the “minimise drought impacts” of the impact pathway spectrum. Enable economic growth and diversification by bringing vacant houses onto the rental market, enabling economic growth and diversification through scoping the provision of human resources, and improved community-wide well-being through The Resilience Project work to reduce other threats.
One action sits within the underpinning activities section, “enable the provision of targeted drought relief through spend data analysis and associated communications”. 
Action Strategic Alignment
Table 6.1 demonstrates the linkages between actions and the existing integrated and strategic planning programs and 
initiatives at a local, regional, state, national, and international scale. 
Table 6.1: Action Strategic Alignment
Strategic Planning Program / 
Initiative
Enable Economic Growth and 
Diversification by Bringing 
Vacant Houses onto the Rental 
Market 
Enable the Provision of Targeted 
Drought Relief Through Spend 
Data Analysis and Associated 
Communications  
Enabling Economic Growth and 
Diversification Through Scoping 
the Provision of HRM Support to 
Local Businesses
Strengthen the Capacity of 
Community Groups to Deliver 
Social Connection Activities 
Improve Community-Wide Well-
Being Through the Resilience 
Project 
Maintaining Open Green Space 
Amenity Through Improved 
Water Efficiency
Temora Local Housing Strategy
(2022-2042) (Draft)
Bland Shire Housing Strategy 
Temora Shire Council Economic Development 
Strategy 2020 (Draft) 
Temora Shire Community Strategic Plan 
Towards 2035
Bland Shire Council Community Strategic Plan
Bland Shire Council Community Engagement 
Strategy
Bland Shire Council Adverse Event Plan 
Bland Shire Council Local Strategic Planning 
Statement 
Bland Shire Council Combined Delivery 
Program and Operational Plan
Goldenfields Water – Business Activity Strategic 
Plan (2022-2023)
Goldenfields Water Delivery Program and 
Operational Plan (2022-2026)
Temora Shire Adverse Events Plan 
Temora Shire Local Strategic Planning 
Statement 2020 
Temora Workforce Futures Study
(2018-2019)
Temora Business Human Resources Needs 
Assessment 2023
47

Strategic Planning Program / 
Initiative
Enable Economic Growth and 
Diversification by Bringing 
Vacant Houses onto the Rental 
Market 
Enable the Provision of Targeted 
Drought Relief Through Spend 
Data Analysis and Associated 
Communications  
Enabling Economic Growth and 
Diversification Through Scoping 
the Provision of HRM Support to 
Local Businesses
Strengthen the Capacity of 
Community Groups to Deliver 
Social Connection Activities 
Improve Community-Wide Well-
Being Through the Resilience 
Project 
Maintaining Open Green Space 
Amenity Through Improved 
Water Efficiency
South West Slopes Regional Economic 
Development Strategy 2023 Update
Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041
Riverina Murray Destination Management Plan 
2022-2030
Farming Systems Group Alliance (FSGA) 
Community Engagement Report 2022, 
Southern NSW Drought Innovation Hub 
REROC Eastern Riverina Regional Housing 
Strategy 2021 
20-year Economic Vision for Regional NSW 2018 
NSW Water Strategy 2021
Murrumbidgee Regional Water Strategy 
NSW Murray and Murrumbidgee Regional Water 
Strategies 2022 
NSW Community Resilience and Response Plan 
NSW Extreme Events Policy 2018 
DPI Management Drought Guide -
Ninth Edition:  2019
Resilience, and Preparedness Plan 2019 
National Drought Agreement 2018 
CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission –
Progress Update 2022 
Strategic Planning Program / 
Initiative
UN Sustainable Development Goal:
Enable Economic Growth and 
Diversification by Bringing 
Vacant Houses onto the Rental 
Market 
Enable the Provision of Targeted 
Drought Relief Through Spend 
Data Analysis and Associated 
Communications  
Enabling Economic Growth and 
Diversification Through Scoping 
the Provision of HRM Support to 
Local Businesses
Strengthen the Capacity of 
Community Groups to Deliver 
Social Connection Activities 
Improve Community-Wide Well-
Being Through the Resilience 
Project 
Maintaining Open Green Space 
Amenity Through Improved 
Water Efficiency
Goal 1 – No Poverty
Goal 2 – Zero Hunger
Goal 3 – Good Health and Wellbeing 
Goal 4 – Quality Education 
Goal 5 – Gender Equality
Goal 6 – Clean Water and Sanitation
Goal 7 – Affordable and Clean Energy 
Goal 8 – Decent Work and Economic Growth 
Goal 9 – Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure 
Goal 10 – Reduced Inequalities
Goal 11 – Sustainable Communities 
Goal 12 – Responsible Construction and 
Production
Goal 13 – Climate Action
Goal 14 – Life Below Water 
Goal 15 – Life on Land 
Goal 16 – Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions
Goal 17 – Partnerships for the Goals 
Actions have been developed to align with the three pillars of resilience, economic, environmental, and social. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have been adopted by the United 
Nations align with these pillars, acting as a blueprint for peace and prosperity across our planet and people both now and into the future. For homogeneity, challenges, opportunities, 
and actions have been linked to key SDGs to demonstrate the linkages throughout this RDR Plan.
49
48

Enable Economic Growth and Diversification By 
Bringing Vacant Houses onto the Rental Market 
Spheres
Economic
Social
SDG Alignment
Rationale
When drought conditions affect the region, the spending 
from agricultural activities is reduced, leading to substantial 
flow-on reductions in the local economic activity. To 
address this, there is a strong desire to diversify the local 
economy and attract expanded or new employment 
sectors which are less dependent on agriculture. The 
region would also like to capitalise on major infrastructure 
developments within the wider region such as renewable 
energy and Inland Rail. However, multiple industries 
including agricultural service providers, aged care, health 
and childcare, and local government often can’t fill their 
existing vacancies due to workforce shortages. Attracting 
staff is a multi-faceted challenge. In many instances a 
suitable candidate is identified who would need to relocate 
to the area to fill the role. With minimal houses available for 
rent, prospective employees can be deterred or will choose 
to accept the role but live elsewhere, therefore reducing the 
local economic impact of their employment. 
Despite a consistently low rental vacancy rate of less than 
0.5% across both shires, there is evidence to suggest that 
there are a significant number of unoccupied homes in 
the district. A number of perceived or real barriers exist for 
these homeowners in making them available for rent. For 
some, they may be concerned about losing their pension 
or tenants damaging the property. In some cases, the 
residence may need a few repairs, whilst for others, the 
previous occupants may now be living in aged care homes 
or have passed away. Each of these challenges can be 
overcome with access to the right advice, support, and 
follow-up. This can be complemented by putting a face and 
story to potential future renters, the roles they would be 
filling, and explaining the benefits they bring to the district. 
For hard-to-fill vacancies such as aged care or mental 
health, there is evidence to suggest that once newcomers 
have experienced the local lifestyle, they are more likely to 
consider moving to the district long-term. Similarly, renting 
first allows new residents to try before they buy. Every extra 
property made available can enable a new person or family 
to move to the district, bolstering school numbers, players 
in sporting teams, and money spent in local businesses. 
Greater housing availability will also reduce the upward 
pressure on housing costs and associated cost-of-living 
pressures felt by existing residents. By bringing more money 
into the local economy, businesses will benefit from the 
opportunity to thrive during the good times, to help them 
ride-out the downturn during drought. 
This action is a first step, with further work required to 
continue to build on programs (e.g., Country Change) that 
promote the district to future residents from metropolitan 
or other regional areas. In the medium to long-term, these 
steps will reduce some of the underlying challenges, and 
will progressively facilitate a modification of the system 
towards a diverse economy which is resilient to drought. 
Timeframe
3 months
Estimated Costs
$20,000
Action Owner
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
Stakeholders
•	 Employers with staff vacancies.
•	 Real estate agents. 
•	 Providers of expert advice (financial planning, 
wills and probate, real estate).
•	 Providers of property maintenance and repair 
services.
•	 Aged care homes (given some vacant homes will 
be associated with local residents moving into 
aged care).
•	 Goldenfields Water County Council.
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Recruit third-party contractor who would be 
employed by responsible for steps 2 – 8.
2.	 Match low/no water use houses with Council 
datasets.
3.	 Ride-along with Council waste collectors to 
confirm vacant houses.
4.	 Resulting database of vacant homes would 
remain the property of the respective Councils 
and would not be made available to third parties.
5.	 Develop tailored letter which each Shire which 
can be sent to ratepayers of vacant houses. 
6.	 Send letter to identified vacant homes.
7.	 Conduct media campaign timed to the issue of 
letters to build momentum and bring a face to 
the issue.
8.	 Identify method to conduct follow-up with 
ratepayers (e.g., telephone call from Council 
representative).
9.	 Draft report on key findings and 
recommendations for further action.
KPIs
•	 Number of vacant homes identified (per Shire).
•	 Creation of a vacant-home ratepayer letter.
•	 Number of letters sent to ratepayers.
•	 Number of information sessions hosted and 
participant numbers.
•	 Number and nature of media campaign elements 
utilised.
•	 Number of ratepayers participating in follow-up 
support services.
•	 Number of vacant homeowners linked with 
businesses seeking accommodation for 
employees. 
Resilience Dividend
Social
•	 More people and families living in the area adding 
numbers to local schools, sporting teams and clubs. 
Greater capacity to attract staff for community support 
roles such as aged care, health, and childcare.
Economic
•	 Increase in money flowing through the local economy 
from the rental income and from new residents who live 
local and buy local. 
•	 Increased capacity for existing and new businesses & 
major infrastructure projects to attract skilled workers, 
strengthening and diversifying the economy.
Environmental
•	 Maximal use of current housing stock and improved 
visual amenity with once vacant homes now being 
actively cared for. 
Supporting Actions
Real Estate Agents
•	 Include ‘rental wanted’ advertisements within their 
existing advertising strategies. Participate pro-bono in 
information sessions.
Employers
•	 Participate in media campaign elements to build 
awareness of the link between a lack of rental vacancies 
and recruitment challenges for their business, and the 
co-benefit of bringing new people to the district. Provide 
rental guarantees for employees to reassure cautious 
landlords.
Goldenfields Water County Council
•	 Provide local Councils access to low/no water usage 
residence data for investigation.
Next Steps
1.	 Develop materials and systems to assist and improve 
the capacity of local businesses to advertise and target 
employment vacancies beyond the region, to improve 
the viability of businesses and further bolster spending 
in the local economy. 
2.	 Advocate for delivery of Tafe NSW courses within the 
Shires to reduce barriers for local residents in upskilling 
so they can fill vacancies in critical services (aged care, 
child-care, health) which are key to supporting a healthy 
and resilient community.  
3.	 Implement the recommendations of the HR Needs 
Assessment to further improve the underlying viability 
and resilience of local businesses.
4.	 Investigate and support actions that increase both 
temporary and permanent housing stock. 
50
51

Enable the Provision of Targeted Drought Relief 
Through Spend Data Analysis and Associated 
Communications
Spheres
Economic
SDG Alignment
Rationale
Access to quality data is key to developing robust policies, 
plans and actions to systematically address the challenges 
drought poses within our district and identify sources 
of drought-independent or drought-resilient spending. 
Whilst long-standing businesses can look to their historical 
cash flows to assess drought impacts, they are unlikely 
to share this information publicly. Some businesses have 
commenced operations since the last drought and may 
lack insights into how and when drought will affect their 
business performance. We also know that many of our 
businesses are family affairs without access to dedicated 
accountants or financial managers with the time to delve 
into the data and identify these impacts. What is needed is 
real-time aggregated data at the sector, town, and district 
level to better target business support at the right time to 
the right sector and improve drought impact awareness in 
our business community. 
This action will facilitate access to a spend-data 
subscription service for the two LGAs and associated 
analysis. The subscription (depending on the service 
provider) is usually acquired on a yearly basis with some 
access to previous year(s) of data. Depending on timing, 
this may cover our district pre-, during or post-drought. 
This will provide information on the local economy and 
structure, including trends, to answer key questions: how 
much did our economy and each sector change during 
the period? How is this related to the broader economy, 
our industry mix, and local or regional factors? How 
quickly does economic spending change, where are these 
impacts concentrated, and how does a change in one 
industry sector affect other sectors? Are there key events 
which trigger a change in spending? How many visitors 
are coming to the district, how long do they stay, what are 
their spending patterns, and where are they coming from? 
Is our district attracting spending from other regional areas 
including through a seasonal population, and if so, where 
from and in what sectors?
By quantifying our dependence and susceptibility to drought 
impacts at various scales, we can better target our efforts 
and advocate for investment. Where and when should 
support be targeted to improve drought resilience? Are there 
particular regions or sectors which exhibit positive-growth 
potential which we can leverage to diversify our economy? 
How can we optimise and improve our tourism offerings? 
A key element to the success of this action will be in sharing 
the insights with local businesses, sectors, and stakeholders. 
It is envisaged that the data will also be a key tool for 
advocacy work with decision-makers at regional, State and 
Federal levels. A minimum timeframe of 15 months has been 
set to allow for a one-year subscription and an additional 
3-months of analysis, reporting and sharing. Ideally a two-
year subscription would allow for seasonal differences to 
be identified which are associated with the regions winter-
cropping agricultural system, with the estimated costs 
provided for a two-year subscription.
By facilitating access to data driven insights, this action seeks 
to transform the approach taken by our business community 
in the financial management of their operations before, 
during and after drought. The data will underpin ongoing 
and future work to modify and enhance the economic 
diversity of our region.
Timeframe
15 – 27 months
Estimated Costs
•	 Two-year Spend Data Subscription: $45,000 
•	 Data analysis, insights and sharing sessions: 
$55,000
Action Owner
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
Stakeholders
•	 Temora Business Enterprise Group and Business 
West Wyalong.
•	 Local and Regional Businesses.
•	 Local and Regional Tourism bodies and 
enterprises.
•	 Regional Australia Institute. 
•	 Regional Development Australia - Riverina.
Steps for Implementation: 
1.	 Establish an economic spend data working group 
comprising representatives from Council, the 
local business community, and other relevant 
stakeholders to establish goals, outputs, and 
desired outcomes.
2.	 Evaluate spend data service providers to 
identify provider with the ‘best fit’ for the items 
developed in Step 1. 
3.	 Develop and release a request for quote for a 
person or entity to conduct the required data 
analytics and to facilitate data insights (as per 
steps 4-6).
4.	 Develop templates to store, analyse and 
graphically represent spend data for use during 
and post-project. 
5.	 Conduct data analysis and identify relevant 
insights in line with items developed in Step 1. 
6.	 Share data with internal Council teams, local 
and regional businesses, tourism-related 
entities, business chambers and other relevant 
stakeholders.
7.	 Spend data committee close out the project by 
developing recommendations for next steps.
KPIs
•	 Number and type of economic metrics provided 
as outputs.
•	 Number of drought-impact propagation 
pathways, thresholds, and timeframes identified 
at sector, township and LGA level.
•	 Number and type of data-insight sharing 
activities carried out (e.g., information sessions, 
newsletters, webinars). 
•	 Number of businesses and sectors participating 
in data-insight sharing activities.
•	 Number of Council strategies, plans and 
advocacy activities which utilise the project 
outputs (long-term KPI). 
•	 Number and type of drought relief activities 
instigated as a result of spend data analysis and 
associated communications. 
Resilience Dividend
Social
•	 Understanding when, where and how drought impacts 
the local economy, to understand how individuals, 
families and communities will be affected, and hence, 
where support should be prioritised. 
Economic
•	 Knowing where to target and prioritise resources in 
relation to economic diversification and drought-
resilience support. 
Supporting Actions
Local Business Chambers
•	 Promote participation and utilisation of data insights 
with their membership. Leverage data insights to 
advocate for local and regional investment.
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
•	 Actively share data and insights (during and post 
project) with local and regional Stakeholders. Identify, 
promote, and liaise with business support services, 
such as Service NSW Business Concierge, to facilitate 
businesses improving their resilience.  
Next Steps
1.	 Identify the most appropriate and effective mechanisms 
for improving the drought-resilience of local businesses 
and sectors. 
2.	 Leverage insights to diversify the local economy and 
optimise local economic strategic planning. 
3.	 Leverage insights to optimise local and regional tourism 
strategies and planning.    
4.	 Support measures to improve career pathways including 
access to vocational and tertiary education for residents 
as a means of growing and retaining local talent. 
52
53

Enable Economic Growth and Diversification 
Through Scoping the Provision of Human Resource 
Management Support to Local Businesses
Spheres
Economic
SDG Alignment
Rationale
During the development of this Plan, the drought 
preparedness of main street businesses was explored 
through interviews and main-street conversations. In both 
Temora and Bland Shires, it was apparent that many retailers 
had opened since the last drought and had not turned their 
attention to future drought impacts or how to prepare their 
businesses. These small business owners are predominantly 
run by one or two people who typically spend their entire 
working day involved in the day-to-day operations. This 
limits the time available to develop their business skills, 
optimise their business operations or plan for the future. 
Inefficiencies were also identified in local people obtaining 
access to necessary training, such as first aid courses or other 
certifications required for the operation of their business. 
Businesses of all sizes are further hampered by their ability 
to attract staff for skilled, trade, managerial or professional 
vacancies.
These findings are consistent with the outcomes of the 
Temora Business Human Resources Needs Assessment 
review. This was undertaken by Temora Shire Council and 
Temora Business Enterprise Group in 2023, with funding 
provided by the NSW Growing Regions of Welcome program. 
The Needs Assessment identified that businesses were 
unable to meet operational demands or implement growth 
plans due to challenges in workforce attraction and retention. 
That is, local small and medium sized businesses are (on 
average) surviving, not thriving. When drought conditions 
inevitably affect the region, these existing constraints will 
further hamper their ability to be resilient and remain 
viable through any economic downturn. Furthermore, for 
any strategies designed to diversify the agricultural-based 
economy to be effective, workforce shortages for existing 
businesses need to be addressed first, i.e., why attract more 
businesses when there aren’t enough workers for the existing 
businesses?
The top three recommendations of the review were: 
1.	 Secure suitable independent human resource expertise 
and implementation services, 
2.	 Establish a one-stop-shop for local businesses to provide 
scalable access to HR services and support, including 
meeting a range of common training and other needs 
collaboratively and cost effectively, and 
3.	 Create integrated and formalised pathways to link youth 
and local citizens with government programs, further 
education, professional development, and employment 
opportunities. 
Operationalising these recommendations can be achieved 
through a variety of models. For example, attracting an 
independent human resource business to the region, or 
creating a cooperative where businesses pool their resources 
to employ a shared human resource professional. However, 
it is unclear which model would be the most effective or 
viable in the local region. This project would seek to scope 
out the options available for securing HR support, determine 
how each option could be funded initially and on a long-
term basis, and how to initiate the delivery of the preferred 
HR support model. Engaging with local businesses and 
discussing the strengths and weaknesses of the different 
approaches, the willingness of businesses to pay for these 
services, and the level of support required would be key 
inputs into the decision-making. It is envisaged that this 
scoping study would provide the necessary evidence base 
to inform the implementation of the preferred HR support 
service model.
Ultimately, this project will transform our approach to human 
resource management, from one in which all the actors are 
operating in isolation, to one where we leverage collective, 
coordinated and integrated action. 
Timeframe
3 – 6 months
Estimated Costs
$20,000 - $30,000
Action Owner
Temora and Bland Shire Councils in conjunction 
with Temora Business Enterprise Group and 
Business West Wyalong. 
Stakeholders
•	 Local small and medium businesses.
•	 Service NSW for Business.
•	 Training Services NSW.
•	 TAFE NSW.
•	 Workforce Australia.
•	 Dept Regional NSW.
•	 Regional Development Australia (RDA) Riverina.
•	 Local High Schools.
•	 Temora Business Enterprise Group / Business 
West Wyalong.
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Develop and issue a Request for Quote (RFQ) for 
the scoping study.
2.	 Recruit a contractor for the scoping study to 
complete steps 3 to 8. 
3.	 Review the findings of the Temora HR Needs 
Assessment.
4.	 Identify a short-list of models capable of 
addressing recommendations 1 to 3 of the 
Temora HR Needs Assessment.
5.	 Conduct engagement with businesses in the 
Temora and Bland Shires to gauge support for 
each of the short-listed models, their willingness 
to pay and required level of HR support.  
6.	 Evaluate the challenges and enablers of the 
potential models including how the model would 
be funded. 
7.	 Identify next steps and recommendations for 
the preferred option including cost and funding 
options. 
8.	 Detail a pathway to implementation for the 
preferred option. 
KPIs
•	 Number of businesses engaged. 
•	 Number of models identified and evaluated. 
•	 Identification of a preferred option. 
Resilience Dividend
Economic
•	 Thriving businesses who are well supported will have 
improved capacity to adapt to economic changes 
brought about by drought conditions, floods, or other 
events. Paves the way for diversification of the economy 
through the attraction of non-agriculture-based 
businesses.
Supporting Actions
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
Service NSW for Business 
•	 The respective Shire Councils and business chambers 
work with Service NSW for Business to facilitate in-
person access to Business Concierge’s support services. 
It is envisaged this would involve Business Concierge 
staff attending local businesses in a staged process to 
build rapport with business owners, create awareness 
of their services, prompt businesses to assess their 
business’ financial resilience and ultimately to utilise 
available support from the Business Concierge and 
advisory services from Business Connect.
RDA Riverina
•	 Work together to improve the business community’s 
awareness and utilisation of the RDA Riverina Grow Our 
Own program.
High Schools and Employment service providers
•	 Continue collaborating to identify solutions which 
would facilitate TAFE NSW (or other training providers) 
providing vocational training within the Temora and 
Bland Shire Councils areas. This is particularly the case 
for areas exhibiting a current skills shortage such as 
health-, aged- and childcare positions, which have the 
added benefit of being relatively immune from drought 
impacts, and in relation to childcare, are a key enabler 
for farming families to diversifying their income.
Next Steps
1.	 Seek funding or other necessary support to facilitate the 
implementation of the preferred pathway identified in 
this project for providing HR support. 
2.	 Continue to seek funding and/or support to address 
other challenges constraining the performance of small 
and medium enterprises in the region. 
3.	 Enhance materials and systems to support local 
businesses to effectively advertise vacancies beyond 
the region, such as RDA Riverina’s Jobs Riverina Murray 
website, and encourage people to relocate to the region 
for short and long-term employment through continued 
participation in the RDA Riverina Country Change 
program and the Regional Australia Institute’s Move to 
More campaign. This includes steps to make the region 
more welcoming and attractive to people from diverse 
backgrounds, such as the NSW Growing Regions of 
Welcome program. 
55

Strengthen the Capacity of Community Groups to 
Deliver Social Connection Activities
Spheres
Social
SDG Alignment
Rationale
The region benefits from high rates of volunteerism, with a 
diverse range of community groups providing a solid base 
of social capital. These groups provide opportunities for 
town and rural residents to interact socially in sporting, 
cultural, hobby, or intellectual endeavours. Social 
connection was a recurring theme in the engagement 
conducted for this Plan. Community activities are key to 
encouraging socialisation, reducing sense of isolation, and 
providing outlets for connection, relaxation, learning of new 
skills or entertainment. In turn, this supports the mental 
health and resilience of individuals, and is particularly 
important during times of adversity, such as droughts. The 
feedback highlighted the importance of enhancing the 
resilience and vitality of community groups in good times, 
ensuring their readiness to serve as a support system during 
periods of drought or other natural disasters. 
Community group representatives identified multiple 
challenges, which may be targeted to support their 
resilience. For example, the promotion of groups and 
activities can be difficult. Often, different groups find 
themselves vying for the same audience for events 
organised or aren’t reaching their full potential in terms 
of membership and participation. For newcomers to the 
community, establishing new social connections can be 
daunting, with no centralised resource to explore what 
groups exist. Additionally, there is a need for assistance or 
development of a streamlined approach to access essential 
resources such as training, insurance, grants, and other 
administrative activities. 
Within both Councils, limited resources mean it is difficult 
to deliver the necessary support and engagement with 
community groups. While the staff express a desire to 
develop a comprehensive catalogue of community 
groups, including their mandates and contact details, 
the considerable time investment required is beyond 
their staffing capacity. The introduction of a volunteer 
coordinator position could address this gap, facilitating 
the development of contact lists and serving as a platform 
to share knowledge, experiences, and ideas, ultimately 
enhancing the skillsets of volunteers. 
By monitoring social media and leveraging their existing 
network, the coordinator could establish more robust 
mechanisms to promote events, championing the 
respective Council events’ pages as the primary hub for 
community happenings. 
The envisioned outcome of this project includes the creation 
of databases, systems and processes which could then be 
maintained by existing Council staff. The project would also 
act as a pilot or proof of concept, to explore the value of 
incorporating a volunteer coordinator role long-term.
This action seeks to modify our existing approaches, 
optimising how we support, coordinate, and integrate our 
volunteers, community groups and events to achieve a 
socially cohesive community.
Timeframe
3 – 6 months
Estimated Costs
$40,000 (3 months) or $65,000 (6 months)
Action Owner
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
Stakeholders
•	 Local Community Groups. 
•	 All residents.
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Develop and issue a Request for Quote (RFQ) for 
a 2-day per week role in each LGA.
2.	 Recruit a contractor for the coordinator role 
(in each LGA) to complete steps 3 to 11, noting 
that local knowledge and existing community 
connections will be a key quality of the successful 
candidates. 
3.	 Map existing community groups and points of 
contact.
Steps for Implementation continued
4.	 Contact all community groups and gather data 
on core objectives, target audience, membership, 
frequency of activities, current challenges, 
training needs, and other support required.
5.	 Evaluate needs across community groups to 
establish core training opportunities in the 
region.
6.	 Coordinate (where possible) training providers 
suitable to deliver required training within the 
LGAs.
7.	 Develop supporting templates, checklists, and 
tools in response to community group needs (for 
example, a list of insurance providers, and how-
to-guide for successful grant writing).
8.	 Monitor social media to identify local events, and 
cross promote on Council’s event pages and to 
other community groups to increase visibility 
and participation. 
9.	 Establish an online community directory which 
include an avenue for community groups to 
easily have events listed and promoted.
10.	Develop a short resource, such as an ideas list, 
to encourage community members to host their 
own social gatherings with friends, family, or 
neighbours.
11.	Conduct a hand-over of project elements with 
Council staff to allow the project collateral, 
systems, and processes to be integrated and 
utilised on an ongoing basis. 
12.	Conduct a project completion survey with 
community groups to identify next steps and 
inform recommendations for the future.
KPIs
•	 Number of community groups identified and 
included in the contact register.
•	 Number of training activities co-ordinated.
•	 Proportion of templates, checklists, tools, and 
resources developed to address community 
group needs.
•	 Establishment of the online community 
directory.
•	 Number of community events advertised on the 
Council events page (per month). 
Resilience Dividend
Social
Supporting community groups to achieve their potential will 
enable them to support and deliver social connection activities 
thus reducing social isolation and opportunities for people to 
improve their physical, mental, and spiritual wellbeing. 
Supporting Actions
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
•	 Continue advocating for support of local community 
groups, including securing grant funding for facility 
upgrades and to facilitate community events. Continue to 
promote community activities via Council communication 
channels. 
Community
•	 Recognise their role, capability and capacity in building and 
maintaining social connections by hosting small-scale get 
togethers for their friends, neighbours, or local community. 
Next Steps
1.	 Assess the effectiveness of the role and consider whether 
there is sufficient funding and support to adopt the role as a 
permanent position in each Council. 
2.	 Consider establishing a social media campaign (such 
as a hashtag and associated printed social media selfie-
frames), to allow local community groups and individuals to 
promote and share their social connections activities. This 
would help build a movement where social connection is 
celebrated, ideas shared, and individuals are encouraged to 
take part. 
3.	 Assess the feasibility, suitability, public support, and project 
owner for a monthly ‘community champion’ promotion, 
which seeks nominations from a set number of different 
community groups each month (perhaps 10-12) for 
someone who has shown the values of community spirit, 
helping one and other or going the extra mile. Such a 
program would have a triple-benefit of publicising good 
news stories, promoting the community groups in operation 
in the region, and raising awareness that small acts by many 
individuals are the foundations of a resilient and thriving 
community.
4.	 In conjunction with the ‘community champion’ promotion, 
showcase one mental health-related service provider (could 
be school counsellors, the Primary Health Network, Temora 
Community Centre etc) each month to improve community 
awareness of available services and reduce stigma 
associated with reaching out for assistance. This would be 
promoted on social media, radio, newspaper, and other 
avenues to build awareness .
5.	 Promote funding opportunities to community groups 
that are aimed at delivering activities that build social 
connection and resilience. 
57

Improve Community-Wide Well-Being Through 
The Resilience Project
Spheres
Social
SDG Alignment
Rationale
There are a multitude of entities providing mental health 
support services in the district. These services often face 
resource constraints such as shortage of staff, and over-
stretched employees, particularly when drought conditions 
are experienced. A further challenge is the stoicism 
displayed by many farmers and local residents who are 
reluctant to reach out for support during the difficult times. 
School aged children were identified during engagement as 
being more receptive to engaging in programs and activities 
which foster wellbeing and can act as a conduit in sharing 
this knowledge and promoting change within their families, 
friends, and social circles. 
‘The Resilience Project’ was adopted in 2023 by a few 
schools in the Temora LGA including Temora Public and 
High schools, Ariah Park Central School, Temora West, and 
St Annes Central School. It is a universal support system 
which equips children with skills to face adversity in all 
areas, including drought-related matters. It is an evidence-
based program which promotes a whole of school approach 
to embed behavioural change amongst students, teachers, 
and their families. Impact surveys conducted by these 
schools indicate the program is already seeing positive 
improvements in children’s emotional, social, and physical 
wellbeing. These results echo research conducted by the 
Universities of Adelaide and Melbourne into the program’s 
effectiveness. Anticipated benefits of this project include 
improved confidence and self-esteem, more supportive 
classroom environments, improved relationships at school 
and home, and improved knowledge and ability to express 
emotions. 
A wider benefit of the project is the ability to develop a 
shared common language of gratitude, empathy, and 
mindfulness amongst the community. This will contribute 
to a more resilient community which is better placed to 
deal with the challenges associated with drought and other 
shocks and stresses. The project aims to leverage existing 
initiatives and will be seeking to establish the program in 
five schools in the Temora Shire, and in nine schools in 
Bland Shire. A mix of primary, central, and high schools 
from both the main townships and the outer lying villages 
will be considered for participation. The future goal of the 
program is to be rolled out beyond the school environment 
into early learning centres, community organisations, 
sporting clubs and businesses. This will create a common 
language around wellbeing and help to ensure that a wider 
range of community members have the skills to deal with 
difficult times before they hit.
This action aims to transform the Temora and Bland 
region by building a new generation of young resilient 
residents. This is expected to have ripple effects across the 
communities as school children bring their learnings to 
friends and family, improving everyone’s coping capacity 
during tough circumstances.
Timeframe
12 months
Estimated Costs
$100,000 - $120,000
Action Owner
Temora and Bland Shire Councils in conjunction 
with participating schools.
Stakeholders
•	 Public, Central, Catholic and High Schools.
•	 Sporting clubs and community organisations.
•	 Businesses and the Business Chambers.
•	 Mental health service providers. 
•	 Officer of regional Youth.
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Establish a Resilience Project working group with 
representatives from Temora and Bland Shire 
Councils and participating schools to manage 
the project administration and management.
2.	 Confirm program cost and potential co-
contribution from schools. 
3.	 Implement ‘The Resilience Project’ pulse survey 
to establish a baseline of well-being from which 
changes can be measured through the project. 
Schools and teaching staff to monitor project 
progression, identify lessons learnt and capture 
data on project impact.
4.	 Identify local champions and mental health 
advocates to support program launch.
5.	 Develop a communications campaign to 
accompany program launch leveraging local 
media entities and school communication 
channels.
6.	 Conduct a community launch event in both 
Shires and participating schools and the wider 
community, including sporting clubs, community 
groups and businesses.
7.	 Incorporate Resilience Project program activities 
into each school’s program.
8.	 Monitor project using regular student surveys.
9.	 Promote project successes with local community, 
nearby regions and within the education space as 
deemed prudent. 
10.	Investigate local sponsorship and other avenues 
to support long-term funding of project.
KPIs
•	 Number of schools and students participating in 
program.
•	 Percentage of schools in each LGA participating 
in program.
•	 Launch event held in each LGA.
•	 Number of media stories generated by or related 
to the project.
•	 Number of inquiries from external entities 
seeking information about the project.
•	 Changes in student wellbeing metrics (in 
comparison with State average) and over-time.
Resilience Dividend
Social
•	 Building individual resilience will improve the resilience 
of families, school communities and the wider 
community.
Supporting Actions
Temora and Bland Shire Councils
•	 Continue to collaborate with the Murrumbidgee 
Primary Health Network and the Murrumbidgee Local 
Health District through the Rural Adversity Mental Health 
Program to facilitate access to mental health support 
programs and training. 
•	 Continue providing opportunities for their staff to 
participate in mental health first aid training, use Council 
communication channels to promote the project, and 
share learnings with other regional Councils.
Next Steps
1.	 Attract interest from a university research program 
to track and evaluate the program’s effectiveness in 
addressing mental health and wellbeing challenges 
brought on by drought in agriculturally dependent 
communities. 
2.	 Expand the program to include early learning centres, 
community organisations, sporting clubs and 
businesses.
58
59

Maintaining Open Green Space Amenity Through 
Improved Water Efficiency 
Spheres
Environmental
Social
SDG Alignment
Rationale
Both Temora and Bland Shires are well provisioned with 
sporting fields, playgrounds, parks, and gardens. These 
spaces are utilised by residents of all ages with a broad 
range of activities undertaken such as weekend sport, 
picnics, children’s play outings and outdoor relaxation.
The utilisation of these spaces produces physical benefits 
for the community through formal and informal exercise 
and improved mental wellbeing from outdoor immersion 
and social interaction. Additionally, green spaces offer 
aesthetic value for our towns and villages, being enjoyed 
by residents and visitors alike. Ensuring their quality 
and condition is sustained in drought conditions is also 
important. 
Throughout our history, we have been a leader in the early 
adoption of stormwater harvesting and water recycling 
technologies. This proactive approach has positioned us 
as sustainability leaders, in addition to diminishing our 
dependence on potable water. By securing an alternative 
water source, we have been able to preserve the open spaces 
that define our region’s landscape. In the face of escalating 
variability in our weather patterns it is important we 
optimise our water efficiency strategies, particularly in times 
of drought. Advances in irrigation equipment present an 
opportunity for our region to review our current approaches 
and identify ways of achieving more with less water. 
With a plan for the future, and as funds become available, 
we have the potential to elevate our operations through 
upgrading our irrigation equipment and watering regimes 
for our public open spaces. This approach aims not only to 
enhance our overall efficiency, but also deliver the high-
quality open spaces our communities both expect and value. 
Upon successful implementation of this project in the Bland 
Shire Council, the valuable insights and recommendations 
gleaned can be shared with the Temora Shire Council, 
fostering a collaborative spirit, and ensuring a broader 
impact across our region. Through this effort, we aim to 
not only fortify our own sustainability practices but also 
contribute to the collective resilience of neighbouring 
communities.
This action will allow our Councils to modify their approach 
to water usage in our valued community infrastructure, 
allowing us to do more with less.
Timeframe
3 months
Estimated Costs
$35,000
Action Owner
Bland Shire Council
Stakeholders
•	 Sporting Teams.
•	 Recreational Facility User Groups.
•	 Goldenfields Water County Council.
•	 Temora Shire Council.
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Develop and issue a RFQ for a third-party 
contractor, preferably a local or regionally based 
irrigation service provider, who would complete 
steps 2 to 4. 
2.	 Audit irrigation infrastructure across Bland Shire 
Council’s portfolio.
3.	 Assess facility hierarchy and current irrigation 
approach to identify opportunities to optimise 
irrigation regime. 
4.	 Provide recommendations for:
a.	 	fixtures and fittings upgrades including costs 
(equipment and installation) per facility.
b.	 	need for rain / moisture sensors.
c.	 	optimisation of irrigation frequency.
d.	 	prioritisation of upgrades.
e.	 	estimate of likely water and energy savings 
per facility.
5.	 Share findings with Temora Shire Council.
KPIs
•	 Number of facilities reviewed.
•	 Water and energy savings identified.
•	 Sharing of findings with Temora Shire Council.
Resilience Dividend
Social
•	 Maintaining the amenity and performance 
of recreational and public open space will 
enable residents to undertake activities which 
are beneficial for their physical and mental 
wellbeing. 
Environmental
•	 Improving water efficiency will reduce the 
reliance on non-potable and potable water 
supplies from the regions’ water storage dams 
and aquifers. 
Economic
•	 Maintaining the visual appearance of towns and 
villages, particularly during drought, is a key 
element in sustaining tourism spend within the 
region.  
Supporting Actions
Council and Goldenfields Water County Council
•	 Cross-promote the use of the Goldenfields Water App 
to identify leaks to reduce water consumption and 
unexpectedly high-water bills which contribute to cost of 
living pressures. 
•	 Councils to promote water saving mechanisms and 
process to the community through traditional and social 
media posts. 
Next Steps
1.	 In conjunction with the planned revitalisation strategies 
for the town centres of Temora and West Wyalong, 
identify and implement methods to reduce heat and 
improve visual amenity to encourage visitation and 
spend, particularly during drought conditions, when the 
surrounding region is hot, dry, and dusty. 
2.	 Leverage existing agricultural research organisations, 
such as the Temora Agricultural Innovation Centre, 
FarmLink Research, Landcare, Local Land Services, and 
the Charles Sturt University Southern Drought Hub, to 
identify and foster more widespread implementation 
of drought-resilient farming methods such as drought 
containment feedlots, fodder storage, and optimising 
rainfall infiltration into soils. Demonstration sites and 
financial mechanisms (grants, tax incentives, rebates, 
or subsidies) were identified as options to improve 
knowledge and reduce the financial considerations 
which are often the key barrier to convert intention into 
implementation.
3.	 Advocate for improved data availability to provide 
landholders with higher quality information upon 
which to base their farm management decisions, noting 
that the region is on the outer-limits of the Bureau 
of Meteorology radars at Yeoval, Hillston and Wagga 
Wagga, and rainfall varies substantially from the south-
east to the north-west, such that rainfall recorded at 
Temora and West Wyalong weather observation stations 
is often not representative of the on-ground conditions 
experienced. A network of soil moisture sensors with 
publicly available data, being one option to reduce 
these data limitations.
60
61

07
Monitoring, Evaluation, 
and Learning 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) is a core part underpinning the implementation of the RDR Plan, ensuring effective 
program delivery, transparency, adaptive management, and long-term sustainability (see Program Logic in Figure 6.1). To 
be most effective, MEL processes are embedded into the RDR Plan program governance model and into every phase of the 
program. Given Councils are resource constrained, implementation of the RDR Plan actions will be incorporated and completed 
as part of Councils Integrated Planning and Reporting (IPR) framework and the Community Strategic Plan. This will be regularly 
reviewed and updated by the regional Consortia of local governments and implementation partners to reflect changes and 
allow for active learning and adaptive governance to best monitor and evaluate the performance of the RDR Plan pathways and 
actions, following the RAPTA guide (see Figure 7.1). Delivery of MEL processes will also be considered as part of planning for the 
implementation of the Plan. Timeframes for the delivery of MEL will be integrated throughout the implementation phase and 
beyond. 
Figure 7.1 Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and 
Transformation Approach (RAPTA)
This figure explains the process underpinning this RDR Plan. There are three interlinking sections, with active learning and adaptive governance feeding into every aspect of the resilience, adaptation pathways and transformation approach. 
This approach includes consideration of people, including dialogue, values, and vision. This is informed by scoping and goalsetting, stakeholder mapping and engagement, and imagining change. This leads to effective engagement and legitimacy. This feeds into a systems analysis, which describes the system, explores scenarios, and analyses the system. Output leads to a systems understanding. This feeds into options and pathways to action. This involves generation of options, sequencing pathways, and implementing pathways. This produces a tested adaptation pathway for action. These step feeds back into the first loop, people. 
The core components of the RDR 
Plan’s MEL framework are: 
What the Plan intends to 
achieve
The Program Logic (page 9) describes 
the goals and strategic objectives and 
what the Plan hopes to achieve over 
short, medium, and long term.
MEL scope and 
approaches
MEL scope and approaches, adopted 
from the FDF’s Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning Framework 2020 (as 
shown in Figure 7.2), help to ensure 
the region’s ongoing commitment to 
strengthening drought preparedness 
and resilience.
Figure 7.2 Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Scope
This figure shows that monitoring, evaluation, and learning is informed by four things: 
1.	Rationale 
2.	Outputs 
3.	Effectiveness 
4.	Impacts 
When examining the rationale, it is helpful to ask questions like: 
•	To what extent are the programs aligned with the strategic objectives of the Funding Plan, and targeted at important needs? 
•	What can be done to improve the appropriateness of the investments? 
When examining outputs, helpful questions to ask include: 
•	To what extent are the program outputs being administered and delivered efficiently, and to the expected quality? 
•	What can be done to improve efficiency of the investments? 
During monitoring, evaluation, and learning phases, when examining the effectiveness of the plan, helpful guiding questions include: 
•	To what extent are programs achieving their intended outcomes (and any unintended outcomes)? 
•	What could be done to improve the outcomes of the investments? 
When examining the impact, helpful questions to consider include: 
•	What signs are there towards long-term drought resilience? And 
•	What priorities and opportunities do the programs reveal for drought resilience, future Funding Plans and programs? 
Source: Future Drought Fund. 2020 69 
How the progress of the Plan will be tracked
Key evaluation questions:
•	 To what extent has the Plan been implemented and 
has impacted on the regional stakeholders and 
communities to strengthening drought preparedness 
and resilience? (intended and unintended, positive, and 
negative outcomes)?
•	 How is economic, environmental, and social drought 
resilience changing (or not) in the region, in which 
locations, how and why?
•	 To what extent do the outcomes achieved by the Plan 
align with improvements in overall drought resilience in 
the region?
•	 What future priorities and opportunities are revealed 
by overall trends in drought resilience and/or by the 
outcomes of the Plan?
•	 What priorities and lessons can be drawn to improve 
the appropriateness, efficiency, or effectiveness of 
future Plan implementation so that they make the best 
possible contribution to the Plan’s goals and strategic 
objectives?
63
62

Indicators for regular monitoring:
Table 7.1 below provide specific indicators for regular monitoring of the Plan based on the relevant FDF MEL framework 
indicators and the actions developed in this RDR Plan. Each action has a set of specific Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), 
which can also be used for regular monitoring and evaluating. 
Table 7.1: Indicators for regular monitoring of the RDR Plan 
Intermediate outcomes of the Plan (1-4 years)
FDF High-level 
Indicators  
Specific RDR Plan Indicators
Evaluation Approach
Agricultural businesses 
are self-reliant, 
productive, and 
profitable (economic 
resilience).
•	 Increased in money flowing through 
the local economy from the rental 
income and from new residents who 
live local and buy local. 
•	 Increased capacity for existing and 
new businesses & major infrastructure 
projects to attract skilled workers, 
strengthening and diversifying the 
economy.
•	 Thriving businesses who are well 
supported will have improved capacity 
to adapt to economic changes brought 
about by drought conditions, floods, 
or other events. Paves the way for 
diversification of the economy through 
the attraction of non-agriculture-based 
businesses.
•	 Business owners actively pursue 
opportunities to increase financial 
security of their business pre-, during, 
and post-drought.
•	 Monitor ongoing business cash flow, 
with learning from previous droughts 
implemented into management plans. 
•	 Economic metrics quarterly or annually 
report.
•	 Employment rate report.
•	 Bi-annually business surveys.
•	 Evaluation of previous lessons learned. 
•	 Stakeholder interviews and surveys.
Agricultural landscapes 
are functional and 
sustainable, with 
healthy natural capital 
(environmental 
resilience).
•	 Maintaining the amenity and 
performance of recreational and public 
open space will enable residents 
to undertake activities which are 
beneficial for their physical and mental 
wellbeing. 
•	 Improving water efficiency will 
reduce the reliance on non-potable 
and potable water supplies from 
the regions’ water storage dams and 
aquifers. 
•	 Maintaining the visual appearance of 
towns and villages, particularly during 
drought, is a key element in sustaining 
tourism spend within the region.
•	 Monitor ongoing water usage, annual 
reporting, and tracking.
•	 Monitor outdoor activities of residents 
in public open spaces.
•	 Tourist inbound report.
•	 Stakeholder interviews and surveys.
FDF High-level 
Indicators  
Specific RDR Plan Indicators
Evaluation Approach
Agricultural 
communities are 
resourceful, adaptable, 
and thriving (social 
resilience).
•	 More people and families living in the 
area adding numbers to local schools, 
sporting teams and clubs. Greater 
capacity to attract staff for community 
support roles such as aged care, 
health, and childcare.
•	 Maximal use of current housing stock 
and improved visual amenity with once 
vacant homes now being actively cared 
for.
•	 Building individual resilience has 
improved the resilience of families, 
school communities and the wider 
community.
•	 Community groups has achieved their 
potential to support and deliver social 
connection activities thus reducing 
social isolation and opportunities 
for people to improve their physical, 
mental, and spiritual wellbeing.  
•	 Annual reporting and review of 
plan implementation, barriers, and 
opportunities, making changes to the 
RDR Plan as necessary to meet the 
regional needs of communities.
•	 Stakeholder and community interviews 
and surveys.
•	 Key questions to ask include: 
•	 How confident are the community’s 
necessary skills and resources to 
face drought and make necessary 
changes? 
•	 How invested are they in 
implementing the RDR Plan? 
•	 What actions or decisions have 
been directly initiated as a result of 
the RDR Plan?  
Long-term outcomes ( 4+ years)
FDF High-level 
Indicators  
Specific RDR Plan Indicators
Evaluation Approach
Stronger connectedness 
and greater social 
capital within 
communities, 
contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
Communities 
implement 
transformative activities 
that improve their 
resilience to drought. 
More primary producers 
preserve natural capital 
while also improving 
productivity and 
profitability.
•	 There is a common understanding and 
a shared vision in the region to manage 
drought risks and build community 
drought resilience.
•	 The region works collectively and 
in partnerships to build drought 
resilience across three main pillars.
•	 Measures are implemented to limit 
impacts of drought and better respond 
to drought.
•	 Stakeholders and communities 
actively share knowledge and take 
actions contributing towards drought 
resilience. 
•	 An on-going regional oversight 
committee comprising of the 
Plan’s owners and key stakeholder 
representatives/implementation 
partners is critical.
•	 This committee would have the role 
of initiating actions in line with the 
Plan, reviewing progress against the 
Plan objectives and reflecting changes 
to the Plan as needed to maintain its 
relevance and usefulness.
•	 Monitoring and evaluation activities 
should be taken at regional level by 
this committee, which include:
•	 Monitoring and reporting of 
regional level indicators that 
are captured as part of Local 
Government surveillance, surveys, 
and annual reporting.
•	 Records of case studies 
demonstrate changes as a 
result of actions taken from the 
implementation of the Plan
65
64

Tools to support regular data collection on the indicators
Key data sources for the Plan regular monitoring approach are outlined in Table 7.2 below: 
Table 7.2: RDR Plan Key Data sources 
Data Source/Tool
Description
Frequency of
Collection
Data
Availability
Implementation 
partners and 
stakeholders end of 
program evaluation 
completed online and 
capture in Management 
Information System 
(MIS).
At the end of each program/action, 
request feedback from stakeholders and 
implementation partners.
End of program 
or project.
Continuous and 
ongoing.
MIS. 
Stores and enables analysis of basic 
information on participate stakeholders and 
community group members.
Ongoing.
Real-time.
Media monitoring and 
media analytics.
Monitoring: To capture stories that are 
profiled in the media about region drought 
resilience and relevant actions. 
Analytics: To capture insights about social 
media sites including engagement, reach, 
content performance, reactions, audience 
demographics.
Monthly.
Available in 
local media for 
social and online 
media.
Community surveys.
Online or hard copy surveys sent to 
stakeholders and communities to gather 
feedback on the Plan effectiveness.
Annually.
Annually, one 
month after 
survey closes.
Monitoring visits.
Targeted monitoring visits to interview 
relevant stakeholders and communities to 
gather feedback in written report to support 
data assurance.
Bi-annually.
One month after 
monitoring visit.
Case studies of changes.
Recording case studies of changes made and 
benefits evident as a result of actions taken 
from the implementation of the Plan.
Annual.
Annually.
Evaluative activities to provide a deeper understanding of aspects of the program
The design and delivery of all MEL activities are informed by following principles:
Utilisation-
focused
1
Cost-
effectiveness
2
Fit-for-
purpose
3
Transparent & 
accountable
4
Realistic
5
Flexible
6
MEL roles and responsibilities 
The Project Control Group (PCG) developed during RDR 
Plan development phases will continue their terms of 
reference, operating as a reference governance structure 
overseeing the RDR Plan implementation and ongoing 
development. The PCG consists of: 
•	 Department of Regional NSW – Strategy & Policy 
•	 Temora Shire Council 
•	 Bland Shire Council 
•	 Any other individual selected by the PCG. 
Through the PCG and Council consortia, continued 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning responsibilities will be 
shared. 
The PCG will continue to function, working to secure the 
goals of the RDR Plan and work to facilitate the realisation 
of noted actions. Reporting, accountability, learning, and 
management needs for the RDR Plan will be managed by 
the PCG. 
The key risks to the implementation of the RDR 
Plan and MEL process
Following assumptions were identified, based on the 
FDF MEL framework for the RDR Plan,70 to be effectively 
implemented. These assumptions will need to be reviewed 
and updated during the implementation phase to reflect 
changes and new interventions can be designed. 
Background image of Temora Flour Mill 
Key assumptions affecting the plan 
short term outcomes  
The consortia of local governments have 
dedicated resource, capability, and the right 
governance mechanism to coordinate strategic 
planning activities. 
Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to actively participate in the plan. 
Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other on regional resilience planning. 
Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs.  
The program can be aligned with other relevant 
strategic planning.
Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek to 
implement them.
Stakeholders and communities are willing to share 
learnings with other regions.
There are sufficient learnings to inform future 
program design and implementation.
Key assumptions affecting the plan 
long term outcomes (>4 years)
Supporting consortia of local governments/
stakeholders representing a region will result in 
changes in practice through those regions.  
There are sufficient opportunities for regions to 
implement elements of plans.
Plans contain implementable activities to build 
regional drought resilience across Australia. 
Regions continue to review, update, and 
implement their plans. 
These assumptions will need to be reviewed and updated during the implementation  ase to reflect changes and new interventions can be designed.
Image: Temora Flour Mill, Temora Shire
67
66

08
References
1	 CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
2	 CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>.
4	 CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
5	 CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
6	 CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
7	 Walker, B., Holling, C., Carpenter, S. R. & Kinzig, A. 2004. Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 9(2): 5.
8	 IPCC. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://report.ipcc.ch/ar6/wg2/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FullReport.pdf>.
9	 Resilient Sydney. 2018. Resilient Sydney: A Strategy For City Resilience. City of Sydney. Accessed 17 Nov 2023.
<https://www.cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au/-/media/corporate/files/2020-07-migrated/files_r/resilient-sydney-a-strategy-for-city-resilience-2018.pdf?download=true>.
10	CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
11	CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
12	Taylor, C.M. et al. 2017. Frequency of extreme Sahelian storms tripled since 1982 in satellite observations. Nature, 544: 475-478.
13 Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. 2021 Census All persons QuickStats – Bland. Accessed 5 Sept 2023.
<https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA10800>.
14 Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. 2021 Census All persons QuickStats – Temora. Accessed 5 Sept 2023.
<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/SAL13799>.
15	Bureau of Meteorology. 2022. Understanding Drought. <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>.
16	O’Donnell, A.J., McCaw, W.L., Cook, E.R. and Grierson, P.F. 2021. Megadroughts and pluvials in southwest Australia: 1350–2017 CE. Climate Dynamics, 57, pp.1817-1831. Accessed 14 
September 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-021-05782-0
17	National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2023. Definition of Drought. National Centres for Environmental Information. Accessed 14 September 2023.
<https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/monitoring/dyk/drought-definition>.
18	NSW Government. n.d. Key facts about drought. Accessed 14 September 2023
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/environment-land-and-water/drought-in-nsw/key-facts-about-drought#:~:text=With%20one%20of%20the%20most,in%20inland%20areas%20of%20NSW>.
19	Central Slopes Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia, 2015	
20	Future Drought Fund Farm Business Resilience – Program Framework (Appendix A), March 2021
21	Fisher, R. 2023. Wiradjuri Cultural Objects From Peak Hill, NSW. Australian Museum. Accessed 31 Oct 2023.
<https://australian.museum/learn/cultures/atsi-collection/australian-archaeology/indigenous-objects-peak-hill-nsw/>.	
22	Bland Shire Council. n.d. Our Indigenous Culture. Accessed 5 Sept 2023. <https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/Community/Our-Indigenous-Culture>.	
23	NSW Department of Planning and Environment. 2003. Bioregions of New South Wales: South Western Slopes. National Parks and Wildlife Service. Accessed 5 Sept 2023.
<https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/resources/nature/nswSouthWesternSlopesText.pdf>.
<https://pmst.awe.gov.au/#/map/(m:mfi)?lng=146.96136474609378&lat=-33.896637128110214&zoom=9&baseLayers=Imagery,ImageryLabels>.
25	NSW Department of Planning and Environment. 2023. Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041. NSW Government. Accessed 1 Sept 2023.
<https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-03/riverina-murray-regional-plan-2041.pdf>.
26 Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2023. Temora 2021 Census All persons QuickStats. Accessed 5 Sept 2023.
<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA17350>.	
27	NSW Government. 2018. 2019-2022 South West Slopes Regional Economic Development Strategy. Accessed 1 Sept 2023.
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-05/South%20West%20Slopes%20REDS.pdf>.
28	SnapshotClimate. 2021. Bland – 2020/2021 municipal emissions snapshot. Accessed 15 Oct 2023. <https://snapshotclimate.com.au/locality/australia/new-south-wales/bland/>.
29	Bland Shire Council. n.d. About Us. Accessed 5 Sept 2023.
<https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/Visitor-Information/About-Us#:~:text=Evolution%20Mining%20is%20the%20Bland,the%20Shire’s%20other%20major%20employers>.
30	SnapshotClimate. 2021. Bland – 2020/2021 municipal emissions snapshot. Accessed 15 Oct 2023. <https://statics.teams.cdn.office.net/evergreen-assets/safelinks/1/atp-safelinks.html>.
31	
32	Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. 2021 Census All persons QuickStats – Temora. Accessed 5 Sept 2023.
<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/SAL13799>.
33	Temora Shire Council. 2020. Draft Temora Shire Council Economic Development Strategy. Accessed 12 Sept 2023. PCG Provision.
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. 2021 Census All persons QuickStats – Bland. Accessed 5 Sept 2023. <https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA10800>.
34	Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Census of Population and Housing: Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA). Accessed 25 Oct.
35	NSW Government. 2018. 2019-2022 South West Slopes Regional Economic Development Strategy. Accessed 1 Sept 2023.
<https:// www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-05/South%20West%20Slopes%20REDS.pdf>.
36	Australian Bureau of Meteorology. n.d. Previous Droughts. Accessed 6 Sept 2023. <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.
37	NSW Government. n.d. Key Facts about Drought. Accessed 6 Sept 2023. <https://www.nsw.gov.au/drought-in-nsw/key-facts-about-drought>.
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/jsp/ncc/cdio/weatherData/av?p_nccObsCode=136&p_display_type=dailyDataFile&p_startYear=2022&p_c=-1066984126&p_stn_num=073037>.	
40	Wittwer and Waschik, 2021. Estimating the economic impacts of the 2017–2019 drought and 2019–2020 bushfires on regional NSW and the rest of Australia. Accessed 5 Sept 2023. DOI: 
10.1111/1467-8489.12441
41	ABC News. 2006. Temora Urged to Unite in Drought Planning. Accessed 1 Sept 2023. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2006-12-06/temora-urged-to-unite-in-drought-planning/2146910>.
42	Means, Tiffany. 2021. Climate Change and Droughts: What’s the Connection? Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2021/08/climate-change-and-droughts-whats-the-connection/>.	
43	World Meteorological Organization. 2023. Global Temperatures Set to Reach New Records in Next Five Years. Accessed 6 Oct 2023.
<https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/global-temperatures-set-reach-new-records-next-five-years>.
44	Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2019. IPCC Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 °C. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/989851589954985863/Assessing-Drought-Hazard-and-Risk-Principles-and-Implementation-Guidance>.
45	World Bank. 2019.  Assessing Drought Hazard and Risk: Principles and Implementation Guidance. Washington D.C. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
< http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/989851589954985863/Assessing-Drought-Hazard-and-Risk-Principles-and-Implementation-Guidance >.
46	Climate Council. 2018. Fact Sheet: Climate Change and Drought. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf>.
47 Climate Council. 2018. Fact Sheet: Climate Change and Drought. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf>	
48	Climate Council. 2018. Fact Sheet: Climate Change and Drought. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf>
49	Doyle, Kate. 2018. What you need to know about droughts: Why they happen and how they are defined. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-01/what-you-need-to-know-about-droughts/10051956>. 
50	Bureau of Meteorology. 2023. Media Releases: The Bureau Declares El Nino and Positive Indian Ocean Dipole Events. 19 September 2023. Accessed 25 Sept 2023.
<https://media.bom.gov.au/releases/1183/the-bureau-declares-el-nino-and-positive-indian-ocean-dipole-events/>.
51	Department of Primary Industries. 2023. Combined Drought Indicator. NSW Government. Accessed 6 Oct 2023. <https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/>.
52 CSIRO Climate Change in Australia Threshold Calculator
53 Timbal, B. et al. 2015. Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions. CSIRO. Accessed 20 Oct 2023. 
<https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/MURRAY_BASIN_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf>.	
54 Timbal, B. et al. 2015. Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions. CSIRO. Accessed 20 Oct 2023. 
<https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/MURRAY_BASIN_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf>.	
55	Bland Shire Council. 2022. Bland Shire Council Housing Strategy. Accessed 12 Sept 2023. <https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/Development/Bland-Shire-Housing-Strategy>.
56 WSP. September 2023. Have your say survey.	
57 Temora Shire Council. 2020. Temora Shire Adverse Events Plan – Final. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.temora.nsw.gov.au/files/assets/public/community/temora-shire-adverse-events-plan-final.pdf>.	
58 Temora Shire Council. 2020. Temora Shire Adverse Events Plan – Final. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.temora.nsw.gov.au/files/assets/public/community/temora-shire-adverse-events-plan-final.pdf>.	
59 Temora Shire Council. 2020. Temora Shire Adverse Events Plan – Final. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.temora.nsw.gov.au/files/assets/public/community/temora-shire-adverse-events-plan-final.pdf>.	
60 Bland Shire Council. n.d. Delivery Program and Operational Plan 2023-2024. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/community-strategic-plan/2023-2024/delivery-program-and-operational-plan-2023-24.pdf>.	
61 NSW Department of Planning and Environment. 2023. Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/plans-for-your-area/regional-plans/riverina-murray-regional-plan-2041>.	
62 Bland Shire Council. n.d. Delivery Program and Operational Plan 2023-2024. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/community-strategic-plan/2023-2024/delivery-program-and-operational-plan-2023-24.pdf>.	
63 Bland Shire Council. n.d. Delivery Program and Operational Plan 2023-2024. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/community-strategic-plan/2023-2024/delivery-program-and-operational-plan-2023-24.pdf>.	
64 Temora Shire Council. 2020. Temora Shire Adverse Events Plan – Final. Accessed 12 Sept 2023. <https://www.temora.nsw.gov.au/files/assets/public/community/temora-shire-adverse-
events-plan-final.pdf>. 
65 Bland Shire Council. n.d. Delivery Program and Operational Plan 2023-2024. Accessed 12 Sept 2023. <https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/communi­
ty-strategic-plan/2023-2024/delivery-program-and-operational-plan-2023-24.pdf>. 
66 Temora Shire Council. 2022. Community Strategic Plan – Towards Tomorrow, Towards 2035. Accessed 11 Sept 2023.
<https://www.temora.nsw.gov.au/Economic-Development/Strategic-Plans>. 
67 Temora Shire Council. 2020. Draft Temora Shire Council Economic Development Strategy. Accessed 12 Sept 2023. PCG Provision.
68 Bland Shire Council. n.d. Delivery Program and Operational Plan 2023-2024. Accessed 12 Sept 2023.
<https://www.blandshire.nsw.gov.au/files/sharedassets/public/v/1/community-strategic-plan/2023-2024/delivery-program-and-operational-plan-2023-24.pdf>. 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>.  
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>. 
69
68

Future Drought Fund Logo
the Future Drought Fund