Western Riverina  
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan

Acknowledgement of Country
Griffith City Council, Leeton Shire Council, Murrumbidgee 
Council, and Narrandera Shire Council acknowledge the 
Traditional Custodians of the region’s lands and waters, 
and pay our respect to Elders past and present.
We value the vital involvement of members of the primary production 
and broader communities of each council area to the formulation 
of this plan and extend our thanks to those who contributed.
This project is supported by Griffith City, Leeton Shire, Murrumbidgee, and Narrandera Shire Councils, 
 This document was prepared for Griffith City, Leeton Shire, 
Murrumbidgee, and Narrandera Shire Councils by Meridian Urban.

Introduction 
2
Purpose 
4
How does the plan help
4
Vision and principles
6
Region snapshot
7
About the Western Riverina Region 
8
People and community
9
Wiradjuri Nation
9
Economy 
10
Environment 
10
How this plan was prepared 
11
Strategic alignment – state, regional and local 
12
A stakeholder-driven approach 
12
Engagement observations and insights
14
Regional enablers 
15
How our region is impacted by drought
16
Natural river systems 
16
Irrigation areas
17
The region’s different types of ‘drought’ 
18
Drought impacts
19
Cascading impacts of drought
20
Drought history 
21
A focus on the 2017-2019 drought
22
Future drought
23
Future climate scenarios
23
Trends, stressors and shocks
29
Western Riverina in Australia’s future drought context 
30
Our drought resilience 
31
Drought action plan 
33
Pathway 1 – Anticipate water availability 
35
Pathway 2 – Proactively manage business interests 
36
Pathway 3 – Support off-farm diversification 
37
Pathway 4 – Grow local co-operative service provision
38
Pathway 5 – Support community cohesion 
39
Pathway 6 – Embed environmental stewardship and sustainable agricultural practices
40
Implementation 
41
Pathways implementation
41
Governance structure
42
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
42
Tracking progress and reporting
43
Appexdix A — Drought history 
47
Appendix B – Concepts to guide adaptive learning
54
Contents

Glossary
Key terms used throughout this plan are defined below.
ADAPTATION
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual or expected shocks 
and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and socio-
economic changes.
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE
Coordinating iterative, flexible, and responsive interactions between systems when designing 
interventions and for their implementation and evaluation.
COPING CAPACITY
Communities that may be constrained in their capacity to use available resources to cope with adverse 
events and to prepare for, absorb and recover.
DROUGHT
Drought means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount 
of available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors without changing 
the economic status or outcomes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while 
maintaining natural processes and ecosystem services.
GOVERNANCE
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a society 
share power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or informal.
INTERVENTION OPTIONS
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, initiatives, and investments that are 
planned to bring about change in the system.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of lived experience within a 
landscape, bearing witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, 
culture – how people interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
RESILIENCE
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise to maintain the existing functions, 
structure, and feedback. Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic resilience, 
environmental resilience, and social resilience.
RISK
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, recognising the diversity of 
values and objectives associated with such systems.
SHOCK
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples include major storms, floods, bush 
fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism, and cyber-attacks’.
SOCIAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
existing social and community functions.
STRESSOR
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect, e.g. drought.
SYSTEMS
The interaction of processes, networks, and inter-dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
THEORY OF CHANGE
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain how and why outcomes and 
impacts will be achieved through use, implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities, 
and outputs.
TRENDS
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and are expected to shape 
change into the future.
THRESHOLD
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable causes a system to shift to a 
qualitatively different regime. Also referred to as a tipping point.
TRANSFORM
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, functions, feedback, 
and identity.
TRIGGER POINT
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management intervention. Trigger points are 
usually defined in the planning phase.
1

Introduction 
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a collaboration between Griffith City, Leeton 
Shire, Murrumbidgee, and Narrandera Shire Councils, and their communities, working 
together to advance the region’s resilience to the impacts of drought.
1 Other focus areas under the Future Drought Fund include farm business resilience, roll-out of the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool, and better 
land management practices that support landscape resilience.
Drought is a recurring feature of the Australian 
landscape. While common experiences exist, the 
impacts and major pressures through drought varies 
across geographies, and across communities. 
The Western Riverina region is dependent on the 
land, water and climatic conditions for prosperity. 
This highlights a need enhance drought resilience 
opportunities to position the region to respond to 
and recover from dry times. Sustainable and diverse 
economies, and connected communities that are 
responsive to drought signals, are the foundation to 
reduce vulnerability and mitigate potential impacts. 
The Western Riverina is unique in its drought 
context. Whilst susceptible to periods of drought, 
the irrigation schemes of the region and regulation 
of the Murrumbidgee River set it apart from other 
parts of NSW. Water uncertainty in the region, as 
opposed to climatic events leading to drought, is 
a consequence of an interplay of factors. These 
factors, broadly grouped by climate, policy and 
operational infrastructure requirements, each have 
their own challenges but interact in combination 
across the drought cycle. 
Within the region, vulnerabilities from drought are 
Within the region, future vulnerabilities to drought 
are indicated by downward trends in rainfall and 
soil moisture. Changes in the Snowy Mountains 
catchment area would also have effect given the 
flows received from the Alpine region. Across the 
community, challenges are voiced in the evolution 
of the complex water policy landscape which places 
its own pressures on the community. Under this 
broader context, the region retains a self-driven 
focus on harnessing co-operative community and 
economic opportunities. This plans seeks to build 
on the collective strengths and regional identity of 
the Western Riverina as a premier food bowl for 
Australia to take steps now to stem the impacts of 
future drought on our region.
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan program 
is one of five focus areas1 of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund. The NSW 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan program is jointly 
funded through the Commonwealth Government’s 
Future Drought Fund and the NSW Government, 
supporting local governments to work together 
regionally to plan for drought resilience proactively 
and pragmatically. 
Drought resilience
‘will ensure regional Australia can endure deeper, 
longer droughts, and recover from them sooner. 
This will help Australia’s agricultural industries 
maintain national farm income, increase food 
security, and protect the regional jobs that rely on 
agriculture during the toughest years. Importantly, 
it will also increase the resilience of rural and 
regional communities and improve environmental 
outcomes’. 
(CSIRO, 2022)
Image: Fivebough Wetlands
2

Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan Framework
Figure 1 ­— Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan Framework
As the premier food bowl of Australia, we are driven by a shared desire to 
provide the primary production that supports Australians to succeed, whatever 
water uncertainty arises. We sustainably, responsibly, and efficiently utilise our 
natural endowments of water and landscape applying innovative and sustainable 
agricultural practices. Our diverse community is built on an attitude of seeking out 
opportunity, a self-starter initiative and acting together for collective success.  We 
co-operate to enhance our towns and communities, even in the dry times, to leave a 
sustainable future for the next generation.
Strategic pathways
Priority Actions
Drought  
Resilience  
Action Plan 
Monitoring 
Evaluation and learning 
1. Anticipate water availability
2. Proactively manage business interests 
3. Support off-farm diversification 
4. Grow local co-operative service provision
5. Support community cohesion 
6. Embed environmental stewardship  
and sustainable agricultural practices
Vision
Action pathways 
Implementation
Guiding principles
Self-responsibility  
and accountability  
at the core
Strength  
in  
diversity
Co-operation  
drives collective  
success
Cohesion  
creates  
communities
Water  
availability is our  
lifeblood
Self-responsibility  
means environmental  
stewardship
3

Purpose 
The Western Riverina RDRP provides direction and 
options for how the community, business, industry 
networks, and local governments can adapt to 
strengthen drought resilience and transform for new 
opportunities. 
The purpose of this plan is to:
›
Increase understanding of the region’s current 
and future drought resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic, environmental and 
social characteristics
›
Recognise the interdependent nature of the 
local economy, community wellbeing, and 
environmental sustainability through the drought 
cycle and across business types
›
Understand local signals and drought priorities 
in the community’s voice and create stronger 
connectedness and greater social capital 
within communities
›
Inform decisions based on a combination of local 
knowledge, and risk and resilience information
›
Identify pathways and opportunities to improve 
regional drought resilience, mitigate risks and 
adapt to change
›
Help Councils and regional organisations be in a 
stronger position to implement strategic actions 
and support partnerships that drive enhanced 
drought resilience 
›
Develop concrete actions to address 
and mitigate short-term and long-term 
drought impacts.
For the purposes of this plan, references to 
regional businesses include farms and agricultural 
business, contractors, suppliers, industry, retail and 
commercial services and references to community 
includes all townships, irrespective of size. 
How does the plan help
The Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan combines drought history, climate analysis and 
local input to form a comprehensive understanding 
of the impacts of drought and to anticipate and 
prepare for the next drought cycle. 
Whilst the future cannot necessarily be predicted, 
this plan addresses drought resilience by building 
in actions across the system where impacts are felt 
and across the drought cycles where interventions 
can be most effective. The plan consolidates on 
the range of existing programs and initiatives. It 
supports the ongoing collaboration between key 
actors who support the community through drought 
cycles. 
The impacts of drought can be insidious with a 
slow onset but prolonged effects that reach across 
the community. It is important we understand the 
warning signals of drought and retain a focus on 
continuous preparedness. 
How previous impacts of drought have manifested 
across community networks, local business and the 
natural environment provides a guidepost for where 
actions are needed. This plan supports a focus on 
outcomes through:
›
Prevention of potential impacts
›
Increased preparedness and resilience through 
recognition of signals
›
What is needed in response
›
What is needed for recovery.
4

These areas of absorptive capacity, adaptive 
capacity and transformational capacity provide a 
view of the priorities identified by this plan relative 
to different components of the drought cycle, effort 
and/or costs associated. Some opportunities are 
short-term and more immediate, whilst others are 
more transformative in nature and require long-term 
effort to generate change.
This concept forms part of a resilience ‘theory of 
change’ model2 which helps us to break down and 
consider the complex elements of drought resilience 
and the links across issues. This makes clear both 
how and why its impacts run so deep. This approach 
also helps to inform decision-making for enhanced 
resilience and adaptation as conditions and 
circumstances change over time.
2 The drought resilience plan integrates the ‘Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach’ (RAPTA) developed by CSIRO which provides a 
framework to map resilience interventions. For more information on RAPTA, visit https://research.csiro.au/eap/rapta/ 
This plan supports drought resilience in the Western 
Riverina through approach that will:
thought-bubble	 Understand and recognise  
the triggers and impacts 
shapes	 Build capacity to meet  
challenges 
building-columns	 Unite in community
comment	 Use regional voices to advance 
strengths and opportunities
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan provides 
the framework for implementation and identifies 
practical ways the community and businesses of 
the region can prepare for and respond to drought 
impacts. Implementation funding is available from 
longer-term investment under the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund, as well as other 
funding and grant assistance opportunities.
Implementation of actions contained in this plan is 
dependent on funding availability.
sun-plant-wilt
Absorb
swap-arrows
Adapt
seedling
Transform
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan supports collective and cooperative measures to prepare for drought in 
the face of changing and uncertain futures. This is done through several intervention approaches: 
Image: Visit Griffith
5

Vision and principles
Vision
As the premier food bowl of Australia, we are driven by a shared desire to provide the primary production 
that supports Australians to succeed, whatever water uncertainty arises. We sustainably, responsibly, and 
efficiently utilise our natural endowments of water and landscape applying innovative and sustainable 
agricultural practices. Our diverse community is built on an attitude of seeking out opportunity, a self-starter 
initiative and acting together for collective success. We co-operate to enhance our towns and communities, 
even in the dry times, to leave a sustainable future for the next generation.
Guiding principles 
badge-check
Self-responsibility and  
accountability at the core 
People in this region are frank and honest. We 
are very good at what we do – whether running 
the local café or managing a multi-million dollar 
diversified agri-business portfolio. The sense 
of responsibility and personal accountability 
is strong – people need practical and realistic 
support to keep doing what they do well.
people-group
Co-operation drives collective success 
Not many parts of Australia work under such 
successful co-operative approaches like this 
region. From the irrigation schemes to the mills 
and even local pubs, the co-operative business 
structure provides a trust-based way to 
transform communities by growing services and 
prosperity in other critical sectors – like aged 
care, housing, and even retail – so that local 
services can be retained in-community, owned 
by community. 
link
Strength in diversity 
Farmers in this region know how to build, 
manage and grow diversified on-farm 
operations – they have been doing it 
efficiently for generations. Transferring this 
culture of diversification into off-farm economic 
growth that supports manufacturing and 
value‑added employment and prosperity is a 
clear opportunity. 
water
Water availability is our lifeblood 
The region is unique in the way it receives its 
natural endowment of water – receiving both 
in-region rainfall and irrigation waters from 
Australia’s snow country via the Snowy Hydro 
scheme. This combination of water sources 
supports arguably Australia’s most critical 
and diversified irrigated and dryland country. 
However, uncertainty exists for both sources 
of water, which create similar drought-like 
conditions through different causes. 
group-arrows-rotate
Cohesion creates communities 
The region embodies the Australian ideals of 
mateship. There are tight-knit communities in 
towns and districts across the region that band 
together in a crisis to help each other through. 
It’s a clear and common foundation of what it 
takes to live successfully and sustainably. 
sun
Self-responsibility means 
environmental stewardship 
There is an awareness of the precious nature 
of resources with which the community is 
entrusted. There is increasing recognition 
and practice in environmental restoration, 
regenerative agriculture, and care for Country 
that will pay great dividends as efforts increase.
6

Region snapshot
LARGEST INDUSTRIES  
wheat Agriculture warehouse Manufacturing
user-nurse Health and education  
utility-pole-double Electricity and water supply
PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL 
COMMODITIES
wheat Broadacre cropping  
apple-whole Fruit and nuts cow Livestock
people-roof
Population
47,589
First Nations population
8.5%
(3.4% NSW average)
person-walking-with-cane
Population aged 65+
20.6%
(17.7% NSW average)
REGIONAL ECONOMY*
23,752 jobs (2021)
Economy $3.5b (2020)
Local businesses 5,608 
(2022)
UNEMPLOYMENT 
Griffith: 3.0%
Leeton: 3.8%
Murrumbidgee: 2.9%
Narrandera: 5.2%
VOLUNTARY WORK 
(organisations)
13.2% — 23.2%
(13.0% NSW Average)
Largest industries (by employment)
GRIFFITH
egg Poultry Processing
grapes Wine / Alcoholic Beverage 
Manufacturing 
Hospital Hospitals
LEETON
school Secondary Education 
cow Meat Processing 
wheat Grain Mill Product Manufacturing
MURRUMBIDGEE
wheat Other Grain Growing 
sheep Grain-Sheep or  
Grain-Beef Cattle Faming 
building-columns Local Government Administration
NARRANDERA
wheat Grain growing, and Grain-Sheep  
or Grain-Beef Cattle farming 
building-columns Local Government Administration 
cow Meat Processing 
user-nurse Aged Care Residential Services
Information sourced from: ABS 2021 Census data, Regional Development Australia, and AgTrack - Agricultural and Land Use Dashboard
ASSETS
check Western Riverina Intermodal Freight Terminal
check Griffith Medical Health Precinct
check Griffith Regional Airport
check Country Universities Centre
check Yanco Agricultural institute
check TAFE NSW campuses 
check Narrandera Fisheries Centres
AREAS OF SIGNIFICANCE
check Murrumbidgee River and tributaries
check Billabong Creek
check Murrumbidgee Valley and  
Oolambeyan National Parks
check Fivebough and Tuckerbil Wetlands
check Recreational lakes
*Values include Carrathool Shire LGA
(gross value add)
7

Murrumbidgee River
Griﬃth
Yenda
Narrandera
Leeton
Whitton
Coleambally
Jerilderie
Darlington Point
Figure 2 ­— Map of the Western Riverina Region and local centres
About the Western 
Riverina Region 
The Western Riverina, as part of the 
broader Riverina Murray region, is known 
as Australia’s ‘food bowl’. It is built around 
premium agricultural areas, and long-
standing agricultural industry strengths 
linked to secure water and complemented 
by beneficial climate conditions and 
versatile soils. The Western Riverina 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan covers 
the local government areas (LGA) of 
Griffith City, Murrumbidgee, Leeton Shire 
and Narrandera Shire.
Griffith is the largest regional city in the 
Western Riverina and is one of the three 
regional cities in the broader Riverina 
Murray region alongside Wagga Wagga 
and Albury. A number of smaller centres 
support Griffith in surrounding rural 
communities. Leeton is the second largest 
centre in the Western Riverina and Leeton 
Shire includes the towns of Whitton and 
Yanco. The shire is a strong driver of the 
broader regional strengths, in particular 
through the role it plays in value-
add agriculture, including agricultural 
education and research. 
Murrumbidgee Council contains the three 
townships of Coleambally, Darlington 
Point and Jerilderie. These centres 
account for over 90 percent of the LGA’s 
population, and reflect strengths through 
food and fibre production, benefiting from 
the Murrumbidgee River, Billabong Creek 
and water supplied from the Murray River.
Narrandera Shire is located at the juncture 
of the Newell and Sturt Highways, 
representing a transition from the broad 
acre agricultural areas to the east to the 
highly productive Murrumbidgee Irrigation 
Area. Narrandera forms the main town 
and provides a concentration of services, 
supported by smaller communities in 
Barellan, Binya, Grong Grong, and a 
number of rural localities.
Across each LGA the strength in 
agriculture is linked through connection to 
water, a highly evolved local industry with 
value-add processing, and connection 
to major markets and major transport 
infrastructure. Key assets include the 
Murrumbidgee River, and flows received 
from the Alpine Region. The Western 
Riverina is home to the major irrigation 
schemes of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation 
Area, Coleambally Irrigation Area, and 
Murray Irrigation area, alongside other 
private irrigators. This irrigation network 
supports many farms and provides 
some of the nation’s most important 
irrigation areas.
Building on agricultural strengths, 
educational and research institutes 
form key assets in the region. This is 
includes the Country Universities Centre, 
Yanco Agricultural Institute, and TAFE 
campuses across LGAs, with the largest 
TAFE campus in the Riverina located at 
Griffith. These educational facilities and 
major health facilities anchor services in 
the region and provide for a mixture of 
employment options. 
The position of the region has influenced 
its economic development and 
agricultural strengths, capturing major 
freight corridors between capital cities, 
and evolving its own manufacturing and 
transport hubs. These form the basis of 
future growth ambitions, with further links 
to emerging activation precincts across 
the state.
The northern part of the region (north 
of Jerilderie) is within the Wiradjuri 
Nation, the largest territory at the 
time of European settlement. The 
Nation encompasses the Central West 
slopes and plains and extends from 
Coonabarabran to the north, hugging 
the Great Dividing Range south towards 
the Murray River in the south and out to 
western NSW. The Nation encompasses 
approximately one fifth of NSW. Wiradjuri 
people are known as ‘people of three 
rivers’, acknowledging the three rivers 
that are associated with their Country: 
the Wambuul (Macquarie River), Kalari 
(Lachlan River) and Murrumbidjeri 
(Murrumbidgee River).
NEW SOUTH WALES
Wiradjuri
Figure 3 — Approximate extent of the Wiradjuri Nation3
3 Griffith City Council, 2019, Griffith City Council Reconciliation Action 
Plan December 2019/December 2021, Available at https://www.griffith.
nsw.gov.au/page.asp?f=RES-GWK-21-15-76. 
8
Barellan

People and community
The Western Riverina is attracting new agricultural 
ventures and business operators who are keen to 
trial innovative approaches. Across the region, the 
vibrancy of agricultural industry is shining.
At heart of this is a strong community co-
operative style of approach to not only business, 
but community development. A drive to work 
together, and to share knowledge and benefits, is 
a key attribute behind some of the region’s most 
successful economic and community ventures. 
Strong community identity and a sense of civic duty 
is foundational in this regard. It also informs the 
community’s dedication to volunteering activities 
and organisations. Whilst volunteerism rates are 
in decline nationally, community dedication at the 
local-scale across the Western Riverina remains 
relatively strong. 
Sport and recreation plays a major role in the 
wellbeing of people and communities in the region, 
displayed through the diverse range of sporting 
teams and sporting calendar. This goes beyond 
those that play, but to the broader community as 
avid spectators and volunteers who contribute 
to the local teams and the running, maintenance 
and administration of local venues and facilities. 
Other social interest groups also add to the vibrant 
tapestry of community spirit and provide important 
creative and social connections.
Green spaces, recreational and natural assets are 
therefore critical to community wellbeing. While 
maintaining water to these spaces during drought 
is challenging, it is also essential to underpin 
community cohesion and mental wellness at a 
broader scale. There are also significant visitor 
economy dividends associated with these assets, as 
well as the region’s colonial heritage and lively arts 
and culture scene. 
Wiradjuri Nation
The Wiradjuri Nation is the largest 
traditional owner group in NSW 
known to have cared for the lands in 
the regions for at least 60,000 years. 
Colonisation drastically changed their 
way of life, leading to dispossession and 
cultural suppression. 
The culture of the Wiradjuri people is 
closely linked to the land and waterways, 
and retains a strong belief that if we 
care for Country, it will care for us. 
There are several sites of significance 
to the Wiradjuri people in the area, 
including the Koonadan Aboriginal 
Place and the Fivebough and Tuckerbil 
Wetlands. Conservation practices are 
key to ensuring these sites continue to 
maintain an ecological balance.
Water has played a critical role in the 
lives of Aboriginal people, for survival 
in arid environments and for culture, 
spiritual connection to land and waters 
and identity. Water helped in defining 
language boundaries and ceremonial 
places, and also underpins many land 
management practices. Traditional 
Aboriginal water collection and storage 
practices have evolved for many 
centuries and continue into the present. 
In collaboration with First Nations/
Aboriginal people, a state-wide 
Aboriginal Water Strategy is currently 
under development, building upon 
consultation over recent year. The plan 
will identify ways of increasing water 
rights and ensuring that First Nations 
people are empowered to contribute 
to water management and planning 
decisions. 
Image: Jerilderie Plains
9

Environment 
The Western Riverina is part of the wider Riverina 
Bioregion which has high soil fertility and a generally 
abundant water supply. These aspects underly its 
primacy as a premier food-growing region.
The climate of the Riverina Bioregion is dry and 
semi-arid with hot summers and cool winters, and 
most rainfall occurring in winter months. Vegetation 
ranges from river red gums along river channels, to 
saltbush on the plains. National parks in the region 
include Murrumbidgee Valley and Oolambeyan 
National Parks. The region’s natural assets include 
significant wetlands and swamps such as the 
Fivebough and Tuckerbil Wetlands. These areas 
provide important habitat for native fish, amphibians, 
birds, mammals and many other water dependent 
fauna. These areas are also of cultural heritage 
significance to the region’s First Nations people.
Since European colonisation there has been 
substantial modification of the vegetation and 
landscape through pastoral activities, the use 
of ground and surface water resources, and the 
introduction of feral animals to the region including 
Carp in the river systems. 
One of the most profound changes at a landscape 
scale was the construction and commencement of 
the Snowy Mountain Scheme (Snowy Scheme). The 
Snowy Scheme was designed to produce electrical 
energy. However, one of the key objectives of the 
Scheme was to mitigate the effects of drought 
on irrigated agriculture in NSW and Victoria by 
improving the security of water supply to farmers 
along the fertile Murray and Murrumbidgee Rivers.
4 This includes Carrathool Shire in addition to Griffith City, Leeton Shire, Murrumbidgee, and Narrandera Shire 
Economy 
Collectively, the Western Riverina economy supports 
approximately 23,752 jobs and its economic 
value is an estimated $3.5 billion4 per year. The 
four key strengths of the region are in agriculture, 
manufacturing, utilities, and health and education 
The high-quality agricultural lands support a long-
held sector strength with significant value-add 
opportunities. The sector retains strong links to 
manufacturing, which also benefits from the linkages 
to large cities, distribution points of ports and 
airports, and links to freight and logistics hubs. 
Economic assets exist through the major freight 
routes, freight railway lines, and links to the 
neighbouring regional city precincts in Albury and 
Wagga Wagga. The region’s Western Riverina 
Intermodal Freight Terminal and urban industrial 
areas also proivde economic enablers.
Investment in the region continues with major 
projects planned and underway. Strengths which 
support the key industries are its access to water 
and irrigation systems, proximity to metropolitan 
markets, extensive road and rail infrastructure and 
emerging population-serving employment clusters. 
Industry
Employment  
(2021)
Gross Value Add  
(2020)
Agriculture 
3,926 jobs (16.5% share) 
$583m 
Manufacturing 
3,827 jobs (16.3% share) 
$526m
Health and education
4,405 jobs (18.5% share)
$390m
Electricity and water supply (including renewables)
382 jobs (1.6% share)
$144m
10

How this plan was prepared 
Image: Leeton Chill & Grill Festival
The Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan was prepared through the 
valued contribution of a broad cross section of community members, stakeholders, 
local government, government services, community organisations, businesses and local 
producers. This engagement was supported by an evidence-based resilience assessment 
for the region. 
map
Resilience Assessment
›
research and literature 
›
strategy and policy reviews
›
regional characteristics
›
trends and projections for drought 
impacts; and
›
drought resilience indicators assessment.
building-user
Stakeholder engagement
›
online community and business surveys
›
community, industry and 
government workshops
›
community drop-in sessions 
›
targeted consultations, interviews and 
discussions with community, industry and 
services representatives.
The narrative, theme and actions within the plan are directed by the conversations across community 
engagement. The plan builds on existing strategies through the lens of drought resilience which supports 
development on the identified strategic pathways. 
11

Strategic alignment – state, 
regional and local 
Looking upwards, the regional drought resilience 
program provides strategic alignment with 
international scale goals including the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the 
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, 
alongside national-scale strategies and frameworks 
and state-level strategic instruments. This alignment 
demonstrates how working locally contributes to 
broader sustainability and resilience outcomes for 
NSW and Australia. 
Key plans and strategies contributing to this 
alignment and the preparation of the Western 
Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan has 
included (but is not limited to):
›
Murray-Darling Basin Plan 
›
Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041
›
Western Riverina Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2023 update)
›
Draft Murrumbidgee Regional Water Strategy
›
Riverina and Murray Joint Organisation (RAMJO) 
strategies, plans and papers
›
NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
›
NSW Government Department of Primary 
Industries Drought Hub
›
Department of Regional NSW Drought Signals 
Dashboard 
›
Commonwealth Government’s Drought 
Resilience Self-Assessment tool
›
Council Integrated Planning and Reporting 
Framework documents.
A stakeholder-driven approach 
The resilience assessment which underpins the 
RDRP built an understanding of local context and 
drought impacts around the economic, natural 
environment and social characteristics of the 
region. However, impacts are not felt in isolation 
but rather can compound and cascade. Community 
consultation was key to understanding how these 
interactions occur and build. 
The engagement process centred on community 
workshops, drop-in sessions, targeted meetings 
and discussions, and an online survey to collate 
experiences, insights and views from a broad cross 
section of community members. We spoke with 
growers, livestock graziers, industry and community 
group representatives, business operators, First 
Nations organisations, subject matter specialists, 
service providers, local and state government 
agencies, elected representatives and more. 
Discussion was had on what was needed into the 
future to better position the region collectively 
when the next time a dry period is upon us. This 
discussion focussed on actions and initiatives that 
were required in preparation for drought, the needs 
during drought and then into recovery. 
Figure 4 — Engagement workshops held in-region
9 workshops across weeks in  
July and September 2024
Coleambally / Narrandera 
Barellan / Leeton / Griffith
4 drop in sessions
Darlington Point / Jerilderie 
Whitton / Griffith 
Online survey
Community / Business owners 
and operators
72 survey responses
45+ workshop attendees
12

Engagement observations and insights
Key insights communicated through the stakeholder consultation process and 
informing the preparation of this plan include:
people	 Co-operative community approaches 
are strong and working well. This sets 
the region apart from other areas. There 
is a strong desire to work together for 
mutual benefit.
sun-plant-wilt	 Irrigation has stabilised the local 
economy over the past 50 years which 
has limited the impacts of drought on 
the region to an extent, though it is still 
felt. 
star-of-life	
Mental health and wellbeing ahead 
of the next drought should be a key 
area of focus. Mental health support 
once drought has set in is welcomed, 
but it can be too late. Tools to support 
producers ahead of drought is a clear 
opportunity, as well as building broader 
community mental health literacy.
farm	 Primary producers in the region benefit 
from opportunities to showcase their 
property management and production 
processes. People come from around 
the world to learn from Western 
Riverina producers.
wheat-awn	
The Western Riverina plays a key role 
in broader food security matters, and 
as a key exporter for the nation. As 
key players in this system we want to 
see what is being planned at higher 
policy levels. 
building-columns	
State and Commonwealth Government 
services that support drought 
preparedness should be more actively 
promoted and marketed.
raindrops	
An improved and shared understanding 
of how the water market operates is 
needed. 
droplet-slash	 To deal with reduced water availability, 
economic development needs to 
focus on non-water dependent jobs / 
industries. Government assistance is 
needed in diversifying the economy 
to reduce reliance on contribution 
from agricultural.
water-arrow-down	 The key is to act early when making 
decisions in the face of drought, which 
applies to on and off-farm businesses.
truck	 The efficiency of government processes 
and systems places unnecessary stress 
on people. For example, registration of 
trucks (of which properties / businesses 
usually have many) which must be done 
in-person. Issues were also present with 
previous grant application process and 
timelines of such availability. 
glass-water	
Townships have good water allocations 
that provide opportunities for 
new businesses.
coins	
Resilience is driven by efficiencies and 
strong self-accountability based upon 
business acumen, efficient management, 
innovation and sustainability.
shop	 Business and property succession 
planning is critical.
13

Messages from the Community 
Community views are strong on how the region builds its own resilience and how it contributes to the 
resilience of Australians more broadly. Key messages from the community, which are central to this 
plan include: 
pan-food
Our region was developed 
purposefully to provide food 
for Australians – and we 
take that legacy seriously by 
developing and innovating 
world class food production 
processes 
list-ol
One size fits all approaches 
don’t work – specialised and 
targeted support is critical 
trophy
We are a critical driver of the 
success of cities and towns 
of everyday lives of people 
all over Australia – our 
resilience drives Australia’s 
resilience 
droplet
We need greater water 
certainty and availability  
list-check
Trust us to manage  
our own future, and  
help us to keep being as 
efficient as we can be  
house-medical
Centralisation of  
services doesn’t meet 
community need – we need 
core services in community  
to support our prosperity 
ENERGY
WATER
CONNECTION
Renewables
at scale
Access to
Renewable 
Energy
Zone
Energy
Reliability
Federal
Policy
State 
Strategies
Access 
and
Consumption
Quality and
security
Technology
and innovation
Freight
routes
Road
resilience
network
Digital access 
and bandwidth
Ageing
infrastructure
Figure 5 — Regional enabling priorities of the Western Riverina
Regional enablers 
To bolster the resilience to 
the effects of drought, the 
region’s ability to capitalise 
on its community and 
economic development 
opportunities is reliant upon 
key enabling attributes. 
Beyond water, these include 
access to reliable energy 
networks, digital connectivity 
and transport infrastructure. 
14

How our region is  
impacted by drought
How the Western Riverina region is impacted by drought is closely aligned to its 
connection with water, which is the ‘lifeblood’ of the region. 
Natural river systems 
This is a unique part of Australia. The region derives 
the benefit of relatively modest in-region rainfall, but 
also the bounty of surface water from rain and snow 
precipitation from far away. The Murrumbidgee is 
sourced from high in the Australian Alps, winding 
its way across the south-west slopes of NSW and 
across the riverine plains to where it meets the 
Murray River. The Snowy Scheme was originally 
conceived as an irrigation scheme to draw the 
snowmelt from the Snowy Mountains west into the 
Murrumbidgee and Murray Rivers, before it also 
diversified into hydro-electric power generation.
The Murrumbidgee River connects centres and 
communities across the region and is the basis for 
productive agricultural lands, nationally important 
wetlands, and hydroelectricity further beyond the 
Western Riverina. 
The Murrumbidgee catchment is part of the 
southern Basin of the Murray-Darling Basin, with 
this basin flowing into the Murray River. The Murray 
River system also influences the region, supplying 
water to south of Billabong Creek. This supports 
production in and around Jerilderie and the broader 
Murrumbidgee Council area. 
Land uses are diverse across the Murrumbidgee 
Valley. A high proportion of land is used for dryland 
grazing and cereal-based cropping. The region 
supports the production of over 40 percent of NSW 
grapes and 50 percent of Australia’s rice. Given the 
diversity of users, and the context to which it sits as 
part of the broader Murray-Darling Basin system, 
there are competing interests which provide the 
backdrop for a range of issues related to regional 
water planning and policy in the region. 
The Snowy Scheme water makes its way 
through the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (MIA) 
via Blowering Dam and Burrinjuck Dam on the 
Murrumbidgee River. Blowering Dam stores water 
that has been released from storages further 
upstream in the Snowy-Tumut Development 
Section of the Snowy Scheme. Water releases from 
Blowering and Burrinjuck Dams are managed by 
NSW State Water, to provide for town water supply, 
irrigation and environmental use requirements. On 
the Murrumbidgee River, as at Gundagai, the Snowy 
Scheme contributes inflows of around 25 percent 
during average inflow years, but 60 percent during 
drought years. Water from the two storage dams 
flows down to Berembed Weir, a journey taking 
five days and a further two days to Gogeldrie Weir. 
From Berembed Weir, water moves into Bundidgerry 
storage and onto the Narrandera Regulator, which 
is the start of the system owned and maintained by 
Murrumbidgee Irrigation.
Image: Griffith Main Canal
15

Irrigation areas
The Murrumbidgee River acts as the natural delivery course for the major food producing areas of the MIA and 
the Coleambally Irrigation Area (CIA) via Blowering Dam (on the Tumut River, a tributary to the Murrumbidgee) 
and Burrinjuck Dams. These irrigation areas provide over one-quarter of all the fruit and vegetable production 
in NSW and are also one of Australia’s largest exporters of bulk wine. The southern part of the region, south of 
Jerilderie and Billabong Creek, is serviced by Murray Irrigation which supplies to more than 740,000 hectares 
of farmland. 
This access to water through the establishment of irrigation schemes, and other water sources, has supported 
the growth and scale of operations in the region both in agribusiness and associated manufacturing. Economic 
activity in the region, both historically and at present is strongly linked to the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Scheme, 
and the water infrastructure investment that support the modern-day irrigation network.
Figure 6 — Major irrigation areas in the Western Riverina
Jerilderie
Narrandera
□
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area
□
Coleambally Irrigation Area
□
Murray Irrigation Area
Barellan
Leeton
Griffith
Yenda
Whitton
Darlington Point
Coleambally
16

The region’s different types 
of ‘drought’ 
The Bureau of Meteorology notes that drought is a 
prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount 
of available water is insufficient to meet our normal 
use. We typically think of drought as the absence 
of rainfall in a region given most other regions in 
Australia are predominantly dryland in nature. 
‘Water uncertainty’ is a preferred term in the region 
rather than this traditional rainfall and climate-led 
view of drought. This uncertainty can come from a 
range of different mechanisms in this region which 
may occur singularly or in combination. Engagement 
highlighted three kinds of ‘water uncertainty’ for 
the region:
›
‘Natural’ drought – which is the climate-related 
drought experienced across Australia, and 
involves a deficit in the level of rainfall occurring 
in region.
›
‘Human-made’ drought – which is the lack of 
irrigation water due to government policy or out-
of-region water availability. 
›
Operational constraints influences – which 
involves the asset-based constraints of 
scheme maintenance and operation, an more 
significantly, reliability of supply.
The effects of drought and any resilience initiative 
need to be aligned with responses to the broader 
context, including policy drivers and operational 
implications of changing rainfall patterns in the 
Snowy Mountains. These may result in less water 
availability or a reduction in the reliability of water 
supplies in the region. The interplay of these factors 
creates uncertainty in the water landscape for 
this region. 
Whilst the irrigation schemes have stabilised local 
and regional economic activity, water shortage 
and drought impacts can still be felt across the 
community. Into the future, the impact of climate 
change on the Snowy Mountain region is also 
important to the Western Riverina given the reliance 
on elevated inflows in drier periods from the Snowy 
Scheme. This emphasises a need to plan ahead to 
alleviate potential future impacts. 
Climate change impacts on inﬂow 
reliability, especiall in drought times
Less rainfall 
Higher temperatures
Heat waves
Water buy backs & 
supporting actions
Reduced Water Availability 
Policies / Programs / Actions in response to the various drivers need to 
be aligned to avoid unintended consequences and implementation gaps.
Climate
Policy 
Infrastructure 
Operation
Economic / Social / 
Environmental 
impacts of less water
Figure 7 — Drivers of loss of water availability in the Western Riverina
17

Drought impacts
Regardless of how drought manifests, whether it is climatic, policy or operationally-related, the impacts are 
largely still the same. The impacts below were identified through consultation to inform the plan. 
family People and Social Impacts
›
Social isolation
›
Increased mental and physical 
health issues
›
Increased demand on community services
›
Challenges in attracting and 
retaining workers
›
Youth retention
›
Maintenance of sports and 
recreational facilities
›
Reduced ability to partake in sporting and 
recreation activities
›
Household financial distress, and capacity 
to access local services
›
Population decline and loss of skills
›
Increased need for community group 
activity with less volunteers available
›
Increased potential for conflict and 
reduced community cohesion
›
Impacts on culture and cultural practices 
›
Infections and illness from water quality
water Environmental Impacts
›
Loss of topsoil through groundcover loss 
and wind erosion 
›
Increased demand on alluvial ground water 
›
Reduced root zone soil moisture
›
Water turbidity
›
Pressure on the wetlands to support a 
wider variety and quantity of wildlife
›
Low inflows into the water courses and 
higher evaporation rates impacting the 
health of flora and fauna
›
Biosecurity and pest and weed outbreaks
›
Vegetation dieback
›
Increased potential for bushfire and 
grassfire, and dust storms
›
Water and food availability for wildlife
trees Economic Impacts
›
Reduction in water allocations 
›
Limited fodder and water availability 
for livestock
›
Reduced discretionary spending in townships
›
Water uncertainty creates loss of 
confidence in both commercial & residential 
property market
›
Reduction in agricultural production, reduced 
yields 
›
Loss of or reduced farm income, 
balance sheet impacts and reduced 
borrowing capacity
›
Maintaining cash flow and debt servicing
›
Loss or reduction in on and off 
farm employment
›
Increased fodder and water prices
›
Changes in farm ownership models
›
Halting of investment and capital projects on 
farms and directly associated businesses 
›
Research and innovation can stall 
›
Compounding effects of other natural events 
such as frosts
18

Cascading impacts of 
drought
The effects of drought are not isolated, they 
are interconnected across the social and 
economic systems in the region and broader 
pressures on the landscape. Given the 
significance of agriculture within the regional 
economy, impacts to the sector have broader 
flow on effects to downstream industries, 
supply chains, and the local businesses in town 
that rely on discretionary spending. 
Many existing challenges within a regional 
area are made harder. Workforce attraction 
and retention can be an issue through drought. 
Where workers leave during drought, it can be 
difficult attracting these workers back which 
can be both timely and costly to business 
operations and can impede productivity in the 
recovery cycle. 
As part of the development of this plan, it is 
essential to consider the relationship between 
drought impacts and their underlying causes, 
with a focus on addressing the root causes 
rather than merely responding to the resulting 
chain of symptoms. In this regard, the design 
and implementation of actions can address 
multiple challenges across the system. 
Impacts from external trends
water	
Changing water policy environments 
including water buy backs and 
allocation changes
house	
Housing pressure and availability of land 
in and around towns impacting housing 
supply for workers 
sheep	
Costs of living and rising costs of 
farming inputs
globe	
Demand from overseas markets is driving 
the need for sustainability and accreditation
hospital	
Changes to government service delivery 
models which centralise employment to 
larger centres and results in consequences 
for awareness of programs and support, 
and access to services
person-arrow-up-from-line	
Changes to farm structures, with an 
increase of corporate farm and the resultant 
impacts to local community service 
provision, population and local spend
tv	
Limited telecommunications and electricity 
network reliability and coverage.
Image: Banna Lane Festival Griffith - Artwork by Reubszz
19

Drought history 
The impacts of drought can vary based on community, weather conditions, and the prevailing macro 
influences and trends of the time. Additionally, personal circumstances can vary significantly. Major droughts in 
Australian history have affected the Western Riverina region, characterised by periods of low rainfall.
Figure 8 — Yearly mean precipitation anomaly by LGA
*Note that the data does not extend back to the Federation drought of 1890-1902
1895 – 1902 
Federation  
Drought
1937 – 1945 
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009 
Millennium  
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019 
Tinderbox 
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
20

Figure 9 — Soil moisture across LGAs. Major historical droughts align with lower soil moisture levels
The region experiences some years of consistent rainfall, scattered with year-to-year fluctuations. The WWII 
Drought and Millenium Drought display some of the more protracted periods with notable impacts to soil 
moisture levels.
A comprehensive synthesis of historic drought climate data specific to the region is included at Appendix A. 
An analysis of this was undertaken as part of the Resilience Assessment reporting that informs this plan.
A focus on the 2017-2019 drought
During the 2017-2019 period, rainfall for much of Australia, in particular most of the Murray–Darling Basin, was 
substantially below average. The three years from January 2017 to December 2019 was the driest on record 
for any 36-month period starting January, when averaged across the Murray-Darling Basin and NSW. Average 
rainfall for the basin was over 100 millimetres lower than the second driest period (January 1965 to December 
1967), and NSW received around 170 millimetres less rainfall than the next driest period, the Federation 
Drought (1900-1902).
A notable feature of the rainfall deficiencies of these three years is that they were concentrated in the cooler 
seasons. Both 2018 and 2019 were especially dry. The period was the driest and hottest on record for the 
basin as a whole. These record warm temperatures exacerbated dry conditions, at times rapidly drying soils in 
a matter of months. This led to periods in 2017 and 2019 that researchers have termed ‘flash drought’.
Image: Grain storage, Jerilderie
21

Future drought
The agricultural industry is a significant economic 
driver for the region. The high-quality agricultural 
lands support a long-held sector strength with 
significant value-add in industries of education 
and manufacturing. Because of this, it is important 
to consider the projected impact of future climate 
changes to better plan for potential increased 
rainfall uncertainty and its impacts of associated 
water policy. 
The further in advance we plan, build awareness 
and put in place redundancy measures, the more 
options we will likely have available to address 
issues down the track.
Future climate scenarios
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) reporting, under all 
emissions scenarios considered global surface 
temperature will continue to increase until at least 
the mid-century. Increasing temperatures and 
energy within the climate system are projected 
to result in widespread changes to weather and 
climate patterns, including drought and all elements 
of the water cycle. 
The below section presents projections of drought 
and associated climate conditions which are 
assessed over two possible future climate scenarios 
using regional climate model ensembles. Projections 
are shown across the region using the reference 
period (1976-2005) and then two timescales 2050 
(2036-2065) and 2070 (2056-2085). The IPCC’s 
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 
and 8.5 are used. RCP 4.5 models mean global 
warming of between two to three degrees Celsius 
and is the most likely future scenario based on 
current climate commitments. RCP 8.5 is a mean 
global warming of four degrees Celsius or more. 
This is considered a worst-case scenario. 
Current climate models do not account for global 
climate tipping points. This means that the effects 
of tipping points are typically not included in climate 
projections and impact assessments. Breaching 
global climate tipping points represents significant 
risks on top of the changes typically described 
in climate assessments. The effects of breaching 
certain tipping points may include abrupt changes 
to the El Niño Southern Oscillation, rainfall patterns, 
and rainfall variability that are not represented 
in climate model projections, on top of the main 
consequences of more rapid warming and sea-
level rise.
While days above 35ºC and Forest Fire Danger 
Index (FFDI) are not direct indicators of drought, 
they describe weather conditions that often occur 
alongside drought or are exacerbated by drought. 
Regional drought climate indicators:
raindrops	 Generally decreasing trends 
in annual precipitation across 
the region, worsening into the 
far term
sun-plant-wilt	 Reduction in soil moisture levels 
across all scenarios modelled
sun-haze	 Increasing temperatures are 
likely to be the primary driver 
of increased frequency and 
severity of evapotranspiration 
and drought conditions
fire	 Other climate and weather-
driven events like heatwaves 
and bushfires / grass fire may 
compound broader impacts from 
drought events.
22

Below projections of these indices use an ensemble of CSIRO’s Electricity Sector Climate Information (ESCI) 
datasets (days above 35ºC and days above an FFDI of 25).5
Griffith City
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
15%#
↓ 0.019 mm^
↓ 0.019 mm^
↓ 0.013 mm^
↓ 0.026 mm^
Annual total precipitation
414 mm
↑ 1 mm
↓ 7 mm
0 mm
↓ 15 mm
Days above 35ºC
31
49 ↑ 18
55 ↑ 24
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
53
67 ↑ 14
74 ↑ 21
Leeton
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
16%#
↓ 0.023 mm^
↓ 0.025 mm^
↓ 0.015 mm^
↓ 0.031 mm^
Annual total precipitation
422 mm
↓ 3 mm
↓ 10 mm
↓ 9 mm
↓ 19 mm
Days above 35ºC
30
47 ↑ 17
53 ↑ 23
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
51
64 ↑ 13
71 ↑ 20
Murrumbidgee
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
12%#
↓ 0.015 mm^
↓ 0.013 mm^
↓ 0.007 mm^
↓ 0.021 mm^
Annual total precipitation
385 mm
↓ 6 mm
↓ 3 mm
↓ 4 mm
↓ 17 mm
Days above 35ºC
30
47 ↑ 17
53 ↑ 23
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
54
68 ↑ 14
74 ↑ 20
Narrandera
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
14%#
↓ 0.019 mm ^
↓ 0.018 mm^
↓ 0.009 mm^
↓ 0.023 mm^
Annual total precipitation
436 mm
↓ 3 mm
↓ 9 mm
↓ 7 mm
↓ 18 mm
Days above 35ºC
30
47 ↑ 17
53 ↑ 23
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
48
62 ↑ 14
68 ↑ 20
# Mean water content as a percentage of capacity. 
^ Change (mm/yr) in relative soil water content of the 1976-2005 reference period’s relative soil water holding capacity.
5 CSIRO n.d., ESCI Climate Data, Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources. Available at: https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/
projects/esci/esci-climate-data/ 
23

Annual precipitation 
Considering the modelled 
scenarios for precipitation, all 
see either a minimal change or a 
reduction in annual total rainfall by 
2050. Under the RCP4.5 scenario, 
this annual reduction lessens in 
severity in Murrumbidgee and 
Narrandera by 2070; but, grows in 
Griffith and Leeton. 
Under the RCP8.5 scenario by 
2070, the reduction in annual 
rainfall grows significantly across 
each LGA over the course of the 
two decades. This is notable for 
Murrumbidgee, as it has the lowest 
rainfall rate in the climate reference 
period and the most significant 
reduction from 2050 (-3mm) to 
2070 (-17mm) under this scenario 
(Figure 12).
Figure 12 — Annual precipitation changes 
across the region. 
Climate model reference period
2050 (RCP4.5)
2070 (RCP4.5)
-50
-25
-10
-5
5
10
25
50
100 - 200
200 - 250
250 - 300
300 - 350
350 - 400
400 - 500
500 - 600
600 - 700 
700 - 800
8
Precipitation  
(mm)
Precipitation change (mm)
24

Figure 13 — Annual mean precipitation future climate projections, by LGA
Root zone soil moisture
Root zone soil moisture (RZSM) is presented as a percentage of total capacity during the baseline reference 
period and as a change of millimetres per year of the climate adjusted scenarios.
25

Root zone soil moisture
Under all four future scenarios 
modelled, each is set to see an 
annual reduction in root zone soil 
moisture. However, under the 
RCP4.5 scenarios, the reduction 
does lessen from 2050 to 2070. 
Under the RCP8.5 scenarios, the 
annual reduction increases to 
2070 (Figure 14 — Root zone soil 
moisture future climate projections, 
by LGA). The reduction, both in 
2050 and 2070, is most intense in 
Griffith and Leeton.
Figure 14 — Root zone soil moisture future 
climate projections, by LGA
Climate model reference period
0
10
25
50
60
70
80
85
90
100
RZSM %
2050 (RCP4.5)
2070 (RCP4.5)
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm/yr)
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Figure 15 — Annual change in root zone soil moisture
26

What does the climate data tell us?
The region will continue to be susceptible to the 
impact of drought which can be protracted events, 
such as the Millennial drought, or relatively shorter 
time periods of high intensity. 
Climate projections indicate an increase in drought 
risk, which worsens in the far-term under a higher 
emissions scenario. 
Potential increases in frequency and severity 
of drought conditions will be largely driven by 
temperature, evapotranspiration and reduced soil 
moisture in the Western Riverina region.
Relevance of climate change in the 
neighbouring Alpine region
In addition to the climate projections for the Western 
Riverina region, climate change impacts in the 
Snowy Mountains (Alpine region) must also be 
considered given the reliance of inflows directed 
from the Snowy Scheme into the Murrumbidgee 
catchment. Over time, reduced snowpack, rainfall, 
changes to landform, erosion and runoff, and 
increased temperatures in the Snowy Mountains 
region is likely to have an impact on the Western 
Riverina. 
The water from the Alps which flows through to 
the Basin and the irrigation schemes is of high 
significance, supporting ecosystem services of 
national economic, social and environmental 
importance. With the water held in high regard now, 
every gigalitre flowing from the Alps catchment to 
the Basin is likely to be more important in the future. 
Climate projections for the NSW Alpine region 
indicate continued warming and drying – with winter 
temperatures increasing by more than 2°C in the far 
future and spring rainfall projected to decrease by 
20 percent in the far future. 
Through an increase in temperatures and changes 
to rainfall patterns, there are subsequent impacts to 
the quantity of both surface water and groundwater, 
with some projections showing that, across the 
Alpine region, there is likely to be a reduction in 
surface-water run-off in the future. 
Climate change threats to the natural condition of 
the catchments may also impact high quality water 
delivery from the Alps. This includes water yield, 
water flow regimes and water quality. 
Further investigation is needed to understand how 
the projected reduction in surface water run-off in 
the Alpine region, and other influencing processes 
on water yield and delivery within the Alps, interacts 
with the run-off generally received through the 
Murrumbidgee catchment. With the Murrumbidgee 
and Murray water catchments receiving inflows from 
the Snowy Scheme under the Snowy Water Licence, 
future reviews based on building a climate-based 
understanding will need to be considered. 
Clear reliance is evident on the water quantity and 
quality from the Alpine region to other catchments, 
importantly the Murrumbidgee catchment, and 
broader considerations to the contribution it makes 
to agricultural production and other industries in 
the Basin.
Image: ‘A Country Life’ (Brett Collins)
27

Trends, stressors and shocks
To support preparedness and planning for drought we must also consider other trends, stressors and acute 
shocks, beyond the climate, that may amplify drought impacts into the future. These can influence our 
resilience to different conditions, circumstances and scenarios. It is also important in terms of governance 
arrangements and strategic priorities to ensure broader actions are cognisant of interaction with drought in 
our communities. 
family
People and community
›
Service availability, 
particularly health and 
community services
›
Workforce shortages, 
and worker attraction 
and retention to regions
›
Demographic shifts 
in population (ageing 
population and 
youth retention)
›
Housing availability and 
new dwelling supply
›
Costs of living 
pressures and local 
discretionary spending
›
Urbanisation and 
population mobility 
trends 
coin
Economic
›
Water policy and water 
allocation changes
›
Cost of farming with 
rising inputs
›
The state of the national 
economy, commodity 
prices, market volatility 
and interest rates
›
Fuel prices and 
transport costs
›
Positive impacts 
of strategic road 
connectivity on 
market access
›
Major project investment 
decisions, both private 
and public
›
Changing farm 
enterprise ownership 
models and their scale
›
Energy access
›
Transition to renewable 
energy sources
trees
Environmental
›
Widespread 
invasive species
›
Feral animal numbers
›
Land use conflicts, 
particularly on primary 
production areas
›
Loss of riparian habitat
›
Water management 
within the Murray-
Darling Basin
›
Water infrastructure 
projects and 
funding decisions
›
Soil erosion
›
Water licensing 
arrangements 
to improve 
environmental flows
›
Climate change
Western Riverina in Australia’s future drought context 
At the national level, a consequence of the most recent drought (2017-2019) was increased pressure 
on Australia’s food security. Grain was imported to feed stock and the nation. Similar imports in 2006‑7, 
2003-4, and 1994-5 correlate to the worst drought related cropping years in recent decades. Since 
this event in 2019, Australia’s population has grown from 25.5 million to 27.2 million, with continued 
growth projected. This growth adds to the demand on available water and increases the pressures on 
food insecurity into the future. Any response to drought, particularly within the productive area of the 
Western Riverina, fits within the context of a strategic view of national food and water security. This 
would consider the potential scenarios of water availability, as well as the related potential biosecurity 
risks. Subsequent revisions of the Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan will monitor the 
development of a national policy response to this trend, and reflect community views to advocate 
more on this significant issue. 
28

Our drought resilience 
Drought resilience can be considered against three macro indicators, each with their 
own influencing factors. Considering how this plan can address all these factors ensures 
we can address all aspects of the system.
coin 
Economic  
resilience
Continuity 
Employment 
Diversity
tree
Environmental  
resilience
Infrastructure and built assets 
Natural processes 
Land management
family
Social  
resilience
Personal wellbeing 
Decision making capacity 
Community wellbeing
A snapshot of vulnerability and resilience to drought 
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences’ (ABARES) has developed an 
index that ranks remote, rural or regional agriculturally dependent communities (at the LGA level) according to 
their potential to be adversely affected by drought.
The result is a snapshot based on drought exposure and drought sensitivity at the farm level (farm sensitivity), 
the reliance on employment in agricultural production industries (community sensitivity), the adaptive capacity 
of a LGA to drought based on economic diversity, and a final combination of the potential drought impact. 
The data comprises data variables and indicators which have been combined and ranked. Scores are not 
necessarily representative of the magnitude of impact, rather it positions the sensitivity with respect to other 
LGAs assessed. There is a strong link to employment in agricultural production, particularly for community 
sensitivity which may not be representative of broader community sensitivity detailed throughout this plan. 
Community Vulnerability and Resilience to Drought Index  
(measured from 0 [lowest] to 1 [highest])
LGA
Farm  
sensitivity
Community 
sensitivity
Economic  
diversity
Potential 
drought  
impact
Griffith City
N/A*
0.30
0.53
0.20
Leeton Shire
N/A*
0.27
0.59
0.18
Murrumbidgee
0.76
0.58
0.16
0.90
Narrandera Shire
N/A*
0.32
0.47
0.22
* Insufficient data for broadacre farm samples in the region
29

The ABARES CVRDI scores indicate for the region:
›
Some evidence of farm-based exposure, which is linked to both exposure to climate variability, and the 
effects that has on farm outcomes
›
A low to moderate level of community dependence on agricultural activity in terms of employment
›
Some demonstrated economic diversity highlighted by a strong regional centre offer, service industry and 
economic output
›
A low to higher level of overall potential drought impact, particularly in Murrumbidgee noting it has a 
particularly strong agriculture sector with high value agriculture commodity output (while potential drought 
impact measures farm sensitivity and community sensitivity, whether there is lasting loss or harm depends 
on a community’s adaptive capacity).
While the region is susceptible to future drought impacts, and this is more apparent for Murrumbidgee 
compared with other LGAs, its economic diversity supports a level of adaptive capacity in some areas 
of the region. Levels of community connection and social capital, along with diversified economic 
development opportunities, offer key opportunities to aid immediate as well as long-term drought resilience. 
Murrumbidgee’s proximity to the regional centres of both Griffith and Albury potentially moderate drought 
vulnerability scoring through access to employment and services in relative proximity.
The above provides a snapshot of community vulnerability to drought, though a number of limitations are 
noted. As this plan details, impacts in the Western Riverina extend to broader pressures on water availability, 
and subsequent impacts to community and economic outputs. 
Photo: XXXXX
 Image: Northbank Bridge, Narrandera
30

Drought action plan 
The drought action plan for Western Riverina 
incorporates priorities for drought resilience across 
strategic pathways for action. The action plan 
provides: 
›
Details of specific actions against each pathway
›
The alignment of the action to an 
implementation pathway
›
Anticipated stakeholders
Timeframes are indicative and are dependent upon 
opportunities and timing for funding and other 
variables. 
While Council is listed next to a number of actions, 
this is generally in anticipation of advocating and 
leading next steps of the action rather than sole 
responsibility in delivery. Many of these actions are 
of a scale or fall outside council operations and 
require funding and resourcing from other levels of 
government or input from industry.
A program logic approach was used to match 
the drought resilience needs illuminated by the 
engagement feedback with pragmatic actions. 
The degree to which the actions contribute to our 
movement along the resilience ‘theory of change’ 
journey is also detailed. This is about whether 
the actions ‘absorb, adapt or transform’ how we 
collectively prepare for and grow our resilience 
to drought effects. This scale also helps us to 
understand the level of effort and the timeframes 
associated with each action.
Pathways for change 
This drought action plan establishes a framework to 
guide focus and efforts in response to community 
needs and community strengths highlighted 
through engagement. The action plan spans six 
strategic pathways, reflecting the three systems 
of drought resilience of community, economic, 
and environmental characteristics. These strategic 
pathways are:
water	 Anticipate water availability
cash-register	 Proactively manage business interests 
croissant	 Support off-farm diversification 
location-crosshairs	 Grow local  
co-operative service provision
people	 Support community cohesion
trees	 Embed environmental stewardship 
and sustainable agricultural practices
These pathways can be approached at different 
scales. This can be by different actors and through a 
range of mechanisms over time from transformative 
resilience actions at a large scale to proactive 
resilience actions by individuals and the more formal 
or common pathways. 
Immediate
Opportunity
Absorb
Adapt
Transform
1—2
Years
2—5
years
Figure 16 — Resilience theory of change 
31

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 1 –  
Anticipate water availability 
The region’s social and economic 
resilience is inextricably linked 
to water availability. Reducing 
the inherent uncertainties of 
water availability is critical to 
the ongoing sustainability of the 
region. 
This is particularly the case 
with the evolution of the water 
market in NSW, whereby water 
allocations have been decoupled 
from land ownership. The 
ability to trade water unlocks an 
additional revenue stream for 
those farmers who hold those 
allocations, but it also creates 
challenges for those farmers 
who have to purchase both land 
and water allocations. In times 
of drought, they could be left 
with a farm (and its associated 
debt obligation) and having to 
purchase water temporarily at 
a high price due to reduced 
availability. 
Key actions under this pathway to 
build resilience include:
›
Increasing collective 
understanding of water 
market dynamics – including 
communicating the risks 
of temporary allocation 
purchases 
›
Improving water allocation 
forecasting 
›
Improving access to and 
awareness of climate forecasts 
for dryland farmers 
›
Considered and well-
informed planning for water 
infrastructure programs 
and management
ID
SPECIFIC ACTION 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
1.1
Develop an agreed approach for drought fodder management/distribution with improved governance 
arrangements overseen by a local independent authority (e.g. using Stock Saleyard operations as a model)
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and ensure 
coordination of processes
Council
1.2
Councils to review town water supply restrictions policies and approaches to providing emergency water 
supplies, recognising the wellbeing benefits of towns being “green” even during dry times, and include water 
use efficiency approaches.
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and 
support common good outcomes
Council
1.3
Undertake an independent assessment of the Lake Coolah development proposal with consideration to multiple 
objectives including flood mitigation, wetland enhancement and water delivery system efficiency
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council
1.4
Councils to review stormwater management and town sewerage discharge strategies and approaches to 
maximise opportunities for reuse of water resources
Adapt to strengthen preparedness through 
continuous improvements 
Council
1.5
Work with International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage Australia and Irrigation Australia to promote the 
bench marking of irrigation scheme delivery efficiencies, and explore a “5 Star” approach – that will support 
regional marketing of agricultural products
Adapt to leverage existing strengths
Industry groups 
1.6
Deliver continuing education / training program on the operation of water markets, with irrigators as the 
target audience
Adapt through increased local understanding 
of the system
Industry groups
Irrigators
1.7
Work with the NSW Government to introduce training and programs for primary producers to further develop 
rainfall and weather intelligence using drought signals / indicators for use in conjunction with soil moisture and 
other weather data.
Adapt through improved processes to 
complement planning 
Council
State Government
1.8
Promote engagement with the One Basin CRC projects delivered through the Griffith Hub, and explore the 
possibility of a Centre of Irrigation Excellence building upon the existing Irrigation Research and Extension 
Committee model.
Transform through increased capacity and 
recognition of local strengths
Council
32

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 2 –  
Proactively manage 
business interests 
Strength of small business is a 
feature of the region whether 
it’s fuel, cafes, hairdressers, 
mechanical or the local 
accountant. While drought 
generally impacts farmers first, 
the flow-on effects are felt across 
towns and communities through 
business impacts and in-turn, 
employment and expenditure. 
Resilient, diverse and prepared 
businesses are better positioned 
to ride the peaks and troughs 
when they are planned for and 
anticipated. A range of pressures 
exist outside of drought times 
which requires strategic long 
term planning to address, while 
more agile initiatives provide 
interventions during drought, and 
are effective where planned for 
in advance. Priority action areas 
include: 
›
Support for businesses to 
adapt and prepare 
›
Ensuring the region has the 
right skills, and attracts new 
skills for confident business 
growth 
›
Ensure business has the 
information they need to 
operate effectively.
ID
SPECIFIC ACTION 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
2.1
Investigate the reintroduction of previous Services Australia farm exit program 
Adapt to facilitate business transition
Council 
Services Australia (Federal 
Government) 
2.2
Investigate potential to fund local application (using a co-operative approach) of the NSW Farmers’ 
Federation “Ag Career Start” program
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and build 
local capacity 
Council
2.3
Undertake a more detailed analysis of economic flows / benefits done by ABARES prior to the next 
drought (taking milling and downstream activities into account)
Adapt to strengthen preparedness through 
understanding of the system
Council
2.4
Undertake a review across all the local education service provider course and curriculum offerings to 
meet local agricultural industry and supply chain needs including opportunities for rural cadetships, 
apprenticeship advisors, and how to increase housing with a link to trade apprenticeships
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council 
TAFE NSW 
Local education providers
2.5
Support small businesses with computer and internet training
Absorb immediate action to support 
community capacity 
Council
State Government
2.6
Promote the benefits of “lifestyle” driving the purpose of business / financial / succession planning, and 
promote the benefits and delivery of business plans e.g. for improved access to capital
Adapt to strengthen preparedness
Council 
2.7
Promote drought assistance programs or financial subsidy programs to “supply chain” businesses when 
they are impacted by agricultural clients who are impacted by drought 
Adapt to support endurance during drought
Council 
Business owners and operators 
2.8
Engage a project officer to help local businesses (small to large) develop their own drought resilience 
plan - and facilitate access to grant funding from various agencies
Adapt to strengthen preparedness
Business owners and operators  
Council
2.9
Provide training to local providers on responding to tenders
Absorb immediate action to support local 
capacity 
Council 
2.10
Provide local support to Services NSW / Concierge service to provide opportunities for workers 
displaced by drought to get other local short-term work
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and 
mobilise workforce supply
Council  
State Government 
2.11
Promote the need to broaden the rules for “backpacker” workers to attract more workers for 
agricultural related industries
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects and ensure 
workforce supply
Federal Government 
2.12
Promote opportunities in alternate industries that suit available soils, water and climatic conditions.
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council 
State Government 
2.13
Review / update regional economic development strategies to include promotion of non-water 
based industries, agricultural industries that align with available soils and water, and others that take 
advantage of available products
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects and diversification 
of economy
Council 
State Government
2.14
Undertake regional internet/phone service audit for digital access, along with an energy access audit 
and advocate for improved connectivity 
Absorb immediate action to inform advocacy 
of key barriers
Council
2.15
Advocate for improved consistency in funding for the Rural Financial Counselling Service to support 
local business operators to take proactive steps toward enhanced drought resilience
Absorb immediate action to provide continuity 
of services 
Council 
2.16
Develop a “Generation Ag Link” program modelled on the CSIRO program “Generation STEM Link”
Adapt to strengthen preparedness by building 
capacity and local industry understanding 
Industry groups 
33

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 3 –  
Support off-farm 
diversification 
The region boasts many 
economic development 
opportunities which over time 
will offer varied income and 
productivity opportunities. Some 
of these opportunities are truly 
transformative and offer long term 
prospects for change, growth 
and stability. As an agriculturally 
based economy, there is 
benefit in:
›
Leveraging existing tourism 
assets as a major economic 
pillar 
›
Building the financial strength 
of all businesses regardless of 
sector or scale 
›
Diversifying the regional 
economy through 
manufacturing and value 
adding agriculture 
›
Keeping our towns active 
and attractive.
ID
SPECIFIC ACTION 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
3.1
Councils to have a strategy for future land release and development, potentially adopting a 
“cooperative model“ approach
Absorb immediate action to identify site 
potential 
Council
3.2
Build on the Regional Arts Development Program - Regional Cultural Tourism report 
Absorb immediate action to build existing 
work foundations 
Regional Arts Network
Council 
3.3
Advocate for public service remote area benefits to attract and retain critical services and workforce
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through continuity of services 
Council
3.4
Develop an Ag Industry focussed “Job Keeper” type program (taking principles from the Farm 
Household Allowance program delivered by Services Australia) for application during drought.
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through continuity of operations 
Industry groups
State Government 
3.5
Promote agritourism and a viable diversification strategy
Adapt to strengthen preparedness through 
economic diversification
Council
Tourism organisations
3.6
Promote value added manufacturing for existing and emerging agricultural commodities, such as 
almonds, grapes, citrus, sugar plum etc
Adapt to strengthen preparedness through 
economic diversification
Industry groups 
3.7
Investigate a Geographic Indicator designation that would support sustainability accreditation for the 
Western Riverina agricultural industries 
Adapt to leverage existing strengths
Industry groups 
3.8
Develop public works / maintenance program of works e.g. town revitalisation, roadside clean-up / 
maintenance, farm clean outs to be done during drought 
Adapt to inform preparedness through ready 
made actions with impact
Council
3.9
Schedule training during “down time” to upskill people in the agricultural industry
Adapt to strengthen preparedness
Farm business owners and 
operators 
3.10
Outside of drought, promote availability of water in towns as an opportunity for new businesses – 
include in Economic Development strategies
Adapt to strengthen preparedness through 
economic diversification
Council
3.11
Promote National and State support for regionalisation strategies such as the Regional Development 
Australia “Country Change Riverina and Murray” strategy (to encourage movement from cities to 
regional areas)
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through continuity of services
Federal Government
State Government 
3.12
Facilitate affordable housing, fast track land development, explore community cooperative approach 
and private / public partnerships with Council
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council
State Government 
3.13
Upskill and build capability of local providers in diverse business areas to allow them to compete in the 
tender and procurement process during drought that support broader business offers. 
Adapt to strengthen preparedness through 
economic diversification
Council 
34

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 4 –  
Grow local co-operative 
service provision
The co-operative model of 
business and service provision 
in this region is truly unique. It 
is not found in many other parts 
of Australia at such a significant 
scale and could support the 
region’s long-term resilience 
and prosperity. It is borne from 
a generational legacy of the 
collaboration needed to operate 
and maintain the complex 
irrigation schemes that thread 
through the landscape. Without 
co-operation, in this landscape, 
water availability would not exist. 
Expanding this co-operative 
model beyond its irrigation roots 
is already evident, with pubs 
and rice mills already emerging 
to trade using this model of 
ownership and operation. 
Extending this model further into 
retail, grocery, aged care, and 
possibly even housing is arguably 
not too much of a stretch to 
achieve. 
This pathway seeks to focus on 
this demonstrated strength of 
collaboration and cooperation in 
Western Riverina communities. 
This builds on these existing 
tangibles and non-tangible 
cultural assets to maintain 
baseline service provision for 
key sectors, and support social 
and community fabric and morale 
during drought times through 
enabling mechanisms that drive 
locally cooperative outcomes.
ID
SPECIFIC ACTION 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
4.1
Establish ongoing “Wellbeing Hubs” connecting community organisations to landholders, business and 
the community and develop action plans for priorities of each hub 
Transform into the long term supporting 
continuity of services and community 
network capacity
Community organisations
Council 
4.2
Develop cooperative structure models for a range of situations along with guidelines to encourage 
people and corporations to co-invest in community services
Transform into the long-term supporting 
continuity of services and community 
network capacity
Community organisations
4.3
Promote programs, financial planning advice and funding available from providers including 
Services Australia
Adapt to broaden clarity and uptake of 
programs 
Services Australia
Council
4.4
Councils to consider the provision of more ‘drop in’ style community services to support locals 
especially in drought when costs can prohibit travel
Absorb to strengthen local access to support
Council
4.5
Link community-based investment in local infrastructure (e.g. ongoing social activities) with LGA 
programs including for social connectivity and for places of refuge linked to floods / bushfires etc.
Adapt immediate actions to support ongoing 
preparedness 
Council
4.6
Undertake an audit of Council roads to identify priorities for an “Infrastructure Betterment” program to 
make access to farms more resilient to droughts, floods and other events 
Adapt to direct future funding and support 
movement networks 
Council 
Landowners
35

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 5 –  
Support community 
cohesion 
Cohesive and connected 
communities are a key ingredient 
to support drought resilience. 
Drought, as opposed to other 
hazards, can divide communities 
through isolation. Strong 
community connections are 
therefore critical in ensuring 
community care and wellbeing, 
looking out for mates and 
providing mutual relief. 
This was a clear priority 
identified by the community 
through the plan engagement 
process. Community connection, 
participation and identity 
are already strengths of the 
Western Riverina and need to be 
maintained and bolstered. 
This pathway seeks to build on 
the existing community strength 
of the Western Riverina region 
to support cohesiveness of the 
social fabric and morale during 
drought times by:
›
Supporting strong 
social cohesion
›
Attracting and retaining social 
and cultural events 
›
Maintaining an 
inclusive community.
ID
SPECIFIC ACTION 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
5.1
Include delivery of hard copy documents to households in communications strategies 
(where requested)
Council 
State Government
5.2
Advocate for additional subsidies during drought for youth sport and support similar initiatives such as 
“Active Farmers”
Adapt to utilise existing initiatives 
and programs
Council
5.3
Councils and community groups to drive / facilitate / promote volunteerism and develop a steering 
committee (or similar) to direct volunteer deployment in times of drought 
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and 
capability to respond 
Council
Community groups
5.4
Develop written and visual history of the region (providing a way for intergenerational involvement 
and connection)
Transform into the long term through retaining 
regional identity 
Council
5.5
Develop a list of groups and associations seeking volunteers, based on examples such as SES 
community actions teams – link to “Community Hub” Actions
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and 
capability to respond
Community groups 
5.6
Council to promote and deliver free “Big Social” events
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and 
support role of community networks 
Council
Community organisation
5.7
Support existing and promote new “Food Festival” programs to show case locally grown products – 
invite celebrity chefs
Adapt the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council
Destination groups
5.8
Develop a local “Drought Self Help’’ kit (similar to Red Cross kit)
Adapt to strengthen preparedness
Council 
5.9
Build on and expand the “Teach the Teachers” program relating to agricultural production and 
experiences of living in rural communities
Adapt to strengthen preparedness and 
connection to the region
Council 
Industry groups
Schools
5.10
Support excursions from city schools to the region and continue to support “Boys to the Bush” program 
Adapt to strengthen preparedness build 
understanding across region to urban areas
Council
Community organisations
Department of Education
5.11
Explore opportunities for mentor programs for both men and women, and promote existing programs 
focused on rural leadership and change makers
Adapt through capacity building of locals 
Council 
Community organisations 
5.12
Support delivery of drought resilience programs within schools
Absorb immediate action to 
strengthen preparedness
Schools
5.13
Continue to invest in the maintenance and enhancement of community facilities to support community 
cohesion during times of drought
Absorb immediate action to 
strengthen preparedness
Council
5.14
Work with Indigenous groups to “co-solve” water issues
Transform the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council
First Nations groups
36

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 6 –  
Embed environmental 
stewardship and 
sustainable agricultural 
practices
The health of the landscape is 
integral to our economic and 
community wellbeing. Retaining 
soil moisture in the landscape and 
topsoil retention are clear drought 
impact reduction pursuits. Pest 
and weed management offer 
further opportunities to stem 
landscape degradation. 
Areas for action include 
supporting land management 
and maintaining and 
enhancing biosecurity.
ID
SPECIFIC ACTION 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
6.1
Promote and support Landcare in providing opportunities for landholders to demonstrate the benefits 
derived from their business and land practices (including use of photo diaries)
Adapt to support resilient landscapes 
Landcare
6.2
Support Landcare and associated programs and advocate for continuity of funding on programs that 
focus on climate ready revegetation and improving native seed supply 
Adapt to support resilient landscapes
Landcare 
6.3
Promote a policy for fixed riparian zone / corridors for reconstruction and restoration
Adapt the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Council
6.4
Support actions for on-going carp management within the region’s waterways
Absorb immediate actions to support ongoing 
efforts 
State government agencies 
6.5
Advocate for and ensure understanding of the impacts of future reviews of the Snowy Water Licence
Adapt into long-term to maintain 
economic stability
Council
Industry groups
6.6
Link Landcare with Regional Services Australia to identify funding opportunities for involvement in farm 
management professional development opportunities
Adapt the long-term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
Landcare
6.7
Promote the landscape and production benefits of sustainable and restorative agricultural practices 
and focus on driving buy-in through initiatives such as mapping of land use capability. 
Adapt to support resilient landscapes
Industry groups
Landcare
6.8
Work with First Nations peoples to bring First Nations ecological practice back to Country 
Transform through actions building 
partnerships and resilient landscapes 
First Nations groups
6.9
Support the establishment of Landcare groups across each of the council areas
Adapt to support resilient landscapes
Council
Landcare
6.10
Develop a program to focus on improvements to road side revegetation for connected corridors 
Adapt to support resilient landscapes
Council
37

Implementation 
The Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan relies on collaborative 
implementation approaches involving a range of stakeholders. 
The action plan for drought resilience spans the drought cycle and its interaction 
with the community, that is before, during and recovery from drought. The actions 
to implement cover levels of government, community and industry groups, service 
providers, not-for-profits, landowners, and local communities with actions that have 
effect at different points of the drought cycle. This includes short, medium and long term 
opportunities, and interventions that are strategic by strengthening preparedness or are 
agile and ready to be implemented when enduring drought. 
Pathways implementation
The purpose of the action plan is to inform future drought funding and ongoing preparedness across the 
region. Stakeholders work together regionally to build drought resilience in the economy, environment and 
our communities, proactively and pragmatically. 
The action plan has been drawn together through community expression, 
existing initiatives and background data. In developing this action plan, it is 
noted that:  
money-check-dollar	 actions are purposefully listed 
with multiple stakeholders, 
and unspecified timeframes or 
funding to acknowledge that 
delivery is dependent on a 
range of variables
money-bill-trend-up	 implementation will occur 
through participation of all 
stakeholders over time as 
priorities, resources and 
funding arise
group-arrows-rotate	 as a regional plan, the actions 
are collective and collaborative 
user-tag	 roles and responsibilities are 
flexible, including for local 
governments. The plan is 
owned by the region. Any 
stakeholder can start an action 
that is within their capacity
user-gear	 some actions are indeed 
underway by various 
stakeholders, the purpose of 
maintaining them in the action 
plan, is that the community 
has advised that the action is 
integral to drought resilience.
38

Stakeholder roles in implementation
DESCRIPTION 
An advocate actively supports a position, 
action or policy. The task is outside the 
advocate’s jurisdiction, capacity or resourcing 
and advocacy is required to engage with those 
parties with capacity to deliver. For example, 
telecommunications advocacy. 
A partner joins others in a common cause 
or action where roles and responsibilities 
are shared across areas of expertise. Each 
partner brings an element to the action for 
joint delivery. For example, region-wide 
strategic initiatives.
A lead is in control of an action. The action 
may still involve partners or other roles, but 
the action is reliant upon a lead party due to 
their technical or other expertise. E.g. Health or 
counselling matters 
An owner is the only party that can undertake 
or permit the action. E.g. local government as 
public asset owners 
A supporter is united with others in the 
need or benefits of the action but potentially 
does not have a major role. The action is led 
or owned by others. E.g. A supporter may 
provide assistance in kind, technical advice or 
donations to action leaders 
A stakeholder is anyone who has an interest 
in the project, program or action. Stakeholders 
will have varying degrees of involvement from 
owner to advocate and all points between.
A deliverer is responsible for implementation 
and outcomes of an action or funded program. 
e.g. Community agency delivering social aid 
programs. 
A funder provides the funding arrangements. 
The party is not involved with scoping, 
executing or delivering the program but may 
require some outcome reporting or evidence. 
e.g. the government grant funding for a pest 
control program delivered by others. 
Governance structure
Implementation of the regional drought resilience 
plan is to be driven by a collaborative and multi-
disciplined drought resilience project control group 
(PCG). Membership will be broadened to provide 
an integrated and coordinated approach to drought 
resilience efforts. 
This will enable the PCG to adopt agile approaches 
and shift priorities as needed depending on 
changing circumstances, and as opportunities arise. 
Despite this, all actions remain relevant in terms of 
maximising funding opportunities. This also allows 
expertise across the strategic pathways, and for 
partnerships to evolve as funding and priorities arise
A Chair of the PCG will be selected.
A PCG Terms of Reference is to be prepared for 
its membership to guide its function. The Terms of 
Reference could include: 
›
Role and purpose and connection to the RDRP 
›
Stakeholder and membership lists 
›
Meeting arrangements, (potentially quarterly) and 
responsibilities of attendees 
›
The circumstances of a quorum and decision 
making protocols 
›
The election or rotation of a chair person 
›
An action plan for the first 60 days or 12 months 
including delivery of the priority actions with the 
implementation funding; and 
›
A process for reflection and nominating next 
priority actions.
A Memorandum of Understanding may also 
be required.
PCG meetings should be held in different localities 
across the region over time.
Monitoring, evaluation and 
learning framework
The drought action plan incorporates a large suite 
of projects and actions, some offer immediate 
opportunity, some are medium-term items 
and others are longer-term transformational 
opportunities. Not all actions can be focused on or 
delivered at once. The ‘absorb, adapt, transform’ 
framework will guide the PCG in terms of its 
implementation and coordination of activities and 
funding pursuits, and will enable a flexible and agile 
approach as drought conditions change, guiding the 
focus. 
39

Other stakeholders are able to use the plan to 
support funding and grant applications at any time, 
as desired. Opportunities for collaborative delivery 
partnerships, where two stakeholders may wish to 
provide similar projects, should be explored
This system will:
›
Provide regular opportunities to define when 
conditions are changing locally; and
›
Catalyse a change in focus to respond to the 
needs of the changing conditions.
This ensures a level of agility is adopted with 
regard to the implementation approach. Local 
governments may wish to apply more objective 
targets for immediate actions or further incorporate 
the outcomes of this plan into the local government 
reporting framework to ensure delivery. 
As immediate efforts in response to the action plan 
are delivered, broader efforts across collaborators 
is guided in its approach, underpinned by this plan 
which enables stakeholders to work towards and 
contribute to regional drought resilience outcomes, 
including those at the local and property level.
The drought resilience action plan also requires that 
a ‘lessons learned’ posture is adopted, ensuring 
new information, knowledge, approaches and 
science is rolled into implementation delivery as 
a guiding principle. This will mean that over time, 
the drought resilience action plan may be adapted 
to reflect new learnings and the adjustment of 
intervention pathways as required. The PCG 
is responsible to conduct an annual lessons 
learned review, with changes to inform action 
moving forward.
The drought resilience action plan has been 
thoughtfully designed to not only guide collective 
effort and action but to enable adaptation through 
ongoing monitoring, evaluation and learning. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a 10-year 
plan, to be reviewed after five years.
An annual monitoring program to inform adaptive 
learning is outlined below. Addendums to this plan 
can be made, to reflect these learnings over time 
and ensure the document maintains pace with 
changing circumstances and maturation of drought 
preparedness activities. 
Tracking progress and reporting
Action-based project tracking against the drought 
resilience action plan, the principles and objectives 
of the plan should be undertaken on an annual 
basis. This tracking and reporting shall be the 
responsibility of the implementation PCG chair, 
unless otherwise delegated. Likewise, an annual 
evaluation process will be conducted by the PCG, 
guided by the evaluation questions that follow.
Image: Jerilderie Grain Storage and Handling
40

Key evaluation questions
These key evaluation questions are high level questions designed to frame the analysis of progress and 
performance of the Western Riverina Regional Drought Resilience Plan against the above framework. These 
key evaluation questions may help to structure annual tracking and reporting.
PROPERTY
EVALUATION
Effectiveness and Outcomes 
What have been the outcomes (intended, unintended, positive and 
negative) of the plan implementation process and progress?
To what extent has progress contributed to or furthered the 
principles and objectives of the regional drought resilience plan?
Has the plan been used for or otherwise supported successful 
funding and grant applications?
To what extent have stakeholders outside the PCG responded to 
the plan’s content? 
Have any barriers or challenges been identified throughout the 
implementation of plan, and what solutions to address these have 
been identified?
Drought resilience maturation 
To what extent has efforts in implementing the plan contributed to: 
›
Creating stronger connectedness and greater social capital 
within communities, contributing to well-being and security? 
›
Empowering communities and businesses to implement 
activities that improve their resilience to drought? 
›
Supporting more primary producers and land managers 
to adopt whole-of-system approaches to natural resource 
management to improve the natural resource base, for long-
term productivity and landscape health?
Stakeholder engagement 
In what ways are the PCG and other stakeholders collaborating 
and collectively contributing to efforts outlined by the action plan?
In what ways has the plan provided inclusive involvement across 
sectors, disciplines and communities?
In what ways has the plan been able to support individual 
stakeholder goals, objectives and aspirations with regard to 
drought resilience?
The reporting may be undertaken using a range of tools to capture experiences and perspectives from across 
the PCG, allied stakeholders as well as the communities of Griffith City, Leeton Shire, Murrumbidgee and 
Narrandera Shire more broadly. These tools may include:
›
Meetings and event data capture
›
Targeted meeting / interviews with stakeholders
›
Survey data
›
Case studies and data from the PCG
›
Media, including social media; and
›
Funding and grant applications.
41

Achieving the plan’s outcomes
A further opportunity for the PCG to measure the contribution to or achievement of the plan’s outcomes is by 
using local data to assess specific outcomes. The data sources or indicators will need to be selected by the 
PCG and can provide insights as to how the plan is tracking against the resilience theory of change. Outcomes 
include (but are not limited to):
STRATEGIC PATHWAYS
OUTCOMES
Anticipate water availability
1 Community infrastructure is resilient and helps to 
reduce disruptions
2 Capacity to make informed decisions through local knowledge, 
access to data, intelligence and innovate tools is increased
Proactively manage 
business interests
3 Agricultural productivity in the region is sustained
4 Increased capacity to meet local procurement demands and 
local employment
Support off-farm diversification
5 Employment loss is avoided or minimised, ensuring livelihood 
are maintained
6 Reduced decline of gross regional product relative to:
›
Non-drought periods
›
Previous drought periods
›
Other regions in NSW, Victoria and South Australia
Grow local co-operative 
service provision
7 Community partnerships are strengthened through 
program delivery
8 Services are retained in the region, and offered in local centres 
Support community cohesion
9 Capacity and capability of community groups is strengthened
10 Mental health services are available and are accessible
Embed environmental stewardship 
and sustainable agricultural 
practices 
11 Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways is 
reduced throughout and emerging from drought
12 Increase in activities relating to environmental restoration
Learning
Regular (annual) monitoring provides the ability for reflection and learning. The progress tracking and 
reporting methodology, using key evaluation questions, will present specific insights in terms of those 
opportunities to build in ‘lessons learned’ through engagement across stakeholders with a role in drought 
resilience. These lessons should, on an annual basis, be contemplated with regard to the drought action 
plan to determine any relevant updates, new insights, intelligence and technologies that can be integrated to 
ensure the action plan keeps pace with a growing drought resilience maturation across systems and sectors.
This process will ensure the action plan remains a ‘live document’ that appropriately supports and services 
the needs of all stakeholders and importantly, those of the Western Riverina communities in preparation for, 
endurance of, and recovery from drought.
Concepts to guide adaptive learning as part of plan implementation are included at Appendix B. These items 
will help navigate maturation of this plan over time.
42

Appexdix A — Drought history 
Precipitation and root zone soil moisture are considered as indicators of drought 
according to the Bureau of Meteorology’s Australian Water Resources Assessment 
Landscape (AWRA-L) service. Root zone soil moisture is a calculation of the upper and 
lower soil layers in the AWRA-L, which represents the water-holding capacity of the 
top one metre of soil. Root zone soil moisture and precipitation rates are each useful 
indicators of future drought potential.
Locally, some of the most impactful periods of 
drought include the late 1910s, the World War II 
drought, 1967, 1982 to 1983, 2006 and and the 
2017‑2019 drought.
Some of the continent’s most impactful droughts in 
recent recorded history have affected the region. 
Here, we consider the significant drought periods 
identified by the Bureau of Meteorology: 
›
1914 to 1915 
›
1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
›
1965 to 1968 
›
	1982 to 1983 
›
	1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
›
	2017 to 2019
Below, we consider these droughts and the changes 
in conditions against a present-day baseline of 2002 
to 2022*.
(Source BoM, 2024)
Image: Irrigation channel Leeton Shire (David Single)
43

1914-1915
Nationally, this drought was short but notable, primarily due to the failure of national wheat crop. This drought 
was driven by a strong El Nino, with drought conditions first becoming evident in 1914. Rains improved in 1916 
but began to decrease again over the subsequent years (1918 and 1919).
Figure 17 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1910 to 1918)
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
Figure 18 ­— Changes in conditions during drought against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022
-300+
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
44

1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
This drought period was characterised by several breaks (1939 and 1942-1943), but significant periods of 
dryness. Rainfall rates were lower in 1937-1938 and 1940-1941. For the Western Riverina, 1940 was the most 
notable year, with extremely low rainfall totals across the entire region.
Figure 19 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1934 to 1948)
Figure 20 — Changes in conditions during drought against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
45

1965 to 1968
The 1960s was generally dry across the continent. Drought developed in 1964 in northern New South Wales 
and had extended across most of the country by the following year. This was evident across the region, with 
lower rates of rainfall and soil moisture across much of the region. 1967 was the most severe year, with annual 
rainfall rates across each LGA below 200 mm. 
Figure 21: Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1962 to 1971)
Figure 22: Changes in conditions during drought against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
46

1982-1983
Despite being only one year long this was one of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th century. A very 
strong El Nino led to these drought conditions. The region experienced widespread dryness.
Figure 23: Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1979 to 1986)
Figure 24 ­— Changes in conditions during drought against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
47

1997 – 2009 (Millennium drought)
The Millennium drought was a long-lasting period of dryness, most severe in densely populated areas of the 
south-east and south-west of the country. For the Western Riverina region, the beginning of this period was 
relatively unimpactful, as from lower levels in 1997, based on rainfall and soil moisture figures. It is not until 
2001 when there is a dry spell into 2005, and then a severe dry year in 2006.
Editor’s note: The maps below show significant rainfall and higher soil moisture over this period, despite it 
being identified as a drought. This discrepancy is likely due to the reference period used to produce these 
maps (2002 – 2022) and that there was significant dryness in the latter half of that period. This result is 
then compounded by the short-lasting periods of rainfall decline during this long drought period (1997 
– 2009). Therefore, leading to the appearance of increased rainfall and soil moisture compared to the 
reference period.
Figure 25: Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1994 to 2012)
Figure 26: Changes in conditions during drought against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
48

2017-2019
Following a wet 2016, dry conditions returned in 2017 across south and eastern Australia. This was a sustained 
multi-year period of dryness, unprecedented in recorded history. A strong Indian Ocean Dipole was a 
significant contributor to dry conditions the second half of 2019, leading into significant 2019/2020 bushfire 
season. The region was similar affected during this period, with widespread low rainfall and low soil moisture.
Figure 27 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (2014 to 2022)
Figure 28 — Changes in conditions during drought against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022
Precipitation (mm)
Soil moisture (mm/yr)
-300+
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
Precipitation, change during drought period (mm)
Historical change, root zone soil moisture (mm/year)
49

Appendix B – Concepts to guide 
adaptive learning
As part of learning processes through the implementation, this appendix provides key 
considerations to guide further iterations and amendments to this RDRP.As drought 
resilience processes mature, the ability for further robust adaptation pathways to be 
implemented will emerge. 
The table below captures specific items identified for integration as part of future plan iterations.
NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Expansion of drought resilience relative to diverse stakeholder groups
1
Expand on what drought means to different segments of the region’s community and industries, 
and adaptation pathways to ‘maintain, modify or transform’ to grow drought resilience.
As implementation of this foundational RDRP occurs, and monitoring, evaluation and learning 
processes are undertaken, opportunity will arise to advance the concepts of resilience theory, 
and make more clear how the adaptation pathways are continuously improving and escalating to 
underpin drought resilience maturation.
2
Continue to engage with diverse community and industry groups to advance implementation of 
the plan.
Future plan updates could capitalise on the community’s desire to be engaged and involved in 
the plan’s delivery by acknowledging the role that key knowledge holders could play. Stakeholder 
engagement could be expanded to include direct participation of different drought vulnerable 
groups including gauging their capacity to participate and how best to engage with them moving 
forward. This information could be used to better target vulnerable residents and ensure adequate 
supports are in place to involve different community segments.
Expansion of resilience adaptation pathways
3
Use diverse quantitative and empirical evidence on the potential impact of the interaction of 
historical and projected drought with key economic and social variables over time, such as 
demographic changes, shifts in the diversity of businesses, and livelihoods and employment 
opportunities for different community segments, in emergent versus declining types of industries, 
and in labour mobility among different industry and sectors.
4
Further develop the theory of change to aligns the plan’s objectives and actions towards reaching 
its intended outcomes, including the degree to which the proposed actions contribute to 
adaptation and transformation.
5
Expand on the interrelationships between economic, social and environmental factors across 
existing and updated documents, plans and strategies, and describe how these relationships 
influence potential cascading impacts of drought.
50

NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Expansion of resilience adaptation pathways (cont)
6
Future plan updates could profile drought impacts for those non-agricultural sectors identified as 
key sectors in the community, such as mining, renewable energy, health care and social assistance 
and tourism sectors. Such a profile could include an exploration of how these sectors can build 
resilience or drive transformation through learning, preparedness and planning.
7
Future plan updates could develop a suite of plausible future scenarios through a participatory 
process and based on climate, drought and other drivers of change. The development of future 
scenarios could consider how trends, shocks or stresses (including drought) will interact with and 
likely affect the region’s economic, social and environmental characteristics, and the implications 
for diverse stakeholder groups. This exercise will also assist these stakeholders to explore 
and identify actions and pathways that assist with building resilience under different plausible 
future scenarios.
Resilience action planning
8
Establish resilience indicators for each of the plan’s ‘priority areas’, using baseline observations 
drawn from the MEL process within the initial years of plan implementation.
9
Future updates could provide more information to substantiate the assumed mechanisms by 
which its actions can be achieved, and to what extent they align with the broader objectives and 
outcomes of the plan.
Implementation
10
As implementation advances, expand the implementation content of the plan with respect to its 
governance arrangements and the function / operation of the PCG.
11
As partnership arrangements and relationships are built through this foundational plan, more 
information could be built on the main purpose of each collaboration setting clear intent and 
requirements, alongside specific measures. This can provide greater structure to partnerships, 
which may be a focus under each pathway. 
The types of partnerships and activities sought may influence these reporting arrangements. 
Review of partnership may be ongoing to ensure appropriate representation of groups, including 
First Nations communities and non-farming populations.
12
Future plan updates could provide more explicit descriptions of what external support is required 
for successful implementation.
13
Future updates to the plan may provide further detail on the sequencing of actions, as these are 
prioritised and refined and as funding becomes clearer.
51

NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
14
Further develop structured approaches to capturing lessons from performance measures, linked 
with monitoring in addition to lessons from annual evaluations currently identified in the MEL. 
Integrate lessons learned from the plan’s existing evaluation questions back into the plan’s actions.
Continue to enhance and mature the plan’s MEL processes over time as the plan transitions from 
foundational into a performance posture.
15
Further develop performance indicators tied to actions in the plan’s MEL plan. This will improve 
accountability by showing the degree to which proposed priorities and actions contribute to 
the plan’s articulated vision and outcomes. This could include using quantitative and empirical 
evidence for key economic and social variables over time. This could include evidence that helps 
to track demographic shifts, changes in the diversity of businesses, livelihoods and employment 
opportunities for different community segments in emergent versus declining types of industries. It 
could further include evidence of labour mobility among different industry and sectors in order to 
assess actions focused on economic diversification.
Resilience assessment
16
Ensure future iterations of the plan are qualified by a review of the Resilience Assessment 
components to identify key circumstantial changes which have occurred.
17
Continue to build upon and refine the program logic approach embedded within the Resilience 
Assessment that supported the development of the current plan, into a well-developed theory of 
change that provides a detailed and explicit causal mechanisms and valid assumptions by which 
the plan, through its implementation, will deliver the desired outcomes and impact. 
52