WIMMERA 
SOUTHERN 
MALLEE 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge the Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, 
Jadawadjali, Wergaia, Jupagulk, Tjap Warrung,  
Dja Dja Wurrung and Gunditj Mirring Peoples 
as the Traditional Owners of Country that the 
activities of the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan are being held 
on. We respect their ongoing connection to lands 
and waterways upon which we depend, and we 
pay respects to their culture and their Elders 
past, present, and future. We acknowledge that 
Aboriginal self-determination is a human right 
enshrined in the United Nations Declaration on 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and we are 
committed to working towards social, economic, 
and cultural equity for Aboriginal Victorians.

1
Preface
Drought causes significant financial, social and 
environmental impact on people, communities and 
the region. The Wimmera Southern Mallee region 
is committed to taking steps now to ensure well 
considered strategies are in place to prepare for 
and manage through future dry periods.
The Wimmera Southern Mallee Drought Resilience 
Plan (the Plan) was developed under the Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) Program, 
which forms part of Future Drought Fund. The RDRP 
Program is supporting the development of regional 
drought resilience plans throughout Australia over 
2021 to 2024.
The aim of the Plan is to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify and address 
their needs to be better prepared for and able 
to manage future dry seasonal conditions and 
droughts. The Plan may inform future investments 
in regional drought resilience. This Plan builds on 
the Wimmera Southern Mallee’s historic and recent 
experiences of drought and related strategies, 
programs and activities.
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought resilience initiatives to help 
Australian farms and communities prepare for 
the impacts of drought. These are implemented 
through a suite of programs under five focus areas:
1.	Harnessing innovation
2.	Better risk management
3.	Better climate information
4.	More resilient communities
5.	Better land management.
The RDRP program is included under ‘better risk 
management’. Regional drought resilience includes 
elements that cover all focal areas. The Wimmera 
Southern Mallee Drought Resilience Plan therefore 
bridges all Future Drought Fund categories and 
identifies actions the community proposed to build 
drought resilience.
Agriculture Victoria in partnership with regional 
communities facilitated the development of this 
Plan, which was jointly funded by the Victorian 
and Commonwealth Government under the Future 
Drought Fund.
This Plan should be read in conjunction with  
the Drought in the Wimmera Southern Mallee  
Region report.
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.

2

Contents
Preface	
1
Introduction	
4
Building drought resilience	
8
What is drought?	
8
Resilience	
9
Wimmera Southern Mallee drought resilience themes, outcomes and actions	
10
Thematic Framework 	
10
Theme 1: Communities and people	
12
Theme 2: Farming enterprises	
14
Theme 3: Industry and businesses	
16
Theme 4: Governments and agencies	
18
Theme 5: Infrastructure	
20
Theme 6: Landscape	
22
Enabling actions to build drought resilience	
24
Next steps for the Wimmera Southern Mallee Drought Resilience Plan	
26
References	
28
Appendix 1	
29
Insights for building drought resilience in the Wimmera Southern Mallee	
29
3

Agricultural systems in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee have been developed in the context of  
a highly variable climate and many farmers have 
lived experience of coping through drought. 
Broadacre cropping is the primary land use in the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee region (55 per cent  
of agricultural production) followed by livestock 
(mostly sheep and lambs at 23 per cent of 
agricultural production). Dryland cropping in the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee is highly dependent  
on the timing and quantity of rainfall.
During the Millennium drought key stakeholders 
came together to advocate for and coordinate 
drought support; this group was known as the 
Horsham Dry Seasonal Conditions Group. Despite 
the name of the group, it had representation from 
across the Wimmera Southern Mallee region.  
Many people from the Group have been involved in 
the development of this Plan and we acknowledge 
the work that the Horsham Dry Seasonal 
Conditions Group has done in supporting local 
people and communities through drought.
Regional Drought Resilience (RDR) Plans are 
developed with an ear to the local community and 
regional stakeholders and aligned with Victorian 
and Commonwealth government principles 
and approaches to drought preparedness and 
response. The Plan supports communities of the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee region to be better 
prepared to respond to future drought events.  
RDR Plans leverage regional strengths and address 
vulnerabilities in the region’s ability to prosper 
during dry seasons and droughts.
RDR Plans are aligned to the strategic priorities of:
•	economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector
•	environmental resilience for sustainable  
and improved functioning of landscapes
•	social resilience for resourceful and  
adaptable communities.
Although Agriculture Victoria coordinated the 
development of the RDR Plan it, is very much 
guided by a Reference Group consisting of 
representatives from community, industry and 
government. The Reference Group members 
and their affiliated organisations guided drought 
resilience thinking and ensured that the plan can 
respond to change through adaptive planning and 
community engagement processes. The Reference 
Group had four workshop style meetings to guide 
the plan content and develop actions. A summary 
of the Reference Group discussions can be found 
in Appendix 1. The Group also provided access 
to local reports, regional priorities and ensured 
coordination of place-based strategies. Additional 
regional stakeholders were also engaged to inform 
the development of the plan.
Agriculture Victoria employed Facilitators for  
each region to capture key ideas and opportunities  
for improvement from community engagement  
and Reference Group discussions. As a result  
of the engagement process, six key resilience 
themes emerged.
1.	People and communities
2.	Farm enterprises 
3.	Industry and businesses 
4.	Infrastructure
5.	Government and agencies
6.	Landscape.
INTRODUCTION
4

WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

For the purpose of this plan, the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee region is defined by the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee Regional Partnership boundary and includes 
the five Local Government Areas (LGAs): West 
Wimmera Shire, Hindmarsh Shire, Horsham Rural 
City, Yarriambiack Shire, Northern Grampians Shire. 
Table 1. includes high level geographic, demographic 
and economic information for these LGAs.
The Wimmera Southern Mallee region in central 
western Victoria encompasses large grain 
growing areas. It is home to many small, vibrant 
communities and is served by the major regional 
centres of Horsham and Stawell. The region 
has relatively low levels of unemployment and 
provides residents and visitors with recreational 
and outdoor pursuits in vast and open landscapes. 
Home to some of Victoria’s iconic natural 
attractions, including the Grampians National Park, 
the Wimmera River, major deserts, wetlands and 
lakes, the region serves a population of 47,400 and 
contributes to the Victorian economy with a Gross 
Regional Product of $2.493 billion (RDV, 2022).
LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
AREA
MAIN SHIRE  
SERVICE CENTRES
AREA SQ KM 
POPULATION 
ECONOMIC OUTPUT 
($ MILLION)
Horsham
Horsham, Natimuk
4,267
20,000
2,816
Northern Grampians
Stawell, St. Arnaud
5,730
11,400
1,800
Yarriambiack
Warracknabeal, 
Hopetoun, Rupanyup
7,326
6,600
461
Hindmarsh
Nhill, Dimboola, 
Rainbow, Jeparit
7,524
5,600
708
West Wimmera
Edenhope, Kaniva
9,101
3800
519
The Wimmera Southern Mallee region
The Wimmera Southern Mallee Regional Partnership 
area and key population and employment statistics.
Table 1.  Key details of the region’s five LGAs
HORSHAM
HINDMARSH
YARRIAMBIACK
WEST 
WIMMERA
NORTHERN 
GRAMPIANS
6

33,948
POPULATION 
(2022)
TOTAL AREA  
SQ KM
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2022)
47,400
$2.5
billion
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

What is drought?
Many definitions of drought exist, generally 
depending on what indicators are used to 
describe it. Meteorological drought relates to the 
lack of rainfall, at least below expected rainfall. 
Hydrological drought relates to the lack of runoff, 
measured by river and creek flow volumes, a lack 
of groundwater availability, and a lack of water 
storage in catchments. Agricultural drought can 
be defined by the lack of productivity on-farm 
resulting from a lack of water. Other definitions 
include institutional drought, where decisions on 
water allocation have induced a water shortage, 
economic drought, which is defined by an 
economic downturn resulting from a lack of water 
availability. Green droughts exist where limited 
rainfall shows the appearance of green paddocks, 
but insufficient water is available for agricultural 
crop production.
Definitions of drought are important because they 
help define the issues to be addressed. For this 
Plan no single definition will be used, since the 
Plan aims to build regional resilience to drought. 
Every individual, business, organisation and 
community will have their own unique drought 
experience. For example, the impact of drought 
is felt differently in broadacre cropping than 
in livestock farming and the health care sector 
requires a different approach to the educational 
sector to cope with drought. This Plan aims to build 
resilience across communities, businesses and 
sectors, however each experiences the impact  
of drought differently.
It is important to note that duration and intensity 
of drought have an impact on how resilient 
a community can be. While on-farm drought 
management can be effective for a seasonal 
drought, it may be less effective for a 5-year 
drought. A meteorological drought with ‘only’ low 
rainfall may have less impact than a hydrological 
drought combined with heatwaves, dust storms 
and fires.
An integrated assessment of the socio-economic 
and environmental impacts of past, present and 
future droughts is available in the supplementary 
report: Drought in the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
region; Information to support the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee Regional Drought Resilience Plan. 
This assessment is based on an analysis that 
considers how drought affects farms and the  
wider community.
In the development of this plan organisations and 
individuals came together to discuss drought 
and chart a course for a smarter, more resilient 
future. The plan was not developed to deal with an 
emergency, or an acute drought. It was developed 
to assist the Wimmera Southern Mallee community 
creatively prepare, respond to and recover 
from drought. The Plan proposes actions that 
individuals, communities, industry and government 
can take to be better prepared for future droughts.
BUILDING DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE
At livestock auctions, farmers have begun offloading stock because  
of the high cost of feed. Federal Government forecasters have 
predicted that Australia is heading for its worst wheat crop since the 
drought of 1994–95, with production likely to be cut almost in half  
in the year ahead. According to the Australian Bureau of Agricultural 
and Resource Economics, Victoria’s wheat belt is in “serious drought”.
—The Age, Droughts and the unexpected, September 15, 2002
8

Resilience
For the purpose of this document, resilience is 
defined as the ability of a system to effectively 
respond to disruptions, like drought, while 
maintaining function. It is about being able to 
consistently and collectively develop, hone 
and create the tools to adapt, thrive and take 
advantage of opportunities when encountering 
change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ of 
the current situation resilience includes the ability 
to adapt and potentially transform the way things 
are done during periods of uncertainty and change. 
There is no one-size-fits-all solution to becoming  
a resilient community. However, certain community 
characteristics are known to contribute to 
resilience. These characteristics have been used to 
build the suite of actions documented in the Plan.
Resilient communities demonstrate some,  
or all, of the following characteristics:
•	Local leadership and initiative
•	Governance that embraces change
•	Connection through formal and  
informal networks
Resilient communities:
•	Work together in the pursuit of common goals
•	Foster self-responsibility
•	Are adaptable and learn lessons from change
•	Can anticipate issues and effectively manage risk
•	Consider different perspectives and options  
to solve complex problems.
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

Thematic Framework 
This Plan is founded on six 
themes underpinned by outcome 
statements and priority actions  
to build drought resilience in  
the region.
The Wimmera Southern Mallee stakeholders 
identified these actions as those with the greatest 
opportunity to build regional drought resilience. 
Not all actions will be implemented straight away. 
Some actions are already underway, others  
require new or further investment and some may 
require further planning to design and implement.
WIMMERA SOUTHERN 
MALLEE DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE THEMES, 
OUTCOMES AND 
ACTIONS
10

WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

COMMUNITIES 
AND PEOPLE
Theme 1
Under the theme of ‘communities and people’ 
actions are captured which help communities 
prepare for and build resilience towards drought. 
It includes actions that contribute to better health 
and well-being outcomes, access to and use 
of primary care services and actions focused 
on improving liveability and connectivity within 
communities. The theme also focuses on the areas 
of employment, education and skill development.
The West Wimmera shire has the lowest 
population density in Victoria with farms and 
communities being relatively isolated. More than 
half the population is employed in the agricultural 
sector. Hindmarsh shire has the second lowest 
population density in Victoria. Employment in 
agriculture contributes to 30 per cent of total jobs 
in Hindmarsh. Yarriambiack shire employment 
also relies heavily on agriculture. In the Northern 
Grampians shire agriculture contributes 13 per cent 
to the shire’s economic output, with manufacturing 
and mining providing a larger output and  
40 per cent total to the shire’s economic output. 
Horsham Rural City has the highest population 
density in the Wimmera Southern Mallee, with 
4.7 persons per square kilometre, but still faces 
significant challenges in providing services and 
creating social, digital and economic connectivity 
compared to other regions in Victoria. Employment 
in agriculture contributes to 8 per cent of total jobs 
with health care, retail and construction sectors 
providing more job opportunities and contributing 
40 per cent of total jobs.
The Wimmera Southern Mallee region includes 
the traditional lands of the Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, 
Jadawadjali, Wergaia and Jupagulk peoples, around 
St Arnaud the Dja Dja Wurrung people, in the 
Gariwerd (Grampians) the Tjap Wurrung people, 
and in the Southern part of the West Wimmera 
shire the Gunditj Mirring People. The Barengi 
Gadjin Land Council has legislative responsibilities 
relating to the management of Aboriginal cultural 
heritage places in the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
region, the Eastern Maar Aboriginal Corporation 
has legislative responsibilities in the Gariwerd 
region, the Dja Dja Warrung Clans Aboriginal 
Corporation has legislative responsibility in an area 
near St Arnaud and the Gunditj Mirring Traditional 
Owners Aboriginal Corporation in the South of the 
West Wimmera shire.
12

Outcomes:
Communities and people in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee are resilient to drought events.
This outcome supports the mental health 
and physical well-being of people, as well as 
liveable and vibrant communities. Opportunities 
are available to connect socially and digital 
access to services are readily available, 
including remote areas. Support is available 
to ensure the cultural and spiritual values of 
water and landscape are maintained during 
drought periods. There are many opportunities 
for recreation, social networks are strong and 
people are willing to step in and help each other 
during difficult times.
Focus Areas for action
Continued investment in community leadership programs
Ensure local sport and cultural events in the region remain organised during drought periods  
and ensure the infrastructure remains serviced
Promote events and activities to share drought experiences
Maintain access to recreational water and park areas during times of drought when their  
impact on community mental and physical health, environment and recreation is most critical
Build and strengthen programs to support mental health and create awareness of support  
options for the whole community
Ensure continuing training and education on the use of digital tools, to reduce the digital divide
Increase awareness and build respect for cultural and spiritual values of Country and protect  
areas of significance from drought impact
Build awareness of the actions that can be taken to increase resilience to drought
Continue to include drought resilience, preparation and response options in regional education  
and training, particularly as it applies in a local context
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Theme 2
FARMING 
ENTERPRISES
The ‘farming enterprises’ theme covers farm 
planning and business management and includes 
actions related to innovation and adoption, tools, 
information and data to support decision making, 
and diversified income streams for farmers.
The Wimmera Southern Mallee is primarily  
reliant on dryland cropping and livestock grazing 
(Figure 1), producing more than a quarter of 
Victoria’s grain and sheep meat, respectively 
(DJPR, 2022). Broadacre cropping includes grains, 
pulses and oil crops like canola. Livestock farmed 
in the area is primarily sheep.
As a result of expanding farm sizes, competition 
for land is increasing in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee. Farm size growth is often accomplished  
by leasing additional land and purchasing 
land when it becomes available on the market. 
Increasing farm size is expected to result in a 
stronger business with improved economies of 
scale and a stronger market position. Land price 
increases in the northwest region of Victoria 
reflect this increased demand for land ownership.
Resilience of the agriculture sector over the past 
decade has been enhanced by the conversion of 
the channels systems to a rural pipeline network. 
This has enabled a return of stocking levels in  
the region that are more reflective of the 1980’s 
and 1990’s.
14

Nature conservation
	 Managed resource protection
	 Other minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Grazing modified pastures
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Dryland cropping
	 Dryland horticulture
	 Land in transition
	 Irrigated pastures
	 Irrigated cropping
	 Irrigated horticulture
	 Urban intensive uses
	 Intensive horticulture  
and animal production
	 Rural residential and  
farm infrastructure
	 Mining and waste
	 Water
Figure 1. Land cover types in Wimmera Southern Mallee in 2020
Data source: ABARES 2021, Catchment Scale Land Use of Australia –  
Update December 2020
Outcomes:
Farms and other businesses are financially sound and contribute to strong 
economies that are well prepared for and more resilient to the effect 
of future drought. Jobs on farms and in the agriculture sector are more 
attractive, accessible and reliable, especially to youth. The agricultural 
sector is productive and integrated in the regional landscape.
Focus Areas for action
Advocate for support of financial advice and counselling services to enable farm and other 
businesses to make timely business decisions
Assist farm businesses with whole of farm planning, including drought preparedness, treatment 
of drought as a business risk, system and income diversification, and alternative income streams, 
especially in periods of non-drought
Encourage and support Wimmera Southern Mallee community members to access and utilise 
financial advice and counselling services
Encourage and support on farm drought preparedness activities related to land, crop and  
livestock management that are specific to the Wimmera Southern Mallee farming systems,  
climate and environment
Strengthen and expand locally specific and relevant agricultural research, development and extension
Support youth and careers in agriculture through workshops, career days, meet and greets  
and on-farm traineeships
Encourage entrepreneurship in farming businesses, both in family farms and enterprises  
through ‘skilling up’
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

Theme 3
INDUSTRY AND 
BUSINESSES
The ‘industry and business’ theme includes actions 
to build resilience in businesses and industries 
involved in the agricultural value chain, but also 
those that are affected by drought impact on the 
agricultural sector. Especially in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee, small and medium businesses 
are an integrated part of the community and 
regularly provide essential services.
Businesses in the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
show a wide variety of profiles. Many businesses 
have links to agriculture or the agricultural value 
chain. Smaller communities often host businesses 
supplying essential services, like the bakery, local  
hardware shop, and businesses providing hospitality 
services (such as restaurants, hotels, pubs).
The manufacturing sector is less concentrated 
in the region compared to the Victorian average. 
However, it shows a significant specialisation for 
food product manufacturing, likely supported by 
regional output from the food processing centres 
in Stawell, Nhill and Horsham. There is a strong 
link between the agriculture sector and local  
food product manufacturing, which is focused on 
grain mills, cereal products and meat processing. 
The food manufacturing sub-sector is a significant 
contributor to regional gross value added 
and accounts for about 81.2 per cent of total 
manufacturing exports (DJPR, 2022).
16

Outcomes:
Industries and businesses are financially sound and contribute to strong 
local economies that are well prepared for and more resilient to the effect 
of future drought. Rural communities have access to essential services and 
the local economy supports the well-being and liveability in the community.
Focus Areas for action
Advocate for support for financial advice and counselling services to enable industry and small 
businesses to make timely business decisions
Support for commercial services to provide a drought lens to discussions with all businesses, 
including larger firms 
Promote and retain local business leadership/management located in the region for better informed 
decision making and early detection of drought impact
Support networking of industry, businesses, and the financial sector to focus on drought preparedness
Work closely with the financial sector to support customers with high drought impact risks
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

Theme 4
GOVERNMENTS 
AND AGENCIES
The theme of ‘governments and agencies’ includes 
actions which all levels of government and various 
agencies can undertake to build resilience within 
their own institutions and staff, as well as the 
services they provide to community.
The Wimmera Southern Mallee region includes 
five local government authorities (LGAs). Each has 
a council and supporting organisations, often with 
more than one service centre to allow access and 
service provision to remote areas. Due to large 
areas and low population density, rate payments 
only cover minimal operational costs.
In addition to LGAs, several other government and 
not-for-profit organisations operate in the region, 
providing health services, training and emergency 
response and recovery. The Wimmera Primary Care 
Partnership is made up of 30 member agencies 
including local government, welfare, disability and 
education. There are five health services spread 
over fourteen campuses, two bush nursing centres 
and an Aboriginal controlled health cooperative.
18

Outcomes:
Agencies and governments are prepared for the impact of drought 
on people, the environment and the economy. Preparedness supports 
resilience within agencies and governments by ensuring contingency 
plans are in place and resources are available.
Focus Areas for action
Maintain and regularly review plans for drought response and recovery
Promote inter-agency planning for preparation and response to drought periods
Focus government and agency preparations on being pro-active 
Maintain formal and informal networks of key stakeholders on drought preparedness  
and resilience building
Ensure that any funding provided is targeting the needs of local communities
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

Theme 5
INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure for water providing stock and 
domestic needs and access to emergency water 
points are included in this theme. However, 
regional infrastructure that contributes to regional 
resilience also includes digital infrastructure, 
housing, energy and transportation.
The Wimmera Mallee pipeline, transport 
infrastructure, access to digital services, energy 
infrastructure and appropriate and sufficient 
housing have been identified as key infrastructure 
to support drought resilience in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee.
GWM-Water is responsible for delivering stock, 
domestic and agricultural water to customers  
in Western Victoria. The service area covered  
by GWM-Water is approximately 25 per cent of  
the state. The Wimmera Mallee Pipeline was 
constructed between 2006 and 2010 and replaced 
open water channels with pipeline. This saves 
water from leakage and evaporation and improved 
water service reliability and quality. The pipeline 
construction and operation is identified by 
GWM-Water as the largest infrastructure project 
contributing to building drought resilience in 
the Wimmera Southern Mallee region through 
improved security and reliability of access.
Water carting during periods of water scarcity and 
bushfires is made available through emergency 
water points. New emergency water points are 
now controlled by swipe card access, ensuring 
proper water charges are applied where required. 
An interactive map with emergency water supply 
points in Victoria is accessible through a Victoria 
state website (DELWP, 2022).
Groundwater resources are critical for providing 
stock and domestic supply, particularly in the west 
of the region. Mining companies also regularly use 
groundwater for their operations. Groundwater is 
critical to groundwater dependent ecosystems like 
the saline wetlands in the Natimuk Douglas chain 
of lakes.
Housing availability and affordability is considered 
an important factor in the economic resilience 
of the region. The first release of 2022 census 
data shows that population in major towns and 
communities in the Wimmera Southern Mallee has 
generally risen compared to 2016. Approximately 
20 per cent of the population lives in rental 
accommodation, while 75 per cent own a property. 
Almost 75 per cent of households have 1 to 2 
people, while 20 per cent of the dwellings have  
1 to 2 bedrooms (WDA, 2022).
The Western Highway, one of only two major 
interstates freight routes, provides the main 
road transport corridor in the region. It connects 
Horsham, Stawell and Nhill with Melbourne  
(via Ballarat) and Adelaide. Farming, grain 
production, regional visitation and a range of 
manufacturing services rely heavily on this highway. 
The Henty Highway runs north south through the 
region and provides access to the Port of Portland 
to export bulk commodities such as grain and 
mineral sands. The region also has several regional 
airports including Horsham and Stawell, servicing 
emergency medical, fire and rescue, and agriculture 
and related businesses. The transport infrastructure 
in Wimmera Southern Mallee provides strong links 
to the neighbouring regions (DJPR, 2022).
20

Outcomes:
An infrastructure network in the Wimmera Southern Mallee that 
supports water access reliability and security, housing that is affordable 
and attracts skills and people to the region, a (renewable) energy 
infrastructure that is distributed and supports peak demand in droughts, 
and a digital network that allows remote access to services and peer-
support to increase drought resilience.
Focus Areas for action
Investigate feasibility of expansion of Wimmera Mallee pipeline to increase resilience
Investigate further support for investments to increase efficiencies in water distribution and 
management
Strengthen communications infrastructure to support digital access
Promote sufficient and affordable housing in the Wimmera Southern Mallee region
Explore opportunities to expand localised, reliable, renewable energy generation and storage
Further expand mobility options and public transportation to support opportunities for social 
interaction for isolated or vulnerable groups of people
Maintain the road networks to enable economic activity despite lower rate income during droughts
Ensure community halls and houses are safe and accessible for everyone in the community
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

Theme 6
LANDSCAPE
The ‘landscape’ theme relates to managing natural 
resources including soil, water and biodiversity at a 
landscape scale, both in the form of natural capital 
as well as in ecosystem services. The landscape 
in the region is not limited to nature areas like 
national parks but also the agricultural landscape.
Different types of landscape can be identified 
in the Wimmera Southern Mallee. While the 
agricultural landscape covers the largest area, 
several national parks (Grampians, Little Dessert, 
Kara Kara) show a more untouched version of 
the landscape. The region has a diverse range 
of natural landscapes, including grassy plains, 
mountains, wetlands, deserts and forests. 
Environmental assets include Wyperfeld National 
Park, Little Desert National Park, the Pink Lake, 
the Wimmera River and Mount Arapiles. The 
Grampians National Park (Gariwerd) is a popular 
destination and provides a significant contribution 
to the region’s visitation and economy.
The region has a wide range of soil types from 
heavy clays to sandy soils and their management 
influences the productivity of agricultural 
enterprises as well as the health of natural assets.  
Soils that are exposed, due to a lack of ground 
cover, are prone to wind and water erosion which 
negatively impacts on soil fertility and productivity, 
biodiversity values, as well as human health. 
Exposed soils tend to result from land management 
practices like cultivation, stubble burning and 
over grazing. Impacts of climate change are 
predicted to negatively impact ground cover levels, 
particularly during droughts and dry seasons.
Rivers and streams are critical to the social, 
environmental and economic wellbeing of the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee region. Many townships 
are located close to rivers and streams for their 
ability to provide water, recreational opportunities 
and create a pleasant place to live. Waterways 
also provide habitat for much of the region’s 
wildlife including endangered flora and fauna 
and important international migratory birds.  
While there are some waterways that are in good 
condition, many of them have issues with poor 
water quality, lack of flow, erosion and depleted 
streamside vegetation.
While the region has been highly modified to 
support agriculture, the remaining biodiversity 
within the Wimmera is very resilient and continues 
to support an array of regionally and nationally 
significant species and ecological communities.
Barengi Gadjin Land Council is the trustee for the 
Native Title rights and interest of the Wotjobaluk, 
Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergai and Japagulk peoples, 
collectively known as the Wotjobaluk peoples  
as recognised in the Consent Determination on  
13 December 2005 (BGLC, 2022).
The Determination recognised non-exclusive 
Native Title rights to hunt, fish, gather and camp 
within an area known as Determination Area A  
being roughly described as the Wimmera River  
from the head of the Yarriambiack Creek through 
to Outlet Creek at the northern end of Lake 
Albacutya and including Lake Hindmarsh (Gurru) 
and Albacutya (Ngalpakatia/Ngelpagutya). 
BGLC and the Wotjobaluk people entered into 
an Indigenous Land Use Agreement (ILUA) with 
the Victorian and Federal Government. This was 
registered in November 2005. The ILUA ensures 
that the Wotjobaluk, Jaadwa, Jadawadjali, Wergaia 
and Jupagalk peoples will continue to have a 
say about certain types of developments in the 
area where their native title rights have been 
recognised.
22

Outcomes:
A landscape that is diverse, healthy and resilient and adaptive to drought.  
An environment that supports nature, people, communities and industry 
through extreme conditions, like drought.
Focus Areas for action
Support an interconnected network of drought refuges for flora and fauna to maintain an  
ecologically healthy community during drought
Encourage the establishment of stock containment areas and promote planned grazing management 
to reduce soil erosion
Promote the maintenance of ground cover to support healthy soils that are more resilient  
during droughts
Support Landcare and Caring for Country practices based on traditional land management approaches
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

ENABLING 
ACTIONS 
TO BUILD 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE
Existing constraints to the delivery of actions in 
this plan include access to financial and human 
resources, policy uncertainty, local leadership 
and limited digital connectivity. Many of these 
constraints can be overcome by focusing on 
collaboration between stakeholders, empowering 
local leaders and maintaining a strong network for 
communication and shared planning.
The creation of an enabling environment is 
critical to success of the Plan and requires broad 
participation and cooperation from governments 
(all levels), agencies, statutory bodies, not-for-profit 
organisations, and the private sector.
The Plan reflects the input of the community  
and has wide ranging support. Implementation  
of the plan will contribute to resilience building 
through the principles of managing connectivity, 
actively planning across sectors and promoting 
connected governance.
24

WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

NEXT STEPS FOR THE 
WIMMERA SOUTHERN 
MALLEE DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN
26

This Plan takes the first step in 
providing the necessary framework 
for the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
to identify and communicate its 
drought resilience needs and 
priorities. Continued collective and 
deliberate action is necessary for 
these needs to be met.
This Plan has been drafted for and by the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee community. Community members 
and organisations therefore have an important part 
to play in realising its vision for a more drought 
resilient region.
This Plan can be used by the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee community – in collaboration with industry, the 
non-profit sector, and all levels of government – to:
•	coordinate investment  
•	collaborate for shared outcomes 
•	inform future drought resilience priorities 
•	develop drought resilience programs 
•	monitor resilience to future droughts
Some of the actions identified can be addressed 
directly by the community, while others will require 
broader cooperation from governments, agencies, 
statutory bodies, Not for Profit organisations, and 
the private sector. The Plan contains unfunded 
activities, and some actions can only be addressed 
with further investment.
The Plan is an important step in building regional 
drought resilience. A supplementary document 
‘Regional monitoring, evaluation and learning’ is 
provided to guide how progress towards regional 
outcomes is measured and communicated.
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

REFERENCES
Barengi Gadjin Land Council (BGLC), 2017.  
Growing What Is Good Country Plan – Voices of  
the Wotjobaluk Nations.
Barengi Gadjin Land Council (BGLC), 2022.  
https://www.bglc.com.au/native-title, last visited  
on 20 June 2022
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning (DELWP), 2022. https://www.water.vic.gov.
au/groundwater/emergency-water-supply-points, 
last visited on 5 July 2022.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2017. 
Victorian Population Health Survey 2014
Griffin, D and B Muir, 2018. Barringgi Gadyin –  
The Wimmera River and Wotjobaluk Connection  
to Country. Linking Waterscapes Symposium, 
Ararat, June 2018.
Department of Jobs, Precincts and Region (DJPR), 
2022. Wimmera Southern Mallee Regional 
Economic Development Strategy. 
Integrated Water Management Forums, 2020. 
Wimmera Strategic Directions Statement.
Regional Development Victoria, 2022a. https://
www.rdv.vic.gov.au/regional-partnerships/mallee. 
Last visited on 20 June 2022.
Regional Partnerships Wimmera Southern  
Mallee, 2020. Regional Digital Plan Wimmera 
Southern Mallee.
Tischler, C, K McDonald, K, Rieves. 2022. 
Understanding and addressing digital 
disadvantage in Wimmera Southern Mallee. 
Wimmera Development Association.
Wimmera Catchment Management Authority 
(WCMA), 2021. Wimmera Regional Catchment 
Strategy 2021-2027
Wimmera Development Association (WDA), 2020a. 
Wimmera Southern Mallee Regional Housing 
Review 2020 Summary document.
Wimmera Development Association (WDA), 2020b. 
Wimmera Southern Mallee: Socio-Economic Value 
of Recreational and Environmental Water
Wimmera Development Association (WDA), 2022. 
WDA Stakeholder Briefing - Census - Housing  
and Population in the Wimmera Southern Mallee. 
Presentation, Jul 8, 2022.
Wimmera Primary Care Partnership (Wimmera 
PCP), 2020a. Wimmera Liveability Assessment.
Wimmera Primary Care Partnership (Wimmera 
PCP), 2020b. Liveability Attributes Summary.
28

Insights for building drought resilience in the Wimmera Southern Mallee
Between January and June 2022, Agriculture Victoria engaged with a wide 
range of stakeholders to develop the RDR Plan. This is a summary of the 
discussions with stakeholders that informed the six resilience themes, 
outcomes and actions identified in the RDR Plan. It includes observations, 
local studies and recommendations from local stakeholders. Not all the topics 
presented here resulted in the development of priority actions, but they are 
included as a record of the engagement and discussions that took place.
Communities and people
Maintaining connectivity before and during 
droughts is important to ensure open channels 
of communication and support. Several 
recommendations have come from the aftermath 
of the Millennium Drought, as well as from more 
recent community engagements by the different 
organisations in the Wimmera Southern Mallee. 
Community leadership
One of the difficulties in a sparsely populated area 
is the retention of community leaders. Further 
attention to development and strengthening these 
leaders helps in creating resilience of the region. 
The leadership development and strengthening 
should focus on ‘leadership by action’ rather 
than ‘leadership by status’. In the theme of 
emergency response local leadership has shown 
great benefits, hence its importance in resilience 
building. Leadership development opportunities 
should focus on agricultural and remote areas and 
take into account the large distances that people 
have to travel. Resilience in leadership focuses  
on social aspects, financial resilience and learning. 
Creating new leaders creates more diversity in 
governance of the region. It is important that  
these programs are continuous, and not one-off.
Sharing of experience
The Wimmera Southern Mallee community 
experienced severe impacts of droughts, 
especially the Millennium Drought. Experiences 
from communities have been collected to 
be shared with new generations and regions 
outside the Wimmera Southern Mallee. Reducing 
the ‘unknown and uncertainty’ can help build 
resilience. Knowing what to expect helps in 
preparation. Experiences have been collected 
through recorded stories, as well as through  
the project “Climate Eyes”, which will result  
in the publication of a book that documents 
drought related experiences in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee.
Mental health
Financial stress, worries about the future and 
uncertainty about the present can negatively 
impact people’s mental health. The Millennium 
Drought has focused more attention on mental 
health management. In addition to making the 
topic more accessible through discussion, there 
are now Mental Health First Aid courses, portals 
to provide access to professional health care 
providers, awareness raising within communities 
and agricultural service providers to recognise  
the onset of mental health issues as well as 
improved referral systems. Drought resilience  
is strengthened through a setup of services 
that can be accessed by the whole community, 
including farmers.
APPENDIX 1
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

Digital connectivity
Digital connectivity, ensuring that digital 
infrastructure is available as well as bridging the 
digital divide in the community helps people in 
isolation to reach out and be reached (Regional 
Partnerships Wimmera Southern Mallee, 2020; 
Wimmera PCP, 2020a; Tischler et al., 2022). 
Digital connectivity also allows access to services 
remotely. Telehealth services, having been 
successfully tested during Covid lockdowns, also 
provide access to medical information for families 
in remote areas. Digital connectivity, in the form of 
video conferencing, has also become more popular 
as a result of Covid-induced closure of borders and 
lockdowns. Another benefit of digital connectivity 
is access to climate data and tools and remote 
monitoring of parameters like soil moisture. 
Bridging the digital divide requires access to 
training and education for people who have not 
used these services before or are unfamiliar with 
digital services.
Social connectivity
Social events that bring people and communities 
together help in reducing stress. Ensuring that 
music and art events are organised during droughts 
allow a moment of sharing experiences and 
lessening stress. Small grants provided though 
the ‘Look over the Farm Gate’ project in the 2016 
drought provided critical social connections for 
drought affected farmers and communities which 
were important for mental health. In the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee, shared art project building, 
including decorating structures with different 
pulses and cereal seeds, is one way of supporting 
each other during the drought. Community halls 
provide infrastructure for gatherings and are 
suggested cool locations where people can gather 
during heat wave emergencies.
Recreational areas
Another lesson learned from the Millennium 
Drought is the importance of recreational areas, 
including water bodies. A study published by 
the Wimmera Development Association in 2020 
showed that the majority of recreational users 
are from the region itself, and that the physical 
and mental health benefits from recreational 
activities reduce pressure on health care services 
(WDA, 2020b). Similar to water allocation to sport 
facilities, water allocation to recreational areas 
cannot be expected at the same levels during 
droughts. Discussions, communication and shared 
decision making with local communities before 
drought helps to reduce uncertainty and supports 
resilience building.
Sporting events
Due to Wimmera Southern Mallee’s low population 
density compared to other regions in Victoria, 
large farm properties and long distances between 
communities, sporting events play an important 
role in bringing people together. From the 
population in Hindmarsh, West Wimmera and 
Yarriambiack, 45 per cent participates in sport 
groups or teams (Wimmera PCP, 2020b). Sport 
brings a competitive element to communities 
and draws them together around a common 
goal. Previous droughts have impacted sporting 
facilities, resulting in cancelled sport events. 
There is an opportunity for the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee community to identify facilities that are 
crucial to community connectivity before droughts 
occur. This will allow both participation in the 
decision process, as well as clear communication 
on decisions of water allocation to be made  
during a drought.
30

Volunteer organisations
Volunteer organisations bring people together with 
a shared goal. Their meetings have a similar effect 
on making people feel connected as sporting 
events do. One issue that has been mentioned in 
relation to volunteer organisations in rural areas 
is that the growth of farm size results in smaller 
populations, which makes it more difficult to find 
sufficient participants for volunteer organisations. 
Despite often having small populations, 
volunteering levels in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee are the highest in the State (DHHS, 2017).
Cultural and spiritual value
Land, water, people, the past are all related and 
have a cultural and spiritual value, especially in 
traditional society (Griffin and Muir, 2018). The 
Barengi Gadji Land Council (BGLC) represents a 
large group of Traditional Owners. BGLC’s mission 
statement is “Traditional Owners working together 
as custodians of culture, country, heritage, law and 
language.” Building drought resilience includes  
the protection of cultural and historical sites  
from drought specific risks (e.g. dust and erosion) 
as well as water allocation to traditional title.
Education and learning
One of the principles of resilience building is 
to encourage learning. Learning is encouraged 
through many of the activities described 
previously. In addition, The Wimmera Southern 
Mallee has many formal education opportunities, 
including Longerenong Agricultural College, 
Federation University and vocational training. 
The Skills Audit assessment (2022) evaluated 
educational needs for the region and identified 
actions required to strengthen education in the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee. Drought experience 
and resilience should be included in specialised 
curricula, contributing to drought resilience 
building in the region.
Farming enterprises
Broadacre cropping and livestock, or a 
combination of the two, are the most common 
agricultural systems in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee region. Numerous actions have been 
identified that can help reduce drought risks on 
farms through management of operations and 
business planning.
Diversification of income streams is an effective 
strategy to build financial resilience in family 
farms. This combines the core farming business 
with other on-farm and off-farm incomes, 
recognising that time availability can become  
a constraint in this approach.
There is no single solution to build farm business 
resilience to drought and other shocks. Aims, 
goals and objectives will be different for individual 
families and businesses. Individual agronomic, 
economic and business continuity decisions must 
be made by on a case-by-case basis.
Financial tools and services
Farming can experience strong fluctuations 
in yields, income and expenses. For long term 
business planning, this requires the build-up of 
financial reserves in the ‘fat’ years, to buffer the 
lower profits in the ‘lean’ years. Although this 
sounds like a common sense approach, in year-to-
year operations it is difficult to know how much 
reserve to build, how to balance the requirement 
for maintenance, infrastructure investment and 
building a financial reserve. A variety of financial 
tools and aids are available to cope with the high 
income and cost fluctuations. The Rural Financial 
Counselling Service provides support for farm 
businesses experiencing, or at risk of, hardship 
including financial and business planning.
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

Farming system diversification
Although farming systems are often described as 
either broadacre cropping systems or livestock-
based farming systems, there are many mixed 
farming systems in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee region. Different farms made different 
decisions during and after the Millennium Drought. 
Some decided to reduce or eliminate livestock 
management from the farm, while others chose 
to specialise further in cropping or livestock 
management. Individual businesses make 
individual choices based on the conditions and 
situation that applies to them. At regional level, 
having a diverse set of farming systems helps build 
regional resilience to droughts and other shocks.
Research, innovation and implementation
Agricultural research provides insights in drought 
tolerant crop varieties, maximising productivity 
through improved agronomic management, 
improved grazing and supporting livestock 
management. Research from a range of industry 
groups, like Birchip Cropping Group, the Smart 
Farm initiative in Horsham and VicNoTill provides 
farmers with knowledge and tools to improve their 
drought resilience. Field days, training events 
and networking events are organised around the 
research results and support networking and 
knowledge sharing between farms. Youth-targeted 
events ensure that next generation farmers are 
provided with peer support, as well as the latest 
innovations in farming.
Industries and businesses
Businesses providing access to goods and services 
that improve the liveability of the communities in 
the Wimmera Southern Mallee are critical to the 
resilience of the region. 
Small business essential services
Many small businesses in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee contribute to the regions resilience by 
providing essential services. For example, the  
local hardware store is often a distributor for gas. 
Small local businesses also function as a place  
for community connection. The existence of viable 
and vibrant local businesses support resilience of 
the region.
Financial support industry
The availability of banks, insurance, accountants 
and other businesses in the financial industry is 
essential for the resilience of the local community.  
A financial sector that is familiar with the 
agricultural industry and its associated variability 
in cash flow is essential for a resilient economy. 
Financial and administrative management
Currently the Rural Financial Counselling 
Services (RFCS) program has expanded to small 
businesses. As with farming enterprises, RFCS 
provides support for businesses to make informed 
business decisions. Healthy businesses provide  
a stronger resilience to shocks induced by 
droughts, resulting in less negative economic 
impact in the region.
32

Local leadership
As with governance, business leadership residing 
in the region results in more timely and targeted 
decisions related to drought impact and leads 
to a more flexible business approach. Business 
leadership is improved by encouraging local 
entrepreneurship through training opportunities 
and the creation of favourable business conditions.
Networking
Similar to community networking, business 
networks have an added value in improving 
communication, shared learning and collective 
representation. In some cases, local Chambers of 
Commerce have taken the lead in creating local 
business networks, while at the same time creating 
favourable conditions to attract new businesses.
Governments and agencies
Droughts introduce new and increased pressure 
on existing local government resources. Local 
governments and other agencies encounter more 
distress and increased incidents of family violence 
in the region during periods of drought. Agency 
and local government staff often take leave due 
to increased work stress, and it becomes harder 
to recruit new staff while their services are more 
critical and in demand during drought periods.
Emergency readiness plans
Most of the governments, agencies and 
organisations in the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
have some type of emergency readiness plan. It is 
important to note that under the Commonwealth 
and Victoria State definitions, drought is not 
classified as an emergency. However, in several 
agencies in the Wimmera Southern Mallee, 
drought response is part of their emergency 
planning process. Ongoing revision of the plans, 
evaluating them from the perspective of different 
emergencies supports the readiness of the 
organisations
Inter-agency collaboration and networking
Connected governance helps in preparing for and 
responding to drought. Despite many agencies in 
the Wimmera Southern Mallee being stretched 
for time and resources, regular meetings and 
networking events help to ensure support and 
services to the community are more coordinated.  
If formal agreements for collaboration are 
required, these can be prepared in advance as 
framework agreements. Maintaining the network 
between governments, agencies and organisations 
in addition to the private business and financial 
sector requires time and resources but builds 
greater resilience in the region. The Wimmera 
Southern Mallee Seasonal Conditions Group 
is a good example of a network with the aim to 
coordinate drought preparedness and response.
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

Infrastructure
Infrastructure that contributes to resilience in 
the Wimmera Southern Mallee includes water 
pipelines, energy generation and distribution, 
digital connectivity, road and rail networks.
Expansion of the pipeline service area
Not all customers in the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
are serviced by the existing pipeline and there are 
continuing requests for expansion of the pipeline 
service. One of these proposals expands the 
service area for the pipeline to an area south of the 
current pipeline, covering an area from Edenhope 
in the west to the Grampians east of Balmoral.
The potential for gains in water security and 
reliability should be explored by investigating 
operational distribution and management 
improvements of the system to increase 
efficiencies and reduce water and energy losses.
Emergency water points
GWM-Water have indicated that in the area 
serviced by the pipeline there is a sufficient 
density of emergency water access points. Water 
can be extracted for fire control, but also for large 
remote construction projects, including wind 
farms, where the concrete base of the wind towers 
requires large volumes of water and dust control 
during road construction.
Reuse and desalination
Although there are small-scale opportunities for 
reuse of water or desalination of groundwater, these 
options likely have limited impact on the regions 
water security and reliability, and issues with 
waste-stream management need to be carefully 
considered. Reuse and desalination are often 
brought up as options to reduce water shortages, 
but the general opinion in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee is that this option does not contribute 
significantly to drought resilience building.
Energy
Droughts are often associated with higher 
temperatures and heatwaves. An increased 
demand for cooling results in higher energy 
demand. Energy reliability is important to ensure 
the community does not experience unnecessary 
heat stress. In the low-density areas of the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee, distributed energy 
production and storage, especially with a focus  
on renewable energy solutions, could contribute  
to a more resilient community.
Digital infrastructure
The Wimmera Southern Mallee Digital plan has 
identified several key digital connectivity issues, 
including inadequate mobile coverage, a gap 
in digital divide, the low uptake of the Internet 
of Things, and a lack of NBN business‑grade 
services (Regional Partnerships Wimmera 
Southern Mallee, 2020). Digital exclusion is a 
significant barrier to the uptake of agriculture 
technology and increased productivity (Tischler 
et at, 2022). Analysis of digital access and quality 
of connectivity across primary production in 
the region, including for cropping, wool and 
sheep meat and food processing enterprises, 
confirmed major shortfalls in digital inclusion and 
connectivity as impediments to addressing the 
region’s primary production needs.
Specifically aimed at agriculture, Longerenong 
College established a digital laboratory within the 
AgTide project that aimed to improve uptake of 
digital access and tools, including tools related to 
precision agriculture. In parallel to improving the 
digital infrastructure, reducing the digital divide in 
the region is also identified as critical to resilient 
communities in the Wimmera Southern Mallee.
34

Sufficient and affordable housing 
Both the Regional Economic Development 
Strategy (DJPR, 2022) and the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee Regional Housing Review 2020 (WDA, 
2020a) identify housing as a requirement to 
maintain and expand the region’s liveability and 
economic viability. Low population densities in the 
region can result in more vulnerable communities, 
and an increased population in these areas will 
thus result in a stronger social canvas to build 
resilience upon.
For the Wimmera Southern Mallee these elements 
are considered critical in strengthening resilience 
to drought. Expanding housing opportunities is 
a requirement to be able to maintain and attract 
a regional workforce in the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee. While areas for housing development can  
be assigned, councils are required to expand the  
essential infrastructure like water and sewage 
connections, footpaths, street lighting and 
drainage. Several initiatives are supporting this  
in the Wimmera Southern Mallee, including the  
Regional Jobs and Infrastructure Fund, the Regional 
Workforce Pilots, and the Affordable Housing 
Solutions through the Regional Recovery Fund.
Transportation and mobility
Maintaining roads and transport infrastructure  
is an important enabler to the local economy.  
There are specific difficulties related to council 
road management due to the large distances 
of roads, low rate-payer density, and heavy 
agricultural equipment moving between farms.
As part of the liveability review conducted by 
the Wimmera Primary Care Partnership (2020a) 
access to public transportation is important 
to ensure access to health services and social 
events. The region is not serviced by passenger 
rail and commercial airlines services. Regional 
priorities have been identified to developed to 
establish passenger rail services. Where public 
transportation is limited, volunteer community 
transport is being developed.
A focus on improved mobility through improved 
local transport options as well as regional 
transportation improvements, identified in the 
Horsham Rail plan, are identified as important 
enablers for regional drought resilience.
Community halls and houses
Especially for remote communities, community 
halls provide a location to get together, attend 
events, undertake training, and serve as shelter 
in emergencies and during heatwaves. Proactive 
maintenance and support to create a safe and 
accessible location is an important aspect of 
community resilience.
Childcare and after school care
Large distances between home and school and 
limited available childcare and after school 
care puts additional strains on families and 
communities. Accessible childcare and after 
school programs are identified as required 
to allow more flexibility in personal and work 
life. Experience during COVID lockdowns and 
restrictions showed a similar recommendation  
for better childcare and after school care  
programs to improve the region’s resilience.
WIMMERA SOUTHERN MALLEE DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

Landscape
Biodiversity river pools and drought refuges
Drought and a drying climate leave wetlands 
susceptible to damaging activities like cropping 
and overgrazing. An assessment of climate change 
vulnerabilities for wetlands found that the interval 
between wetland inundation events could increase 
from once every one to two years, to once every 
four years (WCMA, 2021). Maintaining designated 
pools and refuges to receive environmental water 
during droughts is one approach to reduce drought 
impact on the environment. Environmental water 
targets are required to ensure the operation 
of river pools and refuges during droughts 
(Integrated Water Resources Forums, 2020).
Stock containment areas
A drought results in lower biomass production, 
and can lead to overgrazing and soil erosion, with 
potential regional impacts like dust storms and soil 
degradation. One approach to reduce the impact of 
overgrazing is to create stock containment areas 
and combine this with active grazing management. 
Stock containment areas require an investment 
in physical barriers as well as an accompanying 
change in grazing operations. The establishment 
of the pipeline has assisted in the establishment 
of containment areas through more reliable water 
access for livestock.
Ground cover
A reliable approach to limit soil erosion and 
reduce dust is to maintain ground cover wherever 
possible. Although during droughts the lack of rain 
will make it difficult to maintain a ground cover, 
the practice during wetter years will improve soil 
health, improve soil water storage, and create  
a soil structure that is less prone to wind erosion  
in dry years.
Care for Country
A holistic approach to caring for country is 
provided by Traditional Owners, represented by 
Barengi Gadjin Land Council in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee (BGLC, 2017). This is implemented 
through close collaboration with the Catchment 
Management Authorities on developing plans for 
the protection and rehabilitation of waterways and 
wetlands, joint management with Parks Victoria, 
and influencing land management on private 
land through organisations like With Trust for 
Nature, Greening Australia, Landcare and other 
non‑government organisations. This is highlighted 
in the Growing What Is Good Country Plan,  
with a focus on farmers adjacent to reserves  
to create buffer zones to prevent pest plant  
and animal spread.
36

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.awe.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee Region
Information to support the Wimmera Southern Mallee Regional Drought Resilience Plan | June 2022
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Regional summary
The Wimmera Southern Mallee region comprises of a range 
of small to medium sized diverse communities with a strong 
agricultural presence The region has diverse natural assets with 
the Grampains National Park, Wimmera River, deserts, wetlands 
and lakes.The region encompasses the local government 
areas (LGAs) of Hindmarsh, Horsham, Northern Grampians, 
West Wimmera and Yarriambiack. The 2016 census reported a 
population of 47,379 and a Gross Regional Product of $2.5bn. 
Key industries in the Wimmera Southern Mallee region include 
agriculture, forestry and fishery (17%) and health care and social 
assistance (17%).
There are no longer any irrigation districts following 
decommissioning of the Wimmera Southern Stock and Domestic 
channel in 2018. The Wimmera Mallee pipeline is instrumental in 
deliving water to the region.
The region experienced drought and dry seasonal conditions 
during the Millennium drought, 2014-2015 and 2017-2019.
Campaspe
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
Gippsland
West 
Wimmera
Horsham
Hindmarsh
Yarriambiack
Northern 
Grampians
Gouldburn
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund. 
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was a key factor to the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may 
change in 
the future
The Goulburn 
region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness
 or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls 
on surface or subsurface
 water supply
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the WSM Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a reduction in primary production on farm. This impacts farm 
income, consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. 
These on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community 
to generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural 
markets (e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the 
impact of drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-
market impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community health and cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers 
and dams could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced 
ability to boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and 
spending within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions 
+
Changes in the WSM region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
+ 
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
of future drought
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for 
ag farm services 
(but could increase 
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands 
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation 
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from 
green space
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Frontier Economics
3
Drought in the WSM Region

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. Timing of rainfall is important to 
agricultural production which is difficult to extrapolate through yearly 
data. Additionally, dry conditions are associated with frosts which 
has further impacts on the yield of crops. The Wimmera Southern 
Mallee experienced a devastating drought in 2014 and 2015 which 
had a significant impact on agricultural productivity including wheat 
production. Drought conditions were also experienced during the 
Millennium Drought (1997-2009) and the 2017-19 dry periods. 
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Broadacre cropping is the primary agricultural commodity in the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee region (55% of agricultural production) 
followed by livestock (mostly sheep and lambs) (23% of agricultural 
production). Farmers in the Wimmera Southern Mallee can diversify 
between broadacre cropping and livestock to assist drought 
resilience. However, reduced agricultural productivity as a result of 
drought impacts farm cash income and farm business profit, with 
ABARES data showing a downturn in farm cash income and profit 
during both the Millennium drought and during 2014-2015.
Dryland cropping in the Wimmera Southern Mallee region is highly 
dependent on the timing and quantity of rainfall. Long dry periods can 
impact output and productivity for farmers. Wheat production in the 
Wimmera natural resource management (NRM) region experienced 
a significant decline during the 2014-15 drought. There was a slight 
decline during 2017-19, but the region experienced a very strong 
recovery in 2019-20 to the highest production in the region since 
2007-08. The number of sheep and lambs in the region also declined 
during the 2014 and 2015 drought. 
Wimmera Southern Mallee farmers have developed resilience 
measures following recent droughts which assist them in mitigating 
drought impacts including enlarging on-farm dams, storing silage and 
growing forage crops. 
01
02
01
02
03
Past drought 
conditions 
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
in past drought
20.5
21
21.5
22
22.5
23
23.5
200020012002200320042005200620072008200920102011201220132014201520162017201820
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Year
Longerenong
Annual
90th %ile
Median
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Rainfall (mm)
Year
Horsham
Wimmera Southern Mallee region is vast and diverse, and as 
such individual areas within the region may experience different 
meteorological conditions. The timing of rainfall is instrumental 
to germinating, growing and yield crops. The historical rainfall 
and temperature charts provide evidence of the severity of these 
recent drought events. 2014 and 2015 were particularly hot and 
dry experiencing below 10th percentile, and at the same time the 
average maximum temperature was well above the 90th percentile.
There was also a lack of rainfall during the millennium drought and 
2017-19 dry period, with only the years of 2003, 2010, 2011 and 
2016 receiving rainfall above the median. The average maximum 
temperature was also above the median for the entire period of 
the millennium drought (except for 2010 and 2020).
Recently experienced droughts in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2014-15
•	 2017-19
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature
Frontier Economics
4
Drought in the WSM Region

The Wimmera Mallee pipeline provides increased water security for 
the region, enabling farmers to supplement cropping operations with 
livestock and therefore manage variability in seasonal conditions and 
commodity prices. This is a major development for drought resilience 
and will assist in alleviating the economic, social and environmental 
impacts of drought within the region.  
Town water 
There were severe water restrictions during the Millennium drought 
across the region. However, since the Wimmera Mallee Pipeline has 
been in use agriculture and town water supply has been significantly 
more drought resilient. Since 2016 there have not been restrictions 
in the region. Despite this, there are limited options for water trade 
and carryover, with the region being a net exporter of water via the 
Wimmera-Mallee Pipeline.
Recreation and Tourism
 Some tourism opportunities in the region are reliant on lakes and 
the Wimmera River. The Wimmera Mallee Pipeline supplies to 12 
recreational lakes and weir pools. This recreation water was delivered 
through the pipeline mainly for tourism benefits. The Silo Art Trail 
provides a drought resilient tourist attraction for the region.   
Environment   
Wimmera Southern Mallee has a number of ecologically and 
recreationally important wetlands. There is still a contested space 
around recreational water and environmental water and the trade off 
between agricultural and town water use. Wetland, recreational and 
Commonwealth environmental ‘entitlements’ have generally received 
zero water allocations in the past decade.
03
Community outcomes 
in past droughts

Farming communities are severely impacted during periods of 
drought, due to:
Financial pressures resulting from reduced on-farm income and 
increased costs
•	
On-farm issues mostly relating to lack of water and feed for stock
•	
Pressures from invasive native and pest animals on farms
•	
Physical and mental health and wellbeing impacts on individuals 
and families
•	
Flow on financial pressures being experienced by supporting 
businesses in the community.
Agriculture is a significant employer in the region, accounting 
for 17% of all jobs. This is smaller in Horsham (9.2%) where 
the economy is more diversified compared to West Wimmera 
for example (44.0%). The high economic reliance of the region 
on agriculture as a main employer and main value add driver, 
means the economic impacts of drought have the potential to be 
significant. Changes in agricultural production in the region will 
have downstream impacts on businesses that depend on farming 
productivity. Farm labourers, agricultural related jobs and casual 
labourers in the region are likely to first experience these impacts. 
Farmers may need to seek additional employment in the local 
community to create a secondary source of income for the farm.
The added stress during times of drought impacts financial and 
broader mental wellbeing. This is exacerbated due to the uncertainty 
of drought as it is unknown when the pressure is going to be released. 
Rural Financial Counselling Services experience higher demand during 
times of drought. The mental health impacts of this are exacerbated if 
there are no employment opportunities in the local towns which may 
cause a migration away from drought-affected areas. 
Reduced income and returns to employment reduce spending in 
region. Decreased expenditure in farm-reliant businesses coupled with 
decreased farming expenditure throughout the local communities 
translates into decreased income and expenditure in non-agricultural 
related businesses. This cumulates in financial pressure and small 
business closures. Importantly, the impacts of drought, via reduced 
spending in the region, on small businesses are more difficult to 
manage as they do not have the resources or tools available to 
manage their income variability (perhaps compared to farmers). As 
such, the local and regional economies experience a contraction 
during times of drought. This was confirmed by stakeholder 
discussions and is quantified in economic modelling of future drought.
The Wimmera Mallee pipeline meant that the dry conditions in 
2014 and 2015 were managed without the need for restrictions 
on the towns that required enduring Stage 4 restrictions during 
the Millennium drought. Further, the inflows into the Grampians 
reservoirs from 2017 to 2022 were on par with the poor Millennium 
drought conditions and no restrictions (beyond the Permanent Water 
Saving Rules) have been required.
The water allocation framework prioritises town water supply and 
domestic and stock supply before environmental and recreation water. 
As such, during times of drought environmental outcomes can suffer 
— with low allocations to Wetlands, Recreation and the Commonwealth 
Environmental Water Holder observed in most years since 2010. 
0
500
1000
1500
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
Wheat (kt)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
Sheep and lambs ('000)
Figure 4 Key industries production in the Wimmera NRM region
Frontier Economics
5
Drought in the WSM Region

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Wimmera Southern Mallee region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of 
the weather in the Wimmera Southern Mallee region 
with future droughts expected to be longer, more frequent and 
more severe. Climate projections in Figure 5 show that by 2050 the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee region on average will be hotter, drier 
and be exposed to a growing number of fire danger days. Similar to 
the past, the region and sub-regions will continue to face variable 
conditions within and across seasons — however in the future this 
variability will be around a lower average rainfall and higher average 
temperature than previously experienced. This means that, compared 
to current conditions, it is likely that parts of the Wimmera Southern 
Mallee will face some seasons with rainfall significantly below and 
temperatures significantly above current averages. 
The low levels of irrigation throughout the region is likely to expose the 
region to the impacts of drought, even during short periods. However, 
the Wimmera Mallee Pipeline offers significant drought resilience to 
the region’s towns, intensive agriculture and stock, yet this reliability 
may come under stress in future droughts.
Changes in the Wimmera 
Southern Mallee region
Following devastating droughts, the Wimmera Southern Mallee 
region developed more diversified practices to assist in drought 
resilience, including:
•	
Farming systems becoming more opportunistic and flexible 
•	
Investment in Wimmera Mallee Pipeline since Millennium 
drought
•	
Continuation of long-term trends of reduced proportional 
contribution of agriculture to employment and economy
•	
Covid population changes and regional tourism opportunities
•	
Developing leading innovation hubs and other research and 
development
•	
Changes to the relationship between rainfall and inflows
However, future weather conditions predict longer and more 
severe droughts which will test these resilience measures.
01
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
More heat extremes expected
Number of days over 38°C are expected 
to increase from 7.3 days to 11-19 days.
Decrease in frost risk expected, with effect 
of cold clear nights outweighed by increasing 
minimum temperatures
Rainfall will continue to be very variable, 
around a lower average – so increased risk 
of extreme dry
5-12%
48%
Number of very high fire 
danger days expected to 
increase by 8.7 days per year
1.6 to 
2.2 °C 
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions 
+
Changes in the 
WSM region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
+ 
non-agricultural impacts and 
implications
Community outcomes 
of future drought
in average maximum temperatures
on average
Figure 5 Projections of future climate in Wimmera Southern Mallee
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the WSM Region

03
02
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
The agricultural system in the Wimmera Southern Mallee has been 
developed in the context of a highly variable climate with farmers 
already having many strategies to manage drought. However, in the 
face of future droughts, extension is still important to support ongoing 
adaption in agriculture. 
Should the long term trend continue of decreased reliance on the 
agricultural sector for employment, this will reduce the flow through 
impacts of drought into the community. However, conversely there 
will be a higher reliance on economic diversification and employment 
opportunities in towns and regional centres. Declining population 
density in smaller, agricultural-based towns may put them at higher 
risk of drought impacts. 
Future implications of drought are likely to continue to impact the 
wellbeing and mental health of the local communities. Farmers and 
community businesses are likely to continue to rely on financial 
counselling services and the broader community will continue to rely 
on mental health services. 
Town water 
Town water security planning has improved building on lessons from 
drought and Urban Water Strategies incorporating future impacts 
of climate change (including potential droughts). Additionally, the 
Wimmera Mallee Pipeline provides increased water security to the 
region for the use of towns, stock, environment, recreation and 
tourism. However, given future climate projections, water security is 
still at risk.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism initiatives that are not dependent on water availability will 
continue to provide income to the Wimmera Southern Mallee region. 
COVID-19 has provided a boost to regional travel and relocation. 
Environment 
Lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during times 
of drought which will impact the native biodiversity living in and 
relying on these water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food and 
drinking water for wild animals living in the national and state parks 
in the region. Environmental water delivers positive environmental 
values, however currently due to reliability and allocations the 
Commonwealth Environmental Water Holder (CEWH) rarely receives 
water. With future climate projections in consideration, it seems 
unlikely that the CEWH will receive their full entitlement regularly 
moving forward.
Community outcomes 
in future droughts
The increased likelihood and severity of drought in the 
future will mean that the drought impacts on the community from 
agricultural consequences of drought are expected to be larger than 
have been historically observed. In contrast, the Wimmera Mallee 
Pipeline is expected to ensure that town water supply and stock 
water access would not be affected to the same degree as during the 
Millennium drought.
When agricultural businesses seek to reduce costs to endure the 
drought periods, this will result in employment impacts and spending 
impacts throughout the region. Local businesses will continue to feel 
the impact of decreased regional spending. Economic modelling of 
potential future drought across northern and western Victoria found 
the Wimmera-Southern Mallee to be the most severely affected 
region, with GDP in the region falling 20% and a fall in employment 
of 7.2%. This flowed through the region reducing consumption/
spending by 12%. The modelled 3 year drought, while prolonged, is 
not equivalent to the most severe recorded in Victoria.
Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought 
conditions become more prevalent. Not only are mental health 
services important during times of drought, but improved mental 
health increase a person’s ability to adapt. This can improve drought 
resilience by allowing people to effectively plan for future drought 
conditions.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of 
community spirit and liveability within local communities in the region. 
Grampians Wimmera Mallee Water and local governments have 
a strong understanding of the importance of greenspace for their 
communities so water availability will have to be at high risk before 
community greenspace areas do not receive water. However, should 
town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will have a 
mental health toll on residents.
If the future drought conditions result in a more-than-proportionate 
reduction to inflows to the reservoirs that support the regulated surface 
water system, then this raises significant concerns about the reliability 
of town water supplies and water for stock and intensive agriculture. 
Shortfalls in these would have more drastic community outcomes.
Overall the Wimmera Southern Mallee region’s high exposure to 
agricultural industries creates the potential for significant community 
impacts from future drought.
Frontier Economics
7
Drought in the WSM Region

Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness 
The Wimmera Southern Mallee’s combination of infrastructure, large-
scale agricultural land and economies of scale have enabled large 
agricultural output in the region.
This suggest that agricultural research, development and extension will 
remain important to support ongoing adaptation in agriculture, and 
will aid preparedness to future drought. There is also a wide range in 
the capacity of farmers, in terms of the skills to maintain more adaptive 
farming practices and in the ability to maintain buffers of financial assets 
or feed stocks to manage drought conditions when they arise.
Prior to 2020, farmers in the Wimmera Southern Mallee had to rely 
on radar stations at Mount Gambier and Mildura, which are unable to 
track rain bands sweeping across Victoria’s central west. This made it 
challenging to anticipate when and how much rain will fall — to make 
the best use of limited rainfall during drought. This has, however, been 
addressed with the construction of a Bureau of Meteorology Doppler 
radar station near Rainbow.
A remaining vulnerability is the limited adaptive capacity of local 
businesses to manage the reduced spending associated with drought 
periods. There is a need to develop planning or support measures to 
assist them effectively manage the inevitable income volatility. The local 
economies in the Wimmera Southern Mallee region need to be prepared 
and able to bounce back after the next drought. 
A potential information gap noted by stakeholders is the changing 
relationship between rainfall and inflows. This could be a result of 
catchment condition and may also be potentially associated with land 
use change. This has significant potential consequences on the most 
reliable water supplies (via the Wimmera Mallee Pipeline) in the region 
— and a step-change reduction of 58% has been observed in inflows 
to the headworks storages in the region (1997-2021, as compared to 
50 years prior).  
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. Towns 
throughout the Wimmera Southern Mallee region have varying degrees 
of diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The major regional centre of Horsham will provide somewhat of 
a buffer as it is a more diverse economy. This can flow through to 
townships close to Horsham. Townships within an approximately 
50 km radius provide people with the attraction of living in a 
smaller community, lower cost of housing but having employment 
opportunities in the larger centre. 
•	
Medium sized communities such as Stawell, the region’s second 
largest town with a population of 6,032 offers a smaller level of 
diversification to the region.
•	
Smaller sized communities: such as St Arnaud (2,193), Murtoa 
(865), Warracknabeal (2,438), Dimboola (1,424), Nhill (1,749), Kaniva 
(803) and Edenhope (946) are all highly dependent on agriculture. 
As such, these communities will be more severely impacted by 
drought, as there are limited alternatives that can replace the 
people and economic activity provided by irrigated agriculture. 
However, the smaller nature of these communities means services 
are limited currently, noting most communities have a small 
supermarket and health services.
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial Counselling 
are particularly important to manage drought and will be vital as drought 
conditions become more prevalent. These kinds of health services have 
long wait times in the region, even outside of drought, with more local 
services required. Not only are mental health services important during 
times of drought, but improved mental health increase a person’s ability 
to adapt. This can improve drought resilience by allowing people to 
effectively plan for future drought conditions.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the WSM Region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our 
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions and Visit Victoria.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from armonline and ABS.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.