Under the transparency provisions of the World Trade Organization’s (WTO) Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS agreement), Australia is required to have a National Enquiry Point (NEP), and a National Notification Authority (NNA) (Annex B, paragraph 3 and 10) with the responsibilities of receiving enquiries on Australia’s SPS measures and notifying the WTO on its measures.

SPS measures cover border control measures necessary to protect ‘human, animal or plant life or health’; this includes quarantine and biosecurity measures. TBTs cover other impediments to trade resulting from the existence of standards and conformity assessment systems; this includes standards for food packaging and labelling, agriculture and veterinary chemicals, animal welfare, fisheries and forestry.

Australia’s SPS notifications

Australia’s biosecurity measures to facilitate trade and protect human, animal or plant life or health are under constant development. Australia’s SPS contact point provides SPS notifications to the WTO to inform other WTO members of proposals on new or changed biosecurity measures that may have a significant effect on trade.

To find SPS notifications submitted by Australia simply:

- go to the WTO’s SPS webpage

- scroll to ‘actual notifications’

- choose Australia and the year from the drop down boxes

- click search.

Other countries’ SPS notifications

All WTO members are required to inform one another of new SPS measures or changes to their SPS measures that have a significant effect on trade. This can be done by providing details of the measure in a notification to the WTO, which is then uploaded to the WTO website. You can search for existing notifications using the WTO’s Documents Online webpage or the SPS Information Management System.

Australia’s SPS contact point collates a daily list of new SPS notifications from the WTO website and sends an email to stakeholders. To receive this email simply subscribe through the department’s subscription page.

Contact Details

Australian SPS contact point

Trade and Market Access Division

GPO Box 858

Canberra ACT 2601

Australia

Email: SPS Contact