01 November 2024
Meeting Communiqué
Commonwealth, state, and territory agriculture ministers met virtually on Friday 1 November 2024. It was the first meeting chaired by Minister Julie Collins, appointed to the position of Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry in July 2024, and it was the third and final meeting for the year. The Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm also attended.
Minister Collins welcomed the new AMM Northern Territory member the Hon Gerard Maley and thanked the Hon. Mark Monaghan MLA for his work during his time as Minister for Agribusiness and Fisheries. ACT and QLD were represented by its respective senior officials due to the recent ACT and QLD elections. Minister Collins thanked the outgoing members, Ms Rebecca Vassarotti MLA (ACT) and the Hon Mark Furner MP (QLD) for their work during the AMM forum.
High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI) Preparedness
Agriculture Ministers acknowledged the extensive engagement that occurred through the recent national preparedness activity, Exercise Volare, which has highlighted the strengths of Australia’s existing biosecurity systems and also identified opportunities to further enhance national preparedness and response capability.
Ministers welcomed the additional $95 million in funding from the Australian Government to support these objectives under a ‘One Health’ approach.
Ministers agreed as a priority to develop a national agreement to support governance and cost-sharing for a response to this cross-sectoral disease threat, partnering in national investments to strengthen response capability and to continue national collaboration on preparedness including on an integrated approach to communications.
Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity
Dr Michele Allan AO, the independent reviewer of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity (IGAB) briefed ministers on the progress of her review, early findings and potential recommendations. Ministers discussed emerging themes from this work and noted delivery of Dr Allan’s report is due in January 2025.
National Biosecurity Strategy
Ministers re-affirmed the vital role of a strong biosecurity system to protect Australia from potentially devastating pest and disease outbreaks, safeguarding our national economy, our agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries, our regional communities and our unique environment. Ministers are progressing endorsement of the first National Biosecurity Strategy Action Plan as part of the implementation of the National Biosecurity Strategy.
National Statement on Animal Welfare
Ministers are finalising their endorsement of the National Statement on Animal Welfare, which will underpin the renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS). The national statement will cement a commitment to joint leadership between Commonwealth, state and territory governments and will set a vision for the AAWS and its key priority areas.
2025 Priorities
Ministers discussed key priorities for 2025 including biosecurity, climate smart agriculture, First Nations agriculture, trade, workforce and animal welfare, which will be incorporated into AMM’s workplan for the new year. Ministers will continue to use this forum to tackle any emerging nationwide challenges that arise.
Other matters
South Australia updated the meeting on the response to the Tomato Brown Rugose Fruit Virus (TOBRFV) and emphasised the importance of swiftly resolving the National Protocols under the Emergency Plant Pest Response Deed. This disease has not been in Australia before and presents challenges to Australia’s tomato, capsicum and chilli industries. Members acknowledged the importance of resolving outstanding matters in order for growers to resume exports of tomatoes to the rest of the country and for certainty for the industry. Ministers noted that the National Management Group is expected to consider the TOBRFV response plan, including cost-sharing arrangements by the end of next week.
Ministers are working towards national endorsement of amendments to the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land Transport of Livestock to improve the welfare of horses. The Decision Regulation Impact Statement will be published on the Office of Impact Analysis’ website shortly.
Ministers noted progress towards the national commencement of mandatory individual electronic identification (eID) for sheep and goats from 1 January 2025. Ministers also noted all jurisdictions continue to track well toward the national rollout of eID for sheep and goats, including the mandatory eID tagging of newborn lambs and kids from 1 January 2025.
Ministers noted the progress on the development of the National Statement for First Nations in Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and its planned delivery for the 1st quarter of 2025.
AMM discussed the ongoing work being undertaken across Commonwealth, state and territory governments via the Agriculture Senior Officials Committee (AGSOC) Pet Food Working Group on policy options to manage pet food safety, including the development of a cost benefit analysis. AMM noted that a report on this work will be presented to agriculture ministers early next year for their consideration.
Next meeting
The AMM’s meeting schedule for 2025 is being finalised.
Ministerial attendees
- Australian Government: Hon Julie Collins MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and Minister for Small Business (Chair). Hon Anthony Chisholm, Assistant Minister for Education, Assistant Minister for Regional Development, and Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
- Northern Territory: Hon Gerard Maley, Deputy Chief Minister, Minister for Agribusiness and Fisheries, Minister for Mining and Energy, Minister for Corrections, Minister for Renewables, Minister for Recreational Fishers.
- South Australia: Hon Clare Scriven MLC, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, and Minister for Forest Industries.
- Tasmania: Hon Jane Howlett MP, Minister for Primary Industries and Water; Minister for Hospitality and Small Business, Minister for Racing.
- Victoria: Hon Ros Spence MP, Minister for Agriculture; Minister for Carer and Volunteers; Minister for Community Sport until 12pm
- Western Australia: Hon Jackie Jarvis MLC, Minister for Agriculture and Food; Forestry; Small Business
Proxies:
- Victoria: Michaela Settle, Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture was proxy for Minister Spence from 12pm onwards.
- Australian Capital Territory: Geoffrey Rutledge, Deputy Director-General, ACT Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate, was a proxy for ACT member due to the recent ACT election
- New South Wales: Rachel Connell, Deputy Secretary Agriculture and Biosecurity, NSW Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, was a proxy for NSW member, the Hon Tara Moriarty MLC, Minister for Agriculture, Minister for Regional New South Wales and Minister for Western New South Wales, due to an ongoing emergency situation in Western New South Wales.
- Queensland: Graeme Bolton, Director-General, QLD Department of Agriculture and Fisheries was proxy for was a proxy for QLD member due to recent QLD election.