15 August 2025
Meeting Communiqué
Commonwealth, State, and Territory Agriculture Ministers met virtually on Friday, 15 August 2025. The meeting was chaired by the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, the Hon Julie Collins MP. The Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm also attended.
Minister Collins welcomed and acknowledged new members from Queensland, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory, the Hon Anthony (Tony) Perrett, the Hon Gavin Pearce MP, and Ms Suzanne Orr MLA. Minister Collins thanked outgoing members, the Hon Mark Furner, the Hon Jane Howlett and Ms Rebecca Vassarotti MLA for their contributions.
Drought
Ministers discussed the drought conditions including in South Australia, Victoria and Southern New South Wales and the significant toll on farming communities.
During the meeting, Ministers shared updates on the challenges facing their jurisdictions, from weather events and climate conditions, with a particular focus on the hardships farmers are enduring due to prolonged dry conditions. The discussions highlighted the widespread impacts on agricultural production, water availability, and rural economies.
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to working collaboratively to ensure responsive and effective measures are in place. The group also emphasised the importance of long-term strategies to improve drought resilience.
Ministers welcomed the opportunity to discuss this further at the upcoming National Drought Forum, to be held in Gawler, South Australia in September 2025.
Outcomes from the Minister’s Productivity Roundtable
Dr Jared Greenville updated ministers on the Unlocking Productivity in Australian Agriculture roundtable, held on 12 August 2025, and noted that outcomes from the roundtable will be fed into the Government’s Economic Reform Roundtable later this month, highlighting the key role that agriculture plays in Australia’s economy.
Animal Welfare
Ministers noted the update on the renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy, which continues to progress under the joint leadership of the AMM, and cooperation of jurisdictional officials formally through the Animal Welfare Task Group. A National Animal Welfare Framework remains an important objective of the strategy which is being informed by science and evidence, and broad consultation.
National Food Security Strategy
Ministers discussed the Australian Government’s commitment of $3.5 million over 2 years for the development of Feeding Australia: National Food Security Strategy, including an update on the key initial activities underway. This includes the announcement of consultation on the discussion paper and opening of expressions of interest for the National Food Council.
Ministers agreed to work together to support the development of the strategy to boost the productivity, resilience, and security of the Australian food system.
Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity
Ministers agreed the joint response to the independent review of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity, led by Dr Michele Allan AO.
The review’s recommendations and the Ministers’ joint statement and response to the review will be released next week. The National Biosecurity Committee will deliver an implementation plan for agreed recommendations by the end of 2025.
Ministers noted and discussed the various biosecurity incursions currently being managed by jurisdictions.
Workplan for 2025
Ministers endorsed the AMM workplan for 2025, which incorporates the strategic priorities of biosecurity, climate smart agriculture, animal welfare, and trade. Ministers will continue to use this forum for continuing and emerging nationwide challenges that arise.
Algal Bloom
Ministers recognised the serious impacts of the algal bloom affecting waters off the coast of South Australia, with both wild catch fishers and aquaculture operators facing significant disruptions to their businesses, along with tourism operators and coastal communities.
Ministers noted the combined $28 million being provided by the Australian and South Australian governments to combat the effects of the algal bloom and to support affected businesses through science and research, financial assistance, community awareness, and clean-up efforts. Ministers noted there may be future impacts arising from algal blooms.
Ministerial attendees
- Australian Government: Hon Julie Collins MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (Chair). Hon Anthony Chisholm, Assistant Minister for Regional Development, Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, and Assistant Minister for Resources.
- New South Wales: Hon Tara Moriarty MLC, Minister for Agriculture, Minister for Regional New South Wales and Minister for Western New South Wales.
- Queensland: Hon Anthony (Tony) Perrett, Minister for Primary Industries.
- South Australia: Hon Clare Scriven MLC, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, and Minister for Forest Industries.
- Victoria: Hon Ros Spence MP, Minister for Agriculture; Minister for Carers and Volunteers; Minister for Community Sport.
- Western Australia: Hon Jackie Jarvis MLC, Minister for Agriculture and Food, Minister for Fisheries, Minister for Forestry, Minister for Small Business, and Minister for the Mid West.
Proxies:
- Australian Capital Territory: Mr Bren Burkevics, Executive Group Manager, City and Environment Directorate was proxy for Ms Suzanne Orr MLA, Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, Minister for Climate Change, Environment, Energy and Water, Minister for Disability, Carers and Community Services and Minister for Seniors and Veterans due to attendance at another ministerial meeting.
- Northern Territory: Mr Jed Matz, A/Chief Executive Officer, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries was proxy for Hon Gerard Maley, Deputy Chief Minister, Minister for Agribusiness and Fisheries, Minister for Mining and Energy, Minister for Corrections, Minister for Renewables, Minister for Recreational Fishers, due to attendance at another ministerial meeting.
- Tasmania: Mr Ashley Bastock, General Manager (Agriculture and Water) was proxy for Hon Gavin Pearce MP, Minister for Primary Industries and Water and Minister for Veterans Affairs due to emergent issues.