Meeting Communiqué
24 April 2026
Commonwealth, state, and territory agriculture ministers met virtually on 24 April 2026, for the latest Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting (AMM).
The meeting was chaired by the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, the Hon Julie Collins MP. The Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm also attended.
Middle East Impacts Discussion
Ministers discussed the impact of the conflict in the Middle East on primary production in Australia, in particular the price and availability of fuel and fertiliser. Ministers noted the uncertainty created by the conflict is not only driving increased costs for producers but also affecting production decisions and farmer wellbeing. These impacts further compound existing pressures in the sector, including drought and natural disasters.
The Commonwealth updated Ministers on the whole-of-government response to the conflict, including practical steps the Australian Government has taken to support the supply of agricultural inputs. This includes working with key partners to maintain the two-way flow of energy supplies, fertiliser and other critical goods, the arrangements to underwrite shipments of fuel and fertiliser by Export Finance Australia and the $6.15 billion available through the National Reconstruction Fund to strengthen critical supply chains.
Ministers outlined actions being taken by state and territory governments and acknowledged that collaboration and sharing of data is critical to supporting Australia’s farmers and ensuring our food supply system remains strong during this time.
Seasonal Conditions
Ministers discussed ongoing climate challenges being experienced across Australia, with significant flooding in northern Australia and drying conditions across much of our crop growing areas. Ministers noted measures to support producers and the intersection of these issues with the Middle East impacts.
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act (EPBC) reform changes and impacts on the Agriculture Sector
Ministers received an update on the progress of Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) reform implementation.
Ministers noted ongoing industry and jurisdictional interests in the implementation of the changes. The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water is working with both the agriculture and forestry sectors to support implementation of the EPBC Act reforms.
National Biosecurity Reform Agenda
Ministers agreed the approach to finalise a national reform agenda to better address key strategic risks facing Australia’s biosecurity system. Ministers agreed short-term reform priorities for delivery in 2026, which build on work underway. Ministers also agreed for targeted stakeholder consultation in the coming months on medium and longer-term reforms for a future reform roadmap, and on realigning the National Biosecurity Strategy (NBS) implementation to the reform agenda. Ministers requested the National Biosecurity Committee bring forward the future reform roadmap and approach to NBS implementation for their approval in late 2026.
Ministers agreed a joint Agriculture Ministerial Statement advising the national biosecurity reform approach. Ministers also noted the inaugural NBS Annual Report and NBS Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting and Improvement Framework.
National Fire Ant Eradication Program (NFAEP) – Update and proposed new Response Plan
Ministers noted progress of the National Fire Ant Eradication Program, including delivery of planned eradication treatment activities and continued coordination with state partners.
Ministers noted the completion of the independent End of Tranche Review in December 2025 confirming there is sufficient funding to deliver the program until 30 June 2027. Ministers noted implementation of all 19 review recommendations will support successful delivery of the Program through to 30 June 2027 and that work was underway to develop the next response plan for 2027–32.
Ministers also noted the importance of continued collaboration between the Commonwealth, states and territories, and industry to help reduce the impacts of other pests and weeds.
Pet food safety
Ministers considered the management of pet food safety in Australia and agreed that a regulatory approach is not warranted at this time, based on available evidence.
This reflects extensive analysis and investigation undertaken over several years, including detailed examination of regulatory and non-regulatory options, risk profiles, and the effectiveness of existing controls.
Ministers noted that current arrangements provide mechanisms to manage pet food safety incidents and recourse for affected consumers.
Jurisdictions will continue to engage closely with industry on monitoring and surveillance to ensure emerging risks are identified and managed appropriately.
Attendees:
- Australian Government (Chair): Hon Julie Collins, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm, Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
- Australian Capital Territory: *Bren Burkevics, Executive Group Manager, City and Environment Directorate, ACT Government. *Proxy for Ms Suzanne Orr MLA, Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, Minister for Climate Change, Environment, Energy and Water, Minister for Disability, Carers and Community Services, Minister for Seniors and Veterans
- New South Wales: Hon Tara Moriarty MLC, Minister for Agriculture, Minister for Regional New South Wales and Minister for Western New South Wales
- Northern Territory: Hon Gerard Maley, Deputy Chief Minister, Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries, Minister for Mining and Energy, Minister for Corrections, Minister for Renewables, Minister for Recreational Fishing
- Queensland: Hon Anthony (Tony) Perrett MP, Minister for Primary Industries
- South Australia: Hon Clare Scriven MLC, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, and Minister for Forest Industries
- Tasmania: Hon Gavin Pearce MP, Minister for Primary Industries and Water, Minister for Veterans’ Affairs
- Victoria: Hon Michaela Settle, Minister for Regional Development, Minister for Agriculture
- Western Australia: Hon Jackie Jarvis MLC, Minister for Agriculture and Food, Minister for Fisheries, Minister for Forestry, Minister for Small Business and Minister for the Mid West.