7 November 2025
Meeting Communiqué
Commonwealth, State, and Territory Agriculture Ministers met virtually on Friday, 7 November 2025 for the final Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) of the year.
The meeting was chaired by the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, the Hon Julie Collins MP. The Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm also attended.
H5 High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI)/Bird Flu Preparedness
Ministers acknowledged the significant progress that has been made across the Commonwealth, States and Territories in the last 12 months to uplift national readiness for a potential H5 bird flu outbreak. Of note, the implementation of the National Management Agreement for H5 HPAI in Wildlife, the first of its kind in Australia, provides clear governance and cost sharing arrangements for responses to H5 bird flu in wildlife.
Ministers noted the update provided on the suspect detection of H5 bird flu on Heard Island, which would not substantially increase the risk to Australia if confirmed.
Ministers reaffirmed the importance of maintaining a nationally collaborative and One Health approach to strengthening H5 bird flu preparedness. The $12 million being provided to States and Territories to boost biosecurity response capability is already translating into tangible, on the ground equipment. A further $2.15 million is being provided to jurisdictions to protect native species most at risk from an outbreak with plans in development to cover more than 200 sites and species.
National Food Security Strategy
Agriculture Ministers discussed the Australian Government’s progress in the development of the National Food Security Strategy. Ministers agreed to support the development of the strategy to boost the productivity, resilience and security of the Australian food system.
Animal Welfare
Ministers reaffirmed the importance of nationally harmonised animal welfare standards and noted their development is the collective responsibility of all states and territories as regulators of animal welfare.
Ministers were also updated on the renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) and acknowledged progress on stakeholder engagement and the development of animal group chapters.
Drought
Ministers discussed drought conditions that have impacted parts of the country including in South Australia, Victoria and southern New South Wales. Ministers acknowledged the varied and difficult decisions farmers face following winter rains and the depleted reserves in areas experiencing ongoing drought conditions.
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to working collaboratively to ensure responsive and effective measures are in place including those that support ongoing resilience for future droughts.
Ministers acknowledged the Commonwealth is expecting to release its response to the review of the Regional Investment Corporation by the end of the year and look forward to an update that could enhance this important support for our farm businesses.
Ministers reaffirmed that under the National Drought Agreement, drought response is a joint responsibility and acknowledged there are a range of Commonwealth, State and Territory programs that are always available to assist farmers and communities throughout the drought cycle as well as the commitments that have been made by States impacted by recent drought conditions.
Agriculture and Land Sector Plan and net zero
Ministers received an update on the release of the net zero plan, including the Agriculture and Land Sector Plan. The plan will help ensure Australian producers remain leaders in low-emissions food and fibre as Australia transitions to net zero. Ministers discussed opportunities for ongoing collaboration and coordination of action for reducing emissions in the agriculture sector.
National biosecurity system risks and reform
Ministers agreed to the key strategic risks facing our national biosecurity system. They acknowledged current reforms underway to address these risks. As part of this, Ministers endorsed the plan to implement the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity review recommendations and the National Biosecurity Committee’s (NBC) refreshed Terms of Reference, high-level communications plan and three-year strategic rolling forward work plan.
Ministers agreed further reforms are required to better address risks to ensure the system’s resilience and sustainability. Ministers agreed for the NBC to develop a national reform agenda for their consideration in early 2026.
National Statement on First Nations in Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Ministers noted the next stage of consultation to help shape a National Statement on First Nations in Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and that cooperation across jurisdictions in support of this work would continue.
Next meeting
The AMM meeting schedule for 2026 is being finalised.
Ministerial attendees
- Australian Government: Hon Julie Collins MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (Chair). Hon Anthony Chisholm, Assistant Minister for Regional Development, Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, and Assistant Minister for Resources.
- New South Wales: Hon Tara Moriarty MLC, Minister for Agriculture, Minister for Regional New South Wales and Minister for Western New South Wales.
- Northern Territory: Hon Gerard Maley MLA, Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries; Minister for Mining and Energy; Minister for Corrections; Minister for Renewables; Minister for Recreational Fishing.
- Queensland: Hon Anthony (Tony) Perrett, Minister for Primary Industries.
- South Australia: Hon Clare Scriven MLC, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, and Minister for Forest Industries.
- Tasmania: Hon Gavin Pearce MP, Minister for Primary Industries and Water and Minister for Veterans Affairs.
- Victoria: Hon Ros Spence MP, Minister for Agriculture; Minister for Carers and Volunteers; Minister for Community Sport.
- Western Australia: Hon Jackie Jarvis MLC, Minister for Agriculture and Food, Minister for Fisheries, Minister for Forestry, Minister for Small Business, and Minister for the Mid West.
Proxies:
- Australian Capital Territory: Mr Sam Engele, Deputy Director General, City and Environment Directorate was proxy for Ms Suzanne Orr MLA, Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, Minister for Climate Change, Environment, Energy and Water, Minister for Disability, Carers and Community Services and Minister for Seniors and Veterans due to attendance at another ministerial meeting.