The National Management Group (NMG) met on 10 November 2025 and approved an expanded Transition to Management (T2M) Response Plan for the Euwallacea fornicatus (polyphagous shot hole borer (PSHB)) /Fusarium sp. AF-18 complex. The NMG has committed a total of $23.3 million to T2M activities, bringing the total national commitment to $77.8 million to protect Australia’s urban and natural environment, industries, and communities.
This decision builds on and continues Australia’s nationally coordinated response and is informed by input from leading national and international scientific experts, industry and the community. The 18-month nationally cost-shared T2M Response Plan takes a proactive, coordinated approach to transition from an eradication strategy to long-term management.
This phase of the response includes strategies to slow the spread of PSHB and delivery of an Integrated Pest Management program to prepare industries and communities to manage the impact of the pest. This will include opportunities for training, technical workshops and community education.
The T2M response will minimise the impact of PSHB while empowering communities to protect the trees and canopy that defines our urban landscape while mitigating human assisted movement and the risk of long-distance spread.
The Western Australia’s (WA) Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) will continue to deliver movement controls in the Perth metropolitan quarantine area, supported by clear boundaries for infested zones, targeted surveillance, early warning systems and strategic tree treatment.
Ongoing community support and awareness remains vital, and reporting suspect detections and abiding by movement controls will remain critical in this new phase of the response.
The NMG recognises the significant impact of PSHB on WA’s communities, industries and environment, and commends the considerable efforts of local and state governments.
Through this nationally coordinated approach, the T2M Response Plan aims to reduce the biosecurity risks, build resilience, and protect biodiversity for future generations.
The WA DPIRD will continue to work closely with local governments, communities, and industry throughout this next phase of the response. Further information on the PSHB response can be found at www.dpird.wa.gov.au/pshb.
If you are in WA and suspect a tree is showing signs of infestation with PSHB, please contact the Exotic Plant Pest Hotline on 1800 084 881 or report it through the DPIRD MyPestGuide™ Reporter app.
For elsewhere in Australia contact Exotic Plant Pest Hotline on 1800 084 881. You can find out more about how we respond to pest and disease incidents at outbreak.gov.au.