The National Management Group (NMG) met on 18 June 2025 and confirmed that eradication of the Euwallacea fornicatus (Polyphagous shot-hole borer, PSHB)/Fusarium sp. AF-18 complex is no longer technically feasible. In recognition of the importance of preparing industry, local governments, and communities across Australia to manage and minimise the impact of the complex, the NMG agreed that the response should enter an extended 18-month Transition to Management program.
The decision was based on scientific, technical and economic feasibility advice from the Consultative Committee on Emergency Plant Pests (CCEPP), and considered the nature of the complex, an absence of effective chemical treatment options, and challenges in detecting and eradicating infestations.
This decision does not mean that Australia’s nationally coordinated response has stopped. Response efforts to date have slowed the spread and minimised the impact of PSHB, and provided significant insights into technical, operational, social and management strategies, and the challenges faced in the implementation of these efforts. The initial focus of the Transition to Management program will be an orderly finalisation of eradication activities whilst minimising the spread of PSHB from the Perth metropolitan region. The detailed transition program beyond this initial phase will be agreed nationally in the coming months.
The NMG will continue to review and consider revised management strategies on the advice of the CCEPP and the scientific advisory panel that are supporting the response. Insights gained during this phase will support industry and government in preparing for long-term management to mitigate spread and impact of PSHB in Australia.
The WA Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) will continue working closely with impacted local governments and communities during this phase of the response. Further information on the PSHB response can be found at www.dpird.wa.gov.au/pshb.
It is essential that government, the community, and industry continue to work together to manage the complex. If you are in WA and suspect a tree is showing signs of infestation with PSHB, please contact the Exotic Plant Pest Hotline on 1800 084 881 or report it through the DPIRD MyPestGuide™ Reporter app.
Movement restrictions remain in place and are critical to minimising the risk of human-assisted movement of PSHB out of the Perth metropolitan area.
For elsewhere in Australia contact Exotic Plant Pest Hotline on 1800 084 881. You can find out more about how we respond to pest and disease incidents at outbreak.gov.au.