National Management Group Communiqué
High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI) H7 – 21 June 2024
On Wednesday 19 June 2024, New South Wales confirmed a detection of H7 high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) in the Greater Sydney region. Laboratory testing has provided confirmation this detection is a separate spill over event with no linkages to the HPAI H7 currently under eradication in Victoria.
The National Management Group (NMG) met on 21 June 2024 to establish a cost shared eradication program to manage the New South Wales H7 HPAI response under the Emergency Animal Disease Response Agreement. In approving New South Wales’s initial Response Plan, the NMG have agreed to an Upper Limit of Expenditure of $20 million to fund eradication activities.
Additionally, due to changing operational requirements the NMG also approved a revised Response Plan for Victoria’s H7 HPAI eradication program and committed an Upper Limit of Expenditure of $46.2 million towards the response.
Both responses are being conducted by the Victorian and New South Wales Governments in accordance with nationally agreed biosecurity response plans and procedures. More information on eradication activities and movement controls can be accessed via relevant government websites.
- Victoria: https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/biosecurity/animal-diseases/poultry-diseases/avian-influenza-bird-flu
- New South Wales: https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/animals-and-livestock/poultry-and-birds/health-disease/avian-influenza
There are no food safety issues identified; poultry meat and eggs remain safe to eat provided they are handled and cooked as per food safety standards.
In Australia there is a very low risk of people becoming infected with avian influenza viruses through normal contact with healthy birds. People should avoid direct contact with birds or mammals that are sick or have died unexpectedly and use good hygiene measures for handling and disposing of dead birds or mammals.
If you notice any sick or dead birds, this includes all domestic poultry or wild birds, contact the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888. You can find out more about how we respond to animal disease incidents at outbreak.gov.au.