National Management Group Communiqué
High Pathogenicity Avian Influenza (HPAI) H7 – 16 July 2024
Following tracing activities from New South Wales (NSW), the H7N8 high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) strain was confirmed on 27 June 2024 in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT).
The National Management Group (NMG) agreed out of session to extend the cost shared eradication program established in response to the NSW H7 HPAI response and approved ACT’s initial Response Plan. In approving ACT’s initial Response Plan, the NMG agreed to an increase of $11 million to the Upper Limit of Expenditure to fund ACT response activities.
Due to changing operational requirements the NMG met on 16 July 2024 and approved revised Response Plans for Victoria and NSW and agreed to increase the Upper Limit of Expenditure for both response programs.
The NMG has committed a total of $116.49 million in response to the HPAI H7 responses in Australia. This consists of an Upper Limit of Expenditure of $75.49 million for Victoria and a combined $41 million for NSW and ACT.
All responses are being conducted by the Victorian, New South Wales and Australian Capital Territory Governments in accordance with nationally agreed biosecurity response plans and procedures. More information on eradication activities and movement controls can be accessed via relevant government websites.
- Victoria: https://agriculture.vic.gov.au/biosecurity/animal-diseases/poultry-diseases/avian-influenza-bird-flu
- New South Wales: https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/animals-and-livestock/poultry-and-birds/health-disease/avian-influenza
- Australian Capital Territory: https://www.environment.act.gov.au/parks-conservation/plants-and-animals/biosecurity/biosecurity-alerts/avian-influenza
There are no food safety issues identified; poultry meat and eggs remain safe to eat provided they are handled and cooked as per food safety standards.
In Australia there is a very low risk of people becoming infected with avian influenza viruses through normal contact with healthy birds. People should avoid direct contact with birds or mammals that are sick or have died unexpectedly and use good hygiene measures for handling and disposing of dead birds or mammals.
If you notice any sick or dead birds, this includes all domestic poultry or wild birds, contact the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888. You can find out more about how we respond to animal disease incidents at outbreak.gov.au.