October 2024
The Sheep and Goat Traceability Task Force (the taskforce) continues to meet regularly to consider matters related to the national implementation of individual electronic identification (eID) for sheep and goats.
National eID implementation
Regular updates on jurisdictional and industry action, including information on key dates and incentive programs, are published in the Sheep and Goat eID National Implementation Plan.
National sheep and goat eID requirements commence from 1 January 2025, with eID devices mandatory for all sheep and goats born from this date. Harvested Rangeland Goats (HRG) will be covered under the Livestock Production Assurance (LPA) HRG Accreditation program, with accreditation requiring state or territory approval.
Further requirements will be implemented in line with jurisdictional dates in the Sheep and Goat eID National Implementation Plan. Note eID device scanning at processing sites, such as abattoirs, has been mandatory in NSW since 1 July 2024.
National communications and resources
To support national implementation efforts, a national communication and engagement program is underway, led by Sheep Producers Australia and the Goat Industry Council of Australia.
Key work to date includes a dedicated eID resources and support webpage, eID webinars (recordings of past webinars are also available) and in-person meetings. Available communication resources, including “how to guides” and a desk mat for guidance on selecting correct species-specific NLIS approved eID devices , can be found on the eID resources and support webpage.
To promote clear transparent lines of communication nationally, the taskforce has also continued to engage with State and Territory Farming Organisations (SFOs) and other representative bodies through roundtable discussions. The most recent roundtable was held in July 2024 with another planned for November 2024.
Advice to government on key eID implementation matters
The taskforce continues to discuss matters related to the national implementation of eID for sheep and goats, providing consolidated advice to Australian governments as required. An implementation progress update from the taskforce is being provided to Agriculture Ministers in November 2024.
For further information or any enquiries please email livestock.traceability@aff.gov.au.