April 2023
The Sheep and Goat Traceability Taskforce continues to meet regularly to consider matters related to the national implementation of individual electronic identification (eID) for sheep and goats.
Stakeholder consultation
Since October 2022, the taskforce has supported a series of roundtable meetings with representatives from state consultative groups and peak bodies. The taskforce also hosted a Sheep and Goat eID webinar and panel discussion on 3 November 2022. The virtual session included key focus areas; why traceability is important, how eID for sheep and goats helps trace livestock more effectively than the mob-based system, and lessons learned from Victoria’s rollout of eID for sheep and goats. A recording of the panel discussion can be found on the Sheep and Goat Traceability Taskforce webpage, hosted on the Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Fisheries (DAFF) website.
Commonwealth co-investment
At its meeting on 24 February 2023, the SGTTF noted that discussions between governments continue regarding co-investment of the $20 million in Commonwealth funding allocated at the October 2022-23 Budget to support the implementation of eID, along with other on-farm and off-farm traceability improvement. The taskforce noted these were matters for governments to settle in accordance with the Federation Funding Agreements framework and funding arrangements will be executed through Specific Purpose Payments.
The taskforce also noted this is the same process used for government cost-sharing arrangements for emergency animal disease responses. The taskforce noted advice from governments that discussions between the Commonwealth and state and territory governments commenced in late 2022, where all jurisdictions had noted and agreed key principles for bilateral discussions and agreements. Bilateral discussions continue, and agreements may be reached and announced in stages. The first agreement is expected to be announced by mid-2023.
National Sheep and Goat eID Implementation Plan
The SGTTF notes that States and Territories continue to work towards the 1 January 2025 implementation milestone. Jurisdictions are working closely with their industry stakeholders to develop and action state-based implementation plans to progress a nationally harmonised sheep and goat eID traceability system. State-based plans are contributing to the development of a National Sheep and Goat eID Implementation Plan with harmonised national outcomes.
For further information or any enquiries please email livestock.traceability@aff.gov.au