October 2023
The Sheep and Goat Traceability Task Force (the taskforce) continues to meet regularly to consider matters related to the national implementation of individual electronic identification (eID) for sheep and goats.
Stakeholder consultation and engagement
The taskforce hosted a virtual roundtable meeting with representatives from state consultative groups and peak bodies on 23 June 2023. The meeting included an update on implementation progress and key activities underway, as outlined in the Sheep and Goat eID National Implementation Plan, and an ‘issues of focus/question and answer’ session for stakeholders to ask taskforce members questions on key issues and share insights regarding national implementation. Further roundtable meetings are anticipated in 2024.
The taskforce has established a dedicated communication group to enhance consistency in communications on sheep and goat eID nationally. The group comprises representatives from across industry and government and meets on a fortnightly basis.
National Implementation Plan and National Principles
The taskforce notes that States and Territories continue to work towards the 1 January 2025 implementation milestone and that jurisdictions continue to work closely with their industry stakeholders to develop state-based implementation plans.
To enhance public dissemination of information in state-based plans, the taskforce has developed and published a Sheep and Goat eID National Implementation Plan. The plan provides a consolidated national picture of known jurisdictional implementation timeframes (including funding support arrangements, where announced), key government and industry support activities underway and links to websites for further information. It is updated when new information becomes available.
The taskforce has also developed and published the SGTTF National Principles – implementation of individual eID for sheep and goats. The principles, endorsed by Agriculture Senior Officials, provide governments and industry with a framework to guide implementation nationally, including supporting consistency in requirements (for example, legislation and supporting policy material). They are intended to complement existing livestock traceability governance arrangements and documentation, such as the NLIS Sheep and Goat Standards, state and territory legislation and associated policy material.
Advice to government on key eID implementation matters
The taskforce continues to discuss matters related to the national implementation of eID for sheep and goats, providing consolidated advice to Australian governments for consideration, including how the current challenging market and seasonal conditions may impact implementation and traceability matters moving forward.