Through the department, the Australian Government is driving improvements to the national
management of fruit fly in partnership with state and territory governments, industry and community.
This coordinated and shared approach ensures our management of fruit remains strong, facilitating
favourable market access for the export of high-quality produce to international markets.
Successful management of fruit fly is supported by:
distribution mapping
interstate quarantine restrictions
pest free area management activities
domestic and offshore surveillance and trapping networks
research and development
These activities are performed by the Commonwealth, state and territory governments under the
guidance of the Australian National Fruit Fly Management Protocols.
Pest Free Area
A Pest Free Area (PFA) is an area in which a specific pest does not occur as demonstrated by scientific
evidence and supported by ongoing management arrangements. The state of Tasmania and the
Riverland region of South Australia are recognised by many of our international trading partners as free
from both Qfly and Medfly. Commodities from recognised fruit fly PFAs do not require phytosanitary
treatments, to be exported.
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Management of fruit fly in the PFAs is supported by:
extensive trapping and surveillance programs
rapid diagnostics
stringent procedures to validate PFA status
clean production pathways
formal, nationally agreed, management principles for fruit flies outlining specific export
requirements under the Australian National Fruit Fly Management Protocols (Operations
Standard 1 – Pest Free Areas)
industry engagement and public awareness campaigns.
Response activities
If an outbreak is detected within a PFA, governments implement a prompt response. Responses to fruit
fly outbreaks are acted upon in accordance with the Protocols and internationally recognised
procedures, to preserve the PFA’s fruit fly free status. Trading partners are notified about the outbreak,
the eradication process, and the appropriate levels of biosecurity protection that will be implemented to
allow safe trade to continue.
National Fruit Fly Trapping Surveillance Network
Fundamental to supporting area freedom from fruit flies in Australia is the national fruit fly
surveillance network. This draws together specific surveillance activities (for example, in the Torres
Strait islands) and high-density trapping administered within established fruit fly free areas across the
various states and territories.
These programs function as early warning systems to:
detect exotic fruit fly incursions, and incursions of fruit flies into PFAs
verify established fruit fly area freedom status
provide continued information on species’ regional distributions
inform quarantine decisions and fruit fly strategies.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Mediterranean fruit fly
Photo credit: Pia Scanlon DPIRD Plant Biosecurity 2016
Innovation and technology
We are committed to reducing our reliance on agrichemicals and are therefore introducing new and
innovative fruit fly management strategies. These include Sterile Insect Technology (SIT), and funding
research and development programs to further enhance and modernise our fruit fly management
techniques.
SIT is an environmentally friendly insect pest control method involving the release of sterile insects into
a wild population. When applied to fruit flies, sterile male flies compete with wild males and
unsuccessfully breed with females, which decreases the population over time.
SIT has successfully been used in Qfly and Medfly eradication responses in combination with other
treatments to control incursions.
Find out more
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/fruit-flies-australia/management