National action plans improve the way we prepare for, detect and respond to the National Priority Plant
Pests (NPPP).
National action plans
See our current action plans for National Priority Plant Pests:
We continue to develop and publish action plans for all NPPPs.
Pests covered under national action plans
This table shows the NPPP included in each current action plan.
National action plan
National Priority Plant Pest
Xylella
Xylella and exotic vectors
Khapra beetle
Khapra beetle
Hitchhiker pests
Bees (Apis spp.) (exotic species)
Invasive snails (exotic species)
Mites of bees (Apis spp.)
Spongy moth
Spotted lanternfly
Stink bugs
Trees and timber
Bursaphelenchus spp. and exotic sawyer beetle vectors
Dutch elm disease
Longhorn beetles (Anoplophora spp.) (exotic species)
Myrtle (eucalyptus) rust (exotic strains)
Pine pitch canker
Sudden oak death (airborne Phytophthora spp.)
Exotic fruit flies
Fruit flies (exotic)
Pests of broadacre crops
Barley stripe rust (exotic strains)
Karnal bunt
Southern armyworm

Stem borers of sugarcane and cereals (Chilo spp.) (exotic species)
Texas root rot
Ug99 wheat stem rust
Pests of horticultural crops
Banana phytoplasma diseases diseases (exotic)
Begomovirus and vectors (exotic strains and species)
Blood disease and moko disease of bananas
‘Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum’ complex
Citrus canker
Fire blight
Grapevine leaf rust
Grape phylloxera
Huanglongbing and vectors
Panama disease
Phytoplasma 16srl group
Plum pox virus (sharka)
Potato cyst nematode (exotic strains)
Potato late blight (exotic strains)
Tobamovirus (exotic strains)
Spotted wing drosophila
Spotted wing drosophila
How the plans work
Each plan:
outlines the shared responsibility and cooperation between government, industry and research
bodies
establishes how we coordinate business-as-usual and research and development activities.
National action plans contain an implementation schedule. The schedule outlines the actions and
project areas. It is also used to record the progress of the actions.
• 
•

The Plant Health Committee (PHC) oversee the implementation of each plan.
How we develop and manage plans
We work with our stakeholders to develop and manage national action plans. They include the Plant
Health Committee and the Environment and Invasives Committee.
Endorsement and reviews
Plant Health Committee endorse each plan.
Each national action plan has a 10-year lifespan. They are reviewed annually and at each 5-year mark.
National action plans under development
We are working on these plans:
National Action Plan for Exotic Fruit Flies
National Action Plan for Pests of Broadacre Crops
National Action Plan for Pests of Horticultural Crops
National Action Plan for Spotted Wing Drosophila
Get involved
Are you a researcher, industry member or someone interested in NPPP preparedness? Email us at 
plantpestpreparedness@aff.gov.au
Subscribe
Keep up to date with biosecurity news.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/plant/national-action-plans
• 
• 
• 
•