It’s about people: Changing perspectives
A Report to Government by an Expert Social Panel
on dryness
© Commonwealth of Australia 2008
Selected passages, tables or diagrams may be reproduced provided acknowledgment of the source is included.

Drought Policy Review Expert Social Panel 2008, It’s About People: Changing Perspective. A Report to Government by an Expert Social Panel on Dryness, Report to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra, September.

ISBN 978-0-9803714-7-5

Secretariat Drought Policy Review Expert Social Panel Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601

The activities of the Drought Policy Review Expert Social Panel, including the provision of a Secretariat and the publishing of this report, were supported by the Australian Government.
The Hon. Tony Burke MP Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Parliament House Canberra Act 2600
Dear Minister
On behalf of the Expert Social Panel, I present to you a report on the social impacts of drought on Australian farm families, rural businesses and communities. The report is based on a combination of independent research and the personal experience of Australians.
The Panel’s process of visiting rural Australia was both a positive and valuable experience and was recognised as a critical statement by the Australian Government of its desire to listen to people.
The Panel heard from more than 1000 people at its 25 public forums, held nine major centre meetings with key stakeholders and received more than 230 written submissions.
The Panel was welcomed into communities and members were often overwhelmed by the generosity and honesty of people who were willing to share their sometimes painful experiences. The public forums gave the Panel a first-hand account of the experiences of farmers, small business operators, social support providers and community members who have been living with dryness over recent years.
The Panel’s report is written in direct terms and is sometimes critical of existing government policies and non-government services. We believe the report takes a fresh and comprehensive look at the ongoing challenges facing farm families, rural businesses and communities in living with drought and puts forward practical recommendations for a strong, healthy, vibrant and sustainable rural Australia.
The Panel appreciates the opportunity to undertake this important assessment of the social impacts of drought and trusts the information contained in this report will make a vital and lasting contribution to an improved national drought policy.
Yours sincerely



Peter Kenny Chairman







It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness   iii
Contents
Contents

 TOC \o "1-2" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869253" EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	 PAGEREF _Toc268869253 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869254" CONTEXTUAL OVERVIEW	 PAGEREF _Toc268869254 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869255" OBSERVATIONS ON VALUES, ATTITUDES AND POLICY	 PAGEREF _Toc268869255 \h 13
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869256" PLANNING FOR FUTURE DRYNESS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869256 \h 20
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869257" COMMUNITY	 PAGEREF _Toc268869257 \h 25
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869258" FAMILIES	 PAGEREF _Toc268869258 \h 34
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869259" HUMAN SUPPORT SERVICES	 PAGEREF _Toc268869259 \h 39
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869260" EDUCATION AND TRAINING	 PAGEREF _Toc268869260 \h 47
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869261" HUMAN CAPITAL	 PAGEREF _Toc268869261 \h 58
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869262" HEALTH AND WELLBEING	 PAGEREF _Toc268869262 \h 62
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869263" RECOMMENDATIONS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869263 \h 72
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869264" GLOSSARY AND ACRONYMS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869264 \h 78
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869265" REFERENCES	 PAGEREF _Toc268869265 \h 79
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869266" BIBLIOGRAPHY	 PAGEREF _Toc268869266 \h 85
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869267" APPENDICES	 PAGEREF _Toc268869267 \h 96
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869268" 1	ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869268 \h 97
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869269" 2	TERMS OF REFERENCE	 PAGEREF _Toc268869269 \h 98
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869270" 3	THE PANEL	 PAGEREF _Toc268869270 \h 101
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869271" 4	BACKGROUND AND ASSESSMENT PROCESS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869271 \h 103
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869272" 5	PUBLIC FORUMS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869272 \h 105
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869273" 6	LIST OF INDIVIDUALS AND ORGANISATIONS CONSULTED BY THE PANEL	 PAGEREF _Toc268869273 \h 107
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869274" 7	LIST OF SUBMISSIONS	 PAGEREF _Toc268869274 \h 109
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869275" 8	TIMETABLE OF NEWSPAPER ADVERTISMENT	 PAGEREF _Toc268869275 \h 115
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869276" 9	CLIMATE RISK AND ADAPTATION AMONG PRIMARY PRODUCERS:	 PAGEREF _Toc268869276 \h 117
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869277" 10	THE SOCIAL WELLBEING OF RURAL AUSTRALIANS:	 PAGEREF _Toc268869277 \h 135
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc268869278" 11	THE SOCIAL WELLBEING OF RURAL AUSTRALIANS:	 PAGEREF _Toc268869278 \h 151

Executive summary
Executive summary
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

There needs to be a new national approach to living with dryness, as we prefer to call it, rather than dealing with drought. Governments should focus future policy on facilitating the social wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities to improve their capacity to live with dryness. Better social outcomes are most likely to give better economic and environmental outcomes. The new approach reaffirms the fact that Australia will face periods of prolonged dryness in the future and acknowledges that dryness has an adverse impact on the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities.
This is the first assessment to exclusively examine the social impacts of dryness in a review of government drought policy. The Panel believes people should be the priority (and not the farm property or the respective industry), and propose future policy be about people: changing perspectives on dryness.
Importantly, individuals and families want to live in rural Australia and contribute to the nation. These people are full of hope and their determination and initiative must be supported. If governments agree that the social wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities should be a core element of future policy for rural Australia, then there should be an urgent statement of commitment, on behalf of the whole nation, to a strong, healthy, vibrant and sustainable rural Australia.
The Panel is deeply concerned by the extent of distress in drought-affected communities in rural Australia. Too many farm decisions are made under stress and without adequate consideration of the needs of the family and in the absence of prior thought and planning. Family and business are intricately linked for the majority of farm families, but decision-making mostly occurs in separation and often at the expense of each other.
At times the Panel found it difficult to separate the social impacts of dryness from the longer term socio-demographic trends contributing to a decline of some rural populations. However, it was clear from the Panel’s assessment that drought has an impact on the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities. Much of the existing responses attempting to deal with dryness are wearing away at the social fabric and capital of rural Australia and threatening the future viability of some rural communities. It is also clear the existing impacts of underlying structural change in rural communities are more acutely felt during times of stress brought on by dryness.
The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO are predicting there is an increased risk of severe drought over the next 20 to 30 years compared to the past 100 years, particularly over southern Australia; and that this increased drought risk will be exacerbated by increasing temperatures. If these predictions are correct, then farm families, rural businesses and communities need to be better prepared. The Panel consider there is a role for governments in helping farm families, rural businesses and communities to realistically expect seasonal variation and therefore plan for the intense risks and rewards that are associated with, and flow on from, primary production.
For all the assistance provided, farm families, rural businesses and communities currently living with dryness in rural Australia do not feel or perceive they are measurably better off. To date, the support for farm families, rural businesses and communities in times of dryness has been implemented within a crisis-framed response. As a consequence, a ‘drought industry’ of services (as coined by one farmer) has emerged which sometimes duplicates and results in confusion for those being assisted.
The Panel recognises the significant contributions of farm families, rural businesses and communities to its assessment. The Australian Government needs to be aware that in recognising and seeking to understand the social impacts associated with dryness it has begun a dialogue which must continue beyond this report.
The Panel identified the social impacts of dryness on farm families, rural business and communities by:
reviewing existing literature; commissioning independent research and surveys 
holding 25 public consultation forums across rural Australia, attracting more than 1000 participants 
meeting with federal, state and territory governments and non-government organisations 
receiving more than 230 written submissions. 
The positive response to the consultation process is a significant indication of the importance in which people hold these issues.
This report has been structured around the following themes:
observations on values, attitudes and policy
planning for future dryness
community
families
delivering human support services (including education and training; human capital; health and wellbeing). 
The Panel has made some observations on values, attitudes and policy, noting that existing policy responses to dryness are not working in all cases. Exceptional Circumstances (EC) policy arrangements were the subject of either strong support or dissatisfaction, depending on eligibility or for a range of other reasons. While those who receive assistance say it is keeping them on the farm, EC policy has created feelings of division and resentment. Stress is undoubtedly being caused by the existing declaration process, in the implementation of different approaches between and across state jurisdictions, in meeting complex criteria, and in completing complex paperwork. The Panel considers
Executive summary

future policy should seek to move people towards an acceptance that future dryness will occur and is not a crisis, and that planning for dryness should be about personal, family, farm and community wellbeing.
The challenge is to design policy to address the social wellbeing needs of farm families, rural businesses and communities in ways which do not inhibit the efficiency of agricultural industries. The intimate connection between the farm as a place of work, as a residence and as part of family tradition has important implications when considering the effectiveness of institutional support in responding to farm families experiencing adjustment stress.
In Changing Perspectives on Dryness, the Panel provides an overview of its preferred policy approach. Rather than providing crisis-framed assistance in times of difficulty, government policy should be focused on early intervention to counteract the worst effects of dryness and to provide incentives in better times which encourage commercially and environmentally responsible management under variable seasonal conditions. Future policy should be focused on the investment in, and the planning for, the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities and this needs to occur prior to periods of dryness.
In the Community section, the agriculture sectors are identified as remaining important to many rural and regional towns. When family farms are struggling with events such as dryness, the communities in which people normally spend their money and participate also suffer. Dryness negatively impacts on the ability of members of a rural community to work together for the benefit of the whole community, eroding the capacity of people to engage in community projects or do the voluntary work that keeps rural communities alive. In some places there appears to be a wide range of non-government organisations, volunteers, welfare agencies, community and church-based organisations seeking to help drought affected families. This help can come through distributing food parcels, clothing, pamper packs, and helping with the payment of household bills. This intervention typifies a short-term crisis-framed response, and is not a model that should be employed during periods of prolonged dryness. There are also a variety of community development initiatives being held, such as community socialising events. These events should be supported by government only where they link rural communities to various human service providers and/or facilitate clear referral pathways. Overall, however, they also fall within a crisis-framed response and fail in the long term to address people’s ongoing needs.
The Panel found that dryness impacts on how farm families function through separation and isolation; increased burdens of responsibility, belt-tightening and contribution of further labour to the farm, particularly by women and children. Issues surrounding succession planning cause great stress during times of dryness because of reduced cash flows and unmet expectations. While many male farmers say they are coping, they may not recognise or understand some of their coping mechanisms are placing great pressure on their families. While arguably tolerable for short periods, this has the potential to erode the composition of families and the development of children.
The Panel observed that some areas appeared to lack drought-specific or focused human support services, while other areas appeared to have too many. The Panel believes the current response by governments to fund a variety of providers and individuals, as well as a considerable presence from non-government charity and church organisations, has created a ‘drought industry’. At a
fundamental level it appears that government funded, drought-specific or focused human support services for defined periods of time has created an extra layer of services. This extra layer often has limited coordination or is not linked to existing professional networks or referral pathways. Human support services can perform a vital role in the long-term sustainability of rural communities to what are fundamentally ongoing problems. However, governments and non-government organisations must move away from crisis-framed responses to dryness and adopt more long-term sustainable approaches to the delivery of existing human support services in rural communities. A longer-term approach would allow human support services to focus on early intervention and the ongoing wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities.
Dryness reportedly affected people’s participation and ability to access education and training. The Panel heard that some children and young adults are being denied educational and extracurricular opportunities because of household financial limitations resulting from the dryness. Many schools are reporting a significant drop in student numbers and where these drop below critical mass, the schools and the social services they support, are lost from the community. Tertiary enrolments in agriculture related courses have fallen and there has been a loss of young people to the industry. There is a view that guidelines for government assistance contain barriers to rural youth accessing tertiary education. The Panel heard of the difficulty farmers experience in having their existing skills recognised and in accessing training. To assist farm families plan for dryness, education and training must be available in rural areas and these must be based on sound adult learning principles.
Dryness has meant farm businesses have cut costs, usually through the laying off labour and by spending less in the community, significantly affecting human capital. This has a flow-on effect on local businesses and services. It was often reported that within the labour market, particularly younger people are moving away to pursue other employment opportunities outside of agriculture because of dryness. There appears to be an increase, influenced by dryness, in secondary farm household income streams. This often involves someone physically spending time away from the property. These types of arrangements need to be acknowledged by farmers and policy-makers as successes, and not deemed to be failures. Some farm families and financial planners are factoring into their business planning ongoing government support, rather than looking for ways to enable families to become independent.
People reported that dryness has a significant impact on individuals and families and others within rural communities in respect to health and wellbeing. Many people expressed concern about the impact felt by school children from drought-affected families. The Panel heard that while there has been a lot of support for men, support for women is less available. Currently there appears to be an ad hoc and expensive approach of bringing in extra mental health resources during times of dryness, which is not as successful as expected. The Panel believes there needs to be greater investment in the capacity of existing primary and allied health care services in rural communities to enable them to be responsive to the physical and mental health impacts of future dryness. Governments must be more effective in encouraging people in rural communities to self-identify their health needs and to be able to seek appropriate support at an early stage.
Details of the Panel’s terms of reference and assessment process are outlined in appendices.
Contextual overview
CONTEXTUAL OVERVIEW

Australia is a dry continent ; rainfall therefore, is not a measure of our dryness, but simply a measure of our variation. The Panel heard where 3 millimetres of rainfall in seven months was exceptionally dry in one region at the same time that 200 millimetres in another region was exceptionally dry – and so the variation is large but the impact, particularly on the farm manager, is similar.
The Australian agriculture sector is always in the midst of adjustment. This has brought with it the social and economic stresses normally associated with change. Compounding this, the existing period of dryness is causing widespread distress which has reduced the ability of rural families and communities to cope. It is therefore not surprising that issues which have little to do with drought are being associated in the minds of many rural Australians.
Rural and remote Australia is experiencing some overarching socio-demographic trends which have implications for a wide range of aspects of rural society, including the impacts of dryness.
Agriculture has been a major contributor to Australia’s economic development since European settlement but there have been significant changes in rural Australia in the last century. At the end of the 19th century, farming, forestry and fishing accounted for 20 per cent of Australia’s gross domestic product. Agriculture and mining combined provided 95 per cent of Australia’s exports and jobs for about 30 per cent of Australia’s workforce. By the end of the 20th century, agriculture and mining accounted for just 7.5 per cent of Australia’s total output, 6 per cent of its workforce (around 308 000 jobs) and 42 per cent of its exports.
While the agricultural share of Australia’s GDP has fallen significantly - from around 14 per cent in the early 1960s to 2 per cent now - agricultural output has increased two and a half times, with many sectors experiencing strong productivity improvements. In fact, productivity growth within the agricultural sector, while showing high variability over the past three decades, has continued on an upward trend.
Australian Bureau of Statistics figures show a decline in farm numbers and an increase in average farm size. The number of farms declined from a peak of more than 200 000 in the mid-1950s to slightly more than 110 000 in 2000. Over the same period the average farm size rose from approximately 2000 hectares to nearly 4000 hectares.
The major factor in these changes is the external environment in which Australian agriculture is required to operate. Domestic markets have always been small, requiring Australian agriculture to be more dependent on exports and maintaining a competitive edge than many other countries. Agriculture provides around one-fifth of Australia’s export income.
National economic growth has been associated with a long-term decline in agriculture’s terms of trade. Coupled with improvements in the productivity of purchased inputs, this has meant a changing economic environment for farm families, rural businesses and communities. These changes have led to an adjustment of resources out of agriculture and the restructuring of existing farms to capture economies of size and to increase the real income flows.
To cope with all these circumstances, Australian farmers have made extensive use of advances in agricultural science and technology to become among the most efficient and least dependent on government support of any in the world. Government subsidies to primary producers accounted for only 4 per cent of Australian farmers’ income in 2001.
Global economic forces are another important stimulus to change in agriculture. Actions of overseas governments to protect or isolate their economies from international events and the increased volatility of residual free markets in agricultural products, coupled with high production risk in agriculture, give rise to intense fluctuations in the global demand for agricultural products.
These forces are likely to continue with the rural sector likely to come under increasing adjustment pressures in the coming decades as a result of climate change and structural changes in the Australian and international economies. These changes will require continued focus by farmers and policy-makers to maintain the competitiveness of agriculture.
Australia as a whole has undergone a dramatic transformation from a rural society to an urban society. A little over a century ago more than 60 per cent of the nation were rural dwellers and lived outside towns.
By 2006 the total population of Australia was 19.9 million persons. More than half of the Australian population lived in major urban centres and cities with populations greater than 1 million people. Only 7 per cent lived in other large urban centres with populations between 25 000 and 1 million and a further 5 per cent lived in urban centres with populations between 100 000 and 250 000. Thirty-three per cent of the population lived in regional centres of up to 100 000 (22 per cent), small towns (2 per cent), and rural areas (9 per cent).
The population of Australia increased by 6.8 per cent in the five years to 2006. The rate of increase was unevenly distributed around Australia, with major urban areas and regional centres experiencing the strongest increases between 2001 and 2006 (8.2 per cent and 5.7 per cent, respectively). The populations of small towns also increased (3.1 per cent), however rural areas experienced a population decrease of 0.9 per cent. In 2007, only 31.5 per cent of Australia’s population did not live in a major city and 12 per cent lived in rural areas and small towns of less than 1000.
The average age of the Australian population is increasing, with the number of people in older age groups increasing much faster than the number in younger age groups. Illustrating this trend is the fact that young people and young families in particular, are moving from small towns and rural areas to larger urban areas and cities for better access to education and employment prospects. The average age of farmers in 2006 was 52 years. Mature age people in rural areas continue to work well into their 60s at a rate 10 per cent higher than the rest of the country. Together these factors indicate that the working population of rural areas is ageing.
Despite these trends, there is little to suggest a direct connection between the sector’s fortunes and its ageing demographic. Such figures may also give a slightly misleading impression of farmer demographics because they do not account for the active participation of younger family members in farm businesses.
Many small inland towns, dependent on agriculture, now have populations on the cusp of viability. Any shocks experienced by the agricultural industry are likely to have a significant impact on these rural communities. These towns undoubtedly suffer in the face of severe dryness.
Agricultural employment has traditionally been characterised by a high proportion of self-employed, family and casual workers. The combination of changed farming practices, the population drift to regional centres and strong competition from other sectors of the economy, particularly mining, means that many agricultural industries are now facing shortages in skilled labour. There is strong evidence that dryness leads to loss of employment in agriculture, and flow-on effects to employment in rural communities and businesses in nearby towns, particularly those heavily dependent on agriculture and lacking economic diversity. Agriculture-based small rural communities are struggling under this combined impact.
There are broad patterns of lower access to services already existing in Australia, and dryness may merely add to what is already chronic disadvantage in these areas. Rural people are reported to have much lower levels of socio-economic status, and less opportunities and options for the future than people living in urban areas. People in rural and regional Australia generally have poorer access to health care services and experience poorer levels of health than the rest of the Australian population. They may need to travel long distances to access health services, incurring associated time and travel costs. Male suicide rates are higher in rural Australia, . These adverse circumstances tend to be accentuated and extended because of the periods of prolonged dryness, with the situation of Indigenous Australians particularly magnified.
In spite of these disadvantages, rural families generally express higher levels of satisfaction with their family, community and life circumstances than urban people. Australian farm families, rural businesses and communities pride themselves on their resilience and their capacity to cope in a challenging environment. This capacity can be compromised, and their resilience made more fragile by the added burden caused by significant changes in traditional weather patterns.
Australia’s recorded rainfall history features several distinctly dry periods of a decade or longer. The mid to late 1920s and the 1930s were a period of generally low rainfall over most of the country, continuing over the eastern states through most of the 1940s. A similar dry spell occurred in the 1960s over central and eastern Australia. During these low rainfall periods, not every year is dry; it is just that rainfall in most years is below the long-term average, and there are often runs of years with recurrent dryness. The ‘Federation drought’ of the late 1890s through to 1902 is an example of a most damaging type of drought, when one or two very dry years follow several years of generally below-average rainfall. The more recent 1991-95 drought in Queensland, northern New South Wales and parts of central Australia and drought that most parts of Australia have experienced in recent years are further examples of this severity.
As part of the Australian Government’s current review of national drought policy, the Bureau of Meteorology and the CSIRO were commissioned to assess the impact of climate change on the nature and frequency of exceptional climatic events. This assessment covered past and future changes in the intensity and frequency of exceptionally high temperatures, low rainfall and low soil moisture. The assessment focused in detail on the extremes that define exceptional circumstance events.
The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO concluded there is an increased risk of severe dryness over the next 20-30 years, compared to the past 100 years, particularly over southern Australia. This increased drought risk will be exacerbated by increasing temperatures – so droughts will be hotter in the future.
This future scenario does not automatically mean the end of farming, rather that farm families, rural businesses and communities will need to continue to adapt to manage changes in climate. The old adage of ‘three good years, three bad years and four average years’ is likely to shift (with an increase in ‘bad years’). This does not mean there will not be good seasons for primary producers. It does mean that the dry years will be dryer and more frequent and will have a significant impact.
Australian farmers are all too aware of the natural variability of the Australian climate. To date, the agricultural sector has coped with cyclical dryness by using responsible farm management strategies, with relief being available for droughts of unusual length or severity. Some areas of Australia have now been declared as experiencing ‘exceptional circumstances’ for 13 of the past 16 years. As at June 2008, a significant proportion of Australia was declared as experiencing exceptional circumstances because of drought.
Catastrophic events such as earthquake or flood have immediate and identifiable consequences. The nature of prolonged dryness is insidious. Dryness has both a physical and a social component. It represents a time of major upheaval in rural families and for rural communities which unfolds over years and requires a different set of intervention strategies.



Observations
OBSERVATIONS ON VALUES, ATTITUDES AND POLICY
Background
There are several aspects of family farming which result in farm families experiencing adjustment stress differently from those in other occupations. These relate to:
the intimate connection between the farm as a place of work, residence, family tradition and identity; 
a desire to pass on the occupation of farming and particular farm assets to the next generation; 
being seen to be self-sufficient and independent; 
gender roles, and; 
attitudes towards alternative occupations and non-farming lifestyles. 
These factors have important implications for considering the adequacy and effectiveness of drought assistance.
How drought is perceived is key to influencing the effectiveness of national drought policy. Previously, drought was perceived as a specific defined event, an aberration of nature and not part of the ongoing and normal factors that affects agriculture. The inevitable emphasis in such a scenario is on drought as a crisis and the focus is always on defining those circumstances in which government assistance should be provided to farmers facing ‘exceptional circumstances’. The underlying policy assumption has been that through government assistance the community can be returned to ‘normal’ economic and climatic stability.
This assumption confuses variability with cost by treating departures from favourable seasonal conditions as a ‘loss’ of production and income. Climatic variation is normal in Australia and so are the production and income fluctuations associated with it.
This perception has consequences for a range of policy decisions of great significance to farmers and rural business operators. A failure to drought proof, for example, is often equated with an inability to control weather, rather than an inability to conduct a rural business under conditions of climatic variability.
Governments generally have supported the idea of rural adjustment. However, political pressures and emotive media coverage during prolonged dryness often lead to these adjustment positions being
softened by resorting to emotional language and imagery. In dry situations, climatic, hydrological and biophysical evidence can be overshadowed by the political persuasiveness and immediacy of personal stories of hardship and suffering.
The constant adjustment problems of the farm families, rural businesses and community sectors have elicited government programs which have largely avoided dealing directly and openly with the social dimensions of their experience. Farmers have a deep aversion to the word ‘welfare’, and tend not to see their problems as welfare problems, but as consequences of poor economic conditions and policies. Accordingly, adjustment policy has tended to characterise the problem as arising from alleged failures in the farm finance market, and the overwhelming bulk of adjustment support has gone into subsidising the interest payments of the farm business.
Given the nature of farming as a business, and given the overwhelming majority of farms in Australia are family owned and operated, from time to time families will experience significant business and personal stress. The challenge is to design programs which address the social wellbeing needs of farm families, rural businesses and communities more broadly, in ways which do not unnecessarily inhibit the efficiency of the industry. However, given the close relationship between business performance and family wellbeing this is no easy task. The Panel recognise that while farming can be a great way of life for many, it can also be a health hazard for others. Indeed farming can be both for the same person and this presents challenges for farmers and those endeavouring to provide services.
Rather than providing incentives in times of difficulty to counteract the worst effects of dryness, governments should invest in providing incentives in better times to encourage commercially and environmentally responsible management under variable seasonal conditions.
Findings
Listening to rural Australia has also allowed the Panel to understand that the language of drought support needs to change. Words like ‘drought’, ‘welfare’ and ‘propping up’ have negative connotations for farm families but are often used by governments. In contrast, the Panel found the words of ‘dryness’ and ‘investment’ do resonate with farm families.
The Panel believes there is a mismatch between the values and assumptions of policy and those of rural people – and saw examples of this failure in understanding.
These values and assumptions vary in the extent to which they focus on promoting economic efficiency and farming as a business, versus focusing on social wellbeing considerations and farming as a preferred occupation and lifestyle. The business and family affairs of farmers clearly overlap and this situation, in turn, impacts on the health and viability of the social fabric of rural communities.
Recent agricultural adjustment policy has largely assumed that if farmers and their families are not making an adequate living from farming, their rational, ‘business-like’ course of action is to pursue alternative livelihoods. This means rural people are often seen to be battling on despite what appears to be good business judgement. One of the revelations for the Panel was that for many who identified themselves as third and fourth generation farmers at public forums, there is an intrinsic value to farming as a way of life and some are unwilling to accept, or simply to operate within, a business-framed model.


Farming is not like any other small family business. No other business creates the emotional connections that farming does. It’s where the business owner and their family live. It’s where they raise there children. It’s where they connect to their community. It’s where their family memories are generated. It’s where they care for and raise their stock. It’s where they improve the land, planting trees, gardens, dams and landscapes. It is full of highs and low – tough times and good – fire, flood, drought, plague, good seasons and bad. It’s not just about generating an income. If it was, there would be a lot less food producers in Australia. So unlike other businesses it’s not as easy as saying ‘just sell up and move into town’. There is emotional fallout and wide-ranging impacts to deal with which non-farmers may find difficult to understand.
Shire of Strathbogie, Euroa, Victoria

It is clear there has always been an element of ‘risk’ or ‘gamble’ associated with farming in Australia, based on the belief there will always be a good season ahead. The Panel identified a level of ‘defiant optimism’ in farmers determined to continue farming and holding out hope for better seasonal and financial conditions. It was referred to by an attendee at the Panel’s Goulburn forum as the ‘ostrich syndrome – people believe that if they put their head down and work harder they’ll be able to get themselves out of trouble’. The Panel unfortunately heard there are many farm families, rural businesses and communities that are not prepared, or preparing for, prolonged dryness.
There are many farmers who are psychologically attached to their property and policy measures, such as exit assistance, are largely unwanted, nor are incentives to move to another profession. Many farmers are more than willing to continue suffering varying degrees of social deprivation to maintain their generational bond to the property. Some male farmers are clearly putting the land before themselves and their families with a belief that the wellbeing of themselves and families should only be addressed once the wellbeing of the farm is attended. The Panel senses there are lessons for government on how this issue could be progressed if they sought a greater appreciation of those individuals and families who do strike the balance between attachment to the land and alternative incomes.
Drought-induced stress is exacerbated when communities are eroded by the closure of health services and small businesses, they lose employment and feel the consequent drift of populations. Governments sometimes contribute to the erosion of social capital with policies such as those, for example, which result in the closure of schools and hospitals and the loss of bus runs.
Feelings of being misunderstood only add to the negative emotional effects of dryness. Many statements made at the forums embodied the belief that governments, the media and city residents all had a negative attitude towards farmers and failed to understand their difficulties, thus directly affecting farmers’ ability to cope with the ongoing impact of dryness.
Recommendation 1
An improved policy for dryness must focus on preparing for dryness and planning for personal and family wellbeing.
The Panel found rural Australians feels isolated, alienated and disconnected from the rest of the country. However, the people who live there wish to continue to do so. The Panel was welcomed everywhere and the process of visiting rural Australia was also a positive and valuable experience for the communities, and was recognised as a critical statement by the Australian Government of its desire to listen.
Recommendation 2
Governments must make a high-level statement of commitment to a strong, healthy, vibrant and sustainable rural Australia.
In this context, while programs such as the Australian Government’s Australia’s farming future, provides eligible primary producers with assistance in whole farm planning, business and risk management and in understanding the implications of climate change, these do not advise farm families on looking after their personal and family wellbeing or planning for the future. Unless these programs take the psychology of farm families, rural businesses and communities into account in their design, they will fail to meet the outcomes desired by government.
The Panel believe existing policy responses to dryness are not working as intended. At public forums and in submissions, Exceptional Circumstances (EC) policy arrangements were the subject of either strong support or dissatisfaction, depending on one’s eligibility. For all the funding provided, people do not perceive they are measurably better off or report that they feel supported by governments. This is despite some farmers saying they could not survive without EC interest rate subsidies.
EC policy was reported as having created feelings of division and resentment, particularly by farmers who have successfully managed and adapted to prolonged dryness towards those farmers eligible for EC assistance. Many hold the view that farmers are eligible because they have not made the necessary hard decisions; and are therefore critical of EC recipients being ‘rewarded for failure’. The criteria for EC income support was also criticised by those who felt disadvantaged as a result of broadening their income base off-farm to better manage income fluctuations. The Panel believes there is circular conflict in that EC income support provides a reason for farm families not to broaden their off-farm income base but, at the same time, the Panel supports assistance for those people who are unable to





Drought relief in my area helps to keep unproductive farms unproductive, by rewarding poor management while at the same time, discriminates against and is of no assistance to good operators. Drought relief fails to encourage better farming practices.
Farmer, Mirboo, Victoria
One of the largest areas of community division has come from inequitable eligibility criteria for accessing of government drought support – am I correct in suggesting around 30 per cent of primary producers are eligible? Anecdotally, most of the locals I come across seem only to be eligible through some ‘creative accounting’! We currently have a very ‘two tiered’ community – those not on Centrelink payments and interest rate subsidies are suffering big time.
Farmer, Condobolin, New South Wales
There should be no discrimination of those who earn off-farm income and look after themselves as opposed to those who make irresponsible and short-sighted decisions and in bad times look for more government contributions.
Farmer, Yerong Creek, New South Wales


support themselves. Rural businesses also protested that despite also suffering the effects of dryness they are largely missing out on assistance and felt farmers were receiving preferential treatment.
The Panel heard how the process for EC declarations, meeting EC criteria, and completing complex paperwork creates stress. Many farmers claimed the process of applying for EC support can seem overwhelming for people already under considerable stress. Some farmers reported that they were angry because they went through the EC process and were told they didn’t qualify or they felt they probably would qualify but were too exhausted to face the process. Farmers are frustrated by what they see as bureaucratic ‘red tape’. EC policy and the criteria and forms for assistance are overly complicated and this has led to an ‘industry of interpreters’ put in place by governments. This suggests that usually competent rural business managers experiencing sustained distress in times of dryness are personally challenged by the application process. An unintended consequence is a further loss of self-esteem and confidence.





I experience severe drought conditions when I mismatch my farm management decisions with the lack of rainfall. Bringing in a rural welfare system will only finance me to make more bad management decisions at the tax payers’ expense.

Farmer, Narrabri, New South Wales

Both EC and human service policy responses are crisis oriented, which is not sustainable for governments, service providers and importantly, rural communities. This approach is encouraging the idea that the present dryness is a temporary aberration and avoids the need to take a longer term strategic approach for preparedness. In some cases this is encouraging farmers to erode their resource base to maintain their short-term finances in the expectation they make up ground later on.
Exceptional Circumstances policy arrangements appear to work differently according to farm circumstances. While, for some, the EC payments are a valued assistance in difficult times, for others it is all that is keeping them on the farm. Some farmers gave the impression they had changed their behaviour in order to remain eligible for support. Policy influenced some farmers to delay or avoid decision-making or to make preparedness plans. Once people become reliant on drought assistance, without a longer term plan, it is difficult for them to think or act in a way where they will no longer rely on assistance.
The implementation process required by the existing policy is causing great stress. The diﬀerent approaches between and across state jurisdictions is confusing to people. This is particularly the case when diﬀerent state governments apply their own varying thresholds for eligibility within the context of the broader national policy, or apply eligibility criteria at variance with those across a nearby political boundary. Farmers on the receiving end of this arrangement only see that some people seem to be more deserving than others according to the judgement of oﬃcials.


It is apparent over the last decade that droughts are becoming more regular and the EC program is ill-equipped to deal with change in climatic circumstances.

Western Australian Farmers’ Federation
Current drought policies separate out those prudent operators that take diversified risk management or conservative approaches to farming and consequently do not need to rely on government assistance when difficulties arise. Policy should seek to move people towards an acceptance that dryness is normal and not a crisis and that planning for dryness is about developing strategies for personal, family and farm wellbeing.

Recommendation 3
Existing and improved policy for dryness should be based on principles that include:
– integrated development of individual and family wellbeing plans consistent with farm business and natural resource management planning as a mutual responsibility for future public-funded assistance. 
– a transition strategy so that when current drought declarations are concluded there continues to be government investment to assist farm recovery and planning for future periods of dryness. 
Recommendation 4
The drought support roles of federal, state and local governments should be clarified and a lead agency or coordinating committee be established across government and within each jurisdiction to ensure proper implementation of dryness-related policy.
Recommendation 5
People who provide support to farm families, rural businesses and rural communities during times of stress, including those working in government and non-government organisations should be respectful and understanding of the stress facing farm families and rural communities, and in particular ensure they are clear and factual in their communication and do not impose or offer their own value judgements.
Planning
PLANNING FOR FUTURE DRYNESS
Decisions on family farms are rarely made on purely financial grounds as farms are always more than just a business. On the farm, financial concerns, personal and community social capital, and land and environment management considerations are equally important. To be effective, policy must be designed accordingly and not captive to any single issue.

Some 98.5 per cent of Australian farm businesses are family owned and operated. … issues that affect the farm business invariably affect the family unit and vice versa.
National Farmers’ Federation
m businesses are family owned the farm business invariably ational Fa
Some farmers have documented (with evident pride) how they and their ancestors have survived worse droughts than the current circumstances, while other farmers appear to continue to view dryness as an aberration from ‘normal’ seasons.
The value of the terms ‘drought’ and ‘exceptional circumstances’ in current policy formulations have been questioned, particularly in parts of Australia already experiencing extended periods of relative dryness. The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO report, along with other commentary, has noted that hotter and drier weather is likely to become more frequent across much of Australia.
The Panel heard how financial, emotional and workload stress is impacting on the decision-making of farm families. This is compounded when complex generational, succession planning and structural adjustment decisions are also needed.
One component of social capital, given the high average ages of many working in agriculture, is having succession and exit plans in place. The Panel believes that despite active government promotion for well over two decades, succession planning remains an unresolved issue for many farm families. This observation is backed by research showing low levels of communication between farmers and their children about farm transfer. Therefore, when succession and exit options become essential during times of dryness, this can become an additional stressor and can make rational decision making difficult.
Planning

The Panel was struck by the experiences expressed by older farmers. For many, ‘soft landings’ are not an option. Some want to stop farming (or, for health reasons, should stop) but the financial and personal barriers are too high. Some are waiting for the next good season to clear debt and sell up. Some have discouraged their children from pursuing a career in farming, while others are saddened that their children are not interested in taking over a farm which has been in the family for many generations. Others want to transfer their property to their children (but without accumulated high debt) or wish to gift the property to their children.
The need for coordinated intervention appears to be becoming critical for many older farmers and their families, and options such as conditional access to aged pensions may need to be explored.
Responses to a 2004-05 Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE) attitudinal survey indicated that more than 80 per cent of farmers are seeking to maintain the long-term productive capacity of the land, even if this means lower profits in some years. Discouragingly, almost 20 per cent are not seeking this.

The biggest impact of the drought on sustainability programs is the capacity of farmers to adapt. There is a willingness to change practices however with limited financial resources available many will delay implementing the changes until conditions improve.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation, Griffith, New South Wales

Nationally, 71.0 per cent of agricultural businesses have reported barriers to the improvement of their management of natural resources and identified the most common barriers as:
lack of financial resources (78.9 per cent) 
lack of time (63.1 per cent) 
lack of government incentives (40.0 per cent) 
age and/or ill health (22.2 per cent) 


… a glaring shortcoming in government drought policy is the inadequate investment into long range weather forecasting to provide farmers with increased surety in their annual planning processes
Western Australian Farmers’ Federation
…relevant R & D is vital for managing dry times
Farmer, Bothwell, Tasmania
The views expressed to the Panel emphasise how important it is that flexible, comprehensive and coordinated planning support services are available to help people to help themselves, with authoritative information and advice able to be tailored to individual circumstances.
The most cost effective intervention governments and peak industry organisations can make is through providing consistent and up-to-date information and tools to assist farm families, rural businesses and communities to manage changing circumstances constructively and, as appropriate, take advantage of available opportunities.
The Panel believes maintaining social capital and individual wellbeing management are critical for ensuring that policy directions for planning for future dryness is realised. Many presentations and submissions suggested that coordination and collaboration among service providers would improve the effectiveness of outcomes, as would matching the provision of government support to a mutual responsibility framework.
The capacity of farm families, rural businesses and communities to plan will be constrained unless government policies and support programs offer clear criteria for access, have long-term application and availability timeframes, or are of specified duration. Knowing what to apply for, and the process of making an application, should be within the capacity of the intended beneficiaries, or if needed, with the assistance of accredited intermediaries where barriers exist.
The preferred approach
The Panel considers the social wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities should be at the core of future policy for rural Australia. Individuals and families want to live in rural Australia and contribute to the national estate. These people are full of hope and their self-reliance and initiative must be supported and encouraged.
Future policy should better focus on encouraging farm families, rural businesses and communities to be prepared for future dryness. The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO have predicted there is an increased risk of severe dryness over the next 20 to 30 years compared to the past 100 years, particularly over southern Australia, and that increased dryness risk will be exacerbated by increasing temperatures by as much as one degree Celsius over that period. If the Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO are correct in their predictions then farm families, rural businesses and communities need to be better prepared. Future policy needs a strong applied research component to interpret the science and to develop an understanding and acceptance of the advice by farmers. The challenge is made even greater by varying expert opinion in the public domain.
Planning

Presentations and submissions made to the Panel reinforce the views that there are no easy solutions to addressing increasing dryness and that planning and implementing risk strategies need to be developed farm-by-farm and community-by-community. It is of concern to the Panel that too many decisions involving family and business are implemented without adequate consideration of each other and in the absence of prior thought and planning.
The Panel considers the priority for all levels of government, in collaboration with peak industry organisations and non-government support agencies, must be to extend, coordinate and deliver the information and tools necessary to help farm families, rural businesses and communities to help themselves respond to the challenges of living with future dryness.
To be effective, social wellbeing needs to be planned in a holistic manner. The Panel strongly believes business planning is just one of several factors involved in planning for social wellbeing. Successful farming businesses also plan for and invest in their individual and family’s needs. There are a broad range of areas which should be given regular consideration by farm families when planning for wellbeing. For example, farm families could consider developing and regularly updating:
family plans, which document the needs and the value of healthy families to the business
business plans
personal development plans, including health and learning considerations
property management plans
environmental plans
human resource and workforce management plans
farm succession plans.
This list is not exhaustive, but demonstrates the Panel’s belief that operating a successful family farm involves investing in far more than business planning. The strong connection between farm families and the land necessitates holistic planning in which social, environmental and economic considerations are of equal importance.
This theme is the focus of the Panel’s thinking, and has also been identified by others. For example, the Australian Centre for Agricultural Health and Safety’s publication Managing the pressures of farming recognises the value of holistic planning by encouraging farmers to complete several checklists based on business, family and personal considerations.
Governments need to provide the means and encouragement for farm families to consider, develop, document and implement their own overarching wellbeing plans. In addition to planning for dryness, the Panel believes that governments have a role in providing appropriate human services to support
rural Australia before, during and after drought. Similarly, governments have a role in helping to build strong rural communities and in providing access to education, services and support.
Recommendation 6
To alleviate the stress of future dryness, governments and non-government organisations must move away from crisis-framed responses and:
– adopt more long-term sustainable approaches based on the delivery of existing human support services, focused on planning for the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and rural communities prior to periods of dryness; and 
– provide incentives to support the development of individual and family wellbeing plans as part of a shift towards better preparedness for dryness. 
The Panel believes there are differing views on the role of governments in supporting people to live with the impacts of dryness. Given there are no mutual responsibilities on those who are currently being supported through dryness, the Panel suspects this enhances the argument of those critical of drought support. In this context, the Panel suggests that for future periods of dryness governments consider a policy which only provides assistance if recipients have developed an appropriate range of plans before dryness gets to a point ‘beyond their control’ and/or where governments determine their points of intervention.
In this report the Panel has made a series of recommendations consistent with an improved policy and planning process and which contribute to the capacity of farm families and rural communities to prepare for dryness.
Community
COMMUNITY
Background
Dryness poses increasing difficulties in maintaining the social fabric or social capital of rural and regional Australia, and hence may threaten the viability of some rural communities. A 2000 ABARE study indicated there is a clear pattern whereby the greater the reliance of a town’s economy on expenditure by farmers, the lower the population growth. Small towns of less than 1000 people which are highly reliant on broadacre farming are most likely to be in decline.
1  Some key statistics for rural communities

Topic
Statistics and notes
Community participation and isolation
In 2006, 63.5 per cent of households in rural areas were connected to the internet, second only to people in major urban centres (66.1 per cent), and higher than those in regional centres (54.8 per cent) and small towns (51.3 per cent).
In 2006, only 2.8 per cent of rural dwellings did not have a motor vehicle, in contrast to 11.2 per cent of dwellings in major urban centres.
Volunteering
In 2006, 27.9 per cent of people in rural areas and 26.6 per cent of people in small towns undertook voluntary work, as compared with the national average for the Australian population of 19.8 per cent.
Role of mothers
In 2006, mothers in rural areas had the highest level of participation in the workforce (greater than mothers in regional centres, small towns or major urban centres).
In the five years to 2006, the greatest increase in the level of participation by
mothers in the workforce occurred in small towns and regional centres – a possible response to the flow-on effects of drought.
Immigration
In the five years to 2006, the number of people from overseas countries settling into regional centres increased by 39.1 per cent - this increase was also strong in small towns (26.9 per cent) but lower in rural areas (12.5 per cent).
Population ageing and dependency
The total population of rural and remote Australia decreased between 2001 and 2006, possibly making some community services non-viable.
Over these five years, dependency ratios decreased in rural and regional Australia because of a decrease in the number of children – thus accelerating the rate of population ageing overall, and possibly increasing the need for aged-care services.
Source: BRS 1,2.


Expenditure by farm families in smaller towns is an important source of income for many small businesses. A farmer may only spend 10 per cent of their total expenditure locally but ABARE calculations show farm expenditure represents as much as one-third of small town economies.
Consequently the impact of dryness on the farm is amplified in small towns. Service industries like retail and wholesale trade, transport and storage, finance and machinery are all affected by farmers’ spending patterns.

The consumer dollar has evaporated around Coolah – empty shopfronts, struggling eateries and watering holes. Most distressing is the observation that children are missing out on weekend sports. The downturn has not happened only as a result of the drought, but the prolonged drought has worn everyone down and the resources and energy are spent. It is hard to keep up the enthusiasm for doing the community thing.
Farmer, Coolah, New South Wales

The loss of casual employment on farms during dryness flows on to the community where those laid off are forced to seek work elsewhere, often having to permanently leave the community. This can become a vicious circle. Loss of job opportunities in town means people in rural communities have to travel further afield for income, and in turn are taking their spending capacity out of their local community.

Employment opportunities are decreasing rapidly. There are very few employment advertisements in this area and with shops closing all over the area retail is disappearing fast.

Farmer, Waikerie, South Australia


Population loss impacts most in the drop in numbers of children at schools, the loss of young people seeking higher education and employment in cities, and the drift of workers who have lost their jobs. This can lead to a permanent loss of valuable skills to a community.
Bureau of Rural Sciences figures indicate the majority of the population in dryness affected areas are between 35 and 64 years of age. Standards of health in rural communities are poorer than the rest of the community. Community members sometimes have to travel great distances if they wish to access medical, education and entertainment options which are taken for granted in urban Australia. Less leisure time is then spent in the local community.
Social capital is built on social networks of trust, mutual support and understanding; creating the glue that holds a community together. When people are part of social networks, they are more involved in community life, they provide more informal care for others, they do more volunteer work and they are more active in social organisations. People’s perception of their community is also important. If farm families perceive their local area as a community of which they are a part, despite distance from neighbours or lack of facilities, then they will behave as if it is a community.
Maintaining social sustainability in these communities has become an issue for all individuals, families, organisations and businesses in many parts of rural Australia.
Of great concern to many rural communities is the loss or decline in sporting clubs. Football, tennis and bowling clubs are suffering a loss of members and a loss of sponsorship. Physical activity is critical to health, wellbeing and productivity, as is connectedness and social inclusion.
Farmers report that dryness significantly impacts on a rural community’s ability to work together for the benefit of the whole community. When people focus on their individual or family circumstances they do not have the capacity to engage in community projects or voluntary work which keeps rural communities alive and prosperous.

Shrinking communities have issues with less people running community organisations and these groups become tired and fatigued and eventually clubs and organisations wind up and this further destroys the fabric of small rural communities and farmers become increasingly isolated on their farm.
Rural Financial Counselling Service, Murray Mallee, Victoria


Men and women repeatedly told the Panel they are now too busy to volunteer and could no longer afford the cost associated in relation to fuel and the wear and tear on the car.
The burden of protecting people, property and the natural environment in vulnerable rural regions in Australia falls largely on volunteer services. For example, the Bushfire CRC at the La Trobe University reports the contribution of volunteer firefighters to the Australian economy is considerable. In 2000-01, in Victoria alone, this was estimated at $480 million in equivalent wages. Most rural fire services have reported declines in the number of volunteers over recent years. Country Fire Authority Victoria volunteer figures for the past 16 years show a decline of 30 per cent in volunteer numbers. Another issue of concern is the general increase in the average age profile of volunteers. In 2003-04, 31 per cent of the volunteers in the Queensland Fire and Rescue Service were over 55 years of age.


Farmers who are working off-farm are not available in the local area for volunteer activities such as the Rural Bush Fire brigade call out, this places increased burden on those who are in the local area to attend all callouts, and make up the crew for the fire vehicle in case of emergencies. This creates extreme stress in the bushfire season where the workload falls into the few remaining people who work in the district.
Farmer, Pilliga, New South Wales
A paper by Hall and Scheltens explores how dryness is portrayed by the media and by rural people calling the Australian Government’s Drought Hotline, which was established in November 2002 through Centrelink to provide advice to distressed rural people. The hotline primarily provided support for financial assistance claims, but also gave immediate access to counselling and support during 2002-03. The authors conclude that, although dryness is primarily framed by the media as a crisis, rural people’s own stories reveal a complex picture of entrenched and chronic problems which go well beyond drought. These stories indicate chronic rural disadvantage and the authors considered that improved ongoing support services were needed for rural communities, not just for those which focused ad hoc crisis-framed responses to dryness.
The Australian Government has established a Social Inclusion Committee of Cabinet, a Social Inclusion Unit within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and an Australian Social Inclusion Board. The Social Inclusion program encourages all Australians to play an active role in all facets of Australian life. To achieve this, the government has identified key priorities for social inclusion, such as opportunities in accessing services, securing a job, connecting with family, friends and the community, and equipping people to deal with personal crisis. Basic to social inclusion is the principle that all Australians should have a voice and for those voices to be heard. The Panel considers the issues identified within this report warrant rural Australia being on the government’s social inclusion agenda.
Recommendation 7
The needs of farm families and rural communities in remote and dryness affected areas should be an item for consideration by the Australian Social Inclusion Board. The specific circumstances of Indigenous populations in such communities should be considered a priority by the Board.
Observations
Many people at the Panel’s forums spoke of a ‘preferred’ community which they grew up in, moved into or want to retain. Dryness heightens people’s sensitivity to instances of businesses closing, families leaving the district, and of new ‘outside’ entrants, generating fears for the future fabric of their local community and vital community activities, such as volunteer bush fire brigades.

The drought has had a direct effect on all members of small rural communities as it is not only the farmers that have been affected but for example the contractors who had purchased farming equipment such as expensive air seeders and earthmoving equipment. We know of contractors who have gone bankrupt as the farmers who promised them work could not fulfil their commitments to them due to the drought. We know of small shops that once had booming businesses that are now just empty shelves.
Farmer, Walgett, New South Wales
The decline in and exhaustion of volunteers mentioned to the Panel at almost every forum is symptomatic of the level of stress on members of rural communities. This has a widespread impact on the local rural community and has an individual social cost of a higher degree of isolation from the community.
The Panel repeatedly heard at its forums and through individual submissions that the social capital in Australia’s rural communities is in danger of being, or has already been, seriously eroded. As evidence, rural people pointed to the declining number of volunteers willing to participate in community organisations and local sporting groups. Community and sporting groups reported they are struggling to maintain numbers and activities.
People spoke of volunteer exhaustion as the burden falls to fewer and fewer remaining members of the community. This has reportedly caused community assets like libraries and childcare centres to close in some locations while putting great strain on local school and sporting activities.
It was common for the Panel to be told about the flow-on effects of population loss in rural areas and that a loss of young people, in particular, was being exacerbated by dryness. Sporting clubs and teams are struggling to find members, with some even struggling to field a side. It was recalled that local sporting games were once the major point of social interaction in the community. The Panel
heard that people could no longer justify both the cost and the time away from the farm and that many people were withdrawing because of drought-induced depression or because they could not afford the cost of socialising.

People retire to regional centres where health and support services for the aged are better. This leaves a void of would be community leaders to organise things for the betterment of the town. And those of us still here are flat out because now we have to work on twice as many committees to keep the town functioning.
Farmer, Minyip, Victoria

The Panel was told of the social cost to women in particular as reduced income during dryness meant they were required to increase their share of the farm work, look after children and also possibly earn off-farm income. With dryness having already restricted cash flow, rising fuel costs have also impacted on the ability of rural people to socialise. Public liability insurance requirements and public health regulations imposed on volunteer groups by governments, were cited as having an impact on the social fabric of communities, and discourage holding functions and social events which are often ‘the life blood of rural communities’.
Many people spoke about a variety of socialising events staged by government and non-government organisations (with varying levels of funding support from governments, charity and the private sector). The socialising events targeted at drought-affected people take many forms including: farm family gatherings; barbecues, yoga, concerts, men’s shed initiatives, women’s pamper days, dinners, field days, and workshops. The New South Wales Government alone has funded more than 2100 social
gathering events in recent years. The Panel was told by the numerous individuals and organisations putting on these events that they are hugely important for promoting social interaction within a stressed population and that they are also used, but not primarily, as a means of reaching clients who would not normally engage with drought-specific human service providers, such as social counsellors.
Recommendation 8
To effectively prepare communities for the social impacts of future dryness, governments must ensure support of community development initiatives reinforce social changes that will endure. Community development initiatives, such as community socialising events, should have clear objectives aimed at linking farm families and rural communities with vari-ous human service providers and/or facilitate clear referral pathways.
There are a range of individuals and non-government welfare or church-based groups that are almost competing with each other to deliver packages of food, clothing or toiletries and to hold community socialising events. Some church-based organisations are providing outreach pastoral care (travelling to properties) in conjunction with giving financial support toward household expenses. Many of these organisations reported they struggled to deliver this aid in the face of resistance from farmers whose real battle is to maintain the viability of their farming enterprises. A number of people informed the Panel that, in their view, many of these groups may have lost sight of their client group.
At many forums the Panel was told that because government drought programs are aimed at farmers rather than all who live within rural communities, some townspeople felt isolated and excluded because they are not receiving government funding such as that provided to farm families. The Panel also heard from a number of small businesses that a number of the food parcels being delivered to farm families were not locally purchased and had the unwelcome effect of denying local businesses much needed turnover when they were feeling the affects of dryness in much the same way as farmers.
Recommendation 9
In the light of the availability of income support, non-government organisations should carefully consider whether there is a genuine need for food parcels or whether other forms of support would provide enduring benefits.
In some parts of Australia Indigenous communities are being particularly affected. For those people still reliant on hunting bush tucker to supplement their diet, dryness has caused a decline in the amount of bush resources. The Panel heard this has also impacted negatively on the bush tucker businesses. People are therefore moving away from the Indigenous communities on the land and into town, with the resulting separation putting additional strain on families. Several councils reported the loss of jobs from rural communities and the inability of farm businesses to employ labour have had a negative impact on the wellbeing of Indigenous Australians, who already suffer the worst health and economic standards in Australian society.
Findings
The Panel found it difficult to separate the impact of dryness from the longer term socio-demographic trends contributing to a decline for some rural populations. However, it is clear from the public forums and submissions that rural people see dryness as having a major impact on the social fabric of regional Australia and the health and wellbeing of their communities. The Panel has no doubt that social change is felt more acutely during times of stress brought on by dryness.
Where family farms are struggling, the communities in which they normally spend their money also suffer. The Panel heard of small agriculture-dependant businesses being pushed to the brink and there is a flow-on effect to other local businesses because of reduced spending as a result of dryness.
The economic downturns in rural communities brought about by dryness also affect the ability for local businesses to donate funds to the local agricultural show and community events, making the work of volunteers even harder, although there is little research to quantify this impact.
The loss of health and education services from small rural communities is a further compounding reason for people and their families leaving rural areas.
Social isolation as a result of poverty, depression and the extra labour demands caused by dryness conditions are putting great pressure on the remaining volunteers in towns to hold together the social fabric of their community together. People told the Panel they were simply worn out.
Many rural communities are accustomed to minimal services as a way of life but governments can quickly destroy the social fabric of a town with insensitive decision-making, acutely felt by people already stressed because of dryness. This is particularly the case when taking decisions which impact on the character of communities.
The Panel believes state and territory governments must consider the unintended consequences of withdrawing services and infrastructure during periods of stress, such as dryness. The Panel is supportive of any Australian Government initiatives which will provide incentives to consider the social impact of decisions regarding the provision of rural services and infrastructure (for example, schools, school bus services and local hospitals).
The current welfare service delivery system is designed for the aged, people with disabilities and the unemployed. Discussion and consultation with farm families and communities indicates services and individual workers have tried to modify this existing model of service delivery with mixed success.
In some places there appears to be a wide range of non-government organisations, volunteers, welfare agencies, and community and church-based organisations distributing food parcels, clothing, pamper packs, and helping with the payment of household bills to farm families. Many of these non-government organisations have been doing this type of work for a long time but the difference now is that many of them are doing it on a much larger scale with the backing of government funding. One prominent example in recent years is the Australian Government providing the Country Women’s
Association (CWA) with more than $15 million to distribute as emergency grants to fund community based activities and to meet immediate household needs of rural families in drought affected areas. Rural families receiving other drought assistance were still able to apply for the CWA grants, with the majority of this assistance distributed by the CWA within weeks of application.
The Panel is perplexed as to whether there is an overwhelmingly genuine need for such basic assistance when presumably someone in need of such help would be eligible to obtain income support payments under the Australian Government’s Exceptional Circumstances Drought Assistance arrangements. While the CWA assistance proved to be extremely popular, it has been an essentially temporary measure that plainly conflicted with the government’s own criteria for income support. It was also not core business for the CWA and put additional stress on their limited volunteer resources.
The feedback from some of the recipients of food parcels suggests they feel embarrassed by the offering and have guilt in accepting. The varying methods of identifying those who receive such assistance versus people who do not can sometimes be of concern. The Panel was told by a number of providers that farmers were broadly reluctant to seek or accept such help and those providers had to find ‘creative’ ways to dispense assistance so as to not offend. “I just had to do something to help,” “Someone’s got to do it,” “I just wish I could help everyone,” were statements by providers of basic assistance which were frequently heard by the Panel. Some providers were obviously burdened by this responsibility and were clearly themselves stressed.
The Panel strongly believes providing food parcels and other goods is a short-term, crisis driven response which is not sustainable, both from a donation/funding outlook and from a sustained human resource perspective. This intervention typifies a short-term disaster response, not a model to be employed during periods of prolonged dryness. It is a short-term fix which has the effect of diverting attention away from the need for a more strategic approach to helping rural communities and people prepare for, and live, with dryness.
Recommendation 10
Effective and improved policies which support farm families and rural communities to live with dryness should be:
– delivered by appropriately qualifi ed and supervised individuals, organisations and service providers;
– have clear criteria and guidelines and ensure that funding provides scope for rigorous independent evaluation. 
In respect to the variety of socialising events that staged by government and non-government organisations, the Panel deems there to be anecdotal evidence for and against these initiatives. As short-term, one-off initiatives they would undoubtedly provide a single positive impact, especially when many rural community events are declining and/or people could not afford to socialise because of the financial effects of dryness. The Panel consider it would be useful to examine whether there are associated public health benefits for a community in promoting social interaction during periods of prolonged stress.
However, the Panel does consider these socialising initiatives for drought-affected communities are largely artificial and are unlikely to be maintained beyond the current injections of government funding. The Panel believes that as one-off means of reaching clients who do not normally engage with drought-specific human service providers, these events could have merit if they involved coordinated small gatherings (where everyone could be individually spoken to), where they facilitate clear referrals and they did not involve alcohol. The Panel suspects the larger events are often self-promoting and fund-raising exercises and would pose difficulties for drought-specific human service providers to effectively engage with people. Overall, the Panel considers these socialising initiatives to fall within a crisis-framed response and that they lack long-term value in addressing people’s ongoing needs.
Families
FAMILIES
Background
Impacts of dryness on various aspects of family life have been summarised in a companion booklet to the 2008 Country matters: social atlas of rural and regional Australia. Farm family-related impacts identified include:
dryness may strengthen migration away from rural and regional areas, particularly by young people – thereby affecting membership of households and the availability of family members to work on-farm 
there may be less support and encouragement for young people to take over farms
there is greater pressure on women to work off-farm to supplement on-farm income
gender roles may change as women need to work both on and off-farm
family workloads may increase because farm families cannot afford paid labour
community networks may be lost as farm families’ social interaction decreases – contributing to their feelings of social isolation.
The national extent and significance of these effects is difficult to assess, as the relevant studies are generally based on detailed research work in specific locations, using ethnographic methods which allow people to provide their own accounts of impacts on their families and their lives.
The Panel heard that increased workloads and debt of farm families leads to many young people working long hours both on and off farms, assisting with farm labour tasks, and sometimes missing school as a result. Teachers told the Panel that dryness had a noticeable effect on poverty levels, preventing students from attending excursions or from taking part in representative events for financial reasons.
A study by Stehlik, Lawrence and Gray focused on women’s experiences of drought and confirmed that it is experienced differently by men and women. Women’s contributions to the economic and social survival of farm families enduring dryness may be accorded secondary status to those of the men who are principally designated as ‘the farmers’.
Australian farmers are considerably older than those of people in most other occupations. The increase in farmers’ average age is because of both fewer and fewer young men and women entering agriculture, and older farmers are delaying retirement. Older farmers may be reluctant to retire because they see this as an acknowledgement of their ageing which is foreshadowing a loss of the independence central to their life and identity as farmers. This may also be a major factor in their resistance to exit and adjustment programs which encourage ‘non-viable’ producers to leave
Families
2  Some key statistics for rural families

Topic
Statistics and notes
Rural families and households overall
Family size
Family size in rural areas is generally falling, but still remains larger than in regional centres and cities3
Numbers of children
Declined across all states and territories over the period 2001-2006, with the greatest rural decline being in Queensland3
Numbers of young people
Numbers of young people aged 15 to 24 years declined in rural areas in all states and territories over the period 2001-2006, largely reflecting members of this age group moving to urban centres3
One-parent families
Rural areas have the lowest proportion of one-parent families of all areas (also see statistics below for farming families)
Home ownership
Rural areas have the highest level of home ownership as compared with small towns, regional centres and urban locations – in 2006, 76.2 per cent of all dwellings in rural areas were owned or being purchased, reflecting both housing affordability and the older age profile of residents in rural areas3
Motor vehicle ownership
In 2006, only 2.8 per cent of rural dwellings did not have a motor vehicle, as compared with 11.2 per cent of dwellings in major urban centres and cities3
Farming families
Number of farming families
The number of Australian farming families declined by 9 per cent from 112 800 in 2001 to 102 600 in 20064. The smallest decrease was 1 per cent in the Northern Territory, and the largest 13 per cent in Queensland
Family types
At the 2006 Census, around half (51 per cent) of farming families were couple families with children – as compared with 45 per cent of families in this category Australia-wide. There was a considerably smaller percentage of one-parent farming families (3 per cent), than one-parent families in Australia overall(16 per cent)4
Family income
From the 2006 Census, the median household income for farming families was $1122 per week. Negative or nil income was reported by 3 per cent of farming families as compared with 1 per cent of all households Australia-wide. When adjusted for differences in household sizes, the median household income for farming families was lower than that for all Australian households ($605 per week as compared with $649 per week)4
Average age of farmers
The average age of Australia’s farmers has been steadily increasing since 1981 5, and the median age was 52 years at the 2006 Census4. The proportion of farmers older than 65 years increased from 15 per cent in 2001 to 18 per cent in 2006; and the proportion of farmers under 35 years decreased from 12 per cent in 2001 to 10 per cent in 20064
Women in farming
In 2006, more than half (56 per cent) of women who were the Census reference person or spouse/partner in a couple farming family reported being a farmer or farm manager as their main occupation. The remainder reported main their occupations of clerical, sales and service workers (32 per cent); education professionals (13 per cent); labourers and related workers (10 per cent); and health professionals (10 per cent)4
Entry of young men into farming
Fewer young men are entering agriculture – since 1976, the number of men aged in their 20s entering farming has more than halved5
Entry of young women into farming
Fewer young women are entering agriculture - since 1976, the number of women in their early 20s entering agriculture has declined by 80 per cent - many young rural women move to urban locations following education and a career5
Sources: BRS3, ABS4, Barr et al5 .
agriculture. Not having a family member to which they can pass the farm may also be a contributing factor. In addition, many farmers in older age groups have relatively low levels of formal education which may contribute to a lack of resilience and adaptability in confronting dryness.
Observations
The Panel heard reports of some isolated young families on properties with no access to outreach community health, maternal or child health services. Their change of circumstances had gone unnoticed to the health providers of the region and they appeared to be invisible to the broader community. The Panel also heard consistent evidence that some marriages were breaking down in rural communities under the combined strain of physical separation enforced by the need to earn oﬀ-farm income and the debt-burden on the farm. Many couples claimed to be too tired to invest time and energy in maintaining their relationship.

Drought makes it incredibly difficult to plan for the future as each individual is pre-occupied with the day-to-day struggle.
Female farmer, Gilgandra, New South Wales

Women, particularly, complained that their husband’s response to drought and debt was to work harder and longer to the point where families were no longer communicating. While the men see themselves as ‘resilient’, their wives see them as ‘stubborn’ and unrealistic about their economic situation.
Living with a sick feeling in your belly over the long term does not help any aspect of family life – relationships, harmony and physical health, supporting each other and neighbours and friends.
Female farmer, South Australia
Where properties are a considerable distance from town, off-farm work can mean staying in town during the week and returning to the property at the weekend. I know of some cases where this has led to divorce. One client told how she had obtained off-farm work but would never do it again or recommend it to anyone else due to the effect on the family.
Rural Financial Counsellor, New South Wales

The Panel noted consistent reports about the impact of dryness on children in farm families. These impacts ranged from social isolation because they either could not go to school or because they could not participate in community sporting activities; there were no buses available to take them, or their parents could not leave the farm or could not afford the fuel.
Many forums discussed children working long hours on farms to help out the family, including children as young as six. In some cases, children are missing school altogether when dryness related work on the farm becomes critical.
Children were described as picking up on the financial and emotional stresses in families. This sometimes results in them, particularly boys, leaving school early to earn an income to reduce the pressure on their parents.
Children require a stable nurturing environment to grow, develop and learn. Stressed families and households will, over time, negatively impact on children’s ability to do this and to develop their own coping mechanisms for adult life.
Women told of experiencing drought in a different way to their husbands. They feel the need to be emotionally strong to hold the family together and are often working as labourers beside their husbands in the place of hired workers. They also frequently home-school children where distance or the closure of schools has made this necessary. They are taking off-farm employment to bring in additional income or to support their children’s education if needed.

Rural women play a significant role in communities affected by drought and ongoing climate change. In these circumstances women in rural communities take on critical roles spanning family, business and community, over and above the already heavy demands made on them.
Local Government and Shires Association of New South Wales

Women frequently talked about a sense of isolation, brought about by the loss of social contacts and the cost of fuel.
Recommendation 11
To account for the needs of farm families, an improved policy for dryness must consider:
–   the changing demographics of farm families and rural communities 
– impediments to farm succession to enable effective intergenerational change
 – the contribution of women and youth to farming and rural communities 
Dryness appears to have exacerbated family succession issues. Many families are in such debt that the older generation cannot afford to retire, making it difficult for a younger generation to return to the farm. Many farms are still under the legal ownership of elderly parents in their 80s and 90s, although the son, and occasionally grandson, runs the farm. Finding money for parents to leave the farm and relocate to an aged-care facility may either increase the debt level of the farm or require a part of the farm be sold off.
Farmers also told the Panel they could not pass the family farm onto their children because of taxation laws surrounding the gifting or transferring of assets, and the effect this can have on social security entitlements, such as the pension. Properties that have suffered from years of dryness often cannot provide for the living costs of two generations. Many farmers say they are reluctant to pass on debts to the children and actively encourage them to not continue in farming.
Recommendation 12
The Australian Government’s Review of Taxation should consider whether existing tax laws present institutional barriers to farm succession, and whether changes could provide improved succession planning incentives for farmers.
The Panel met a lot of young enthusiastic farmers who commonly reported that the ownership of the family farm was still with their parents or involved complex ownership structures. Such family arrangements often cause great stress during times of dryness owing to reduced income flows and unmet succession expectations. The Panel heard that decision-making while under stress was usually not successful, or not done.
Findings
The Panel found the present dryness has had an impact on the functioning of rural families, through enforced long-term separation of family members, psychological impacts on toddlers and school age children, an increased burden of responsibility on women and the divisive issue of succession planning in tightened economic circumstances. This conclusion is contrary to the findings of a study by the Australian Institute of Family Studies outlined in its submission to the Panel.
The Panel formed the view that while many farmers will say they are coping, their coping mechanisms are creating greater pressure on their families.
Recommendation 13
Government policy should focus on encouraging farm families to properly assess and to access human support services.
Women and children, both on farms and in communities generally, appear to be bearing a large part of the emotional burden of dryness. They are expected, and willing, to step-up to provide support on the farm, the business and in the community. Many of them are exhausted and without social support networks of their own.
Succession planning is a major issue for an ageing farm population. Because of dryness and lack of cash flow, many older farmers feel they cannot afford to retire and pass the farm on to their children. Ideally these decisions should be factored into a farmer’s strategic approach to family farm business planning. However, debt and concerns relating to taxation issues are exacerbating an already sensitive issue for many farmers and their children.
Recommendation 14
Further research is needed into understanding the wellbeing of farm families facing periods of dryness.
Human support
HUMAN SUPPORT SERVICES
Background
The focus of recent research on services in rural and remote Australia and how service provision may be aﬀected by dryness, has been on how existing services can be improved and made more appropriate and accessible to drought-aﬀected communities, families and individuals. Gaps in services are not often raised.
Lynn discusses approaches to rural human services provision in Victoria and attempts made there to offer a generalist approach that integrates individual and community needs by involving partnerships between community and government. This research found that, in terms of engagement and partnership with communities, the attempts have not been well-integrated with other initiatives and tend to be re-created as another specialised activity.
Several studies focus on the staffing side of rural services and the challenges faced by service providers working in rural and remote locations. Green and Lonne discusses occupational stress experienced by rural human service providers. They report that social workers, welfare workers and other service providers living and working in small rural communities say they are generally highly satisfied with their work and lifestyle but, paradoxically, they also report high levels of occupational stress and may experience ‘burn-out’. Addressing this kind of stress requires systemic and structural strategies – employers have a key role in developing and implementing these strategies.
Chenoweth argues that living and working in rural communities poses significant challenges for human service providers and they need special preparation for this kind of work. She considers there is evidence rural practice differs from urban in requiring more generalist skills, a better appreciation of space and place factors, a need for practice to be embedded in communities, an ability to work with Indigenous people, an awareness of the problems and opportunities posed by technology, and an ability to live and work in a small community where it may be difficult to separate personal and professional life. To adjust to these differences, more student rural placements may be valuable, together with more integrative education for human service practitioners.
The Panel believe there is a multitude of drought-specific or focused human support services operating in rural communities. Many services are providing support against a crisis framework specific only for dryness, while others provide support at a more general and ongoing level, such as rural financial counsellors. The term ‘human support services’ is used by the Panel to refer to a divergent range of current drought-specific or focused financial/social/family counsellors, chaplains, and advisors (but not limited) who are operating in rural and remote areas, some with government funding and others through non-government backing, in roles covering financial, social, family, relationship, and health issues.
The Panel found it an almost impossible task to fully and, importantly, accurately grasp the wide-range of drought-specific, focused human support services and more general support measures that are operating in rural Australia today. Drought assistance: A summary of measures provided by Australian, state and territory government has almost 100 entries. The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government’s Regional entry point includes more than 2500 links in its regional programs inventory and almost half of these are relevant to human services.
There is considerable diversity among the number and scope of state and territory government initiated programs for dryness. For example, South Australia has 23 drought-specific programs while Western Australia, Northern Territory, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory each have three or less. New South Wales, Queensland and the Northern Territory offer transport subsidies. Queensland alone offers electricity tariff relief.
Australian Government initiatives include:
$8 million over 2007-09 to establish 24 Family Support Drought Response teams across Australia to deliver a range of family relationship services to individuals, families and small businesses 
in communities affected by dryness. These teams are funded to provide family relationship counselling, crisis intervention, dispute resolution, case management and other services aimed at helping people affected by prolonged dryness conditions. This program is administered by the 
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs through the funding of non-government local providers
the Mental Health Support for Drought-Affected Communities measures provide crisis counselling services for individuals and training for clinicians and community leaders. The Department of Health and Ageing is providing $10.1 million over two years to be delivered by Divisions of General Practice
an April 2007 dedicated drought-round of grants under the Local Answers program supported 81 projects totalling $10 million. The Local Answers program is administered by the Australian Government Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
Centrelink’s drought bus provides information on Australian Government assistance available, and links to fi nancial counsellors and social workers, including Beyond Blue: the national depression initiative. 
There are many other organisations and government agencies providing assistance to dryness affected communities, even if they may not be funded directly to do so. For example, a number of non-government organisations are funded through the Australian Government Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs:
the general rounds of the Local Answers program which helps disadvantaged communities identify opportunities to develop skills, support children and families and foster proactive communities: 
–  build effective parenting and relationship skills that strengthen families; 
–  build skills and opportunities to make families and communities more self-reliant, and; 
–  assist individuals to get involved in community life through local volunteering, mentoring or training to build leadership skills. 
Volunteer Grants program which provides funding for eligible not-for-profit organisations to support their volunteers and encourage volunteering by: 
–  purchasing small equipment and sporting items to help their existing volunteers and to encourage more people to become volunteers and; 
–  contributing towards fuel costs incurred in their volunteering work, such as when using their cars to transport others to activities, deliver food and assist people in need. 
the broader range of resources available under the Family Relationship Services program, which provides funding to non-government organisations to establish centres to deliver a range of support and specialised services to minimise disruption to family relationships. The abovementioned funding of the Family Support Drought Response teams falls within this program. 
In some locations the Panel was alerted to the considerable presence of a variety of non-government charity and/or church organisations, including the Salvation Army, Aussie Helpers, Red Cross, the Country Women’s Association, St Vincent de Paul, Anglicare, Centacare, Uniting Care, YWCA, YMCA, Relationships Australia, and the Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia.
In addition, there are also a number of self-motivated single operators who are not attached to any organisation or funding source. These individuals, generally, lack professional supervision and
qualifications and vary in their levels of quality and the services they deliver. Some local government bodies also had dedicated programs, and often, but not always, with support from other tiers of government.
Observations
There was considerable discussion during the public forums about the role that drought-specific or focused human support services were playing within drought-affected communities. A number of written submissions also discussed the perceived value of various human support services for drought-affected communities.
The Panel heard that funding for drought-specific or focused human support services is sourced from a variety of places, including the Australian, state, territory and local governments, and also non-government organisations such as churches and charities. Despite the multitude of funding sources, the Panel found large variances in the level and quality of the drought-specific or focused human support services being provided. Some areas the Panel visited appeared to lack human support services, while other areas had potentially overlapping services. In the latter examples, the Panel believe the current response by governments has created a ‘drought industry’, as one farmer called it, of contracted providers that appeared to sometimes overlap but ostensibly attempted to supply similar services to the same target group.
The Panel observed that some drought-specific or focused human support service providers, however well-intentioned, frequently did not appear to have the appropriate training or skills to effectively engage farming individuals or rural communities, particularly in circumstances when independent-oriented farming individuals may not properly understand the social impacts they were experiencing. In such cases the methods varied between ‘doorknocking’ or ‘cold calling’ on farms, through to working at improving networks and referral mechanisms with other services within the community.
The Panel heard a number of comments in the public forums and written submissions about the lack of effective networks and referral mechanisms between support service providers.
Two consequences of the lack of coordination between human support services were that:
clients may not have been effectively referred to the most appropriate support services; and 
some drought-specific or focused support workers advised the Panel they were providing services outside their area of expertise. 
The lack of coordination between government-funded drought-specific or focused human support services was further complicated by the range of similar services also provided by non-government





“There are a range of service providers that currently have programs and activities appropriate to addressing the social and mental wellbeing of drought affected communities; however, there is limited coordination of these services in terms of networking, collaboration and integration.”
General Practice Alliance South Gippsland, Inverloch, Victoria
“Drought funding from state and federal governments has been provided to a range of local organisations in a scattered approach…The uncoordinated approach to funding poses a risk of duplicating services at best and undermining existing initiatives at worst”
Southern Grampians and Glenelg Primary Care Partnership, Hamilton, Victoria


organisations and charities. In many cases, both government-funded and non-government funded service providers appeared to have low awareness of the support each other was offering in local communities. As a reflection of this, many of the forum participants and written submissions expressed a desire for existing human support services to be better coordinated.
The Panel also heard that a number of support workers were only employed on short-term contracts, some for no longer than six to 12 months duration. These funding terms were inclusive of time required by the recipient to recruit and train staff, establish local networks and then deliver a service. This was particularly the case for support workers who were hired under what the Panel views as a crisis-framed approach to providing support for drought-affected areas. These short-term contracts sometimes resulted in:
support workers having difficulty establishing strong networks within the community and in developing referral services with other support providers; 
support workers continually worrying about their job security and employment prospects for when their contracts expired; and 
a minority of support workers having employed less appropriate methods of reaching potential clients in an effort to have an immediate impact in the community and to engage with potential clients as quickly as possible. 
Recommendation 15
In planning for dryness, improved human support services, must be available and responsive to the needs of farm families and rural people.
The Panel heard that some drought-specific or focused human support service organisations in receipt of government funding to provide drought services have had difficulty in sourcing appropriately trained professionals in the areas requiring assistance. A small number of local providers
even reported that they, in turn, found what they termed ‘other consistent uses’ for the funding or employed people without appropriate qualifications.
While the Panel met many highly professional drought-specific or focused support workers who are providing much needed services to their communities, some of the services that the Panel came across were less than ideal. The different levels of professionalism and effectiveness between those providing drought-specific or focused human support services more often than not reflected their level of skills, training, qualifications, experience and peer support and supervision.
The Panel was also concerned about the strain and occupational stress some of the people delivering drought-specific or focused human support services, and also health workers, appeared to be experiencing. Human support service providers who had greater experience, professional peer support and supervision and established referral networks generally appeared to be coping better than those who were operating, sometimes by choice, ‘on their own’.
Recommendation 16
The distributors of community assistance and social services, including volunteers, should themselves have access to professional support.
The Panel was impressed by Centrelink’s drought-specific or focused Rural Services Officers, who are respected by their communities, do not appear to carry welfare-associated stigma and are reportedly doing a good job at assisting farmers, rural small business and are linking into existing professional networks.
Recommendation 17
The outreach mobility of human services to respond to rural people in times of stress, such as future periods of dryness, needs to be improved, with one option being an expansion of the Centrelink Rural Services Officer program.
Within the context of its forums, the Panel heard from attendees who viewed the role of the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) as a vital support tool in providing guidance and referral advice to rural farm families and small business operators. The Panel broadly support this view and was able to meet many impressive people working as individual rural financial counsellors.
Notwithstanding, the Panel is concerned a number of RFCS providers and individual rural financial counsellors made public statements which indicates there remains significant room for improvement in the administration of the RFCS. Issues which concerned the Panel include:
comments that “I am the only one they can talk to”
inability by some to articulate when, how and to whom they refer clients
an over-emphasis on their own contractual arrangements
a disdain for the need to provide monitoring and evaluation reports
a view by some that their key objective was to obtain government assistance for their clients
the appearance that some received little professional supervision. 

The Panel notes this only applies to a small number of the RFCS providers and individual rural financial counsellors but importantly, the people that these comments apply to are strong identities and vocal advocates in their communities. The Panel accepts that it was only able to observe a relatively small number of communities but a theme was consistent.
The Panel understands that the RFCS has been in transition to a case management approach since 1 July 2008. The Panel was concerned by a number of comments received from rural financial counsellors expressing their aversion to moving to these new arrangements and criticising the decision. The Panel supports the move to a case management approach for the RFCS and judges that individual rural financial counsellors have an important role in helping their clients develop options for financial improvement according to their individual situation and then provide a referral and information service. The onus should be on the client to make the best decision which suits their individual needs. With this in mind, the Panel believes it is appropriate an independent formative evaluation of the RFCS occur as soon as practical.
Recommendation 18
An independent formative evaluation of the Rural Financial Counselling Service must occur as soon as practical to: assess the progress that has been made in delivering a case-management approach; identify the institutional barriers that exist, and; to determine any improvements and adjustments that may be needed.
The Panel believes rural financial counsellors are not ‘counsellors’ nor are trained as such, and therefore immediate consideration should be given to a name change. The Panel also observed that the administration of the RFCS sits uncomfortably within the Australian Government Department of Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry as an agency predominately focused on national-level industry issues versus other human service oriented agencies which deal with individuals as part of their core functions.
Recommendation 19
The word “counselling” should be removed from the name of the Rural Financial Counselling Service and replaced by a more appropriate title, better fitting the service’s broader role.
Findings
The Panel believes drought-specific or focused human support services are a key resource which can be better harnessed for the ongoing long-term benefit of farm families, rural businesses and communities – not just something that should be put in place during times of dryness.
Human support services have the potential to play a vital role in the long-term sustainability of rural areas. However, in future, such services must move away from crisis-framed responses to dryness and instead move towards more longer term sustainable approaches. Human support service delivery which is focused on short-term interventions at the crisis end is an inadequate piecemeal response to what are fundamentally ongoing problems. At a basic level it appears that governments funding providers to deliver drought-specific or focused human support services for defined periods has caused the creation of an extra ‘layer’ which is often poorly linked to existing professional networks or referral hierarchies.
A longer term approach would allow human support services to focus on early intervention and the ongoing wellbeing of farm families and rural communities. This would improve farmers’ mental and physical health, skills, support networks, and their ability to better prepare and cope with risks to their business and themselves during periods of dryness.
The Panel discovered from its consultations throughout rural Australia that the current spread of human support services is largely uncoordinated and inefficient. A multitude of human support services operate in farming areas and while a variety of providers can foster innovation, they were often reported as uncoordinated and spread poorly. Some regions do not have sufficient human support services and others are seemingly oversupplied, with a vast range of service providers funded by various government and non-government sources offering similar services to the same clients.
At a national level these services have few linkages to complementary programs or understanding of ongoing implementation activities. There is a clear need for governments to pursue more streamlined human support service delivery in rural areas with stronger hierarchical leadership in order to facilitate better region-specific coordination and referral pathways. The focus needs to be on how human support services are delivered rather than simply what services are delivered.
Where possible, the Panel believes the co-location of service providers into service hubs for rural centres would be the most desirable way to link human support services and to facilitate more effective referral pathways. This would be particularly useful in ensuring farm families and rural communities had clearer and easier access to the most appropriate support services and would also assist in the earlier identification of referral needs.
Recommendation 20
Access to government drought assistance and services must be improved by making applications and referral pathways simpler.
The Panel often heard praise for rural financial counsellors during the public forums and in written submissions and how rural financial counsellors were well-known and mostly trusted by their communities. However, the Panel is concerned as to whether there are sufficient services in rural communities for people in need of other forms of counselling. The co-location of rural financial counsellors with other support services, such as social workers, would help to ensure that emotional and mental health issues were recognised early and that clients could be referred easily to co-located service providers with the correct area of expertise.
Recommendation 21
An urgent audit should be conducted on the extent, experience and qualifications of hu-man support services being implemented on-the-ground in rural Australia (government and non-government).
Recommendation 22
Following this audit, strategies must be developed to achieve the most appropriate distri-bution and allocation of resources and linkages between human service providers, includ-ing clear hierarchies to facilitate better region-specific coordination and referral pathways. These strategies should also consider:
–   co-locating service providers where possible to form service hubs for rural centres
– providing specific mental health first aid training and health promotion for service providers to better identify, react and refer clients with mental health issues 
– establishing minimum standards and appropriate qualifications for human support service providers and their employees, including non-government organisations 
– ensuring funding terms for human support services are of an appropriate length to enable effective establishment, delivery and review of the services provided. 

Education
EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Background
As part of its review of the social impacts of dryness, the Panel asked the Bureau of Rural Sciences to compare people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas with the Australian population generally. The results show that people in dryness affected areas are less likely than the average Australian to have continued their education on to Years 11 and 12. They also show the adults in drought-affected areas are more likely to have a diploma or certificate from a college or TAFE than a degree or a diploma from a university. In fact, adults working in dryness affected areas are less likely than those from the general Australia population to have any post-school qualifications.
Young people who left school early were less likely to find an apprenticeship or traineeship during dryness. The need to travel long distances for TAFE training was identified as a significant issue, requiring parental support because of cost and a lack of public transport.
In 2006, the Australian Government Department of Education, Science and Training received a report on the impacts of dryness on secondary education access in Australia’s rural and remote areas. This report was critical of the lack of information on the circumstances of children living and being educated in rural and remote Australia. In particular, it found there was a dearth of information about how periods of recurring dryness were affecting the access of young people to education.
Dryness, in addition to ongoing rural restructuring, has had a particular impact in more remote areas. In some Australian country towns, the loss of student numbers as families leave town seeking work has led to closure of schools, leaving communities without any local history of shared school networks. These children are now forced to board in the nearest town at a hostel, or to be home schooled or undertake distance education. This decreases opportunities for frequent, incidental contact centred on school and neighbourhood activities between family members and neighbours. The loss of teachers also impacts on the human and social capital of a community.
Many high schools are reporting a significant drop in student numbers because of rural restructuring and dryness. In Blackall, Queensland, for example, numbers are reported to have dropped by one third over a one year period. Charleville High School has reported a similar fall. This impacts on teacher numbers and subject offerings. Teachers are frequently forced to teach outside their discipline and have difficulties accessing professional development. Students are forced to take more subjects by distance and families have difficulty funding extra-curricular activities.
In 2007, Drought Assistance for Schools funding was provided as part of a package of measures totalling $714 million to support farmers, small businesses and communities in rural and regional Australia. This package recognises the financial and social pressures on families and schools located in EC declared areas. This funding is provided directly to rural and remote schools to assist with ongoing education expenses and the cost of educational activities, such as student excursions, which may be cost prohibitive for families experiencing financial hardship as a result of the dryness. It may also be used to assist with the cost of items such as text books, uniforms, subject levies, student attendance at extra curricular activities and other educational activities which directly benefit students.





Our school has had to minimise the number of excursions offered to the children as they require some subsidy from the parents, and reduce the annual school camp to accommodate the requests of parents who could not afford the traditional school camp fees. In recent years of drought, the P and C has addressed the concern of parents who could not afford to send their children on camp, and subsidised the Year 7 transition camp. These excursions and camps are vital part of our children’s education and serve to maximise their learning experiences and understanding of the world around them.
Beacon Progress Association, Beacon, Western Australia


Less than 15 years ago, up to 50 per cent of remote students had governesses; now only 7 per cent do. Home tutors are now overwhelmingly mothers, who are also often replacing hired labour on their properties at a time of increased workloads associated with dryness.
Increased workloads and farm debt lead to young people working long hours, both on and off farms, assisting with farm labour tasks and sometimes missing school as a result.

A mother in Pilliga cited home schooling four children and managing the farm while her partner sought off-farm income created enormous pressure on her. While she felt the need to attend a basic computing class to develop skills to support her children and the management of the farm business, there were few resources such as childcare/alternative school supervision and no-one to manage the farm.
Western Institute of TAFE, Outreach Unit, Coonamble, New South Wales


For many children from remote communities, attending boarding school for their high school years has been both a tradition and a necessity. Parents have seen this as a social as well as an educational necessity. This is clearly expensive. While the difference in cost between public and private schools in any Australian city can be significant, distance adds a completely new dimension. If a family live 20 kilometres out of Bourke there may be several options for schooling their children. If a family live 200 kilometres out of Bourke the choices might be distance education, boarding school or a parent and children needing to relocate to a regional centre where there is access to education and work.
Boarding schools recognise their rural and remote families are under particular stress and have tried to support them through delayed payment schemes, increasing bursaries and scholarships and making staff aware of the rural situation. A study found many parents have opted to pay the fees over a longer time period. This delayed payment can result in a greatly reduced ability to support their young people going on to tertiary levels.





Many families are choosing not to send their children away to boarding school for secondary school as they can’t afford the school fees. This means the children then have to travel vast distances daily to the local high school, less time to study and also as they are at home, are called on to be unpaid workers on the property. Not that they resent this, but they are missing out on social skills gained while living in cities.
Country Women’s Association of New South Wales

Young people at boarding school were reported to be anxious about their parents and about the circumstances at home as a result of dryness and to worry that their parents cannot afford for them to be away.
Some families access the Australian Government’s Second Home Allowance which enables, usually, mothers to move to their closest centre with their children. The children attended the local schools and women had the opportunity to work, often providing a much needed second income to the family. This arrangement can lead to long family separations and the isolation of men on drought ravaged farms. Young people in remote areas may also attend hostels, such as those located in Hay and Longreach. The cost of hostel accommodation can be well above the Assistance for Isolated Children allowances, causing significant hardship for families.
Special needs children are reported as having suffered particular disadvantage, especially when they live in a remote area away from services and support. In their study, Alston and Kent found there was an urgent need for support programs, respite care and special supports for home tutors to support the education of special needs children.
The rate of improvement in educational attainment in the decade to 2006 was much lower for people living in rural areas (1.9 per cent increase per year) than in all other areas, being less than half of the national average (4.3 per cent per year). In 2006, many more people in Australia had vocational qualifications than a bachelor degree (3 784 000 and 2 477 000, respectively). Nearly one-quarter (23.8 per cent) of the working-age population had vocational qualifications, compared with the much smaller proportion with degrees (15.6 per cent).

Source: BRS (2008)
In regional centres, small towns and rural areas, this difference was much more pronounced than in major urban centres. This has implications for the potential of people in these communities to diversify into the information economy or service industries. It also has implications for farmers, members of farm families and farm-hands seeking work off-farm to supplement their income during dryness, with work options being constrained by qualifications targeted at their farming operation. With increasing demands for information technology skills or vocational certification, taking on off-farm work may require gaining further qualifications.
Gaining new qualifications or training may present challenges, especially during dryness, because of difficulties accessing educational or training programs, the cost of the program (especially for those already experiencing financial hardship), time spent away from the community and family, and the ability to take on new knowledge in times of stress.
The 2006 Australian Bureau of Statistics Census of Population and Housing illustrates the situation (using the Australian Standard Classification of Occupation 2002). For these figures, ‘farming population’ is defined as that portion of the population aged 15 years and over actively engaged in farming work, including the categories of ‘farmers and farm managers’, ‘farm specialists’ (eg shearers and other contractors), and farm workers (eg farm hands and labourers). For this analysis, ‘non-school qualification’ refers to educational attainments other than those of pre-primary, primary or secondary education and may be attained concurrently with school qualification.
Within the farming population, 23.5 per cent of workers had post-school qualifications compared with 42 per cent of the Australian population generally. Of these, nearly 5 per cent of the farming population held a bachelor degree or post-graduate qualifications. This was less than one-quarter of the level attained in the Australian population (21.9 per cent). Those who held an advanced diploma, diploma or certificate represented 18.5 per cent of the farming population, which was 40 per cent less than the Australian population (30 per cent).
These figures are based on the total population of farmers across Australia and mask important differences between peri-urban farmers of major cities, regional centres and small towns, and those farmers in rural and remote areas. Nevertheless, they serve to highlight that the lower level of education and training within the working farming population has implications for its members’ ability to diversify into off-farm occupations as a risk management strategy.
The Youth Affairs Council of Victoria, in Talking about the big dry: young people and the impact of drought states that data collected on post-secondary school students reveals dramatically higher levels of deferral of higher education placements by young people in rural and regional Victoria as compared with those in metropolitan Victoria. It paints a picture of a gradual increase in deferral over the past few years, potentially related to the impact of widespread dryness in the corresponding years.
In the Alston and Kent study, young people themselves reported:
a lack of access to Youth Allowance because of means-testing on parental assets 
financial difficulties associated with parents being asset rich and income poor 
many families being unable to support their young people away from home 
an increased need for them to delay their entry to university in an attempt to earn the required amount to be classified as independent for the purposes of Youth Allowance 
the lack of unskilled full-time employment in their towns as a result of dryness, making earning this money difficult or impossible 
anecdotal evidence that some give up their university places because of financial pressures 
anecdotal evidence that some drop out from university because of financial and emotional pressures
the need to choose shorter courses to relieve the family’s financial burden and/or allow younger siblings access
giving up a place at university because of family financial pressures
a huge sense of frustration that university education is no longer available on a merit basis 
A Tertiary Education Roundtable, organised in 2007 by the NSW Farmers Association, was told of a dramatic fall in tertiary enrolments in agriculture related courses. The Australian Farm Institute reported that the demand for undergraduate agriculture places fell 19 per cent from 2001 to 2006. They also reported a decline in the vocational level of enrolments in agriculture. With universities reporting a decrease in enrolments, despite strong demand by employers for agriculture and related graduates, the Association sees the issue as a major threat to rural industries and the communities that thrive on the success of this industry. In the view of the NSW Farmers Association, the length, severity and extent of the current dryness has acted as a deterrent to young people who may have otherwise sought a career in agriculture, with enrolments at an all-time low for many tertiary institutions in NSW.
With increasing demands for information technology skills or vocational certification, accessing off-farm work may require further qualifications. Acquiring these qualifications can be difficult, especially during drought because of the cost of programs and the time spent away from the farm and family.
The absence of childcare facilities in rural communities can be a major obstacle to farm families earning off-farm income and to providing children with respite from stressed families. The Community Child Care Cooperative of NSW reports that childcare services in drought affected areas in that state are struggling to maintain viability in the face of reduced child numbers, reduced capacity to fund raise and difficulty in attracting trained staff. Childcare facilities are also struggling to recruit parents to management committees because this takes time and energy parents can no longer spare. The general decline in volunteer capacity in rural towns is also impacting on schools.
The Australian Government has recently launched a Review of Higher Education in recognition of the need for longer term, system-wide reform to enable higher education to make a major contribution to economic productivity and prosperity. This review will examine and report on the future direction of the higher education sector, its fitness for purpose in meeting the needs of the Australian community and economy, and the options for ongoing reform. A key objective of the review is to widen access to higher education and to improve student support programs so as to promote social inclusion and individual opportunity. The review is also intended to help to develop a long-term vision for higher education into the next decade and beyond.
Observations
The Panel consistently, across all public forums, was told of the great concern rural people hold for the education of their children and of the sacrifices they were prepared to make to ensure their children were well educated.

Lack of childcare centres in rural communities reduces the capacity for women to fully participate either socially or in the workforce.
Centrelink worker





Our community of Wubin lost its primary school at the end of 2007 due to the effects of drought seasons starting in 2002. When it closed, we lost five young families who all made the final decision to move away and change their career and education prospects. This severely affects those left who want to stay and now do not have a school or a bus run that can take any future children to schools further away.
Rural Remote and Regional Women’s Network of Western AustraliaCentrelink


Parents at several of the Panel’s forums talked about their concern that staffing numbers in schools were dependent on student numbers and the loss of even a small number of students in a rural school could result in the loss of a valuable teacher. This also often meant the loss of a school bus.
The NSW Farmers Association reports of Year 11 and Year 12 students being expected to learn via video conferencing because time with teachers is so limited under school funding formulas.
Recommendation 23
State governments must consider the short to medium-term social and economic impacts, when dryness is a contributing factor, when assessing the viability of classes, schools and bus services.
Recommendation 24
Where school closure is the judicious option, state governments should assist rural fami-lies to access other education options for their children.
The Panel repeatedly heard of a greater frequency during periods of dryness of children arriving at school hungry. For example, the school principal at Bothwell in Tasmania has established a ‘breakfast club’ to ensure students start the day with a good meal. It is unclear whether children are hungry children is because of a lack of income for food or a lack of time parents can spend away from the farm to prepare meals for children.
In submissions and at public forums mothers described the stress of being torn between their responsibility to the farm and their responsibility to their children, when they need to replace hired labour on their properties and to become teachers for their children.
Farm families repeatedly reported on the impact of being asset rich and cash poor and having little accessible cash during times of dryness to meet the educational needs of their children although, reportedly, remaining ineligible for government assistance because of the asset test.





Time and money constraints are putting pressures on families and are affecting the quality of education for those students accessing School of the Air. There is not enough money to hire governesses and lack of money to hire external labour means that mothers are required to be out working the property or undertaking off-farm work.
The Uniting Church in Australia Frontier Services, New South Wales

The Panel heard evidence, which is supported by numerous submissions, that high school retention rates have been dropping for boys. These students are taking available work in preference to staying on to finish high school because they were determined to relieve the family of a financial burden and save their parents from the additional financial stress associated with tertiary education.

Kids in schools are very affected. Morawa has a school psychologist who is dealing with five schools. She has recently been allocated another two schools which puts her work load ratio to 1:1800. This is absolutely impossible to meet the kids needs.
Rural Remote and Regional Women’s Network of Western Australia

Eligibility for the Youth Allowance and the Living Away from Home Allowance has been identified in submissions and at public forums as a barrier to rural students accessing tertiary education and as a major cause of stress in families. Parents reported sending high school leavers out to find a job for 12 months so as to be deemed ‘independent’ of their parents and therefore eligible for allowances. There are few jobs in rural and remote communities for young people and often these are in part-time, insecure work, forcing children to travel further from home to work. Many parents reported that, in the process, their children lost their aspiration to move to higher education.
Rural universities play a key role in skill building and capacity development in rural Australia with regional universities also providing many economic benefits to the communities in which they are based. The Panel heard that the financial impacts of prolonged dryness are likely to be contributing to declining undergraduate enrolments in agriculture and other rural-focused courses. This decline suggests that skills shortages and knowledge deficits will emerge as significant constraints to agricultural productivity in the near future. This, in turn, results in fluctuating funding allocations which impact on the capacity of regional universities to maintain their facilities and staff resources. The Panel consider there is a role for governments to take into consideration the impact of drought in influencing fluctuating student numbers and to applying leniency in funding to maintain critical mass.
In 2007, the then House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry heard evidence there is a mismatch between existing tertiary agricultural facilities and what can be sustainably funded and maintained, as detailed in its inquiry report into rural skills training and research. In this situation, there is a strong argument for leadership to facilitate quality tertiary educational outcomes through more specialisation and partnerships.
Rural universities and TAFE institutions could be more engaged with industry and government to identify areas in which education institutions can promote innovative ways of dealing with dryness in rural communities. Possible strategies might include:
funding rural bonded university places (similar to medicine at some universities)
including rural placements as core elements of relevant degrees
developing university-wide rural strategies to raise awareness of opportunities in rural areas and provide placement assistance to graduating students. 
The South Burnett Community Development program in Queensland submitted that families are reluctant to encourage their young people to undertake rural studies, as they do not want the same hardship for their children as they have experienced during many years of dryness and uncertainty. They cite a study conducted by the Burnett Inland Economic Development Organisation in 2005 which found 100 per cent of rural families involved in the study would not encourage their young people to engage in primary production.
The extended period of dryness has forced many farmers to seek off-farm work to support their families. This can mean separation from their community when work is not available locally or when farmers do not have the qualifications to find jobs.
Numerous submissions and several people at the Panel’s forums raised the issue of recognising farmers’ existing skills or re-skilling them to better equip them to move to off-farm work. Several submissions pointed to skill recognition and accreditation as a way of increasing self-esteem among farmers severely impacted by the prolonged dryness.
The Northern Agricultural Catchment Council of Western Australia observed male farmers tend to amass a wide variety of skills which are in constant demand. These skills include plant operation, plant maintenance, welding and an array of building skills. In addition, most farmers have long experience in running a small business, managing staff and have an excellent work ethic. Such skills tend not to be formally recognised and may limit both entry and the level of entry into work outside farming. Farmers themselves are sometimes quick to understate their level of skill. Many say that if they were not farmers they do not know what else they could do.


Drought conditions impact significantly on the uptake of education and training for farm, and yet it is imperative that during these difficult times, they stay informed, engaged and connected to new learning and networking opportunities. There is a disjunct between the increasing challenges imposed by drought on farming families, and the growing need to improve business management and diversification skills. In times of crisis, farmers are focused on sustaining and maintaining farm operations rather than education and training opportunities.
Department of Primary Industries and Water, Tasmania
Male farmers expressed reluctance to attend training because of time or money issues. Others just claimed exhaustion. The Murray-Mallee Rural Financial Counselling Service expressed concern that reduced numbers at information or training seminars are interpreted by organisers as a lack of interest or need when there may be contributing physical and mental exhaustion factors. They believe an important aspect of education and training for farmers is to take it to the farm-gate and work with farmers in smaller groups, especially when farmers are affected by dryness and low incomes.
Many farmers expressed concern over the termination of the FarmBis program which was jointly funded by the Australian Government, participating states and the Northern Territory. FarmBis provided assistance for primary producers and rural land managers to undertake approved training activities to build business and natural resource management skills. The attraction of the program was that it was focused on rural re-skilling and delivered at the local level. The federal/state FarmBis program in the Northern Territory, Queensland, Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia ended on 30 June 2008. The national FarmBis program in New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory ended on 29 February 2008.
Volunteering NSW has developed an online Skills Passport designed to acknowledge prior learning and to facilitate timely employment in a variety of industries specifically catering for temporary and transient local workforces.
Some state governments have initiated ‘skills store’ concepts in regional centres where farmers can have their current skills assessed and be given advice about vocational training. The issue with these systems is that while the initial advice is often free, the vocational training can be both expensive and a long way from the property.

Network members have observed lower levels of participation in training and professional development, brought about by the drought. The most common barriers to participation and training and professional development reported to Network members are farmers’ inability to leave their farms (eg due to hand-feeding; staff shortages; prohibitive petrol and diesel costs); not having the necessary finance to participate; and extremely limited access to childcare.
New South Wales Farmers’ Mental Health Network

Vocational programs for all those who live outside metropolitan areas should recognise that distance and isolation are hurdles to accessing educational opportunities and options need to be available taking this into account.
Recommendation 25
There must be more flexible training delivery methods for adult learning (using adult learn-ing principles), including providing outreach training, for farm families and people in rural communities who find it difficult because of dryness to attend training opportunities. This could be achieved by:
– vocational education and training programs aimed at assisting farm families with up-skilling or re-skilling, including recognition of prior learning, to broaden opportunities to earn off-farm income; 
– funding for vocational education institutions to help farm families and people in rural communities more readily access further education opportunities. 
– careful consideration of the timing and appropriateness and potential effectiveness of delivering education and training programs during times of stress, such as dryness. 
Findings
One of the strongest messages arising from the research literature, the submissions to the Panel and at the public forums is that the social wellbeing of children and teenagers is suffering because of dryness. Young people are being denied educational and extracurricular opportunities because of household financial limitations resulting from dryness. In some cases this has reportedly narrowed children’s aspirations for further education and employment options. Education is essential to social and economic wellbeing, as well as to the resilience and future adaptive capacities of communities. This is a significant problem.
Many teachers and parents reported that dryness is having a noticeable effect on rural parents’ ability to fund curricular and extracurricular activities for their children, preventing students for financial reasons from attending school excursions, going to school without food or taking part in representative events. The Panel is concerned as to why this need was spoken of so strongly by so many when the Australian Government has provided more than $17 million, as of 1 July 2008, in dedicated Drought Assistance for Schools funding to help families with these very expenses. Throughout the consultation process, the Panel did not hear anyone identify or acknowledge this significant level of funding, despite its intention to directly benefit students suffering because of dryness.
In the past, children of primary school age in remote areas have had the choice of attending a small local school, boarding in their nearest town at a hostel or being home schooled. The drift of people away from rural and remote areas has resulted in the closure of small schools and the loss of school bus services. The lack of assistance for rural families to gain access to the same quality and choice of education as is available in metropolitan and large regional centres is a concern. This withdrawal of education services needs to be arrested, particularly in drought declared areas.
Recommendation 26
Further research is needed to better understand how reoccurring stressors such as dryness affect the education outcomes for young people.
Government decision-making can sometimes erode the social capital of rural communities with inflexible policies about student to teacher ratios. When the loss of people from rural communities results in a loss in student numbers, this not only impacts on staffing levels in schools and changes the social structure within a school. Rural schools are often a rich source of community facilities such as libraries, meeting rooms, sports areas, workshops and classrooms – spaces and places for community to become and to be community. These are also major point of social connection for the community through students, parents, teachers and volunteers.
A major issue in rural Australia is the declining opportunity for young people to access tertiary education. Rural families now struggle to find the money to pay for their children’s post secondary education. The Panel is concerned that cash poor farmers and rural businessmen, anxious their children take advantage of the Australian Government’s Youth Allowance and Living Away From home allowance, are so heavily focused on the eligibility criteria and the associated asset test that this is forcing families to make decisions which may not be in the long-term best interest of their children. This is certainly causing great stress and anxiety for families. In particular, the criteria that deem a young person to be financially independent of their parents is having a perverse outcome as it influences family behaviour to gain government assistance.
The Panel notes the Australian Government has launched a Review of Higher Education to examine and report on the future direction of the higher education sector, its fitness for purpose in meeting the needs of the Australian community and economy, and the options for ongoing reform. A key objective of this review is to widen access to higher education and to improve student support programs so as to promote social inclusion and individual opportunity. The review is also intended to help develop a long-term vision for higher education into the next decade and beyond.
Recommendation 27
The Australian Government’s Review of Australian Higher Education must consider the education challenges facing rural Australia and specifically examine whether the nature of farm families income and asset circumstances disadvantages farm families accessing youth allowance assistance.
Older farmers are finding it difficult to get off-farm employment without a certificate even though they have valuable skills. Recognition of prior learning (RPL) should be made more accessible through waiving the relevant fees, establishing a recognised skills ‘passport’ and including an option to undertake practical demonstrations and not just be tested in written form.
Human capital
 K.Hennessy, R.Fawcett, D.Kirono, F.Mpelasoka, D.Jones, J.Bathols, P.Whetton, M.Staffors Smith, M.Howden, C.Mitchell and N.Plummer, An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on the Nature and Frequency of Exceptional Climate Events, Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2008
 Garnaut.R, Garnaut Climate Climate Change Review: Draft Report, June 2008 Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/pages/all-reports--resources-draft-report
 Estlake S, An Introduction to the Australian Economy, 3rd edition, January 2006, Available: http://www.anz.com/business/info_centre/economic_commentary/EncycAmericana(2006update).pdf
 Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics, Australian Farm Survey Results 2005-2006 to 2007-2008,Available: www.abareconomics.com/publications.html/economy/economy.08/fsr-08.pdf
 Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Drought Support: Issues Paper, Available: http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/81880/government-drought-support-issues.pdf
 Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics, Australian Farm Survey Results 2005-2006 to 2007-2008,Available: www.abareconomics.com/publications.html/economy/economy.08/fsr-08.pdf
 Estlake S, An Introduction to the Australian Economy, 3rd edition, January 2006, Available: http://www.anz.com/business/info_centre/economic_commentary/EncycAmericana(2006update).pdf
 CSIRO, Urban Australia: Where most of us live, Australian Government ,Available: http://www.cossa.csiro.au/lb/lbbook/urban/yb1.htm
 CSIRO, Urban Australia: Where most of us live, Australian Government ,Available: http://www.cossa.csiro.au/lb/lbbook/urban/yb1.htm
 Bureau of Rural Sciences, 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13896 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
 BRS 2008c
 ABS 2008
 BRS 2008c
 Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Drought Support: Issues Paper, Available: http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/81880/government-drought-support-issues.pdf
 Aslin H and Russell J, Social Impacts of Drought: Review of Literature for the Expert Social Panel, Bureau of Rural Sciences,
 Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20Mental%20health.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008]
 Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear , Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. in the Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7) 2004.
 Bureau of Meteorology, The ‘Federation Drought’ 1895-1902, Available: http://www.bom.gov.au/lam/climate/levelthree/c20thc/drought.htm
 K.Hennessy, R.Fawcett, D.Kirono, F.Mpelasoka, D.Jones, J.Bathols, P.Whetton, M.Staffors Smith, M.Howden, C.Mitchell and N.Plummer, An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on the Nature and Frequency of Exceptional Climate Events, Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2008
 Crosby E, Welfare and Support Services for farm families, rural businesses and rural communities Families, Changing Families, Challenging Futures, 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 1998
 Drought Policy Review Task Force, National drought policy, final report Volume 1. Canberra, Australian Government Publishing Service 1990
 ibid
 ibid
 Wahlquist, A (2003) Media representations and public perceptions of drought. In: Botterill, LC & M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing.
 Elaine Crosby, Welfare and Support Services for farm families, rural businesses and rural communities Families, paper given at Changing Families, Challenging Futures, 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 1998
 Gamble, D, S Blunden, L Kuhn-White, M Voyce & J Loftus (1995) Transfer of the family farm business in a changing rural society, RIRDC Research Paper No 95/8.
 Hodges, A. and Goesch, T. 2006, Australian Farm families, rural businesses and rural communities: Natural Resource Management in 2004-05, ABARE Research Report 06.12, prepared for the Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra, September 2006
 Australian Bureau of Statistics 4620.0 - Natural Resource Management on Australian Farm families, rural businesses and rural communities, 2006-07
 ABARE, 2000, Country Towns, Impact of farm families, rural businesses and rural communities expenditure on employment and population
 Hall, G & M Scheltens (2005) Beyond the drought: towards a broader understanding of rural disadvantage. Rural Society, 15(3): 347-58.
 NSW Department of Primary Industries, Press release, “Popular drought community events provide welcome relief to more than 117,000 families”, 4 September 2008
 Pers.com, at Alice Springs Forum to Expert Social Panel, National Review of Drought Policy, 21 July 2008
 Stehlik, D, G Lawrence & I Gray (2000) Gender and drought: experiences of Australian women in the drought of the 1990s. Disasters, 24: 38-53.
 Lynn, M (2004) The return of community to rural human services. Rural Society, 14(3): 228-44.
 Green, R & B Lonne (2005) ‘Great lifestyle, pity about the job stress’: occupational stress in rural human service practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 252-66.
 Chenoweth, L (2004) Educating practitioners for integrative rural practice. Rural Society, 14(3): 276-87.
 Alston, M & J Kent (2006) The impact of drought on secondary education access in Australia’s rural and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/4415AD4A-F3AF-40DF-9F10-00F5DE08E855/12764/Impact_Droughtreport23Jan2006.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
 ibid
 ibid
 ibid
 Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70.
 Aliston and Kent (2006).
 ibid
 BRS (2008b) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Education. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13898 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
 ibid
 DEEWR (2008c) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 3: Higher Education. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
 ibid