Human capital
HUMAN CAPITAL
Background
Labour force participation in rural areas is 67.5 per cent compared to the Australian average of 64.5 per cent. A corollary of the high participation rates is low unemployment and many rural industries are now under-supplied with both unskilled and skilled workers.
The National Farmers Federation report, 2008 Labour Shortage Action Plan, released in March 2008, also noted that many of those affected by job  losses were said to have permanently left the industry, with some leaving the community altogether. The NFF and other industry organisations are concerned that when better seasonal conditions return, numbers of skilled workers will be needed. This would generate career and employment opportunities and the report makes strong recommendations for the early promotion and development of the range of skills required by the agricultural sector in anticipation of increasing demands for labour. This concern about the ability to replace skilled staff is not limited to those in the agricultural sector.  A report by the Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics reviews the consequences for rural communities of skills shortages in a range of other sectors of rural and regional Australia.
The BTRE report notes that discussions about the regional impact of skills shortages are made more difficult by the fact that available data on the location and extent of skill shortages is ‘patchy at best’. In particular, there are few detailed reports on the geographic distribution of skill shortages. Although the impact of skill shortages on the economy is not well defined in the research, it is agreed skills shortages will have consequences for productivity.
Employment in agriculture is being affected by the impacts of dryness, changes in the availability of and access to water, trade reform, global markets, productivity improvements, and more reliance upon specialised contractors than local labour. Overall, employment in agriculture, forestry and fishing has fallen by 89 300 to 346 400 in the ten years to February 2008, a 20.5 per cent fall. The pattern of decrease is broadly consistent across the country. In 2006, agriculture accounted for up to 3.1 per cent of total employment in Australia, down from 4.4 per cent in 1996.
The grain, sheep and beef cattle sectors dominate employment, accounting for 43.5 per cent of agriculture employment as at February 2008. Horticulture and fruit growing are second, at 22.9 per cent of employment, and services to agriculture are third at slightly more than 7 per cent.
Human capital

Of the 17 broad industry groups, agriculture, forestry and fishing has the highest proportion of workers aged 45 years and over (54 per cent), compared with the average for all industries (37.2 per cent). The industry also has the highest share of workers aged 65 years and over (13 per cent)
compared with just 2.3 per cent for all industries. The share of younger workers, by contrast, is low for people aged 15 to 24 years (10.3 per cent compared with 17.7 per cent for all industries) and even more so for workers aged 25 to 34 years (14.4 per cent compared with 21.7 per cent).
Farm expenditure can represent more than one-third of economic activity in small towns. When there is a high level of dependence on a single agricultural commodity or production system and few alternatives, the impacts from dryness and other pressures on the farm, small businesses and the local community are likely to be greater.

If the farming sector is undergoing financial hardship, farming families spend less money. This leads to other small businesses in the area experiencing financial hardship.
Gannawarra Shire Council, Kerang, Victoria


Generally, the population of farming regions is declining. All of the 20 local government areas in Australia with the fastest population declines during the period 2006 to 2007 were in rural Australia; 14 were in NSW, five in Queensland and one in Western Australia. Bourke in NSW had the largest fall. The Bourke Shire Council advised the Panel the area had lost approximately 1000 people (25 per cent) over the past seven years.
The pressures of dryness can also require family members to seek off-farm employment to supplement income, sometimes at high personal cost.
Drought Force is an Australian Government program delivered through Community Work Coordinators providing farms and communities in exceptional circumstances declared areas with an opportunity to participate in Work for the Dole projects, provided they do not displace existing or potential paid employees.
Drought Force is designed to ease the burden of dryness for farmers and their families and to make sure farms and properties are maintained and able to cope once a drought breaks. Drought Force also encourages people to remain in their local community, retaining and building local skills and supporting the local economy.
An additional incentive is provided under the Australian Apprenticeships Incentives program to encourage primary producers to continue to offer skills development and employment in exceptional circumstances declared areas.
Diversification of industries increases the social and employment resilience of communities, providing a buffer against the impacts of shocks to the community associated with any particular industry.
Recommendation 28
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must develop policies and initiatives to address trade and other professional skills shortages in farm families and rural communities. These policies and initiatives must be underpinned by regional-specific research on the location, extent and impact of skill shortages. Policy and initiatives should:
– recognise that training and education of people in rural settings leads to greater retention of that skill base in rural communities; 
– recognise the important role rural universities play in educating and training skilled workers for rural areas; 
– promote rural-bonded scholarships as a means of addressing agriculture and rural trade and other professional skills shortages 
Observations
Securing a strong workforce for the future, in the face of strong competition for available labour in rural communities, is a major challenge for the Australian agriculture and food sector. Labour and skills shortages, as well as recruitment difficulties, are being experienced in a wide range of agriculture industries in rural and regional areas. Shortages exist for core jobs in these industries, such as farm managers and fruit pickers, as well as for support services such as traditional trades.
There is little hard data about what and where labour and skills shortages are occurring. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the extent and impact of shortages is likely to vary widely between industries and regions. Based on pre-drought labour requirements, the National Farmers’ Federation anticipates an additional 80 000–100 000 workers are required to fill employment vacancies in Australian agriculture when the sector emerges from this period of dryness.
Coupled with the regional location of jobs in agriculture, attracting and retaining workers in a competitive employment market is challenging. Complicating labour attraction for agriculture is a general perception of the industry having poor working conditions and low wages; long hours outside, sometimes involving heavy work; and lack of professional development. The ongoing drought exacerbates these diﬃculties, leading to a negative perception of the future viability of agriculture industries and contributing to a signifi cant decline in people employed in agriculture. Having secured employment elsewhere, the agriculture industry may not be able to attract workers back. This is likely to impede recovery from dryness.
Dryness has meant farmers have had to cut costs, usually through the laying off workers and spending less in town. In consequence, local businesses and services are declining, and skilled labour, particularly younger people, are moving to pursue other employment opportunities.
The Panel heard suggestions that governments should intervene to encourage or compel employers to establish (or stay) in rural areas. While some proposals may have merit, generally these decisions are best made at the enterprise level and the priority of government should be to assist communities to respond effectively to the new and emerging pressures.
Human capital

Increasingly, families are adapting to pressures by seeking alternative dual or multiple family income streams, often involving both partners physically spending time away from the farm. The Panel strongly believes these types of arrangements need to be acknowledged as successes, and not deemed to be failures.
The Drought Force program which encourages unemployed farm workers to undertake on-farm work and help farmers maintain their property during dryness was rarely mentioned in public forums and mentioned in only four submissions; twice favourably and once to say it had too much red tape.
Recommendation 29
A formative evaluation of the Drought Force program, as well as other employment pro-grams, must be undertaken to better address the functioning of the labour market in the agriculture sector during periods of dryness, and to encourage people to remain in their local community.
A number of parents with young children on a farm raised the issue of their family’s need to take off-farm work to maintain income through dryness and that, at times, this placed them in a difficult position regarding child care and their farm work. Parents told of their concern about sometimes putting their own children in unsafe environments by having them stay with the parent that worked the farm. For example, young children spending time within the confines of a tractor cabin or the ute as one of the parents went about the farm work. These parents confirmed they would prefer to dedicate more time to their children or have child care readily available.
Findings
Many have suggested governments should intervene to create employment in rural industries and communities to counteract socio-economic pressures associated with declining and ageing populations. While there are opportunities for governments to improve health and education employment in rural Australia generally, the Panel considers governments are unlikely to be effective in dealing with drought-related employment issues in a segregated manner and the desired changes should be led by industry.
Recommendation 30
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must promote and educate people on the rewards and risks associated with careers in agriculture and other rural industries.
The Panel notes that dryness appears to be straining human resources in health and education, and makes employment related comments in the sections addressing: health; education; services; and values, attitudes and policy.
Health and wellbeing
HEALTH AND WELLBEING
Background
Mental health
Mental health is one of Australia’s National Health Priority Areas. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (1997), almost one in five Australian adults will experience mental illness at some stage in their lifetime. Mental illness affects people in urban and rural areas, both sexes and all ages, with females accounting for 53 per cent of mental illness in 2003 and males 47 per cent.
Evidence is mixed as to whether rural and remote communities experience a significantly higher incidence of depression than urban areas. However, there are a range of factors faced by people in rural and remote which may contribute to poor mental health outcomes. These include a lack of resources, having to travel long distances to access care, reluctance to admit there is a problem and reluctance to seek care because of the high visibility within a close-knit community. Rural populations also have a significantly lower supply of mental health services compared with capital cities and are disadvantaged in the distribution of specialist services such as psychiatrists and psychologists.
With the exception of several valuable reports which target the impacts of drought on the mental health of specific rural populations, , , , , ,  little is known about the specific impacts of chronic long-term dryness on the mental health of farm families and rural communities.
A submission by the Australian Institute of Family Studies provided results from a survey conducted in 2007 of 8000 people living in rural and regional families. This is one of the few quantitative studies containing results about the impacts of drought on the mental health of farm families and rural communities. The results show almost twice the rate of mental health problems in areas where survey respondents perceived they were currently in drought compared with areas where people perceived they had not been in drought during the past three years.
The Panel commissioned the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) to undertake research into the personal wellbeing of people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas. BRS found that, compared against the Australian population, people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas were:
approximately 40 per cent more likely to report feeling less satisfied with their future; 
approximately 12 to 16 per cent less likely to be satisfied with their life as a whole and their standard of living; 
approximately 14 per cent less likely to feel satisfied with their future security; and 
approximately 8 per cent less satisfied with their spirituality or religion. 
The Panel questioned how these findings might potentially relate to suicide rates.
Nearly 80 per cent of all suicides in Australia are males, with the highest rates occurring in males between 20 to 34 years. Suicide accounts for approximately 20 per cent of deaths of males in this age group. Recent studies examining trends in Australian suicide rates have consistently demonstrated male rates are higher in rural and remote areas than in major cities, , . Further, there is evidence linking suicide to drought in New South Wales, with an 8 per cent rise in the long-term mean suicide rate being associated with a decrease in precipitation of about 300 millimetres.
Access to mental healthcare services and cultural aspects such as reluctance to seek help, may be significant factors in the higher suicide rates in males in rural areas, , , . It has been argued men do not seek healthcare for a range of reasons, including:
a tendency to use indirect sources of help
the perception that seeking help will show their vulnerability
fear and denial
difficulty in relinquishing control
a range of systematic barriers . 
Mental health literacy may be a particular problem for young men in rural areas because they are less likely to recognise or report symptoms of distress or to know what can be done to help. These reasons may also apply more generally to males in other age ranges in rural areas, resulting in recommendations being made by some researchers for suicide prevention strategies to include referral access to help through trusted sources, such as rural financial counsellors and agricultural advisors, , , .
Recommendation 31
There is an ongoing need to evaluate and enhance existing strategies aimed at overcoming reluctance by farm families to access health services in times of stress.
Physical health
There is considerable variation in health outcomes for rural and regional Australia within each geographical location that is masked by broad statistical patterns. Despite this, it is possible to detect a number of common patterns and to identify common factors affecting the health of people living in rural and remote Australia. Populations in rural and remote Australia generally have poorer access to healthcare services and experience poorer health than people living in major cities, . They also have higher levels of mortality, morbidity and health risk factors than those who live in major metropolitan areas, , .
People in rural and remote areas also have different patterns of use of health services . For example, given the shortage of general practitioners and specialists in rural and remote areas, there is a greater tendency for people in these areas to use remote area nurse led clinics or rural hospital emergency departments as a source of primary care than people in major cities. People report postponing their visit to a health service until it is unavoidable, which may lead to poorer health outcomes. People living in rural and remote areas were also more likely to be admitted to hospital for conditions which could have potentially been prevented through the timely provision of non-hospital services and care.

The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare report, Australian Health 2008, notes it is difficult to measure or forecast with any precision how climate conditions or environmental hazards affect human health . This is because the links often involve indirect and complex relationships and the effects are often delayed or displaced. In a submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review, Bambrick et al. also advise it is not yet possible to quantify the extent of the adverse health outcomes (deaths, injuries, infections, stress disorders, etc.) specifically caused by extreme climatic events. The submission suggests this is because methods to separate out the specific impacts of climatic events from co-existing health risk factors have not yet been developed.
The Panel believes its observations are consistent with findings in a report by Alston and Kent on the social impacts of drought. In contrast to other reports, Alston and Kent present people’s perspectives as evidence of the day-to-day impacts of drought on the health and wellbeing of rural Australians. Most of the evidence relates to stress-related health impacts. This includes increased anxiety about future prospects, often leading to depression, poor sleeping patterns, and to increasing suicidal thoughts and actions. Some people reported their loved ones were being treated for high blood pressure since the onset of the drought or were drinking more heavily. It is reasonable to expect that there will be a rise in cardiovascular disease rates as many of the risk factors are experienced by individuals in stressed conditions. There is, however, a time lag from exposure to risk to the on-set of disease, hence the importance of robust primary healthcare services and health promotion activities.
Alston and Kent also found the drought represented an additional stress in dealing with pre-existing conditions. For some, the drought meant people could not leave the farm because livestock had to be hand-fed. This limited the time available for loved ones to support each other in seeking medical treatment.
However, the decline in farming work through drought can result in less accidents. For example, Coleman et al. suggested a downward trend in the number of fatal tractor run-overs between 1988 and 1995 may have resulted from a reduction in farm work because of continued drought, rather than any changed work practices or protective structures.
Observations
Mental health
It is clear to the Panel that extended dryness has a significant negative impact on the mental health of farm families and others within rural communities. In particular, the Panel heard repeatedly during the public forums and in written submissions that the pressures of drought were leading to an increase in the incidence of depression, anxiety and stress in rural and remote areas.
In some cases the negative impacts of drought on the health of farm families and rural communities has reportedly resulted in an increase in prescription drug consumption and increasing social isolation. For example, a rural pharmacist informed the Panel he had seen, “a substantial increase in the prescribing of most psycho-active drugs during the drought”. There were also reports that drought can lead to an increase in alcohol consumption and illicit drug use in rural and remote areas. The Panel also heard of people not filling their chronic disease prescriptions because of financial pressures, illustrating the range of responses by individuals.

Health and wellbeing





“Stress, financial hardship, lowering of self esteem, frustration, loneliness, fear and jealousy are some feelings I have experienced because of the drought”.
Farmer, Walgett, New South Wales
“The sense of spirit and hope has reduced over time. Most telling is the effect that this is now having on the wives of farmers who until recently remained resilient and strong”.
Murrindindi Shire Council, Alexandra, Victoria
“Other natural disasters like fire and flood unite communities as we all draw together to help one another. Drought isolates us through a slow strangulation leaving our moods bad, our self-esteem low and our decision-making difficult”
Farmer, location withheld


Farm families have no respite from witnessing the damage drought causes to their farming business. This has the potential to amplify the impact of drought on the mental health of farm families because the experience is constant.
The increased pressures and sadness caused by drought can permeate beyond farm families to throughout rural communities. Many people at the public forums spoke of drought impacting on their mental health by:
increasing stresses and anxieties about finances, family and the future
increasing feelings of sadness at experiencing stock losses, failed harvests and dying orchards
increasing children’s anxieties as they witness their parent’s growing levels of stress and depression
increasing feelings of isolation as financial constraints and depression result in them withdrawing from community activities and emotionally from family relationships. 
People raised concerns about the psychological effects on school children from drought-affected families. Children are keenly exposed to the financial and emotional condition of their parents. A number of school teachers reported this was leading to behavioural problems in school children from drought-affected families. There is also a reported shortage of school psychologists in rural Australia.
The Australian Government primary and secondary school mental health initiatives, called KidsMatter and MindMatters respectively, are currently limited in their reach to rural schools. The Panel believes it warrants special consideration that these programs are extended to schools in drought affected communities, particularly those rural schools with part-time or no psychologists.
Health and wellbeing

Recommendation 32
The Australian Government’s primary and secondary school mental health initiatives must be extended to schools in dryness affected communities, particularly those rural schools without existing counselling support
Some forum participants told of feeling isolated when one partner needed to pursue off-farm work to improve the family’s cash flow, leaving the other partner to work the farm alone. In some cases this situation was seen as permanently separating families. For example, where a farm was located far from town, one partner may move with the children into town during the week to be close to off-farm employment and schooling, while the other partner remained behind to work the farm. Depending on distance, the family may not be reunited for weeks at a time.
The Panel acknowledges this phenomenon is being driven by factors beyond drought and is not unique to the farming sector, with occupations such as truck drivers and fly-in/fly-out miners experiencing this situation as a way of life. However this isolation can exacerbate health problems during times of high stress brought on by the pressures of drought.
The issue of suicide was touched on in several forums and written submissions. Given that suicide rates for males in rural and remote areas are known to be higher than in major cities, , the Panel was particularly concerned about the potential impact that drought may be contributing by isolating people and increasing financial stresses.
Physical health
The Panel heard that drought can cause deterioration in the physical health of farm families because of a range of reasons such as:
increased workloads because farmers undertake more labour on the farm themselves rather than through employees. Farmer workloads are further increased when one farming partner is left to operate the farm while the other pursues off-farm employment
increased workloads when farmers are pursuing off-farm employment in addition to operating the farm
lack of time / financial resources leading to increased risky behaviour in seeking or continuing appropriate treatment for physical health conditions and injuries
increased physical symptoms of mental health issues relating to increased levels of stress and anxiety. 
Health and wellbeing

Findings
Despite there being a lack of research about the specific impacts of drought on mental and physical health, the Panel recognises a strong link between drought and health outcomes.
Recommendation 33
To improve existing response strategies, governments must support research on the extent to which dryness and access to primary healthcare in rural Australia impact on the health and wellbeing of people.
Drought overlays other determinants of health such as mastery (control), education, employment, health behaviours (smoking and nutrition), access to primary and allied health-care services and impacts on the ability of individuals to seek help. As such, the Panel believes individuals need to become more health literate, aware of their own health and wellbeing needs, to be supported to focus on their ongoing wellbeing at all times and to understand that during times of dryness, that risk factors are heightened.
On this matter, the Panel is pleased there appears to have been remarkable progress made within rural communities in acknowledging the existence of mental health issues and the impact that periods of added stress can have. However, there are still improvements that can and should be made in assisting people in rural areas to recognise symptoms of health and wellbeing problems with themselves, friends and families and to make it easier for people to seek appropriate help in a timely way. In addition, the Panel notes a large number of recent health initiatives have specifically focused on the needs of rural men. The Panel considers it is also important that women’s health needs are recognised and supported.
The Panel strongly believes that if improvements in the wellbeing of farm families and rural communities can be achieved, it will result in healthier and more productive agricultural and rural businesses.
The Panel considers that rural areas need to have their own long-term strategies for building, up-skilling, diversifying and bolstering primary and allied healthcare services rather than the current ad hoc approach of attempting to bring in extra resources during times of drought. This is not to say services employed specifically for drought are not currently assisting; the Panel believe improved levels of primary healthcare services would be more sustainable and better placed to scale up in times of dryness. It believes this would aid health protection, prevention, early intervention strategies and facilitate improved networks and referral pathways.
Access to primary healthcare services was described as very limited in areas where GP services were present but did not bulk bill for services provided.
Recommendation 34
The current ad hoc approach of bringing in extra health resources during times of dryness should cease and instead the capacity of existing primary and allied health care services in rural communities must be sustainably built upon to enable them to respond to the health and wellbeing of the community and the impacts of future dryness. This includes improving access to affordable services.
Health and wellbeing





“Many people regularly miss being supplied with their regular medications for periods of days or weeks because of the business demands and economic impact of the drought… For example, one middle-aged grazier asked me to advise him which three of his five prescribed PBS medicines (two for blood pressure, two for Type2 diabetes and one for cholesterol) he could most safely stop taking because, at an average cost of more than $25 each per month ($125 per month total), he could only afford two of them. He had previously conducted a similar conversation with his doctor. When I explained that it would be unethical of me to provide such advice, he asked me to write down what each medicine was for so he could make up his own mind about which to cease.”
Pharmacist, New South Wales
“For three months, when my partner first re-started milking, he was still working full-time off-farm. He would not tell his boss what he was doing, because he did not want to be put off, as business there was quietening down… He was convinced that all he had to do was work harder. By Christmas I was quite beside myself, watching him push himself harder and harder, working longer and harder hours; never seeing him. My heart ached watching him, knowing there was nothing I could do. At one stage he spilt acid on his hand and the white-tail spider bite he had received the previous year flared up. His hand looked like it was rotting away. Even then, I could not convince him to see a doctor. His mother, a nurse suggested that he should see a doctor, but he did not have time. I had to watch and wait. I prayed. I prayed that he would come home each night, that there would be no accident”
Female farmer, New South Wales

The Panel found there was an absence of adequate communication from governments to farm families and rural communities about what health services can realistically be provided and maintained in local areas. While it is rational that population levels will have a bearing on the services available locally, the absence of a better understanding in this area is causing great stress, which is compounded during times of dryness. Services provided by remote area nurses and nurse practitioners are currently indistinguishable in the national data and are not supported by mainstream primary care support strategies. This compounds the sense that people and families do not have access to adequate primary healthcare services.
Recommendation 35
Governments must make better efforts to engage with rural communities and the primary health-care sector, to ensure there is no continuing mismatch between needs and capac-ity of the remote and rural primary healthcare services and local people’s expectations of these services.
Health and wellbeing

The need to travel long distances to access specialist services can cause further stress. Some women reported that the absence of childcare services inhibited their ability to travel to access medical treatment. In this regard, the Panel believes initiatives such as Patient Assisted Travel Schemes (PATS) are critical for assisting farm families and people in rural communities to access specialist services where they are not available locally.
Recommendation 36
The Panel supports adopting the recommendations relating to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes outlined in the then Senate Standing Committee on Community Affairs September, 2007 report Highway to health: better access for rural, regional and remote patients and that the approval for access to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes be vested in the providing primary healthcare professional.
The stress of drought appears to have affected whole communities in parts of rural Australia. The Panel found that although most people will experience short-term stress at various stages of their lives, the longevity of the current drought is causing sustained distress for some. The Panel believes it is important people understand that stress and depression should not be feared and that it is natural when people have feelings of grief and sadness when they are under financial pressure. What is essential is that people and their families can recognise these issues and are able to identify symptoms and have access to appropriate support at an early stage as sustained symptoms can become more serious.
The Panel believes it is essential there be a move away from the current crisis-framed approach to drought support and instead focus on the ongoing, long-term wellbeing of farm families and rural communities. Strategies to make genuine improvements in the areas of health and wellbeing should form a critical part of future planning for dryness, and must include ways to ensure adequate levels of primary and allied healthcare services across remote and rural Australia.
Recommendation 37
Existing physical and mental health services must be easily accessible and responsive to the needs of drought affected families. This could be achieved in a number of ways, including:
– government assistance for mental health and emotional support services for rural communities being examined with a view to improving and the streamlining the on-ground services available, including building stronger linkages and referral capacities between support services; 
– offering farm families and rural people incentives and tools to enable them to become more self-aware of their own physical and mental health needs and to focus on their ongoing wellbeing at all times; 
– assisting farm families to understand that during times of dryness the risk factors in determining health are heightened and that people have clear pathways available for them to seek appropriate help, with this preferably being at an early stage; 
– healthcare services in remote and rural Australia be strengthened to provide health promotion and regular health assessments that include risk factors (eg cardiovascular, stress) known to contribute loss of productivity, quality of life and premature mortality for farm families and people in rural communities; 
– people who are employed in drought support roles being required to possess mental health literacy, referral and first aid skills, and; 
– the professionals providing primary healthcare in rural Australia have ready access to support, upskilling, relief and professional networks to enable them to provide quality care. 
Recommendations

RECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendation 1
An improved policy for dryness must focus on preparing for dryness and planning for personal and family wellbeing.
Recommendation 2
Governments must make a high-level statement of commitment to a strong, healthy, vibrant and sustainable rural Australia.
Recommendation 3
Existing and improved policy for dryness should be based on principles that include:
3.1  integrated development of individual and family wellbeing plans consistent with farm business and natural resource management planning as a mutual responsibility for future public-funded assistance. 
3.2  a transition strategy so that when current drought declarations are concluded there continues to be government investment to assist farm recovery and planning for future periods of dryness. 
Recommendation 4
The drought support roles of federal, state and local governments should be clarified and a lead agency or coordinating committee be established across government and within each jurisdiction to ensure proper implementation of dryness-related policy.
Recommendation 5
People who provide support to farm families, rural businesses and rural communities during times of stress, including those working in government and non-government organisations should be respectful and understanding of the stress facing farm families and rural communities, and in particular ensure they are clear and factual in their communication and do not impose or offer their own value judgements.
Recommendation 6
To alleviate the stress of future dryness, governments and non-government organisations must move away from crisis-framed responses and:
6.1  adopt more long-term sustainable approaches based on the delivery of existing human support services, focused on planning for the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and rural communities prior to periods of dryness; and 
6.2  provide incentives to support the development of individual and family wellbeing plans as part of a shift towards better preparedness for dryness. 
Recommendations

Recommendation 7
The needs of farm families and rural communities in remote and dryness affected areas should be an item for consideration by the Australian Social Inclusion Board. The specific circumstances of Indigenous populations in such communities should be considered a priority by the Board.
Recommendation 8
To effectively prepare communities for the social impacts of future dryness, governments must ensure support of community development initiatives reinforce social changes that will endure. Community development initiatives, such as community socialising events, should have clear objectives aimed at linking farm families and rural communities with various human service providers and/or facilitate clear referral pathways.
Recommendation 9
In the light of the availability of income support, non-government organisations should carefully consider whether there is a genuine need for food parcels or whether other forms of support would provide enduring benefits.
Recommendation 10
Effective and improved policies which support farm families and rural communities to live with dryness should be:
10.1  delivered by appropriately qualified and supervised individuals, organisations and service providers; 
10.2  have clear criteria and guidelines and ensure that funding provides scope for rigorous independent evaluation. 
Recommendation 11
To account for the needs of farm families, an improved policy for dryness must consider:
11.1  the changing demographics of farm families and rural communities 
11.2  impediments to farm succession to enable effective intergenerational change 
11.3  the contribution of women and youth to farming and rural communities 
Recommendation 12
The Australian Government’s Review of Taxation should consider whether existing tax laws present institutional barriers to farm succession, and whether changes could provide improved succession planning incentives for farmers.
Recommendation 13
Government policy should focus on encouraging farm families to properly assess and to access human support services.
Recommendations

Recommendation 14
Further research is needed into understanding the wellbeing of farm families facing periods of dryness.
Recommendation 15
In planning for dryness, improved human support services, must be available and responsive to the needs of farm families and rural people.
Recommendation 16
The distributors of community assistance and social services, including volunteers, should themselves have access to professional support.
Recommendation 17
The outreach mobility of human services to respond to rural people in times of stress, such as future periods of dryness, needs to be improved, with one option being an expansion of the Centrelink Rural Services Officer program.
Recommendation 18
An independent formative evaluation of the Rural Financial Counselling Service must occur as soon as practical to: assess the progress that has been made in delivering a case-management approach; identify the institutional barriers that exist, and; to determine any improvements and adjustments that may be needed.
Recommendation 19
The word “counselling” should be removed from the name of the Rural Financial Counselling Service and replaced by a more appropriate title, better fitting the service’s broader role.
Recommendation 20
Access to government drought assistance and services must be improved by making applications and referral pathways simpler.
Recommendation 21
An urgent audit should be conducted on the extent, experience and qualifications of human support services being implemented on-the-ground in rural Australia (government and non-government).
Recommendation 22
Following this audit, strategies must be developed to achieve the most appropriate distribution and allocation of resources and linkages between human service providers, including clear hierarchies to facilitate better region-specific coordination and referral pathways.
Recommendations

These strategies should also consider:
22.1  co-locating service providers where possible to form service hubs for rural centres; 
22.2  Providing specific mental health first aid training and health promotion for service providers to better identify, react and refer clients with mental health issues; 
22.3  establishing minimum standards and appropriate qualifications for human support service providers and their employees, including non-government organisations; 
22.4  ensuring funding terms for human support services are of an appropriate length to enable effective establishment, delivery and review of the services provided. 
Recommendation 23
State governments must consider the short to medium-term social and economic impacts, when dryness is a contributing factor, when assessing the viability of classes, schools and bus services.
Recommendation 24
Where school closure is the judicious option, state governments should assist rural families to access other education options for their children.
Recommendation 25
There must be more flexible training delivery methods for adult learning (using adult learning principles), including providing outreach training, for farm families and people in rural communities who find it difficult because of dryness to attend training opportunities. This could be achieved by:
25.1  vocational education and training programs aimed at assisting farm families with up-skilling or re-skilling, including recognition of prior learning, to broaden opportunities to earn off-farm income; 
25.2  funding for vocational education institutions to help farm families and people in rural communities more readily access further education opportunities. 
25.3  careful consideration of the timing and appropriateness and potential effectiveness of delivering education and training programs during times of stress, such as dryness. 
Recommendation 26
Further research is needed to better understand how reoccurring stressors such as dryness affect the education outcomes for young people.
Recommendation 27
The Australian Government’s Review of Australian Higher Education must consider the education challenges facing rural Australia and specifically examine whether the nature of farm families income and asset circumstances disadvantages farm families accessing youth allowance assistance.
Recommendations

Recommendation 28
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must develop policies and initiatives to address trade and other professional skills shortages in farm families and rural communities. These policies and initiatives must be underpinned by regional-specific research on the location, extent and impact of skill shortages.
Policy and initiatives should:
28.1  recognise that training and education of people in rural settings leads to greater retention of that skill base in rural communities; 
28.2  recognise the important role rural universities play in educating and training skilled workers for rural areas; 
28.3  promote rural-bonded scholarships as a means of addressing agriculture and rural trade and other professional skills shortages. 
Recommendation 29
A formative evaluation of the Drought Force program, as well as other employment programs, must be undertaken to better address the functioning of the labour market in the agriculture sector during periods of dryness, and to encourage people to remain in their local community.
Recommendation 30
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must promote and educate people on the rewards and risks associated with careers in agriculture and other rural industries.
Recommendation 31
There is an ongoing need to evaluate and enhance existing strategies aimed at overcoming reluctance by farm families to access health services in times of stress.
Recommendation 32
The Australian Government’s primary and secondary school mental health initiatives must be extended to schools in dryness affected communities, particularly those rural schools without existing counselling support
Recommendation 33
To improve existing response strategies, governments must support research on the extent to which dryness and access to primary healthcare in rural Australia impact on the health and wellbeing of people.
Recommendations

Recommendation 34
The current ad hoc approach of bringing in extra health resources during times of dryness should cease and instead the capacity of existing primary and allied health care services in rural communities must be sustainably built upon to enable them to respond to the health and wellbeing of the community and the impacts of future dryness. This includes improving access to affordable services.
Recommendation 35
Governments must make better efforts to engage with rural communities and the primary health-care sector, to ensure there is no continuing mismatch between needs and capacity of the remote and rural primary healthcare services and local people’s expectations of these services.
Recommendation 36
The Panel supports adopting the recommendations relating to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes outlined in the then Senate Standing Committee on Community Affairs September, 2007 report Highway to health: better access for rural, regional and remote patients and that the approval for access to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes be vested in the providing primary healthcare professional.
Recommendation 37
Existing physical and mental health services must be easily accessible and responsive to the needs of drought affected families. This could be achieved in a number of ways, including:
37.1  government assistance for mental health and emotional support services for rural communities being examined with a view to improving and the streamlining the on-ground services available, including building stronger linkages and referral capacities between support services; 
37.2  offering farm families and rural people incentives and tools to enable them to become more self-aware of their own physical and mental health needs and to focus on their ongoing wellbeing at all times; 
37.3  assisting farm families to understand that during times of dryness the risk factors in determining health are heightened and that people have clear pathways available for them to seek appropriate help, with this preferably being at an early stage; 
37.4  healthcare services in remote and rural Australia be strengthened to provide health promotion and regular health assessments that include risk factors (eg cardiovascular, stress) known to contribute loss of productivity, quality of life and premature mortality for farm families and people in rural communities; 
37.5  people who are employed in drought support roles being required to possess mental health literacy, referral and first aid skills, and; 
37.6  the professionals providing primary healthcare in rural Australia have ready access to support, upskilling, relief and professional networks to enable them to provide quality care. 
Glossary

GLOSSARY AND ACRONYMS

ABARE
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
ANZSIC
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification
BRS
Bureau of Rural Sciences
DAFF
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
EC
Exceptional Circumstances: EC events are defined as rare and severe events that are outside those that farmer could normally be expected to manage using responsible farm management strategies. To be classified as an EC event, the event: 
must be rare, that is, it must not have occurred more than once on average in every 20 to 25 years 
must result in a rare and severe downturn in farm income over a prolonged period of time (eg greater than 12 months) 
must be a discrete event that is not part of long-term structural adjustment processes or normal fluctuations in commodity prices
MP
Member of Parliament
SSP
Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
farmer
encompasses male and female farmers unless specifically stated
human support services
includes all government agencies and non-government organisations associated with the delivery of support services
peri-urban
the area immediately adjoining an urban area; between the suburbs and the countryside
rural communities
regional, rural and remote areas of Australia, excluding coastal centres with a population of more than 100 000 people
References

REFERENCES
K.Hennessy, R.Fawcett, D.Kirono, F.Mpelasoka, D.Jones, J.Bathols, P.Whetton, M.Staffors Smith, M.Howden, C.Mitchell and N.Plummer, An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on the Nature and Frequency of Exceptional Climate Events, Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2008 
Garnaut.R, Garnaut Climate Climate Change Review: Draft Report, June 2008 Available: http:// www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/pages/all-reports--resources-draft-report 
Estlake S, An Introduction to the Australian Economy, 3rd edition, January 2006, Available: http:// www.anz.com/business/info_centre/economic_commentary/EncycAmericana(2006update).pdf 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics, Australian Farm Survey Results 2005-2006 to 2007-2008,Available: www.abareconomics.com/publications.html/economy/economy.08/fsr-08.pdf 
Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Drought Support: Issues Paper, Available: http://www. pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/81880/government-drought-support-issues.pdf 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics, Australian Farm Survey Results 2005-2006 to 2007-2008,Available: www.abareconomics.com/publications.html/economy/economy.08/fsr-08.pdf 
Estlake S, An Introduction to the Australian Economy, 3rd edition, January 2006, Available: http:// www.anz.com/business/info_centre/economic_commentary/EncycAmericana(2006update).pdf 
CSIRO, Urban Australia: Where most of us live, Australian Government ,Available: http://www. cossa.csiro.au/lb/lbbook/urban/yb1.htm 
CSIRO, Urban Australia: Where most of us live, Australian Government ,Available: http://www. cossa.csiro.au/lb/lbbook/urban/yb1.htm 
Bureau of Rural Sciences, 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13896 [Accessed 6 August 2008] \
BRS 2008c 
ABS 2008 
BRS 2008c 
Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Drought Support: Issues Paper, Available: http://www. pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/81880/government-drought-support-issues.pdf 
Aslin H and Russell J, Social Impacts of Drought: Review of Literature for the Expert Social Panel, Bureau of Rural Sciences, 
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20Mental%20health.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008] 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear , Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. in the Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7) 2004. 
Bureau of Meteorology, The ‘Federation Drought’ 1895-1902, Available: http://www.bom.gov. au/lam/climate/levelthree/c20thc/drought.htm 
References

K.Hennessy, R.Fawcett, D.Kirono, F.Mpelasoka, D.Jones, J.Bathols, P.Whetton, M.Staffors Smith, M.Howden, C.Mitchell and N.Plummer, An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on the Nature and Frequency of Exceptional Climate Events, Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2008 
Crosby E, Welfare and Support Services for farm families, rural businesses and rural communities Families, Changing Families, Challenging Futures, 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 1998 
Drought Policy Review Task Force, National drought policy, final report Volume 1. Canberra, Australian Government Publishing Service 1990 
ibid 
ibid 
Wahlquist, A (2003) Media representations and public perceptions of drought. In: Botterill, LC M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing. 
Elaine Crosby, Welfare and Support Services for farm families, rural businesses and rural communities Families, paper given at Changing Families, Challenging Futures, 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 1998 
Gamble, D, S Blunden, L Kuhn-White, M Voyce & J Loftus (1995) Transfer of the family farm business in a changing rural society, RIRDC Research Paper No 95/8. 
Hodges, A. and Goesch, T. 2006, Australian Farm families, rural businesses and rural communities: Natural Resource Management in 2004-05, ABARE Research Report 06.12, prepared for the Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra, September 2006 
Australian Bureau of Statistics 4620.0 - Natural Resource Management on Australian Farm families, rural businesses and rural communities, 2006-07 
ABARE, 2000, Country Towns, Impact of farm families, rural businesses and rural communities expenditure on employment and population 
Hall, G & M Scheltens (2005) Beyond the drought: towards a broader understanding of rural disadvantage. Rural Society, 15(3): 347-58. 
NSW Department of Primary Industries, Press release, “Popular drought community events provide welcome relief to more than 117,000 families”, 4 September 2008 
Pers.com, at Alice Springs Forum to Expert Social Panel, National Review of Drought Policy, 21 July 2008 
Stehlik, D, G Lawrence & I Gray (2000) Gender and drought: experiences of Australian women in the drought of the 1990s. Disasters, 24: 38-53. 
Lynn, M (2004) The return of community to rural human services. Rural Society, 14(3): 228-44. 
Green, R & B Lonne (2005) ‘Great lifestyle, pity about the job stress’: occupational stress in rural human service practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 252-66. 
Chenoweth, L (2004) Educating practitioners for integrative rural practice. Rural Society, 14(3): 276-87. 
Alston, M & J Kent (2006) The impact of drought on secondary education access in Australia’s rural and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/4415AD4A-F3AF-40DF-9F10-00F5DE08E855/12764/Impact_Droughtreport23Jan2006.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 

References

ibid 
ibid 
ibid 
Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70. 
Aliston and Kent (2006). 
ibid 
BRS (2008b) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Education. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product. asp?prodid=13898 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
ibid 
DEEWR (2008c) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 3: Higher Education. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia. 
ibid 
BTRE (2006) Skill shortages in Australia’s regions. Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics Working Paper No. 68, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/publications/19/Files/wp68.pdf [Accessed 31 July 2008] 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product. asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
ABARE (2000) Country towns: impact of farmers’ expenditure on employment and population in Australian towns. Current Issues, 4(October): 1-6. 
BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13896 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product. asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
AIHW (1997) First report on national health priority areas, 1996: Cardiovascular health, cancer control, injury prevention and control, mental health and diabetes mellitus (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 1). Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Commonwealth Department of Health and Family Services. 
AIHW (2008b) Mental Health Services in Australia 2005-2006. Mental Health Series No. 10, Cat no. HSE 56. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 
Beyondblue National Depression Initiative (2008) Research 2001-2007: Targeted research in depression, anxiety and related disorders, February 2008. 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins. 
Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70. 
References

Alston, M & J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http:// www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47. 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins. 
Dean, J & H Stain (2007) The impact of drought on the emotional well-being of children and adolescents in rural and remote New South Wales. Journal of Rural Health, 23(4): 356-64 
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/ articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008] 
Stehlik, D (2003) Australian drought as lived experience: social and community impacts In: Fisher, & L Botterill (Eds.) Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives. Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing. 
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20 Mental%20health.pdf 
ABS (2005) Suicides, Australia, 1995-2005. Australian Bureau of Statistics (3309.0). 
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20 Mental%20health.pdf 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen. 
DoHA (2008a) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement on ‘Mental Health - increased mental health services for drought-affected communities’, Available: http://www.health. gov.au/internet/budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/ hfact19.pdf [Accessed 5 August 2008] 
Nicholls, N, CD Butler & I Hanigan (2006) Inter-annual rainfall variations and suicide in New South Wales, Australia, 1964-2001. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(3): 139-43. 
Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47. 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins. 
References

Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/ articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008] 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen 
ibid 
Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47. 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen 
Fuller, J, B Kelly, G Sartore, L Fragar, A Tonna, G Pollard & T Hazell (2007) Use of social network analysis to describe service links for farmers’ mental health. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 15: 99-106 
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/ articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008] 
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 
ibid 
Productivity Commission (2005) Australia’s Health Workforce - Research Report, 22 December 2005. Canberra. 
AIHW (2007) Rural, regional and remote health: a study on mortality - 2nd edition (AIHW cat. no. PHE 95), [Accessed 5 August 2008] 
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 
AIHW (2008c) Rural, regional and remote health: indicators of health status and determinants of health, March 2008 (Rural Health Series no. 9, Cat no. PHE 97). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 
ibid 
Bambrick, H, K Dear, R Woodruff, I Hanigan & A McMichael (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘The impacts of climate change on three health outcomes: temperature-related mortality and hospitalisations, salmonellosis and other bacterial gastroenteritis, and population at risk from Dengue’, joint submission prepared by School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney and National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National University, June 2008, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/ WebObj/03-AThreehealthoutcomes/$File/03-A%20Three%20health%20outcomes.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008] 
References

Alston, M & J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http:// www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
ibid 
Coleman R, L Fragar, C Morton & K Winter (1996) Profile of the health and safety of Australian farmers, farm families and farm workers, RIRDC Funded national Farm Injury Data Collection Project. Available: http://www.aghealth.org.au/tinymce_fm/uploaded/Research%20Reports/ profile_aus_farmers_families_workers_96.pdf [Accessed 25 August 2008] 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins. 

Tables

BRS (2008d) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Social Fabric. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product. asp?prodid=13900 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13896 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product. asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
ABS (2008a) Agriculture in focus: farming families, Australia, 2006 (Cat.No. 7104.0.55.001). Available: http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/ 7104.0.55.001Main%20Features12006?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=7104.0.55. 001&issue=2006&num=&view= [Accessed 2008a] 
Barr, N, K Karunaratne & R Wilkinson (2005) Australia’s farmers: past, present and future. Canberra, ACT: Land and Water Australia 
Bibliography

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ABARE (2000) Country towns: impact of farmers’ expenditure on employment and population in Australian towns. Current Issues, 4(October): 1-6.
ABS (1997) Mental health and wellbeing: Profile of adults, Australia. Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
ABS (2005) Suicides, Australia, 1995-2005. Australian Bureau of Statistics (3309.0).
ABS (2008a) Agriculture in focus: farming families, Australia, 2006 (Cat.No. 7104.0.55.001). Available: http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts 7104.0.55.001Main%20Features12006?o pendocumentandtabname=Summaryandprodno=7104.0.55.001andissue=2006andnum=andview= [Accessed 2008a]
ABS (2008b) Housing and services in remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Australian Social Trends, 4102.0: 1-10.
ABS (2008c) National Regional Profile (an interactive website of the Australian Bureau of Statistics), Available: http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/webpages/National+Regional+Profile [Accessed 31 July 2008]
Agricultural Council of Australia and New Zealand (1992) National Drought Policy, Resolution 1c. Meeting Number 138, Mackay, 24 July 1992.
AIHW (1997) First report on national health priority areas, 1996: Cardiovascular health, cancer control, injury prevention and control, mental health and diabetes mellitus (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 1). Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Commonwealth Department of Health and Family Services.
AIHW (2004) Rural, regional and remote health - A guide to remoteness classifications, March 2004 (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 53). Rural Health Series. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW (2007) Rural, regional and remote health: a study on mortality - 2nd edition (AIHW cat. no. PHE 95), [Accessed 5 August 2008]
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW (2008b) Mental Health Services in Australia 2005-2006. Mental Health Series No. 10, Cat no. HSE 56. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW (2008c) Rural, regional and remote health: indicators of health status and determinants of health, March 2008 (Rural Health Series no. 9, Cat no. PHE 97). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW: Begg S, V T, B B, S C, S L and L A (2007) The burden of disease and injury in Australia, 2003 - Cat. no. PHE 82. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
Alston, M (2004) Coping with crisis: human services in times of drought. Rural Society, 14(3).
Alston, M (2005) Forging a new paradigm for Australian rural social work practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 276-83.
Bibliography

Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70.
Alston, M and J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http:// www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Alston, M and J Kent (2006) The impact of drought on secondary education access in Australia’s rural and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/4415AD4A-F3AF-40DF-9F10-00F5DE08E855/12764/Impact_Droughtreport23Jan2006.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Alston, M and J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
Alston, M and K Witney-Soanes (2008) Social impacts of drought in the Murray Darling Basin. Report prepared for Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, Institute of Land, Water and Society, Wagga Wagga.
ANTA (2003) Australia’s National Strategy for Vocational Education and Training 2004-2010. Australian National Training Authority, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/98206EC7-3B9A-4A58-991F-4F28010BF825/16445/national_strategy.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
ANTA (2004) Strengthening communities and regions: ideas for action - a discussion paper. Australian National Training Authority, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/D4176A1D-4029-4854-B7DA-C3162E56DA87/12064/strengtheningcommunitiesandregionsideasforactionDR.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Ash, A, R Nelson, M Howden and S Crimp (2008) Australian agriculture adapting to climate change: balancing incremental innovation and transformational change. Outlook 2008. Canberra, ABARE.
Ashfield, J (2007) Taking care of yourself and your family: a resource book for good mental health. Peacock Publications for Beyondblue, the National Depression Initiative.
Australian Government (2008a) Australian Social Inclusion Board, 21 May 2008, Available: http://www. pmc.gov.au/social_inclusion.cfm [Accessed 30 June 2008]
Australian Government (2008b) Employment outlook for Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing, July 2008. SkillsInfo, Australian Government.
Australian Health Ministers’ Conference (2008) National Action Plan on Mental Health 2006-2011, Progress report 2006-2007, prepared under the auspices of the Mental Health Standing Committee of the Australian Health Minister’s Advisory Council and endorsed by Australian Health Ministers, February 2008. In: Governments, CoA (Ed.).
Bambrick, H, K Dear, R Woodruff, I Hanigan and A McMichael (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: The impacts of climate change on three health outcomes: temperature-related mortality and hospitalisations, salmonellosis and other bacterial gastroenteritis, and population at risk from Dengue, joint submission prepared by School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney and National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National University, June 2008, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-AThreehealthoutcomes/ $File/03-A%20Three%20health%20outcomes.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008]
Bibliography

Barr, N, K Karunaratne and R Wilkinson (2005) Australia’s farmers: past, present and future. Canberra, ACT: Land and Water Australia.
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh and T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20Mental%20health.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008]
Beyondblue National Depression Initiative (2008) Research 2001-2007: Targeted research in depression, anxiety and related disorders, February 2008.
BITRE (2008) Regional economic growth - BITRE’s taxable income database (an interactive database). Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics, Available: http://www.btre.gov.au/Info. aspx?ResourceId=617andNodeId=13 [Accessed 31 July 2008]
Black, A, J Duff, S Saggers, P Baines, A Jennings and P Bowen (2000) Rural communities and rural social issues: priorities for research. Canberra: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Botterill, L (2000) Policy approaches to farm exit: some factors influencing the efficacy of Commonwealth programs. Canberra: School of Social Sciences, Australian National University.
Botterill, L (2003a) Beyond drought in Australia: the way forward. In: Botterill, LC and M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives,. Collingwood, Victoria: CSIRO Publishing.
Botterill, L and M Fisher (Eds.) (2003) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives: CSIRO Publishing.
Botterill, LC (2001) Rural policy assumptions and policy failure: the case of the re-establishment grant. Australian Journal of Public Administration, 60(4): 9-16.
Botterill, LC (2003b) Uncertain climate: the recent history of drought policy in Australia. Australian Journal of Politics and History, 49(1): 61-74.
Botterill, LC (2004) Valuing agriculture: balancing competing objectives in the policy process. Journal of Public Policy, 24(2): 199-218.
Bowes J M and R Grace (Eds) Children, families and communities: contexts and consequences, Melbourne, Oxford University Press [in press].
BRS (2008a) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Drought. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13901 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
BRS (2008b) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Education. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13898 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
BRS (2008d) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Social Fabric. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13900 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
Bibliography

BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13896 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
BRS (n.d.) Australia’s national drought policy, Available: http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/34200/20030417-0000/www.affa.gov.au/content/output82b3.html [Accessed 28 July 2008]
BTRE (2003) Government Interventions in pursuit of regional development: learning from experience. Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics Working Paper 55, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/ publications/06/Files/wp55.pdf [Accessed 31 July 2008]
BTRE (2006) Skill shortages in Australia’s regions. Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics Working Paper No. 68, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/publications/19/Files/wp68.pdf [Accessed 31 July 2008]
Burke, T (2008a) Expert Panel to review social impacts of drought. Media release. Office of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
Burke, T (2008b) Media Release of the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Tony Burke, on the ‘Details of national review of drought policy’, June 2008, Available: http://www.maff.gov.au/media/ media_releases/june_2008/details_of_national_review_of_drought_policy_released [Accessed 29 July 2008]
Burnside, D (2007) The relationship between community vitality, viability and health, and natural resources and their management - Final Report, prepared for the National Land and Water Resources Audit, Canberra, Available: http://www.nlwra.gov.au/library/scripts/objectifyMedia.aspx?file=pdf/102/47. pdfandsiteID=9andstr_title=URS15%20-%20CVVH%20Literature%20Review%20-%20Final%20Re port%20(pdf).pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008]
Caldwell, T, A Jorm and K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen.
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
Chapman, L and J Greenville (2002) Profiling rural Australia: impact of changes in the agriculture sector on rural towns. Australian Commodities, 9(1): 234-49.
Cheers, B, R Darracott and B Lonne (2005) Domains of rural social work practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 234-50.
Cheney, H, J Willetts and E Wilson (2004) It’s more than the money: the relationship between social values and demographic change in sustaining a rural general practitioner workforce. Rural Society, 14(3): 256-74.
Chenoweth, L (2004) Educating practitioners for integrative rural practice. Rural Society, 14(3): 276-87.
Coleman R, L Fragar, C Morton and K Winter (1996) Profile of the health and safety of Australian farmers, farm families and farm workers, RIRDC Funded national Farm Injury Data Collection Project. Available: http://www.aghealth.org.au/tinymce_fm/uploaded/Research%20Reports/profile_aus_farmers_ families_workers_96.pdf [Accessed 25 August 2008]
Bibliography

Crosby, E (1998) Succession and inheritance on Australian farms. Paper presented at Changing families, challenging futures: 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 1998. Available http://www.aifs.gov.au/institute/afrc6papers/crosby2.html [Accessed 7 September 2008]
Crosby, E (1998) Welfare and support services for farm families. Paper presented at Changing families, challenging futures: 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 1998. Available http://www.aifs.gov.au/institute/afrc6papers/crosby.html [Accessed 7 September 2008]
DAFF (2008a) Background - Exceptional Circumstances [Website of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry], Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/agriculture-food/drought/ec/background [Accessed 29 July 2008]
DAFF (2008b) Information handbook - Exceptional Circumstances. Guide to the policy and assistance measures provided under Exceptional Circumstances arrangements, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, February 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_ file/0013/150322/ec-handbook.pdf [Accessed 25 July 2008]
Dean, J and H Stain (2007) The impact of drought on the emotional wellbeing of children and adolescents in rural and remote New South Wales. Journal of Rural Health, 23(4): 356-64
DEEWR (2008a) 2007-08 Drought Assistance for Schools measure funding, Available: http://www. dest.gov.au/sectors/school_education/programmes_funding/programme_categories/rural_and_ regional_assistance/das/eligible_schools_funding_amounts.htm [Accessed 14 August 2008]
DEEWR (2008b) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 2: School education. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR (2008c) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 3: Higher Education. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR (2008d) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 7: Labour Market Assistance - Individuals have access to income support and socially inclusive labour market programs which further economic development. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR (2008e) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 8: Workforce participation - Policies and strategies are developed to assist disadvantaged Australians to increase their skills and workforce participation through enhanced employment services and employer engagement. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR (2008f) Drought Assistance for Schools, Available: http://www.dest. gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/9D974659-8846-4E82-B17C-1E3FA367983B/20497/ DroughtAssistanceGuidelinesforGovernmentSchools26F.pdf [Accessed 14 August 2008]
Department of Transport and Regional Services (2005) Drought impacts beyond the farm gate: Two regional case studies. Canberra: Department of Transport and Regional Services.
Bibliography

DEST (2004) Review of the higher education equity programme (HEEP) - Department of Education, Science and Training discussion paper examining the current position of disadvantaged students, , Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/2CE01D3E-5CC4-43CE-ABA1-E7D43E446B3B/2389/ discussion.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
DETYA (1999) Equity in higher education (Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs Occasional papers series 99A), Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/occpaper/99A/ equityhe_all.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Diniz, F (2006) Inclusive education: Cross cultural perspectives. Inclusion, participation and democracy: What is the purpose? : Springer, Netherlands.
DoHA (2008a) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement on ‘Mental Health - increased mental health services for drought-affected communities’, Available: http://www.health.gov.au/ internet/budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/hfact19.pdf [Accessed 5 August 2008]
DoHA (2008b) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 11: Mental Health-Improved mental health care for all Australians, [Accessed 6 August 2008]
DoHA (2008c) Department of Health and Ageing: budget statement on ‘Mental health - increased mental health services for drought-affected communities’, Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/ budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/hfact19.pdf [Accessed 5 August 2008]
DoHA (2008d) Health topic quickview: rural health services - [A collection of rural health services-related information on the Department of Health and Ageing website], Available: http://www.health.gov.au/ internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/portal-Rural%20health%20services [Accessed 4 August 2008]
DoHA (2008e) Programs: Mental Health Services in Rural and Remote Areas program [Website of the Department of Health and Ageing], Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/ Content/mental-rural [Accessed 4 August 2008]
DoHA (2008f) Programs: Mental Health Support for Drought Affected Communities [Website of the Department of Health and Ageing], Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/ Content/mental-drought [Accessed 4 August 2008]
DoHA (2008g) Report on the Audit of Health Workforce in Rural and Regional Australia, prepared by the Department of Health and Ageing, April 2008, Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/ publishing.nsf/Content/4F3A981914316A11CA257434008189EC/$File/ruraud.pdf [Accessed 4 August 2008]
Drought Review Panel (2004) Consultations on national drought policy - preparing for the future, Available: http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/41566/20040427-0000/www.affa.gov.au/corporate_docs/ publications/pdf/innovation/drought/drought_report_complete.pdf [Accessed 25 July 2008]
Edwards, B, M Gray and B Hunter (2008) Social and economic impacts of drought on farm families and rural communities. Report prepared for Australian Institute of Family Services.
Bibliography

Employment and Skills Council - NBEET (1994) Cultivating the human factor: employment and skills in Australia’s rural industries: small business employment and skills supplementary report. This report complements and supplements the Employment and Skills Formation Council’s (ESFC) “The Shape of Things to Come”. Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/0561B1CE-D119-4B41-ACC2-6A834783B9A5/3945/94_35.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Expert Social Panel (2008) Drought policy review Expert Social Panel: assessment of the social impacts of drought and related government and non-government social support services - Issues paper, June 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/710644/social_panels_isues_ paper.pdf [Accessed 2 July 2008]
Feldman, DL (2008) Barriers to adaptive management: lessons from the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint Compact. Society and Natural Resources, 21: 512-25.
Fincher, R (1999) New geographies of disadvantage: implications for service delivery. Australian Journal of Public Administration, 58(3): 55-60.
Foskey, R (2005) Older farmers and retirement. Canberra, ACT: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Fuller, J, B Kelly, G Sartore, L Fragar, A Tonna, G Pollard and T Hazell (2007) Use of social network analysis to describe service links for farmers’ mental health. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 15: 99-106.
Funnell, B (2004) On being bold and brave when neither comes naturally. CRUcial Times. Brisbane: Community Resource Unit, Disability Services.
Gamble, D, S Blunden, L Kuhn-White, M Voyce and J Loftus (1995) Transfer of the family farm business in a changing rural society, RIRDC Research Paper No 95/8.
Garlick, S (2000) Engaging universities and regions: knowledge contribution to regional economic development in Australia, A report prepared for the Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/eippubs/eip00_15/00_15.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Government of Ireland (2007) National Action Plan for Social Inclusion 2007-2016, Available: http://www. socialinclusion.ie/documents/NAPinclusionReportPDF.pdf [Accessed 12 June 2008]
Green, R and R Gregory (2004) Rural and remote social welfare practice: differences and similarities in the Australian context. Rural Society, 14(3): 245-55.
Green, R and B Lonne (2005) ‘Great lifestyle, pity about the job stress’: occupational stress in rural human service practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 252-66.
Hall, G and M Scheltens (2005) Beyond the drought: towards a broader understanding of rural disadvantage. Rural Society, 15(3): 347-58.
Higgins, V (2001) Calculating climate: ‘advanced liberalism’ and the governing of risk in Australian drought policy. Journal of Sociology, 37(3): 299-316.
Higgins, V and S Lockie (2001) Getting big and getting out: government policy, self-reliance and farm adjustment. In: Lockie, S and L Bourke (Eds.) Rurality bites: the social and environmental transformation of rural Australia. Sydney: Pluto Press.
Bibliography

Hogan, A, M Hanslip, R Kancans and B Maguire (2008a) Climate risk and adaptation among primary producers: topline results focusing on primary producers reporting the effects of adverse seasonal conditions. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Hogan, A, B Maguire and P Stakelum (2008b) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: a comparative analysis of farmers and people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas and the Australian population using the Personal Wellbeing Index. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Hogan, A, C Polidano and P Stakelum (2008c) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: an analysis of the household, income and labour dynamics in Australia (HILDA) study. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Holmes, J (2006) Impulses towards a multifunctional transition in rural Australia: gaps in the research agenda. Journal of Rural Studies, 22: 142-60.
IPCC (2007) Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
James, R, J Wyn, G Baldwin, G Hepworth and and others (1999) Rural and isolated school students and their higher education choices: a re-examination of student location, socioeconomic background, and educational advantage and disadvantage, Report no. 62 prepared for the Higher Education Council, National Board of Employment, Education and Training, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/ rdonlyres/140EAEEA-EF88-4A12-A5BB-5973E7AA7751/3959/99_11.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Jones, RG (2001) Identifying higher education students from low socio-economic status backgrounds and regional and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/eippubs/eip02_4/ index.htm [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Lindblom, CE (1959) The science of ‘muddling through’. Public Administration Review, 19: 79-82.
Lynn, M (2004) The return of community to rural human services. Rural Society, 14(3): 228-44.
Maguire, B and S Cartwright (2008) Assessing a community’s capacity to manage change: a resilience approach to social assessment. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
McLennan, J and Birch, A 2005, Recruiting and Retaining Australia’s Volunteer Firefighters, Bushfire CRC, La Trobe University.
McMichael, A, R Woodruff, P Whetton, K Hennessy, N Nicholls, S Hales, A Woodward and T Kjellstrom (2003) Human health and climate change in Oceania: A risk assessment, 2002. Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts.
Mlcek, S (2005) Paucity management addresses the limit - situations of human services delivery in rural Australia. Rural Society, 15(3): 297-311.
Nelson, R, PR Brown, T Darbas, P Kokic and K Cody (2007) The potential to map the adaptive capacity of Australian land managers for NRM policy using ABS data. Canberra: CSIRO, Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics, prepared for the National Land and Water Resources Audit.
Nelson, R, P Kokic, L Elliston and J King (2005) Structural adjustment: a vulnerability index for Australian broadacre agriculture. Australian Commodities, 12(1): 171-9.
NFF (2008a) 2008 Labour Shortage Action Plan, National Farmers’ Federation, March 2008.
Bibliography

NFF (2008b) Annual Review, 2007-2008. Barton: National Farmers Federation
Nicholls, N, CD Butler and I Hanigan (2006) Inter-annual rainfall variations and suicide in New South Wales, Australia, 1964-2001. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(3): 139-43.
NSW Department of Health (2008) NSW Drought Mental Health Assistance Package, February 2008, Available: http://www.health.nsw.gov.au/pubs/2008/pdf/drought_package.pdf [Accessed 5 August 2008]
Paton, S and C Cuckson (2004) Meeting the needs of rural families in times of crisis. Rural Society, 14(3): 288-99.
PIMC (2008) Communique of the Primary Industries Ministerial Council - Meeting held in Melbourne, 17 April 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/625624/pimc-13.pdf [Accessed 25 July 2008]
PMSEIC Independent Working Group (2007) Climate change in Australia: regional impacts and adaptation - managing the risk for Australia, Report prepared for the Prime Minister’s Science, Engineering and Innovation Council, June 2007, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/CE5D024E-8F58-499F-9EEB-D2D638E7A345/17397/ClimateChangeinAustraliareport.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
Posselt, H (2000) Socio-economic disadvantage across urban, rural and remote areas. In: Australian Population Association 10th Biennial Conference. Melbourne.
Pretty, G, B Bishop, A Fisher and C Sonn (2006) Psychological sense of community and its relevance to wellbeing and everyday life in Australia. Melbourne: The Australian Psychological Society Ltd.
Productivity Commission (2005) Australia’s Health Workforce - Research Report, 22 December 2005. Canberra.
Productivity Commission (2008) Inquiry into government drought support. Productivity Commission Issues Paper. Canberra: Productivity Commission.
Rodriguez, VB, M Watson and C Mues (2006) National Farmer Survey 2006. A report by the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics to the Rural Policy and Innovation Division of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Oct 2006, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__ data/assets/pdf_file/0003/186942/national_farmer_survey_2006.pdf [Accessed 30 July 2008]
Sartore, G, B Hoolahan, A Tonna, B Kelly and H Stain (2005) Wisdom from the drought: recommendations from a consultative conference. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 13(5): 315-20.
Sartore, G, B Kelly and H Stain (2007) Drought and its effect on mental health. Australian Family Physician, 36(12): 990-3.
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/articles/subviewaust. asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
Senate Standing Committee on Rural and Regional Affairs (1992) A national drought policy: appropriate government responses to the recommendations of the Drought Policy Review Task Force - final report. Canberra: Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Bibliography

Slootweg, R, F Vanclay and M van Schooten (2001) Function evaluation as a framework for the integration of social and environmental impact assessment. Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal, 19(1): 19-28.
Spanswick, S, G Roth, T Drew and P Jones (2007) The impact of drought on small business - a pilot study on Wee Waa (summary only). Cotton Catchment Communities CRC.
Stafford Smith, M (2003) Linking environments, decision-making and policy in handling climatic variability. In: Botterill, LC and M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing.
Steffen, W, J Sims and J Walcott (2006) Farming profitably in a changing climate: a risk-management approach. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Stehlik, D (2003) Australian drought as lived experience: social and community impacts In: Fisher, M and L Botterill (Eds.) Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives. Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing.
Stehlik, D (2004) Guest editorial: towards a 21st century form of practice in rural communities. Rural Society, 14(3): 208-9.
Stehlik, D, I Gray and G Lawrence (1999) Drought in the 1990s: Australian farm families’ experiences. Canberra: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Stehlik, D, G Lawrence and I Gray (2000) Gender and drought: experiences of Australian women in the drought of the 1990s. Disasters, 24: 38-53.
Stewart, J (2006) Value conflict and policy change. Review of Policy Research, 23(1): 183-95.
Thacher, D and M Rein (2004) Managing value conflict in public policy. Governance: an International Journal of Policy, Administration, and Institutions, 17(4): 457-86.
The Australian Centre for Agricultural Health and Safety (2007) Managing the Pressures of Farming Manual, Fourth Edition.
Tichagwa, W (1994) The effects of drought on the condition of women. Focus on Gender, 2(1): 20-5.
Tonts, M and A Black (2002) Changing farm business structures and the sustainability of rural communities and regions: issues for research. Sustaining Regions, 1(2): 17-23.
Truss, W (2000) Agriculture - Advancing Australia, Statement by the Honourable Warren Truss MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 9 May 2000, [Accessed 28 July 2008]
Vanclay, F (2002) Conceptualising social impacts. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 22: 183-211.
Wahlquist, A (2003) Media representations and public perceptions of drought. In: Botterill, LC and M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing.
Walker, B and D Salt (2006) Resilience thinking: sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing world, Washington D.C.: Island Press.
Watson, AS (2000) Australian agriculture: persistent myths and current realities and/or current myths and persistent realities. In: Australian values - rural policies. Organised by the Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation, Synapse Consulting and the University of Queensland. Canberra, ACT.
Webb, T, J Cary and P Geldens (2002) Leaving the land: a study of Western Division grazing families in transition. Canberra, ACT: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Bibliography

Western, J, R McCrea and R Stimson (2007) Quality of life and social inclusion. International Review of Sociology, 17(3): 525-37.
Western Research Institute (2006) The impact of the current drought on the Bourke economy and community. Prepared for the Department of Transport and Regional Services. Bathurst: Charles Sturt University.
White, D and B O’Meagher (1995) Coping with exceptional droughts in Australia. Drought Network News, (June, 1995).
Wilson, L (2006) Developing a Model for the Measurement of Social Inclusion and Social Capital in Regional Australia. Journal Social Indicators Research, 75(3): 335-60.

 
 BTRE (2006) Skill shortages in Australia’s regions. Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics Working Paper No. 68, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/publications/19/Files/wp68.pdf [Accessed 31 July 2008]
 BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product. asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
 ABARE (2000) Country towns: impact of farmers’ expenditure on employment and population in Australian towns. Current Issues, 4(October): 1-6.
 BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13896 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
 BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Australian Government, Available: http://affashop.gov.au/product.asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
 AIHW (1997) First report on national health priority areas, 1996: Cardiovascular health, cancer control, injury prevention and control, mental health and diabetes mellitus (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 1). Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, Commonwealth Department of Health and Family Services.
 AIHW (2008b) Mental Health Services in Australia 2005-2006. Mental Health Series No. 10, Cat no. HSE 56. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
 Beyondblue National Depression Initiative (2008) Research 2001-2007: Targeted research in depression, anxiety and related disorders, February 2008.
 Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
 Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70.
 Alston, M & J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http://www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
 Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
 Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
 Dean, J & H Stain (2007) The impact of drought on the emotional well-being of children and adolescents in rural and remote New South Wales. Journal of Rural Health, 23(4): 356-64
 Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
 Stehlik, D (2003) Australian drought as lived experience: social and community impacts In: Fisher, M & L Botterill (Eds.) Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives. Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing.
 Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20Mental%20health.pdf
 ABS (2005) Suicides, Australia, 1995-2005. Australian Bureau of Statistics (3309.0).
 Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20Mental%20health.pdf
 Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen.
 DoHA (2008a) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement on ‘Mental Health - increased mental health services for drought-affected communities’, Available:  http://www.health.gov.au/internet/budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/hfact19.pdf [Accessed 5 August 2008]
 Nicholls, N, CD Butler & I Hanigan (2006) Inter-annual rainfall variations and suicide in New South Wales, Australia, 1964-2001. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(3): 139-43.
 Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
 Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
 Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
 Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
 Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
 ibid
 Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
 Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
 Fuller, J, B Kelly, G Sartore, L Fragar, A Tonna, G Pollard & T Hazell (2007) Use of social network analysis to describe service links for farmers’ mental health. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 15: 99-106
 Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
 AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
 ibid
 Productivity Commission (2005) Australia’s Health Workforce - Research Report, 22 December 2005. Canberra.
 AIHW (2007) Rural, regional and remote health: a study on mortality - 2nd edition (AIHW cat. no. PHE 95), [Accessed 5 August 2008]
 AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
 AIHW (2008c) Rural, regional and remote health: indicators of health status and determinants of health, March 2008 (Rural Health Series no. 9, Cat no. PHE 97). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
 AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
 ibid
 Bambrick, H, K Dear, R Woodruff, I Hanigan & A McMichael (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘The impacts of climate change on three health outcomes: temperaturerelated mortality and hospitalisations, salmonellosis and other bacterial gastroenteritis, and population at risk from Dengue’, joint submission prepared by School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney and National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National University, June 2008, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-AThreehealthoutcomes/$File/03-A%20Three%20health%20outcomes.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008]
 Alston, M & J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http://www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008]
 ibid
 Coleman R, L Fragar, C Morton & K Winter (1996) Profile of the health and safety of Australian farmers, farm families and farm workers, RIRDC Funded national Farm Injury Data Collection Project. Available: http://www.aghealth.org.au/tinymce_fm/uploaded/Research%20Reports/profile_aus_farmers_families_workers_96.pdf [Accessed 25 August 2008]
 Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
 Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.