Climate change impacts all aspects of our society, including agricultural, forestry and fisheries production.

Australia is already experiencing changes in rainfall, temperature and extreme weather. These changes are impacting productivity, water availability, soil and the spread of pests, weeds and disease.

The first National Climate Risk Assessment provides a comprehensive overview of nationally significant climate risks and impacts. The assessment identifies that risks to food and fibre production will continue to increase. We must adapt to limit climate impacts. The actions we take will be guided by the National Adaptation Plan.

Australia is also acting to reduce emissions and limit the worst impacts of climate change.

The agriculture sector has an important role to play in Australia’s national emissions reduction effort.

Our producers are already leading the world in low-emissions food and fibre production. Further investments in productivity and sustainability will help ensure we can maintain this position in the global transition to lower emissions.

The Agriculture and Land Sector Plan

Government developed the plan with the help of industry, governments, researchers, communities and the private sector.

The National Statement on Climate Change and Agriculture

The National Statement on Climate Change and Agriculture is a joint initiative of Commonwealth and state and territory governments. It outlines a shared vision for a climate-smart agriculture sector. The statement showcases the work already underway across industry to use climate-smart practices.

Our role

We deliver a range of programs to support the agriculture and land sectors to reduce their emissions while achieving other strategic objectives. This includes $44.8 million to:

- improve greenhouse gas accounting

- accelerate on-ground action

- contribute to research on emissions reduction solutions.

We are developing a National Bioenergy Feedstock Strategy to support opportunities for agriculture and forestry producers to grow feedstocks for domestic bioenergy industries. Bioenergy will help to decarbonise hard-to-electrify energy demands.

The department has developed a resource to help farmers understand Australia’s new climate-related financial disclosures regime. It notes that the vast majority of Australian farmers will not have any direct legal obligations under the climate-related financial disclosure rules.

Read more about climate-related financial disclosures and what it means for farm businesses.

We are also supporting the agriculture sector to adapt to climate change and build resilience.

We engage in international forums related to climate change and agriculture, fisheries and forestry. This includes the United National Framework Convention on Climate Change.

The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences undertakes research projects on the impacts of climate change and related policy for agriculture.

Other agencies

Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW)

DCCEEW is responsible for whole of economy emissions reduction strategies and policies.

This includes Australian Carbon Credit Unit (ACCU) Scheme policy. The ACCU Scheme provides opportunities for farmers and land managers to participate in emissions reduction projects and generate additional income streams.

DCCEEW also publishes reports and databases tracking Australia’s emissions by sector.

Clean Energy Regulator

The Clean Energy Regulator administers the ACCU Scheme.

Clean Energy Finance Corporation

Australian Renewable Energy Agency

The Australian Renewable Energy Agency support innovation in renewable energy and low emissions technologies. Investments include bioenergy, solar, electric vehicle and soil carbon projects.

National Reconstruction Fund Corporation

Regional Investment Corporation

Concessional loans are available through the Regional Investment Corporation including to help prepare for, manage through and recover from significant financial disruption due to events outside a farm business’s control, such as drought and natural disasters.

Treasury

The Treasury leads policy development for climate-related financial disclosures and engages closely with the financial regulators and standard-setters on implementation.

Australian Securities and Investments Commission

The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) administers the mandatory sustainability reporting obligations. ASIC has published a regulatory guide alongside a host of information on sustainability reporting requirements. This may help businesses that are seeking further information about the new requirements.