Horticulture is Australia’s third largest agricultural industry. It includes fruit, vegetables, nuts, flowers, turf and nursery products. Australian produce is high-quality.

The industry is very competitive, both in Australia and overseas. It also has labour and seasonal challenges.

We give advice to help farmers be competitive and innovative. We also help manage supply chains and biosecurity.

The industry

Most growers are small-scale family farms. The number of medium to large farms is growing. Industry is changing to face new challenges. Competition has increased due to imported produce. Produce prices and climate conditions are also changing.

To stay successful, industry tries new production methods. It also works to manage natural resources. Australia continues to grow high-quality products that match buyers' tastes.

Growing areas

Most of Australian produce is grown in:

- Goulburn Valley VIC

- Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area NSW

- Sunraysia VIC and NSW

- Riverland SA

- Northern TAS

- Southwest WA

- Coastal northern NSW and QLD.

Performance

Hort Innovation produces the annual Australian Horticulture Statistics Handbook, offering comprehensive and up-to-date data on more than 75 horticultural products, including fruit, nuts, vegetables, nursery, turf and cut flowers.

The full 2021-22 Handbook (PDF and online tool) is available on the Hort Innovation website.

Find out more about horticulture performance in the Agricultural outlook.

Investment and industry bodies

Hort Innovation is the grower-owned, not-for-profit Research and Development Corporation for Australia's horticulture industry. Their primary function is creating value for horticulture growers and those across the horticulture supply chain.

Under law, levies collected from growers are invested by Hort Innovation. Hort Innovation works with industry to choose investments. Investments help growers to be more productive, competitive, profitable and sustainable. The government matches contributions to research and development investments.

Find out more about Hort Innovation.

Find out more about Australia’s Rural Research and Development Corporations.

There are many industry bodies that support Australian farmers. They speak for growers on matters like regulation, marketing, research and development.

Horticulture funding

The Horticultural Netting Program helps growers to buy and install protective netting.

Find out more about the Horticultural Netting Program.