i
It’s about people: 
Changing perspectives 
on dryness
A Report to Government by an Expert Social Panel

ii    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
© Commonwealth of Australia 2008
Selected passages, tables or diagrams may be reproduced provided 
acknowledgment of the source is included.
Drought Policy Review Expert Social Panel 2008, It’s About People: Changing 
Perspective. A Report to Government by an Expert Social Panel on Dryness, 
Report to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra, 
September.
 ISBN 978-0-9803714-7-5      
Secretariat
Drought Policy Review Expert Social Panel
GPO Box 858
Canberra  ACT  2601
The activities of the Drought Policy Review Expert Social Panel, including the 
provision of a Secretariat and the publishing of this report, were supported by 

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      iii 
The Hon. Tony Burke MP
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Parliament House
Canberra Act 2600
Dear Minister 
On behalf of the Expert Social Panel, I present to you a report on the social impacts of drought on 
Australian farm families, rural businesses and communities. The report is based on a combination of 
independent research and the personal experience of Australians. 
The Panel’s process of visiting rural Australia was both a positive and valuable experience and was 
The Panel heard from more than 1000 people at its 25 public forums, held nine major centre meetings 
with key stakeholders and received more than 230 written submissions.
The Panel was welcomed into communities and members were often overwhelmed by the generosity 
and honesty of people who were willing to share their sometimes painful experiences. The public 
forums gave the Panel a first-hand account of the experiences of farmers, small business operators, 
social support providers and community members who have been living with dryness over recent 
years.
The Panel’s report is written in direct terms and is sometimes critical of existing government policies 
and non-government services. We believe the report takes a fresh and comprehensive look at the 
ongoing challenges facing farm families, rural businesses and communities in living with drought and 
puts forward practical recommendations for a strong, healthy, vibrant and sustainable rural Australia. 
The Panel appreciates the opportunity to undertake this important assessment of the social impacts 
of drought and trusts the information contained in this report will make a vital and lasting contribution 
to an improved national drought policy.
Yours sincerely
Peter Kenny
Chairman

iv    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Contents
Executive summary  
1
Contextual overview 
5
Observations on values, attitudes and policy  
9
Planning for future dryness  
16
Community  
21
Families  
30
Human support services  
35
Education and training  
43
Human capital 
54
Health and wellbeing 
58 
Recommendations 
67
Glossary and acronyms 
73
References 
74
Bibliography 
80
Appendices 
1  
Acknowledgements 
91 
2 
Terms of reference 
92
3  
The Panel 
95
4  
Background and assessment process 
97
Contents

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      v 
Contents
5 
Forum venues 
99
6 
List of individuals and organisations consulted 
by the Panel and Panel Chair 
101
7 
List of submissions 
103
8 
List of advertisements for forums and invitations 
for submissions 
108
9  
Climate Risk and Adaptation Among Primary Producers: 
Topline results focusing on primary producers reporting 
the effects of adverse seasonal conditions – a report 
prepared for the Panel by the Bureau of Rural Sciences 109
10 
The Social Wellbeing of Rural Australians: 
An analysis of the household, income and labour 
dynamics in Australia – a report prepared for the 
Panel by the Bureau of Rural Sciences 
127
11 
The Social Wellbeing of Rural Australians: 
A comparative analysis of farmers and people 
working in agriculture in drought-affected areas 
and the Australian population using the 
Personal Wellbeing Index - a report prepared for 
the Panel by the Bureau of Rural Sciences 
144

1    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
1 It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Executive summary
Executive summary
There needs to be a new national approach to living with dryness, as we prefer to call it, rather than 
dealing with drought. Governments should focus future policy on facilitating the social wellbeing of farm 
families, rural businesses and communities to improve their capacity to live with dryness. Better social 
outcomes are most likely to give better economic and environmental outcomes. The new approach 
reaffirms the fact that Australia will face periods of prolonged dryness in the future and acknowledges 
that dryness has an adverse impact on the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities.
This is the first assessment to exclusively examine the social impacts of dryness in a review of 
government drought policy. The Panel believes people should be the priority (and not the farm 
property or the respective industry), and propose future policy be about people: changing 
perspectives on dryness.
Importantly, individuals and families want to live in rural Australia and contribute to the nation. These 
people are full of hope and their determination and initiative must be supported. If governments agree 
that the social wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities should be a core element 
of future policy for rural Australia, then there should be an urgent statement of commitment, on 
behalf of the whole nation, to a strong, healthy, vibrant and sustainable rural Australia.
The Panel is deeply concerned by the extent of distress in drought-affected communities in rural 
Australia. Too many farm decisions are made under stress and without adequate consideration of 
the needs of the family and in the absence of prior thought and planning. Family and business are 
intricately linked for the majority of farm families, but decision-making mostly occurs in separation 
and often at the expense of each other. 
At times the Panel found it difficult to separate the social impacts of dryness from the longer term 
socio-demographic trends contributing to a decline of some rural populations. However, it was 
clear from the Panel’s assessment that drought has an impact on the wellbeing of farm families, rural 
businesses and communities. Much of the existing responses attempting to deal with dryness are 
wearing away at the social fabric and capital of rural Australia and threatening the future viability of 
some rural communities. It is also clear the existing impacts of underlying structural change in rural 
communities are more acutely felt during times of stress brought on by dryness.
The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO are predicting there is an increased risk of severe drought over 
the next 20 to 30 years compared to the past 100 years, particularly over southern Australia; and that 
this increased drought risk will be exacerbated by increasing temperatures. If these predictions are 
correct, then farm families, rural businesses and communities need to be better prepared. The Panel 
consider there is a role for governments in helping farm families, rural businesses and communities 
to realistically expect seasonal variation and therefore plan for the intense risks and rewards that are 
associated with, and flow on from, primary production.

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      2 
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness 2
Executive summary
For all the assistance provided, farm families, rural businesses and communities currently living with 
dryness in rural Australia do not feel or perceive they are measurably better off. To date, the support 
for farm families, rural businesses and communities in times of dryness has been implemented within 
a crisis-framed response. As a consequence, a ‘drought industry’ of services (as coined by one farmer) 
has emerged which sometimes duplicates and results in confusion for those being assisted.
The Panel recognises the significant contributions of farm families, rural businesses and communities 
understand the social impacts associated with dryness it has begun a dialogue which must continue 
beyond this report.
The Panel identified the social impacts of dryness on farm families, rural business and communities by:
• reviewing existing literature; commissioning independent research and surveys;
• holding 25 public consultation forums across rural Australia, attracting more than 1000 
participants;
• meeting with federal, state and territory governments and non-government organisations, and;
• receiving more than 230 written submissions.
The positive response to the consultation process is a significant indication of the importance in which 
people hold these issues.
This report has been structured around the following themes:
• observations on values, attitudes and policy;
• planning for future dryness;
• community;
• families, and;
• delivering human support services (including education and training; human capital; health and 
wellbeing).
The Panel has made some observations on values, attitudes and policy, noting that existing 
policy responses to dryness are not working in all cases. Exceptional Circumstances (EC) policy 
arrangements were the subject of either strong support or dissatisfaction, depending on eligibility 
or for a range of other reasons. While those who receive assistance say it is keeping them on the farm, 
EC policy has created feelings of division and resentment. Stress is undoubtedly being caused by the 
existing declaration process, in the implementation of different approaches between and across state 
jurisdictions, in meeting complex criteria, and in completing complex paperwork. The Panel considers

3    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
future policy should seek to move people towards an acceptance that future dryness will occur and 
is not a crisis, and that planning for dryness should be about personal, family, farm and community 
wellbeing.
The challenge is to design policy to address the social wellbeing needs of farm families, rural 
businesses and communities in ways which do not inhibit the efficiency of agricultural industries. The 
intimate connection between the farm as a place of work, as a residence and as part of family tradition 
has important implications when considering the effectiveness of institutional support in responding 
to farm families experiencing adjustment stress.
In Changing Perspectives on Dryness, the Panel provides an overview of its preferred policy approach. 
Rather than providing crisis-framed assistance in times of difficulty, government policy should be 
focused on early intervention to counteract the worst effects of dryness and to provide incentives 
in better times which encourage commercially and environmentally responsible management under 
variable seasonal conditions. Future policy should be focused on the investment in, and the planning 
for, the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities and this needs to occur prior to 
periods of dryness.
In the Community section, the agriculture sectors are identified as remaining important to many rural 
and regional towns. When family farms are struggling with events such as dryness, the communities in 
which people normally spend their money and participate also suffer. Dryness negatively impacts on 
the ability of members of a rural community to work together for the benefit of the whole community, 
eroding the capacity of people to engage in community projects or do the voluntary work that 
keeps rural communities alive. In some places there appears to be a wide range of non-government 
organisations, volunteers, welfare agencies, community and church-based organisations seeking 
to help drought affected families. This help can come through distributing food parcels, clothing, 
pamper packs, and helping with the payment of household bills. This intervention typifies a short-
term crisis-framed response, and is not a model that should be employed during periods of prolonged 
dryness. There are also a variety of community development initiatives being held, such as community 
socialising events. These events should be supported by government only where they link rural 
communities to various human service providers and/or facilitate clear referral pathways. Overall, 
however, they also fall within a crisis-framed response and fail in the long term to address people’s 
ongoing needs. 
The Panel found that dryness impacts on how farm families function through separation and 
isolation; increased burdens of responsibility, belt-tightening and contribution of further labour to the 
farm, particularly by women and children. Issues surrounding succession planning cause great stress 
during times of dryness because of reduced cash flows and unmet expectations. While many male 
farmers say they are coping, they may not recognise or understand some of their coping mechanisms 
are placing great pressure on their families. While arguably tolerable for short periods, this has the 
potential to erode the composition of families and the development of children.
The Panel observed that some areas appeared to lack drought-specific or focused human support 
services, while other areas appeared to have too many. The Panel believes the current response 
by governments to fund a variety of providers and individuals, as well as a considerable presence 
from non-government charity and church organisations, has created a ‘drought industry’. At a 
Executive summary

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      4 
fundamental level it appears that government funded, drought-specific or focused human support 
services for defined periods of time has created an extra layer of services. This extra layer often has 
limited coordination or is not linked to existing professional networks or referral pathways. Human 
support services can perform a vital role in the long-term sustainability of rural communities to what 
are fundamentally ongoing problems. However, governments and non-government organisations 
must move away from crisis-framed responses to dryness and adopt more long-term sustainable 
approaches to the delivery of existing human support services in rural communities. A longer-term 
approach would allow human support services to focus on early intervention and the ongoing 
wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities. 
Dryness reportedly affected people’s participation and ability to access education and training. The 
Panel heard that some children and young adults are being denied educational and extracurricular 
opportunities because of household financial limitations resulting from the dryness. Many schools are 
reporting a significant drop in student numbers and where these drop below critical mass, the schools 
and the social services they support, are lost from the community. Tertiary enrolments in agriculture 
related courses have fallen and there has been a loss of young people to the industry. There is a view 
that guidelines for government assistance contain barriers to rural youth accessing tertiary education. 
The Panel heard of the difficulty farmers experience in having their existing skills recognised and in 
accessing training. To assist farm families plan for dryness, education and training must be available in 
rural areas and these must be based on sound adult learning principles.
Dryness has meant farm businesses have cut costs, usually through the laying off labour and by 
spending less in the community, significantly affecting human capital. This has a flow-on effect on 
local businesses and services. It was often reported that within the labour market, particularly younger 
people are moving away to pursue other employment opportunities outside of agriculture because of 
dryness. There appears to be an increase, influenced by dryness, in secondary farm household income 
streams. This often involves someone physically spending time away from the property. These types of 
arrangements need to be acknowledged by farmers and policy-makers as successes, and not deemed 
to be failures. Some farm families and financial planners are factoring into their business planning 
ongoing government support, rather than looking for ways to enable families to become independent. 
People reported that dryness has a significant impact on individuals and families and others within 
rural communities in respect to health and wellbeing. Many people expressed concern about the 
impact felt by school children from drought-affected families. The Panel heard that while there has 
been a lot of support for men, support for women is less available. Currently there appears to be an 
ad hoc and expensive approach of bringing in extra mental health resources during times of dryness, 
which is not as successful as expected. The Panel believes there needs to be greater investment in the 
capacity of existing primary and allied health care services in rural communities to enable them to be 
responsive to the physical and mental health impacts of future dryness. Governments must be more 
effective in encouraging people in rural communities to self-identify their health needs and to be able 
to seek appropriate support at an early stage.
Details of the Panel’s terms of reference and assessment process are outlined in appendices. 
Executive summary

5    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Contextual overview 
Contextual overview
Australia is a dry continent1 ; rainfall therefore, is not a measure of our dryness, but simply a measure of 
our variation. The Panel heard where 3 millimetres of rainfall in seven months was exceptionally dry in 
one region at the same time that 200 millimetres in another region was exceptionally dry – and so the 
variation is large but the impact, particularly on the farm manager, is similar.
The Australian agriculture sector is always in the midst of adjustment2. This has brought with it the 
social and economic stresses normally associated with change. Compounding this, the existing 
period of dryness is causing widespread distress which has reduced the ability of rural families and 
communities to cope. It is therefore not surprising that issues which have little to do with drought are 
being associated in the minds of many rural Australians.
Rural and remote Australia is experiencing some overarching socio-demographic trends which have 
implications for a wide range of aspects of rural society, including the impacts of dryness. 
Agriculture has been a major contributor to Australia’s economic development since European 
settlement but there have been significant changes in rural Australia in the last century. At the end of 
the 19th century, farming, forestry and fishing accounted for 20 per cent of Australia’s gross domestic 
product. Agriculture and mining combined provided 95 per cent of Australia’s exports and jobs for 
about 30 per cent of Australia’s workforce3. By the end of the 20th century, agriculture and mining 
accounted for just 7.5 per cent of Australia’s total output, 6 per cent of its workforce (around 308 000 
jobs4 ) and 42 per cent of its exports. 
While the agricultural share of Australia’s GDP has fallen significantly - from around 14 per cent in 
the early 1960s to 2 per cent now - agricultural output has increased two and a half times, with many 
sectors experiencing strong productivity improvements5. In fact, productivity growth within the 
agricultural sector, while showing high variability over the past three decades, has continued on an 
upward trend6. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics figures show a decline in farm numbers and an increase in average farm 
size. The number of farms declined from a peak of more than 200 000 in the mid-1950s to slightly 
more than 110 000 in 2000. Over the same period the average farm size rose from approximately 
2000 hectares to nearly 4000 hectares7. 
The major factor in these changes is the external environment in which Australian agriculture is 
required to operate. Domestic markets have always been small, requiring Australian agriculture to 
be more dependent on exports and maintaining a competitive edge than many other countries. 
Agriculture provides around one-fifth of Australia’s export income.

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      6 
Contextual overview
National economic growth has been associated with a long-term decline in agriculture’s terms of 
trade. Coupled with improvements in the productivity of purchased inputs, this has meant a changing 
economic environment for farm families, rural businesses and communities. These changes have led 
to an adjustment of resources out of agriculture and the restructuring of existing farms to capture 
economies of size and to increase the real income flows.
To cope with all these circumstances, Australian farmers have made extensive use of advances in 
agricultural science and technology to become among the most efficient and least dependent on 
government support of any in the world. Government subsidies to primary producers accounted for 
only 4 per cent of Australian farmers’ income in 2001.
Global economic forces are another important stimulus to change in agriculture. Actions of overseas 
governments to protect or isolate their economies from international events and the increased 
volatility of residual free markets in agricultural products, coupled with high production risk in 
agriculture, give rise to intense fluctuations in the global demand for agricultural products. 
These forces are likely to continue with the rural sector likely to come under increasing adjustment 
pressures in the coming decades as a result of climate change and structural changes in the Australian 
and international economies. These changes will require continued focus by farmers and policy-
makers to maintain the competitiveness of agriculture. 
Australia as a whole has undergone a dramatic transformation from a rural society to an urban society. 
A little over a century ago more than 60 per cent of the nation were rural dwellers and lived outside 
towns8.
By 2006 the total population of Australia was 19.9 million persons. More than half of the Australian 
population lived in major urban centres and cities with populations greater than 1 million people. Only 7 per 
cent lived in other large urban centres with populations between 25 000 and 1 million and a further 5 per 
cent lived in urban centres with populations between 100 000 and 250 000. Thirty-three per cent of the 
population lived in regional centres of up to 100 000 (22 per cent), small towns (2 per cent), and rural areas 
(9 per cent).
The population of Australia increased by 6.8 per cent in the five years to 2006. The rate of increase 
was unevenly distributed around Australia, with major urban areas and regional centres experiencing 
the strongest increases between 2001 and 2006 (8.2 per cent and 5.7 per cent, respectively). The 
populations of small towns also increased (3.1 per cent), however rural areas experienced a population 
decrease of 0.9 per cent. In 2007, only 31.5 per cent of Australia’s population did not live in a major city 
and 12 per cent lived in rural areas and small towns of less than 10009.

7    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The average age of the Australian population is increasing, with the number of people in older age 
groups increasing much faster than the number in younger age groups10. Illustrating this trend is the 
fact that young people and young families in particular, are moving from small towns and rural areas to 
larger urban areas and cities for better access to education and employment prospects. The average 
age of farmers in 2006 was 52 years11. Mature age people in rural areas continue to work well into their 
60s at a rate 10 per cent higher than the rest of the country. Together these factors indicate that the 
working population of rural areas is ageing12.
Despite these trends, there is little to suggest a direct connection between the sector’s fortunes 
and its ageing demographic. Such figures may also give a slightly misleading impression of farmer 
demographics because they do not account for the active participation of younger family members in 
farm businesses.
Many small inland towns, dependent on agriculture, now have populations on the cusp of viability. Any 
shocks experienced by the agricultural industry are likely to have a significant impact on these rural 
communities13. These towns undoubtedly suffer in the face of severe dryness.
Agricultural employment has traditionally been characterised by a high proportion of self-employed, 
family and casual workers. The combination of changed farming practices, the population drift to 
regional centres and strong competition from other sectors of the economy, particularly mining, 
means that many agricultural industries are now facing shortages in skilled labour14. There is strong 
evidence that dryness leads to loss of employment in agriculture, and flow-on effects to employment 
in rural communities and businesses in nearby towns, particularly those heavily dependent on 
agriculture and lacking economic diversity. Agriculture-based small rural communities are struggling 
under this combined impact.
There are broad patterns of lower access to services already existing in Australia, and dryness may 
merely add to what is already chronic disadvantage in these areas15.  Rural people are reported to have 
much lower levels of socio-economic status, and less opportunities and options for the future than 
people living in urban areas. People in rural and regional Australia generally have poorer access to 
health care services and experience poorer levels of health than the rest of the Australian population. 
They may need to travel long distances to access health services, incurring associated time and 
travel costs. Male suicide rates are higher in rural Australia16, 17. These adverse circumstances tend 
to be accentuated and extended because of the periods of prolonged dryness, with the situation of 
Indigenous Australians particularly magnified. 
In spite of these disadvantages, rural families generally express higher levels of satisfaction with their 
family, community and life circumstances than urban people. Australian farm families, rural businesses 
and communities pride themselves on their resilience and their capacity to cope in a challenging 
environment. This capacity can be compromised, and their resilience made more fragile by the added 
burden caused by significant changes in traditional weather patterns.
Australia’s recorded rainfall history features several distinctly dry periods of a decade or longer. 
The mid to late 1920s and the 1930s were a period of generally low rainfall over most of the country, 
continuing over the eastern states through most of the 1940s. A similar dry spell occurred in the 1960s 
over central and eastern Australia. During these low rainfall periods, not every year is dry; it is just that 
Contextual overview

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      8 
rainfall in most years is below the long-term average, and there are often runs of years with recurrent 
dryness. The ‘Federation drought’ of the late 1890s through to 1902 is an example of a most damaging 
type of drought, when one or two very dry years follow several years of generally below-average 
rainfall. The more recent 1991-95 drought in Queensland, northern New South Wales and parts of 
central Australia and drought that most parts of Australia have experienced in recent years are further 
examples of this severity18.
Meteorology and the CSIRO were commissioned to assess the impact of climate change on the nature 
and frequency of exceptional climatic events. This assessment covered past and future changes in the 
intensity and frequency of exceptionally high temperatures, low rainfall and low soil moisture. The 
assessment focused in detail on the extremes that define exceptional circumstance events.
The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO concluded there is an increased risk of severe dryness over the 
next 20-30 years, compared to the past 100 years, particularly over southern Australia. This increased 
drought risk will be exacerbated by increasing temperatures – so droughts will be hotter in the future19.
This future scenario does not automatically mean the end of farming, rather that farm families, rural 
businesses and communities will need to continue to adapt to manage changes in climate. The old 
adage of ‘three good years, three bad years and four average years’ is likely to shift (with an increase in 
‘bad years’). This does not mean there will not be good seasons for primary producers. It does mean 
that the dry years will be dryer and more frequent and will have a significant impact.
Australian farmers are all too aware of the natural variability of the Australian climate. To date, the 
agricultural sector has coped with cyclical dryness by using responsible farm management strategies, 
with relief being available for droughts of unusual length or severity. Some areas of Australia have now 
been declared as experiencing ‘exceptional circumstances’ for 13 of the past 16 years. As at June 2008, 
a significant proportion of Australia was declared as experiencing exceptional circumstances because 
of drought.
Catastrophic events such as earthquake or flood have immediate and identifiable consequences. 
The nature of prolonged dryness is insidious. Dryness has both a physical and a social component. 
It represents a time of major upheaval in rural families and for rural communities which unfolds over 
years and requires a different set of intervention strategies. 
Contextual overview

9    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Observations
Observations on values, 
attitudes and policy
Background
There are several aspects of family farming which result in farm families experiencing adjustment 
stress differently from those in other occupations. These relate to:
• the intimate connection between the farm as a place of work, residence, family tradition and 
identity;
• a desire to pass on the occupation of farming and particular farm assets to the next generation;
• being seen to be self-sufficient and independent;
• gender roles, and;
• attitudes towards alternative occupations and non-farming lifestyles.
These factors have important implications for considering the adequacy and effectiveness of drought 
assistance20. 
How drought is perceived is key to influencing the effectiveness of national drought policy. Previously, 
drought was perceived as a specific defined event, an aberration of nature and not part of the ongoing 
and normal factors that affects agriculture. The inevitable emphasis in such a scenario is on drought 
as a crisis and the focus is always on defining those circumstances in which government assistance 
should be provided to farmers facing ‘exceptional circumstances’. The underlying policy assumption 
has been that through government assistance the community can be returned to ‘normal’ economic 
and climatic stability21. 
This assumption confuses variability with cost by treating departures from favourable seasonal 
conditions as a ‘loss’ of production and income. Climatic variation is normal in Australia and so are the 
production and income fluctuations associated with it22. 
This perception has consequences for a range of policy decisions of great significance to farmers and 
rural business operators. A failure to drought proof, for example, is often equated with an inability 
to control weather, rather than an inability to conduct a rural business under conditions of climatic 
variability23. 
Governments generally have supported the idea of rural adjustment. However, political pressures and 
emotive media coverage during prolonged dryness often lead to these adjustment positions being 
9   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      10 
Observations
softened by resorting to emotional language and imagery. In dry situations, climatic, hydrological and 
biophysical evidence can be overshadowed by the political persuasiveness and immediacy of personal 
stories of hardship and suffering24. 
The constant adjustment problems of the farm families, rural businesses and community sectors 
have elicited government programs which have largely avoided dealing directly and openly with the 
social dimensions of their experience. Farmers have a deep aversion to the word ‘welfare’, and tend 
not to see their problems as welfare problems, but as consequences of poor economic conditions and 
policies. Accordingly, adjustment policy has tended to characterise the problem as arising from alleged 
failures in the farm finance market, and the overwhelming bulk of adjustment support has gone into 
subsidising the interest payments of the farm business.
Given the nature of farming as a business, and given the overwhelming majority of farms in Australia 
are family owned and operated, from time to time families will experience significant business and 
personal stress. The challenge is to design programs which address the social wellbeing needs of farm 
families, rural businesses and communities more broadly, in ways which do not unnecessarily inhibit 
the efficiency of the industry. However, given the close relationship between business performance 
and family wellbeing this is no easy task25.  The Panel recognise that while farming can be a great way of 
life for many, it can also be a health hazard for others. Indeed farming can be both for the same person 
and this presents challenges for farmers and those endeavouring to provide services.
Rather than providing incentives in times of difficulty to counteract the worst effects of dryness, 
governments should invest in providing incentives in better times to encourage commercially and 
environmentally responsible management under variable seasonal conditions.
Findings
Listening to rural Australia has also allowed the Panel to understand that the language of drought 
support needs to change. Words like ‘drought’, ‘welfare’ and ‘propping up’ have negative connotations 
for farm families but are often used by governments. In contrast, the Panel found the words of 
‘dryness’ and ‘investment’ do resonate with farm families.
The Panel believes there is a mismatch between the values and assumptions of policy and those of 
rural people – and saw examples of this failure in understanding.
These values and assumptions vary in the extent to which they focus on promoting economic 
efficiency and farming as a business, versus focusing on social wellbeing considerations and farming as 
a preferred occupation and lifestyle. The business and family affairs of farmers clearly overlap and this 
situation, in turn, impacts on the health and viability of the social fabric of rural communities.

11    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Recent agricultural adjustment policy has largely assumed that if farmers and their families are not 
making an adequate living from farming, their rational, ‘business-like’ course of action is to pursue 
alternative livelihoods. This means rural people are often seen to be battling on despite what appears 
to be good business judgement. One of the revelations for the Panel was that for many who identified 
themselves as third and fourth generation farmers at public forums, there is an intrinsic value to farming 
as a way of life and some are unwilling to accept, or simply to operate within, a business-framed model.
It is clear there has always been an element of ‘risk’ or ‘gamble’ associated with farming in Australia, 
based on the belief there will always be a good season ahead. The Panel identified a level of ‘defiant 
optimism’ in farmers determined to continue farming and holding out hope for better seasonal 
and financial conditions. It was referred to by an attendee at the Panel’s Goulburn forum as the 
‘ostrich syndrome – people believe that if they put their head down and work harder they’ll be able 
to get themselves out of trouble’. The Panel unfortunately heard there are many farm families, rural 
businesses and communities that are not prepared, or preparing for, prolonged dryness. 
There are many farmers who are psychologically attached to their property and policy measures, 
such as exit assistance, are largely unwanted, nor are incentives to move to another profession. 
Many farmers are more than willing to continue suffering varying degrees of social deprivation to 
maintain their generational bond to the property. Some male farmers are clearly putting the land 
before themselves and their families with a belief that the wellbeing of themselves and families should 
only be addressed once the wellbeing of the farm is attended. The Panel senses there are lessons for 
government on how this issue could be progressed if they sought a greater appreciation of those 
individuals and families who do strike the balance between attachment to the land and alternative 
incomes.
Drought-induced stress is exacerbated when communities are eroded by the closure of health 
services and small businesses, they lose employment and feel the consequent drift of populations. 
Governments sometimes contribute to the erosion of social capital with policies such as those, for 
example, which result in the closure of schools and hospitals and the loss of bus runs.
Farming is not like any other small family business. No other business 
creates the emotional connections that farming does. It’s where the 
business owner and their family live. It’s where they raise there children. 
It’s where they connect to their community. It’s where their family 
memories are generated. It’s where they care for and raise their stock. 
It’s where they improve the land, planting trees, gardens, dams and 
landscapes. It is full of highs and low – tough times and good – fire, flood, 
drought, plague, good seasons and bad. It’s not just about generating an 
income. If it was, there would be a lot less food producers in Australia. So 
unlike other businesses it’s not as easy as saying ‘just sell up and move into 
town’. There is emotional fallout and wide-ranging impacts to deal with 
which non-farmers may find difficult to understand.
Shire of Strathbogie, Euroa, Victoria
Observations

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      12 
Feelings of being misunderstood only add to the negative emotional effects of dryness. Many 
statements made at the forums embodied the belief that governments, the media and city residents 
all had a negative attitude towards farmers and failed to understand their difficulties, thus directly 
affecting farmers’ ability to cope with the ongoing impact of dryness. 
Recommendation 1
An improved policy for dryness must focus on preparing for dryness and planning for 
personal and family wellbeing.
The Panel found rural Australians feels isolated, alienated and disconnected from the rest of the 
country. However, the people who live there wish to continue to do so. The Panel was welcomed 
everywhere and the process of visiting rural Australia was also a positive and valuable experience 
desire to listen.
Recommendation 2
Governments must make a high-level statement of commitment to a strong, healthy, 
vibrant and sustainable rural Australia.
eligible primary producers with assistance in whole farm planning, business and risk management 
and in understanding the implications of climate change, these do not advise farm families on looking 
after their personal and family wellbeing or planning for the future. Unless these programs take the 
psychology of farm families, rural businesses and communities into account in their design, they will fail 
to meet the outcomes desired by government.
The Panel believe existing policy responses to dryness are not working as intended. At public 
forums and in submissions, Exceptional Circumstances (EC) policy arrangements were the subject 
of either strong support or dissatisfaction, depending on one’s eligibility. For all the funding 
provided, people do not perceive they are measurably better off or report that they feel supported 
by governments. This is despite some farmers saying they could not survive without EC interest 
rate subsidies.
EC policy was reported as having created feelings of division and resentment, particularly by farmers 
who have successfully managed and adapted to prolonged dryness towards those farmers eligible for 
EC assistance. Many hold the view that farmers are eligible because they have not made the necessary 
hard decisions; and are therefore critical of EC recipients being ‘rewarded for failure’. The criteria 
for EC income support was also criticised by those who felt disadvantaged as a result of broadening 
their income base off-farm to better manage income fluctuations. The Panel believes there is circular 
conflict in that EC income support provides a reason for farm families not to broaden their off-farm 
income base but, at the same time, the Panel supports assistance for those people who are unable to 
Observations

13    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
13   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
support themselves. Rural businesses also protested that despite also suffering the effects of dryness 
they are largely missing out on assistance and felt farmers were receiving preferential treatment.
The Panel heard how the process for EC declarations, meeting EC criteria, and completing complex 
paperwork creates stress. Many farmers claimed the process of applying for EC support can seem 
overwhelming for people already under considerable stress. Some farmers reported that they were 
angry because they went through the EC process and were told they didn’t qualify or they felt they 
probably would qualify but were too exhausted to face the process. Farmers are frustrated by what 
they see as bureaucratic ‘red tape’. EC policy and the criteria and forms for assistance are overly 
complicated and this has led to an ‘industry of interpreters’ put in place by governments. This suggests 
that usually competent rural business managers experiencing sustained distress in times of dryness 
are personally challenged by the application process. An unintended consequence is a further loss of 
self-esteem and confidence.
Drought relief in my area helps to keep unproductive farms unproductive, 
by rewarding poor management while at the same time, discriminates 
against and is of no assistance to good operators. Drought relief fails to 
encourage better farming practices.
Farmer, Mirboo, Victoria
One of the largest areas of community division has come from inequitable 
eligibility criteria for accessing of government drought support – am 
I correct in suggesting around 30 per cent of primary producers are 
eligible? Anecdotally, most of the locals I come across seem only to be 
eligible through some ‘creative accounting’! We currently have a very ‘two 
tiered’ community – those not on Centrelink payments and interest rate 
subsidies are suffering big time.
Farmer, Condobolin, New South Wales
There should be no discrimination of those who earn off-farm income 
and look after themselves as opposed to those who make irresponsible 
and short-sighted decisions and in bad times look for more government 
contributions.
Farmer, Yerong Creek, New South Wales
Observations

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      14 
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     14
Both EC and human service policy responses are crisis oriented, which is not sustainable for 
governments, service providers and importantly, rural communities. This approach is encouraging 
the idea that the present dryness is a temporary aberration and avoids the need to take a longer 
term strategic approach for preparedness. In some cases this is encouraging farmers to erode their 
resource base to maintain their short-term finances in the expectation they make up ground later on.
Exceptional Circumstances policy arrangements appear to work differently according to farm 
circumstances. While, for some, the EC payments are a valued assistance in difficult times, for others 
it is all that is keeping them on the farm. Some farmers gave the impression they had changed their 
behaviour in order to remain eligible for support. Policy influenced some farmers to delay or avoid 
decision-making or to make preparedness plans. Once people become reliant on drought assistance, 
without a longer term plan, it is difficult for them to think or act in a way where they will no longer rely 
on assistance.
The implementation process required by the existing policy is causing great stress. The diﬀ erent 
approaches between and across state jurisdictions is confusing to people. This is particularly the case 
when diﬀ erent state governments apply their own varying thresholds for eligibility within the context 
of the broader national policy, or apply eligibility criteria at variance with those across a nearby political 
boundary. Farmers on the receiving end of this arrangement only see that some people seem to be more 
deserving than others according to the judgement of oﬃ  cials.
I experience severe drought conditions when I mismatch my farm management decisions 
with the lack of rainfall. Bringing in a rural welfare system will only finance me to make more 
bad management decisions at the tax payers’ expense.
Farmer, Narrabri, New South Wales
It is apparent over the last decade that droughts are becoming more regular and the EC 
program is ill-equipped to deal with change in climatic circumstances.
Western Australian Farmers’ Federation
Observations

15    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Current drought policies separate out those prudent operators that take diversified risk management 
or conservative approaches to farming and consequently do not need to rely on government assistance 
when difficulties arise. Policy should seek to move people towards an acceptance that dryness is normal 
and not a crisis and that planning for dryness is about developing strategies for personal, family and 
farm wellbeing.
Recommendation 3
Existing and improved policy for dryness should be based on principles that include:
– integrated development of individual and family wellbeing plans consistent with farm business 
and natural resource management planning as a mutual responsibility for future public-funded 
assistance.
– a transition strategy so that when current drought declarations are concluded there continues to 
be government investment to assist farm recovery and planning for future periods of dryness.
Recommendation 4
The drought support roles of federal, state and local governments should be clarified and a 
lead agency or coordinating committee be established across government and within each 
jurisdiction to ensure proper implementation of dryness-related policy.
Recommendation 5
People who provide support to farm families, rural businesses and rural communities 
during times of stress, including those working in government and non-government 
organisations should be respectful and understanding of the stress facing farm families 
and rural communities, and in particular ensure they are clear and factual in their 
communication and do not impose or offer their own value judgements.
Observations

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      16 
Planning 
Planning for future 
dryness
Decisions on family farms are rarely made on purely financial grounds 
as farms are always more than just a business. On the farm, financial 
concerns, personal and community social capital, and land and environment 
management considerations are equally important. To be effective, policy 
must be designed accordingly and not captive to any single issue.
Some farmers have documented (with evident pride) how they and their 
ancestors have survived worse droughts than the current circumstances, 
while other farmers appear to continue to view dryness as an aberration 
from ‘normal’ seasons.
The value of the terms ‘drought’ and ‘exceptional circumstances’ in current 
policy formulations have been questioned, particularly in parts of Australia 
already experiencing extended periods of relative dryness. The Bureau of 
Meteorology and CSIRO report, along with other commentary, has noted that 
hotter and drier weather is likely to become more frequent across much of 
Australia.
The Panel heard how financial, emotional and workload stress is impacting 
on the decision-making of farm families. This is compounded when complex 
generational, succession planning and structural adjustment decisions are 
also needed.
One component of social capital, given the high average ages of many 
working in agriculture, is having succession and exit plans in place. The 
Panel believes that despite active government promotion for well over 
two decades, succession planning remains an unresolved issue for many 
farm families. This observation is backed by research showing low levels of 
communication between farmers and their children about farm transfer26. 
Therefore, when succession and exit options become essential during times 
of dryness, this can become an additional stressor and can make rational 
decision making difficult.
Some 98.5 per cent of Australian farm businesses are family owned 
and operated. … issues that affect the farm business invariably affect 
the family unit and vice versa.
National Farmers’ Federation

17    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Planning
The Panel was struck by the experiences expressed by older farmers. For many, ‘soft landings’ are 
not an option. Some want to stop farming (or, for health reasons, should stop) but the financial and 
personal barriers are too high. Some are waiting for the next good season to clear debt and sell up. 
Some have discouraged their children from pursuing a career in farming, while others are saddened 
that their children are not interested in taking over a farm which has been in the family for many 
generations. Others want to transfer their property to their children (but without accumulated high 
debt) or wish to gift the property to their children.
The need for coordinated intervention appears to be becoming critical for many older farmers and 
their families, and options such as conditional access to aged pensions may need to be explored.
Responses to a 2004-05 Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE) 
attitudinal survey27 indicated that more than 80 per cent of farmers are seeking to maintain the long-
term productive capacity of the land, even if this means lower profits in some years. Discouragingly, 
almost 20 per cent are not seeking this.
Nationally, 71.0 per cent of agricultural businesses have reported barriers to the improvement of their 
management of natural resources28 and identified the most common barriers as:
• lack of financial resources (78.9 per cent)
• lack of time (63.1 per cent)
• lack of government incentives (40.0 per cent)
• age and/or ill health (22.2 per cent)
The biggest impact of the drought on sustainability programs is the capacity of farmers 
to adapt. There is a willingness to change practices however with limited financial 
resources available many will delay implementing the changes until conditions improve.
Murrumbidgee Irrigation, Griffith, New South Wales
… a glaring shortcoming in government drought policy is the inadequate 
investment into long range weather forecasting to provide farmers with increased 
surety in their annual planning processes
Western Australian Farmers’ Federation
…relevant R & D is vital for managing dry times
Farmer, Bothwell, Tasmania

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      18 
The views expressed to the Panel emphasise how important it is that flexible, comprehensive 
and coordinated planning support services are available to help people to help themselves, with 
authoritative information and advice able to be tailored to individual circumstances. 
The most cost effective intervention governments and peak industry organisations can make is 
through providing consistent and up-to-date information and tools to assist farm families, rural 
businesses and communities to manage changing circumstances constructively and, as appropriate, 
take advantage of available opportunities.
The Panel believes maintaining social capital and individual wellbeing management are critical for 
ensuring that policy directions for planning for future dryness is realised. Many presentations and 
submissions suggested that coordination and collaboration among service providers would improve 
the effectiveness of outcomes, as would matching the provision of government support to a mutual 
responsibility framework.
The capacity of farm families, rural businesses and communities to plan will be constrained unless 
government policies and support programs offer clear criteria for access, have long-term application 
and availability timeframes, or are of specified duration. Knowing what to apply for, and the process of 
making an application, should be within the capacity of the intended beneficiaries, or if needed, with 
the assistance of accredited intermediaries where barriers exist.
The preferred approach
The Panel considers the social wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and communities should 
be at the core of future policy for rural Australia. Individuals and families want to live in rural Australia 
and contribute to the national estate. These people are full of hope and their self-reliance and initiative 
must be supported and encouraged.
Future policy should better focus on encouraging farm families, rural businesses and communities 
to be prepared for future dryness. The Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO have predicted there is 
an increased risk of severe dryness over the next 20 to 30 years compared to the past 100 years, 
particularly over southern Australia, and that increased dryness risk will be exacerbated by increasing 
temperatures by as much as one degree Celsius over that period. If the Bureau of Meteorology and 
CSIRO are correct in their predictions then farm families, rural businesses and communities need to 
be better prepared. Future policy needs a strong applied research component to interpret the science 
and to develop an understanding and acceptance of the advice by farmers. The challenge is made even 
greater by varying expert opinion in the public domain.
Planning

19    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Presentations and submissions made to the Panel reinforce the views that there are no easy solutions 
to addressing increasing dryness and that planning and implementing risk strategies need to be 
developed farm-by-farm and community-by-community. It is of concern to the Panel that too many 
decisions involving family and business are implemented without adequate consideration of each 
other and in the absence of prior thought and planning.
The Panel considers the priority for all levels of government, in collaboration with peak industry 
organisations and non-government support agencies, must be to extend, coordinate and deliver 
the information and tools necessary to help farm families, rural businesses and communities to help 
themselves respond to the challenges of living with future dryness.
To be effective, social wellbeing needs to be planned in a holistic manner. The Panel strongly believes 
business planning is just one of several factors involved in planning for social wellbeing. Successful 
farming businesses also plan for and invest in their individual and family’s needs. There are a broad 
range of areas which should be given regular consideration by farm families when planning for 
wellbeing. For example, farm families could consider developing and regularly updating:
• family plans, which document the needs and the value of healthy families to the business;
• business plans;
• personal development plans, including health and learning considerations;
• property management plans;
• environmental plans;
• human resource and workforce management plans; and
• farm succession plans.
This list is not exhaustive, but demonstrates the Panel’s belief that operating a successful family 
farm involves investing in far more than business planning. The strong connection between farm 
families and the land necessitates holistic planning in which social, environmental and economic 
considerations are of equal importance.
This theme is the focus of the Panel’s thinking, and has also been identified by others. For example, the 
Australian Centre for Agricultural Health and Safety’s publication Managing the pressures of farming 
recognises the value of holistic planning by encouraging farmers to complete several checklists based 
on business, family and personal considerations. 
Governments need to provide the means and encouragement for farm families to consider, develop, 
document and implement their own overarching wellbeing plans. In addition to planning for dryness, 
the Panel believes that governments have a role in providing appropriate human services to support 
Planning
19   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      20 
rural Australia before, during and after drought. Similarly, governments have a role in helping to build 
strong rural communities and in providing access to education, services and support.
Recommendation 6
To alleviate the stress of future dryness, governments and non-government organisations 
must move away from crisis-framed responses and:
– adopt more long-term sustainable approaches based on the delivery of existing human support 
services, focused on planning for the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and rural 
communities prior to periods of dryness; and
– provide incentives to support the development of individual and family wellbeing plans as part of 
a shift towards better preparedness for dryness.
The Panel believes there are differing views on the role of governments in supporting people to live 
with the impacts of dryness. Given there are no mutual responsibilities on those who are currently 
being supported through dryness, the Panel suspects this enhances the argument of those critical of 
drought support. In this context, the Panel suggests that for future periods of dryness governments 
consider a policy which only provides assistance if recipients have developed an appropriate range of 
plans before dryness gets to a point ‘beyond their control’ and/or where governments determine their 
points of intervention.
In this report the Panel has made a series of recommendations consistent with an improved policy 
and planning process and which contribute to the capacity of farm families and rural communities to 
prepare for dryness.
Planning 
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     20

21    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Community
Community
Background
Dryness poses increasing difficulties in maintaining the social fabric or social capital of rural and 
regional Australia, and hence may threaten the viability of some rural communities. A 2000 ABARE 
study29 indicated there is a clear pattern whereby the greater the reliance of a town’s economy on 
expenditure by farmers, the lower the population growth. Small towns of less than 1000 people which 
are highly reliant on broadacre farming are most likely to be in decline. 
Expenditure by farm families in smaller towns is an important source of income for many small 
businesses. A farmer may only spend 10 per cent of their total expenditure locally but ABARE 
calculations show farm expenditure represents as much as one-third of small town economies. 
1  
Some key statistics for rural communities
Topic 
Statistics and notes
Community participation  In 2006, 63.5 per cent of households in rural areas were connected to the
and isolation 
internet, second only to people in major urban centres (66.1 per cent), and 
higher than those in regional centres (54.8 per cent) and small towns (51.3 
per cent).
In 2006, only 2.8 per cent of rural dwellings did not have a motor vehicle, in 
contrast to 11.2 per cent of dwellings in major urban centres.
Volunteering 
In 2006, 27.9 per cent of people in rural areas and 26.6 per cent of people 
in small towns undertook voluntary work, as compared with the national 
average for the Australian population of 19.8 per cent.
Role of mothers 
In 2006, mothers in rural areas had the highest level of participation in the 
workforce (greater than mothers in regional centres, small towns or major 
urban centres).
In the five years to 2006, the greatest increase in the level of participation by 
mothers in the workforce occurred in small towns and regional centres – a 
possible response to the flow-on effects of drought.
Immigration 
In the five years to 2006, the number of people from overseas countries 
settling into regional centres increased by 39.1 per cent - this increase was 
also strong in small towns (26.9 per cent) but lower in rural areas (12.5 per  
cent).
Population ageing  
The total population of rural and remote Australia decreased between 2001
and dependency 
and 2006, possibly making some community services non-viable.
Over these five years, dependency ratios decreased in rural and regional 
Australia because of a decrease in the number of children – thus accelerating 
the rate of population ageing overall, and possibly increasing the need for 
aged-care services.
Source: BRS 1,2.

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      22 
Community
Consequently the impact of dryness on the farm is amplified in small towns. Service industries like 
retail and wholesale trade, transport and storage, finance and machinery are all affected by farmers’ 
spending patterns.  
The loss of casual employment on farms during dryness flows on to the community where those laid 
off are forced to seek work elsewhere, often having to permanently leave the community. This can 
become a vicious circle. Loss of job opportunities in town means people in rural communities have 
to travel further afield for income, and in turn are taking their spending capacity out of their local 
community. 
Population loss impacts most in the drop in numbers of children at schools, the loss of young people 
seeking higher education and employment in cities, and the drift of workers who have lost their jobs. 
This can lead to a permanent loss of valuable skills to a community.
Bureau of Rural Sciences figures indicate the majority of the population in dryness affected areas are 
between 35 and 64 years of age. Standards of health in rural communities are poorer than the rest of 
the community. Community members sometimes have to travel great distances if they wish to access 
medical, education and entertainment options which are taken for granted in urban Australia. Less 
leisure time is then spent in the local community.
Social capital is built on social networks of trust, mutual support and understanding; creating the glue 
that holds a community together. When people are part of social networks, they are more involved 
in community life, they provide more informal care for others, they do more volunteer work and they 
are more active in social organisations. People’s perception of their community is also important. If 
farm families perceive their local area as a community of which they are a part, despite distance from 
neighbours or lack of facilities, then they will behave as if it is a community.
The consumer dollar has evaporated around Coolah – empty shopfronts, 
struggling eateries and watering holes. Most distressing is the observation that 
children are missing out on weekend sports. The downturn has not happened 
only as a result of the drought, but the prolonged drought has worn everyone 
down and the resources and energy are spent. It is hard to keep up the enthusiasm 
for doing the community thing.
Farmer, Coolah, New South Wales
Employment opportunities are decreasing rapidly. There are very few employment 
advertisements in this area and with shops closing all over the area retail is disappearing fast. 
Farmer, Waikerie, South Australia

23    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Maintaining social sustainability in these communities has become an issue for all individuals, families, 
organisations and businesses in many parts of rural Australia.
Of great concern to many rural communities is the loss or decline in sporting clubs. Football, tennis 
and bowling clubs are suffering a loss of members and a loss of sponsorship. Physical activity is critical 
to health, wellbeing and productivity, as is connectedness and social inclusion.
Farmers report that dryness significantly impacts on a rural community’s ability to work together for 
the benefit of the whole community. When people focus on their individual or family circumstances 
they do not have the capacity to engage in community projects or voluntary work which keeps rural 
communities alive and prosperous.
Men and women repeatedly told the Panel they are now too busy to volunteer and could no longer 
afford the cost associated in relation to fuel and the wear and tear on the car.
The burden of protecting people, property and the natural environment in vulnerable rural regions in 
Australia falls largely on volunteer services. For example, the Bushfire CRC at the La Trobe University 
reports the contribution of volunteer firefighters to the Australian economy is considerable. In 2000-
01, in Victoria alone, this was estimated at $480 million in equivalent wages. Most rural fire services 
have reported declines in the number of volunteers over recent years. Country Fire Authority Victoria 
volunteer figures for the past 16 years show a decline of 30 per cent in volunteer numbers. Another issue 
of concern is the general increase in the average age profile of volunteers. In 2003-04, 31 per cent of the 
volunteers in the Queensland Fire and Rescue Service were over 55 years of age.
Shrinking communities have issues with less people running community organisations and 
these groups become tired and fatigued and eventually clubs and organisations wind up and 
this further destroys the fabric of small rural communities and farmers become increasingly 
isolated on their farm. 
Rural Financial Counselling Service, Murray Mallee, Victoria
Farmers who are working off-farm are not available in the local area for volunteer 
activities such as the Rural Bush Fire brigade call out, this places increased burden 
on those who are in the local area to attend all callouts, and make up the crew for 
the fire vehicle in case of emergencies. This creates extreme stress in the bushfire 
season where the workload falls into the few remaining people who work in the 
district.
Farmer, Pilliga, New South Wales 
Community

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      24 
A paper by Hall and Scheltens30 explores how dryness is portrayed by the media and by rural people 
through Centrelink to provide advice to distressed rural people. The hotline primarily provided 
support for financial assistance claims, but also gave immediate access to counselling and support 
during 2002-03. The authors conclude that, although dryness is primarily framed by the media as a 
crisis, rural people’s own stories reveal a complex picture of entrenched and chronic problems which 
go well beyond drought. These stories indicate chronic rural disadvantage and the authors considered 
that improved ongoing support services were needed for rural communities, not just for those which 
focused ad hoc crisis-framed responses to dryness.
Unit within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and an Australian Social Inclusion 
Board. The Social Inclusion program encourages all Australians to play an active role in all facets 
of Australian life. To achieve this, the government has identified key priorities for social inclusion, 
such as opportunities in accessing services, securing a job, connecting with family, friends and the 
community, and equipping people to deal with personal crisis. Basic to social inclusion is the principle 
that all Australians should have a voice and for those voices to be heard. The Panel considers the issues 
identified within this report warrant rural Australia being on the government’s social inclusion agenda.
Recommendation 7
The needs of farm families and rural communities in remote and dryness affected areas 
should be an item for consideration by the Australian Social Inclusion Board. The specific 
circumstances of Indigenous populations in such communities should be considered a 
priority by the Board.
Observations
Many people at the Panel’s forums spoke of a ‘preferred’ community which they grew up in, moved into 
or want to retain. Dryness heightens people’s sensitivity to instances of businesses closing, families 
leaving the district, and of new ‘outside’ entrants, generating fears for the future fabric of their local 
community and vital community activities, such as volunteer bush fire brigades.
The drought has had a direct effect on all members of small rural communities as 
it is not only the farmers that have been affected but for example the contractors 
who had purchased farming equipment such as expensive air seeders and 
earthmoving equipment. We know of contractors who have gone bankrupt as 
the farmers who promised them work could not fulfil their commitments to them 
due to the drought. We know of small shops that once had booming businesses 
that are now just empty shelves.
 Farmer, Walgett, New South Wales
Community

25    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The decline in and exhaustion of volunteers mentioned to the Panel at almost every forum is 
symptomatic of the level of stress on members of rural communities. This has a widespread impact 
on the local rural community and has an individual social cost of a higher degree of isolation from 
the community.
The Panel repeatedly heard at its forums and through individual submissions that the social capital in 
Australia’s rural communities is in danger of being, or has already been, seriously eroded. As evidence, 
rural people pointed to the declining number of volunteers willing to participate in community 
organisations and local sporting groups. Community and sporting groups reported they are 
struggling to maintain numbers and activities.
People spoke of volunteer exhaustion as the burden falls to fewer and fewer remaining members of the 
community. This has reportedly caused community assets like libraries and childcare centres to close 
in some locations while putting great strain on local school and sporting activities.
It was common for the Panel to be told about the flow-on effects of population loss in rural areas 
and that a loss of young people, in particular, was being exacerbated by dryness. Sporting clubs and 
teams are struggling to find members, with some even struggling to field a side. It was recalled that 
local sporting games were once the major point of social interaction in the community. The Panel 
heard that people could no longer justify both the cost and the time away from the farm and that many 
people were withdrawing because of drought-induced depression or because they could not afford 
the cost of socialising.
The Panel was told of the social cost to women in particular as reduced income during dryness meant 
they were required to increase their share of the farm work, look after children and also possibly earn 
off-farm income. With dryness having already restricted cash flow, rising fuel costs have also impacted 
on the ability of rural people to socialise. Public liability insurance requirements and public health 
regulations imposed on volunteer groups by governments, were cited as having an impact on the 
social fabric of communities, and discourage holding functions and social events which are often ‘the 
life blood of rural communities’.
Many people spoke about a variety of socialising events staged by government and non-government 
organisations (with varying levels of funding support from governments, charity and the private 
sector). The socialising events targeted at drought-affected people take many forms including: farm 
family gatherings; barbecues, yoga, concerts, men’s shed initiatives, women’s pamper days, dinners, 
field days, and workshops. The New South Wales Government alone has funded more than 210031  social 
People retire to regional centres where health and support services for the aged 
are better. This leaves a void of would be community leaders to organise things 
for the betterment of the town. And those of us still here are flat out because now 
we have to work on twice as many committees to keep the town functioning.
Farmer, Minyip, Victoria
Community

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      26 
gathering events in recent years. The Panel was told by the numerous individuals and organisations 
putting on these events that they are hugely important for promoting social interaction within a 
stressed population and that they are also used, but not primarily, as a means of reaching clients who 
would not normally engage with drought-specific human service providers, such as social counsellors.
Recommendation 8
To effectively prepare communities for the social impacts of future dryness, governments 
must ensure support of community development initiatives reinforce social changes that 
will endure. Community development initiatives, such as community socialising events, 
should have clear objectives aimed at linking farm families and rural communities with vari-
ous human service providers and/or facilitate clear referral pathways.
There are a range of individuals and non-government welfare or church-based groups that are almost 
competing with each other to deliver packages of food, clothing or toiletries and to hold community 
socialising events. Some church-based organisations are providing outreach pastoral care (travelling 
to properties) in conjunction with giving financial support toward household expenses. Many of these 
organisations reported they struggled to deliver this aid in the face of resistance from farmers whose 
real battle is to maintain the viability of their farming enterprises. A number of people informed the 
Panel that, in their view, many of these groups may have lost sight of their client group.
At many forums the Panel was told that because government drought programs are aimed at farmers 
rather than all who live within rural communities, some townspeople felt isolated and excluded 
because they are not receiving government funding such as that provided to farm families. The Panel 
also heard from a number of small businesses that a number of the food parcels being delivered to 
farm families were not locally purchased and had the unwelcome effect of denying local businesses 
much needed turnover when they were feeling the affects of dryness in much the same way as farmers.
Recommendation 9
In the light of the availability of income support, non-government organisations should 
carefully consider whether there is a genuine need for food parcels or whether other forms 
of support would provide enduring benefits.
In some parts of Australia Indigenous communities are being particularly affected. For those people 
still reliant on hunting bush tucker to supplement their diet, dryness has caused a decline in the 
amount of bush resources. The Panel heard this has also impacted negatively on the bush tucker 
businesses. People are therefore moving away from the Indigenous communities on the land and into 
town, with the resulting separation putting additional strain on families32. Several councils reported 
the loss of jobs from rural communities and the inability of farm businesses to employ labour have had 
a negative impact on the wellbeing of Indigenous Australians, who already suffer the worst health and 
economic standards in Australian society.
Community

27    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Findings
The Panel found it difficult to separate the impact of dryness from the longer term socio-
demographic trends contributing to a decline for some rural populations. However, it is clear from the 
public forums and submissions that rural people see dryness as having a major impact on the social 
fabric of regional Australia and the health and wellbeing of their communities. The Panel has no doubt 
that social change is felt more acutely during times of stress brought on by dryness.
Where family farms are struggling, the communities in which they normally spend their money also 
suffer. The Panel heard of small agriculture-dependant businesses being pushed to the brink and there 
is a flow-on effect to other local businesses because of reduced spending as a result of dryness.
The economic downturns in rural communities brought about by dryness also affect the ability for 
local businesses to donate funds to the local agricultural show and community events, making the 
work of volunteers even harder, although there is little research to quantify this impact.
The loss of health and education services from small rural communities is a further compounding 
reason for people and their families leaving rural areas.
Social isolation as a result of poverty, depression and the extra labour demands caused by dryness 
conditions are putting great pressure on the remaining volunteers in towns to hold together the social 
fabric of their community together. People told the Panel they were simply worn out.
Many rural communities are accustomed to minimal services as a way of life but governments can 
quickly destroy the social fabric of a town with insensitive decision-making, acutely felt by people 
already stressed because of dryness. This is particularly the case when taking decisions which impact 
on the character of communities.
The Panel believes state and territory governments must consider the unintended consequences 
of withdrawing services and infrastructure during periods of stress, such as dryness. The Panel is 
impact of decisions regarding the provision of rural services and infrastructure (for example, schools, 
school bus services and local hospitals).
The current welfare service delivery system is designed for the aged, people with disabilities and the 
unemployed. Discussion and consultation with farm families and communities indicates services and 
individual workers have tried to modify this existing model of service delivery with mixed success.
In some places there appears to be a wide range of non-government organisations, volunteers, 
welfare agencies, and community and church-based organisations distributing food parcels, clothing, 
pamper packs, and helping with the payment of household bills to farm families. Many of these non-
government organisations have been doing this type of work for a long time but the difference now 
is that many of them are doing it on a much larger scale with the backing of government funding. One 
Community

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      28 
Association (CWA) with more than $15 million to distribute as emergency grants to fund community 
based activities and to meet immediate household needs of rural families in drought affected areas. 
Rural families receiving other drought assistance were still able to apply for the CWA grants, with the 
majority of this assistance distributed by the CWA within weeks of application.
The Panel is perplexed as to whether there is an overwhelmingly genuine need for such basic 
assistance when presumably someone in need of such help would be eligible to obtain income support 
arrangements. While the CWA assistance proved to be extremely popular, it has been an essentially 
temporary measure that plainly conflicted with the government’s own criteria for income support. It 
was also not core business for the CWA and put additional stress on their limited volunteer resources.
The feedback from some of the recipients of food parcels suggests they feel embarrassed by the 
offering and have guilt in accepting. The varying methods of identifying those who receive such 
assistance versus people who do not can sometimes be of concern. The Panel was told by a number 
of providers that farmers were broadly reluctant to seek or accept such help and those providers had 
to find ‘creative’ ways to dispense assistance so as to not offend. “I just had to do something to help,” 
“Someone’s got to do it,” “I just wish I could help everyone,” were statements by providers of basic 
assistance which were frequently heard by the Panel. Some providers were obviously burdened by this 
responsibility and were clearly themselves stressed.
The Panel strongly believes providing food parcels and other goods is a short-term, crisis driven 
response which is not sustainable, both from a donation/funding outlook and from a sustained human 
resource perspective. This intervention typifies a short-term disaster response, not a model to be 
employed during periods of prolonged dryness. It is a short-term fix which has the effect of diverting 
attention away from the need for a more strategic approach to helping rural communities and people 
prepare for, and live, with dryness.
Recommendation 10
Effective and improved policies which support farm families and rural communities to live 
with dryness should be:
– delivered by appropriately qualiﬁ ed and supervised individuals, organisations and service 
providers;
– have clear criteria and guidelines and ensure that funding provides scope for rigorous independent 
evaluation.
Community

29    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
In respect to the variety of socialising events that staged by government and non-government 
organisations, the Panel deems there to be anecdotal evidence for and against these initiatives. As 
short-term, one-off initiatives they would undoubtedly provide a single positive impact, especially 
when many rural community events are declining and/or people could not afford to socialise because 
of the financial effects of dryness. The Panel consider it would be useful to examine whether there are 
associated public health benefits for a community in promoting social interaction during periods of 
prolonged stress.
However, the Panel does consider these socialising initiatives for drought-affected communities 
are largely artificial and are unlikely to be maintained beyond the current injections of government 
funding. The Panel believes that as one-off means of reaching clients who do not normally engage with 
drought-specific human service providers, these events could have merit if they involved coordinated 
small gatherings (where everyone could be individually spoken to), where they facilitate clear referrals 
and they did not involve alcohol. The Panel suspects the larger events are often self-promoting and 
fund-raising exercises and would pose difficulties for drought-specific human service providers to 
effectively engage with people. Overall, the Panel considers these socialising initiatives to fall within a 
crisis-framed response and that they lack long-term value in addressing people’s ongoing needs.
29   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Community

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      30 
Families
Background
Impacts of dryness on various aspects of family life have been summarised in a companion booklet 
to the 2008 Country matters: social atlas of rural and regional Australia. Farm family-related impacts 
identified include:
• dryness may strengthen migration away from rural and regional areas, particularly by young people 
– thereby affecting membership of households and the availability of family members to work on-
farm; 
• there may be less support and encouragement for young people to take over farms; 
• there is greater pressure on women to work off-farm to supplement on-farm income;
• gender roles may change as women need to work both on and off-farm;
• family workloads may increase because farm families cannot afford paid labour; and
• community networks may be lost as farm families’ social interaction decreases – contributing to 
their feelings of social isolation
The national extent and significance of these effects is difficult to assess, as the relevant studies are 
generally based on detailed research work in specific locations, using ethnographic methods which 
allow people to provide their own accounts of impacts on their families and their lives.
The Panel heard that increased workloads and debt of farm families leads to many young people working 
long hours both on and off farms, assisting with farm labour tasks, and sometimes missing school as 
a result. Teachers told the Panel that dryness had a noticeable effect on poverty levels, preventing 
students from attending excursions or from taking part in representative events for financial reasons.
A study by Stehlik, Lawrence and Gray33 focused on women’s experiences of drought and confirmed 
that it is experienced differently by men and women. Women’s contributions to the economic and 
social survival of farm families enduring dryness may be accorded secondary status to those of the 
men who are principally designated as ‘the farmers’.
Australian farmers are considerably older than those of people in most other occupations. The 
increase in farmers’ average age is because of both fewer and fewer young men and women entering 
agriculture, and older farmers are delaying retirement. Older farmers may be reluctant to retire 
because they see this as an acknowledgement of their ageing which is foreshadowing a loss of the 
independence central to their life and identity as farmers. This may also be a major factor in their 
resistance to exit and adjustment programs which encourage ‘non-viable’ producers to leave 
Families
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     30

31    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
2 
Some key statistics for rural families
Topic 
Statistics and notes
Rural families and households overall
Family size 
Family size in rural areas is generally falling, but still remains larger than in 
regional centres and cities3
Numbers of children 
Declined across all states and territories over the period 2001-2006, with the 
greatest rural decline being in Queensland3
Numbers of  
Numbers of young people aged 15 to 24 years declined in rural areas in all states
young people 
and territories over the period 2001-2006, largely reflecting members of this
 age group moving to urban centres3
One-parent families 
Rural areas have the lowest proportion of one-parent families of all areas (also 
see statistics below for farming families)
Home ownership 
Rural areas have the highest level of home ownership as compared with small 
towns, regional centres and urban locations – in 2006, 76.2 per cent of all 
dwellings in rural areas were owned or being purchased, reflecting both housing 
affordability and the older age profile of residents in rural areas3
Motor vehicle 
In 2006, only 2.8 per cent of rural dwellings did not have a motor vehicle, as
ownership 
compared with 11.2 per cent of dwellings in major urban centres and cities3
Farming families
Number of farming  
The number of Australian farming families declined by 9 per cent from 112 800
families 
in 2001 to 102 600 in 20064. The smallest decrease was 1 per cent 
in the Northern Territory, and the largest 13 per cent in Queensland
Family types 
At the 2006 Census, around half (51 per cent) of farming families were couple 
families with children – as compared with 45 per cent of families in this category 
Australia-wide. There was a considerably smaller percentage of one-parent 
farming families (3 per cent), than one-parent families in Australia overall 
(16 per cent)4
Family income 
From the 2006 Census, the median household income for farming families was 
$1122 per week. Negative or nil income was reported by 3 per cent of farming 
families as compared with 1 per cent of all households Australia-wide. When 
adjusted for differences in household sizes, the median household income for 
farming families was lower than that for all Australian households ($605 per 
week as compared with $649 per week)4
Average age of farmers The average age of Australia’s farmers has been steadily increasing since 1981 5,
 and the median age was 52 years at the 2006 Census4. The proportion of farmers 
older than 65 years increased from 15 per cent in 2001 to 18 per cent in 2006; and 
the proportion of farmers under 35 years decreased from 12 per cent in 2001 to 
10 per cent in 20064
Women in farming 
In 2006, more than half (56 per cent) of women who were the Census reference 
person or spouse/partner in a couple farming family reported being a farmer or 
farm manager as their main occupation. The remainder reported main their 
occupations of clerical, sales and service workers (32 per cent); education 
professionals (13 per cent); labourers and related workers (10 per cent); and 
health professionals (10 per cent)4
Entry of young men  
Fewer young men are entering agriculture – since 1976, the number of men aged
into farming 
in their 20s entering farming has more than halved5
Entry of young women 
Fewer young women are entering agriculture - since 1976, the number of
into farming 
women in their early 20s entering agriculture has declined by 80 per cent 
- many young rural women move to urban locations following education and a 
career5
Sources: BRS3, ABS4, Barr et al5 .
Families

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      32 
agriculture. Not having a family member to which they can pass the farm may also be a contributing 
factor. In addition, many farmers in older age groups have relatively low levels of formal education 
which may contribute to a lack of resilience and adaptability in confronting dryness.
Observations
The Panel heard reports of some isolated young families on properties with no access to outreach 
community health, maternal or child health services. Their change of circumstances had gone unnoticed to 
the health providers of the region and they appeared to be invisible to the broader community. The Panel 
also heard consistent evidence that some marriages were breaking down in rural communities under the 
combined strain of physical separation enforced by the need to earn oﬀ -farm income and the debt-burden 
on the farm. Many couples claimed to be too tired to invest time and energy in maintaining their relationship.
Women, particularly, complained that their husband’s response to drought and debt was to work 
harder and longer to the point where families were no longer communicating. While the men see 
themselves as ‘resilient’, their wives see them as ‘stubborn’ and unrealistic about their economic 
situation.
The Panel noted consistent reports about the impact of dryness on children in farm families. These 
impacts ranged from social isolation because they either could not go to school or because they could 
not participate in community sporting activities; there were no buses available to take them, or their 
parents could not leave the farm or could not afford the fuel.
Many forums discussed children working long hours on farms to help out the family, including children 
as young as six. In some cases, children are missing school altogether when dryness related work on 
the farm becomes critical.
Drought makes it incredibly difficult to plan for the future as each individual is pre-occupied 
with the day-to-day struggle.
Female farmer, Gilgandra, New South Wales
Living with a sick feeling in your belly over the long term does not help any aspect 
of family life – relationships, harmony and physical health, supporting each other 
and neighbours and friends.
Female farmer, South Australia
Where properties are a considerable distance from town, off-farm work can mean 
staying in town during the week and returning to the property at the weekend. I 
know of some cases where this has led to divorce. One client told how she had 
obtained off-farm work but would never do it again or recommend it to anyone 
else due to the effect on the family.
Rural Financial Counsellor, New South Wales
Families

33    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Children were described as picking up on the financial and emotional stresses in families. This 
sometimes results in them, particularly boys, leaving school early to earn an income to reduce the 
pressure on their parents.
Children require a stable nurturing environment to grow, develop and learn. Stressed families and 
households will, over time, negatively impact on children’s ability to do this and to develop their own 
coping mechanisms for adult life.
Women told of experiencing drought in a different way to their husbands. They feel the need to 
be emotionally strong to hold the family together and are often working as labourers beside their 
husbands in the place of hired workers. They also frequently home-school children where distance 
or the closure of schools has made this necessary. They are taking off-farm employment to bring in 
additional income or to support their children’s education if needed.
Women frequently talked about a sense of isolation, brought about by the loss of social contacts and 
the cost of fuel.
Recommendation 11
To account for the needs of farm families, an improved policy for dryness must consider:
– the changing demographics of farm families and rural communities
– impediments to farm succession to enable effective intergenerational change
– the contribution of women and youth to farming and rural communities
Dryness appears to have exacerbated family succession issues. Many families are in such debt that the 
older generation cannot afford to retire, making it difficult for a younger generation to return to the 
farm. Many farms are still under the legal ownership of elderly parents in their 80s and 90s, although the 
son, and occasionally grandson, runs the farm. Finding money for parents to leave the farm and relocate 
to an aged-care facility may either increase the debt level of the farm or require a part of the farm be sold 
off.
Farmers also told the Panel they could not pass the family farm onto their children because of taxation 
laws surrounding the gifting or transferring of assets, and the effect this can have on social security 
entitlements, such as the pension. Properties that have suffered from years of dryness often cannot 
provide for the living costs of two generations. Many farmers say they are reluctant to pass on debts to 
the children and actively encourage them to not continue in farming. 
Rural women play a significant role in communities affected by drought and ongoing climate 
change. In these circumstances women in rural communities take on critical roles spanning 
family, business and community, over and above the already heavy demands made on them. 
Local Government and Shires Association of New South Wales
Families

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      34 
Recommendation 12
laws present institutional barriers to farm succession, and whether changes could provide 
improved succession planning incentives for farmers.
The Panel met a lot of young enthusiastic farmers who commonly reported that the ownership of 
the family farm was still with their parents or involved complex ownership structures. Such family 
arrangements often cause great stress during times of dryness owing to reduced income flows and 
unmet succession expectations. The Panel heard that decision-making while under stress was usually 
not successful, or not done.
Findings 
The Panel found the present dryness has had an impact on the functioning of rural families, through 
enforced long-term separation of family members, psychological impacts on toddlers and school age 
children, an increased burden of responsibility on women and the divisive issue of succession planning 
in tightened economic circumstances. This conclusion is contrary to the findings of a study by the 
Australian Institute of Family Studies outlined in its submission to the Panel.
The Panel formed the view that while many farmers will say they are coping, their coping mechanisms 
are creating greater pressure on their families.
Recommendation 13
Government policy should focus on encouraging farm families to properly assess and to 
access human support services.
Women and children, both on farms and in communities generally, appear to be bearing a large part 
of the emotional burden of dryness. They are expected, and willing, to step-up to provide support on 
the farm, the business and in the community. Many of them are exhausted and without social support 
networks of their own.
Succession planning is a major issue for an ageing farm population. Because of dryness and lack of cash 
flow, many older farmers feel they cannot afford to retire and pass the farm on to their children. Ideally 
these decisions should be factored into a farmer’s strategic approach to family farm business planning. 
However, debt and concerns relating to taxation issues are exacerbating an already sensitive issue for 
many farmers and their children.
Recommendation 14
Further research is needed into understanding the wellbeing of farm families facing 
periods of dryness.
Families

35    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Human support services
Background
The focus of recent research on services in rural and remote Australia and how service provision may be 
aﬀ ected by dryness, has been on how existing services can be improved and made more appropriate and 
accessible to drought-aﬀ ected communities, families and individuals. Gaps in services are not often raised.
Lynn34 discusses approaches to rural human services provision in Victoria and attempts made there to 
offer a generalist approach that integrates individual and community needs by involving partnerships 
between community and government. This research found that, in terms of engagement and 
partnership with communities, the attempts have not been well-integrated with other initiatives and 
tend to be re-created as another specialised activity.
Several studies focus on the staffing side of rural services and the challenges faced by service 
providers working in rural and remote locations. Green and Lonne35 discusses occupational stress 
experienced by rural human service providers. They report that social workers, welfare workers and 
other service providers living and working in small rural communities say they are generally highly 
satisfied with their work and lifestyle but, paradoxically, they also report high levels of occupational 
stress and may experience ‘burn-out’. Addressing this kind of stress requires systemic and structural 
strategies – employers have a key role in developing and implementing these strategies.
Chenoweth36 argues that living and working in rural communities poses significant challenges for 
human service providers and they need special preparation for this kind of work. She considers there 
is evidence rural practice differs from urban in requiring more generalist skills, a better appreciation 
of space and place factors, a need for practice to be embedded in communities, an ability to work 
with Indigenous people, an awareness of the problems and opportunities posed by technology, and 
an ability to live and work in a small community where it may be difficult to separate personal and 
professional life. To adjust to these differences, more student rural placements may be valuable, 
together with more integrative education for human service practitioners. 
The Panel believe there is a multitude of drought-specific or focused human support services 
operating in rural communities. Many services are providing support against a crisis framework 
specific only for dryness, while others provide support at a more general and ongoing level, such 
as rural financial counsellors. The term ‘human support services’ is used by the Panel to refer to a 
divergent range of current drought-specific or focused financial/social/family counsellors, chaplains, 
and advisors (but not limited) who are operating in rural and remote areas, some with government 
funding and others through non-government backing, in roles covering financial, social, family, 
relationship, and health issues.
The Panel found it an almost impossible task to fully and, importantly, accurately grasp the wide-range 
of drought-specific, focused human support services and more general support measures that are 
operating in rural Australia today. Drought assistance: A summary of measures provided by Australian, 
state and territory government has almost 100 entries. The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, 
Regional Development and Local Government’s Regional entry point includes more than 2500 links in 
its regional programs inventory and almost half of these are relevant to human services.
Human support

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      36 
There is considerable diversity among the number and scope of state and territory government 
initiated programs for dryness. For example, South Australia has 23 drought-specific programs while 
Western Australia, Northern Territory, Tasmania and the Australian Capital Territory each have 
three or less. New South Wales, Queensland and the Northern Territory offer transport subsidies. 
Queensland alone offers electricity tariff relief.
• $8 million over 2007-09 to establish 24 Family Support Drought Response teams across Australia 
to deliver a range of family relationship services to individuals, families and small businesses 
in communities affected by dryness. These teams are funded to provide family relationship 
counselling, crisis intervention, dispute resolution, case management and other services aimed 
at helping people affected by prolonged dryness conditions. This program is administered by the 
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs through the funding 
of non-government local providers.
• the Mental Health Support for Drought-Affected Communities measures provide crisis counselling 
services for individuals and training for clinicians and community leaders. The Department of Health 
and Ageing is providing $10.1 million over two years to be delivered by Divisions of General Practice.
• an April 2007 dedicated drought-round of grants under the Local Answers program supported 
81 projects totalling $10 million. The Local Answers program is administered by the Australian 
Government Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs.
links to ﬁ nancial counsellors and social workers, including Beyond Blue: the national depression 
initiative.
There are many other organisations and government agencies providing assistance to dryness 
affected communities, even if they may not be funded directly to do so. For example, a number of non-
Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs:
• the general rounds of the Local Answers program which helps disadvantaged communities identify 
opportunities to develop skills, support children and families and foster proactive communities: 
– build effective parenting and relationship skills that strengthen families; 
– build skills and opportunities to make families and communities more self-reliant, and; 
– assist individuals to get involved in community life through local volunteering, mentoring or 
training to build leadership skills.
• Volunteer Grants program which provides funding for eligible not-for-profit organisations to 
support their volunteers and encourage volunteering by:
– purchasing small equipment and sporting items to help their existing volunteers and to 
encourage more people to become volunteers and; 
– contributing towards fuel costs incurred in their volunteering work, such as when using their cars 
to transport others to activities, deliver food and assist people in need.
• the broader range of resources available under the Family Relationship Services program, 
which provides funding to non-government organisations to establish centres to deliver a 
range of support and specialised services to minimise disruption to family relationships. The 
abovementioned funding of the Family Support Drought Response teams falls within this program.
Human support

37    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
In some locations the Panel was alerted to the considerable presence of a variety of non-government 
charity and/or church organisations, including the Salvation Army, Aussie Helpers, Red Cross, the 
Country Women’s Association, St Vincent de Paul, Anglicare, Centacare, Uniting Care, YWCA, YMCA, 
Relationships Australia, and the Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia. 
In addition, there are also a number of self-motivated single operators who are not attached to 
any organisation or funding source. These individuals, generally, lack professional supervision and 
qualifications and vary in their levels of quality and the services they deliver. Some local government 
bodies also had dedicated programs, and often, but not always, with support from other tiers of 
government.
Observations
There was considerable discussion during the public forums about the role that drought-specific 
or focused human support services were playing within drought-affected communities. A number 
of written submissions also discussed the perceived value of various human support services for 
drought-affected communities.
The Panel heard that funding for drought-specific or focused human support services is sourced 
from a variety of places, including the Australian, state, territory and local governments, and also 
non-government organisations such as churches and charities. Despite the multitude of funding 
sources, the Panel found large variances in the level and quality of the drought-specific or focused 
human support services being provided. Some areas the Panel visited appeared to lack human support 
services, while other areas had potentially overlapping services. In the latter examples, the Panel 
believe the current response by governments has created a ‘drought industry’, as one farmer called 
it, of contracted providers that appeared to sometimes overlap but ostensibly attempted to supply 
similar services to the same target group.
The Panel observed that some drought-specific or focused human support service providers, however 
well-intentioned, frequently did not appear to have the appropriate training or skills to effectively 
engage farming individuals or rural communities, particularly in circumstances when independent-
oriented farming individuals may not properly understand the social impacts they were experiencing. 
In such cases the methods varied between ‘doorknocking’ or ‘cold calling’ on farms, through to 
working at improving networks and referral mechanisms with other services within the community.
The Panel heard a number of comments in the public forums and written submissions about the lack of 
effective networks and referral mechanisms between support service providers. 
Two consequences of the lack of coordination between human support services were that:
• clients may not have been effectively referred to the most appropriate support services; and
• some drought-specific or focused support workers advised the Panel they were providing services 
outside their area of expertise.
The lack of coordination between government-funded drought-specific or focused human support 
services was further complicated by the range of similar services also provided by non-government 
Human support

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      38 
organisations and charities. In many cases, both government-funded and non-government funded 
service providers appeared to have low awareness of the support each other was offering in local 
communities. As a reflection of this, many of the forum participants and written submissions 
expressed a desire for existing human support services to be better coordinated.
The Panel also heard that a number of support workers were only employed on short-term contracts, 
some for no longer than six to 12 months duration. These funding terms were inclusive of time required 
by the recipient to recruit and train staff, establish local networks and then deliver a service. This was 
particularly the case for support workers who were hired under what the Panel views as a crisis-framed 
approach to providing support for drought-affected areas. These short-term contracts sometimes 
resulted in:
• support workers having difficulty establishing strong networks within the community and in 
developing referral services with other support providers;
• support workers continually worrying about their job security and employment prospects for 
when their contracts expired; and
• a minority of support workers having employed less appropriate methods of reaching potential 
clients in an effort to have an immediate impact in the community and to engage with potential 
clients as quickly as possible.
Recommendation 15
In planning for dryness, improved human support services, must be available and 
responsive to the needs of farm families and rural people. 
The Panel heard that some drought-specific or focused human support service organisations 
in receipt of government funding to provide drought services have had difficulty in sourcing 
appropriately trained professionals in the areas requiring assistance. A small number of local providers 
“There are a range of service providers that currently have programs and 
activities appropriate to addressing the social and mental wellbeing of drought 
affected communities; however, there is limited coordination of these services in 
terms of networking, collaboration and integration.” 
General Practice Alliance South Gippsland, Inverloch, Victoria
“Drought funding from state and federal governments has been provided to 
a range of local organisations in a scattered approach…The uncoordinated 
approach to funding poses a risk of duplicating services at best and undermining 
existing initiatives at worst”
 Southern Grampians and Glenelg Primary Care Partnership, Hamilton, Victoria
Human support

39    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
even reported that they, in turn, found what they termed ‘other consistent uses’ for the funding or 
employed people without appropriate qualifications.
While the Panel met many highly professional drought-specific or focused support workers who 
are providing much needed services to their communities, some of the services that the Panel came 
across were less than ideal. The different levels of professionalism and effectiveness between those 
providing drought-specific or focused human support services more often than not reflected their 
level of skills, training, qualifications, experience and peer support and supervision.
The Panel was also concerned about the strain and occupational stress some of the people delivering 
drought-specific or focused human support services, and also health workers, appeared to be 
experiencing. Human support service providers who had greater experience, professional peer 
support and supervision and established referral networks generally appeared to be coping better 
than those who were operating, sometimes by choice, ‘on their own’. 
Recommendation 16
The distributors of community assistance and social services, including volunteers, should 
themselves have access to professional support.
The Panel was impressed by Centrelink’s drought-specific or focused Rural Services Officers, who are 
respected by their communities, do not appear to carry welfare-associated stigma and are reportedly 
doing a good job at assisting farmers, rural small business and are linking into existing professional 
networks. 
Recommendation 17
The outreach mobility of human services to respond to rural people in times of stress, such 
as future periods of dryness, needs to be improved, with one option being an expansion of 
the Centrelink Rural Services Officer program.
Within the context of its forums, the Panel heard from attendees who viewed the role of the Rural 
Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) as a vital support tool in providing guidance and referral advice to 
rural farm families and small business operators. The Panel broadly support this view and was able to 
meet many impressive people working as individual rural financial counsellors.
Notwithstanding, the Panel is concerned a number of RFCS providers and individual rural financial 
counsellors made public statements which indicates there remains significant room for improvement 
in the administration of the RFCS. Issues which concerned the Panel include:
• comments that “I am the only one they can talk to”;
• inability by some to articulate when, how and to whom they refer clients;
• an over-emphasis on their own contractual arrangements;
Human support

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      40 
• a disdain for the need to provide monitoring and evaluation reports;
• a view by some that their key objective was to obtain government assistance for their clients; and
• the appearance that some received little professional supervision.
The Panel notes this only applies to a small number of the RFCS providers and individual rural financial 
counsellors but importantly, the people that these comments apply to are strong identities and vocal 
advocates in their communities. The Panel accepts that it was only able to observe a relatively small 
number of communities but a theme was consistent.
The Panel understands that the RFCS has been in transition to a case management approach since 
1 July 2008. The Panel was concerned by a number of comments received from rural financial 
counsellors expressing their aversion to moving to these new arrangements and criticising the 
decision. The Panel supports the move to a case management approach for the RFCS and judges 
that individual rural financial counsellors have an important role in helping their clients develop 
options for financial improvement according to their individual situation and then provide a referral 
and information service. The onus should be on the client to make the best decision which suits their 
individual needs. With this in mind, the Panel believes it is appropriate an independent formative 
evaluation of the RFCS occur as soon as practical.
Recommendation 18
An independent formative evaluation of the Rural Financial Counselling Service must 
occur as soon as practical to: assess the progress that has been made in delivering a case-
management approach; identify the institutional barriers that exist, and; to determine any 
improvements and adjustments that may be needed.
The Panel believes rural financial counsellors are not ‘counsellors’ nor are trained as such, and 
therefore immediate consideration should be given to a name change. The Panel also observed that 
Agriculture Fisheries and Forestry as an agency predominately focused on national-level industry issues 
versus other human service oriented agencies which deal with individuals as part of their core functions.
Recommendation 19
The word “counselling” should be removed from the name of the Rural Financial 
Counselling Service and replaced by a more appropriate title, better fitting the service’s 
broader role.
Findings
The Panel believes drought-specific or focused human support services are a key resource which 
can be better harnessed for the ongoing long-term benefit of farm families, rural businesses and 
communities – not just something that should be put in place during times of dryness. 
Human support

41    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Human support services have the potential to play a vital role in the long-term sustainability of rural 
areas. However, in future, such services must move away from crisis-framed responses to dryness and 
instead move towards more longer term sustainable approaches. Human support service delivery 
which is focused on short-term interventions at the crisis end is an inadequate piecemeal response 
to what are fundamentally ongoing problems. At a basic level it appears that governments funding 
providers to deliver drought-specific or focused human support services for defined periods has 
caused the creation of an extra ‘layer’ which is often poorly linked to existing professional networks or 
referral hierarchies.
A longer term approach would allow human support services to focus on early intervention and the 
ongoing wellbeing of farm families and rural communities. This would improve farmers’ mental and 
physical health, skills, support networks, and their ability to better prepare and cope with risks to their 
business and themselves during periods of dryness.
The Panel discovered from its consultations throughout rural Australia that the current spread of 
human support services is largely uncoordinated and inefficient. A multitude of human support 
services operate in farming areas and while a variety of providers can foster innovation, they were 
often reported as uncoordinated and spread poorly. Some regions do not have sufficient human 
support services and others are seemingly oversupplied, with a vast range of service providers funded 
by various government and non-government sources offering similar services to the same clients. 
At a national level these services have few linkages to complementary programs or understanding of 
ongoing implementation activities. There is a clear need for governments to pursue more streamlined 
human support service delivery in rural areas with stronger hierarchical leadership in order to 
facilitate better region-specific coordination and referral pathways. The focus needs to be on how 
human support services are delivered rather than simply what services are delivered.
Where possible, the Panel believes the co-location of service providers into service hubs for rural 
centres would be the most desirable way to link human support services and to facilitate more 
effective referral pathways. This would be particularly useful in ensuring farm families and rural 
communities had clearer and easier access to the most appropriate support services and would also 
assist in the earlier identification of referral needs.
Recommendation 20
Access to government drought assistance and services must be improved by making 
applications and referral pathways simpler.
The Panel often heard praise for rural financial counsellors during the public forums and in written 
submissions and how rural financial counsellors were well-known and mostly trusted by their 
communities. However, the Panel is concerned as to whether there are sufficient services in rural 
communities for people in need of other forms of counselling. The co-location of rural financial 
counsellors with other support services, such as social workers, would help to ensure that emotional 
and mental health issues were recognised early and that clients could be referred easily to co-located 
service providers with the correct area of expertise.
Human support

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      42 
Recommendation 21
An urgent audit should be conducted on the extent, experience and qualifications of hu-
man support services being implemented on-the-ground in rural Australia (government 
and non-government). 
Recommendation 22
Following this audit, strategies must be developed to achieve the most appropriate distri-
bution and allocation of resources and linkages between human service providers, includ-
ing clear hierarchies to facilitate better region-specific coordination and referral pathways. 
These strategies should also consider:
– co-locating service providers where possible to form service hubs for rural centres;
– providing specific mental health first aid training and health promotion for service providers to 
better identify, react and refer clients with mental health issues;
– establishing minimum standards and appropriate qualifications for human support service 
providers and their employees, including non-government organisations;
– ensuring funding terms for human support services are of an appropriate length to enable effective 
establishment, delivery and review of the services provided.
Human support

43    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Education and training
Background
As part of its review of the social impacts of dryness, the Panel asked the Bureau of Rural Sciences 
to compare people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas with the Australian population 
generally. The results show that people in dryness affected areas are less likely than the average 
Australian to have continued their education on to Years 11 and 12. They also show the adults in 
drought-affected areas are more likely to have a diploma or certificate from a college or TAFE than a 
degree or a diploma from a university. In fact, adults working in dryness affected areas are less likely 
than those from the general Australia population to have any post-school qualifications.
Young people who left school early were less likely to find an apprenticeship or traineeship during 
dryness. The need to travel long distances for TAFE training was identified as a significant issue, 
requiring parental support because of cost and a lack of public transport. 
on the impacts of dryness on secondary education access in Australia’s rural and remote areas37. 
This report was critical of the lack of information on the circumstances of children living and being 
educated in rural and remote Australia. In particular, it found there was a dearth of information about 
how periods of recurring dryness were affecting the access of young people to education.
Dryness, in addition to ongoing rural restructuring, has had a particular impact in more remote areas. 
In some Australian country towns, the loss of student numbers as families leave town seeking work has 
led to closure of schools, leaving communities without any local history of shared school networks. 
These children are now forced to board in the nearest town at a hostel, or to be home schooled or 
undertake distance education. This decreases opportunities for frequent, incidental contact centred 
on school and neighbourhood activities between family members and neighbours. The loss of 
teachers also impacts on the human and social capital of a community.
Many high schools are reporting a significant drop in student numbers because of rural restructuring 
and dryness. In Blackall, Queensland, for example, numbers are reported to have dropped by one third 
over a one year period38. Charleville High School has reported a similar fall. This impacts on teacher 
numbers and subject offerings. Teachers are frequently forced to teach outside their discipline and 
have difficulties accessing professional development. Students are forced to take more subjects by 
distance and families have difficulty funding extra-curricular activities.
In 2007, Drought Assistance for Schools funding was provided as part of a package of measures 
totalling $714 million to support farmers, small businesses and communities in rural and regional 
Australia. This package recognises the financial and social pressures on families and schools located in 
EC declared areas. This funding is provided directly to rural and remote schools to assist with ongoing 
education expenses and the cost of educational activities, such as student excursions, which may be 
cost prohibitive for families experiencing financial hardship as a result of the dryness. It may also be 
used to assist with the cost of items such as text books, uniforms, subject levies, student attendance at 
extra curricular activities and other educational activities which directly benefit students.
Education

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      44 
Less than 15 years ago, up to 50 per cent of remote students had governesses; now only 7 per cent do39. 
Home tutors are now overwhelmingly mothers, who are also often replacing hired labour on their 
properties at a time of increased workloads associated with dryness. 
Increased workloads and farm debt lead to young people working long hours, both on and off farms, 
assisting with farm labour tasks and sometimes missing school as a result.
For many children from remote communities, attending boarding school for their high school 
years has been both a tradition and a necessity40. Parents have seen this as a social as well as an 
educational necessity. This is clearly expensive. While the difference in cost between public and 
private schools in any Australian city can be significant, distance adds a completely new dimension. 
If a family live 20 kilometres out of Bourke there may be several options for schooling their 
children. If a family live 200 kilometres out of Bourke the choices might be distance education, 
boarding school or a parent and children needing to relocate to a regional centre where there is 
access to education and work.
Boarding schools recognise their rural and remote families are under particular stress41  and have tried 
to support them through delayed payment schemes, increasing bursaries and scholarships and making 
staff aware of the rural situation. A study found many parents have opted to pay the fees over a longer 
time period. This delayed payment can result in a greatly reduced ability to support their young people 
going on to tertiary levels.
Our school has had to minimise the number of excursions offered to the 
children as they require some subsidy from the parents, and reduce the annual 
school camp to accommodate the requests of parents who could not afford the 
traditional school camp fees. In recent years of drought, the P and C has addressed 
the concern of parents who could not afford to send their children on camp, and 
subsidised the Year 7 transition camp. These excursions and camps are vital part 
of our children’s education and serve to maximise their learning experiences and 
understanding of the world around them.
Beacon Progress Association, Beacon, Western Australia
A mother in Pilliga cited home schooling four children and managing the farm while her 
partner sought off-farm income created enormous pressure on her. While she felt the 
need to attend a basic computing class to develop skills to support her children and the 
management of the farm business, there were few resources such as childcare/alternative 
school supervision and no-one to manage the farm. 
Western Institute of TAFE, Outreach Unit, Coonamble, New South Wales
Education

45    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Young people at boarding school were reported to be anxious about their parents and about the 
circumstances at home as a result of dryness and to worry that their parents cannot afford for them to 
be away42.
mothers to move to their closest centre with their children. The children attended the local schools 
and women had the opportunity to work, often providing a much needed second income to the 
family. This arrangement can lead to long family separations and the isolation of men on drought 
ravaged farms. Young people in remote areas may also attend hostels, such as those located in Hay and 
Longreach. The cost of hostel accommodation can be well above the Assistance for Isolated Children 
allowances, causing significant hardship for families.
Special needs children are reported as having suffered particular disadvantage, especially when they 
live in a remote area away from services and support. In their study, Alston and Kent43 found there was 
an urgent need for support programs, respite care and special supports for home tutors to support 
the education of special needs children.
The rate of improvement in educational attainment in the decade to 2006 was much lower for 
people living in rural areas (1.9 per cent increase per year) than in all other areas, being less than half 
of the national average (4.3 per cent per year). In 2006, many 
more people in Australia had vocational qualifications than 
a bachelor degree (3 784 000 and 2 477 000, respectively). 
Nearly one-quarter (23.8 per cent) of the working-age 
population had vocational qualifications, compared with the 
much smaller proportion with degrees (15.6 per cent)44.
In regional centres, small towns and rural areas, this difference 
was much more pronounced than in major urban centres. 
This has implications for the potential of people in these 
communities to diversify into the information economy 
or service industries. It also has implications for farmers, 
members of farm families and farm-hands seeking work 
off-farm to supplement their income during dryness, with 
work options being constrained by qualifications targeted 
at their farming operation. With increasing demands for 
information technology skills or vocational certification, taking 
on off-farm work may require gaining further qualifications.
Many families are choosing not to send their children away to boarding school for secondary 
school as they can’t afford the school fees. This means the children then have to travel vast 
distances daily to the local high school, less time to study and also as they are at home, are 
called on to be unpaid workers on the property. Not that they resent this, but they are missing 
out on social skills gained while living in cities.
Country Women’s Association of New South Wales
Education
Source: BRS (2008)45
3TVaTT
E^RPcX^]P[
$
F^aZX]V0VT?^_d[PcX^]
 $
!
!$
?a^_^acX^]^U_T^_[TfXcW
QPRWT[^aSTVaTT^aWXVWTa
^aSX_[^\P^aRTacXUXRPcT!%
 
<PY^a
daQP]
RT]caTb
ATVX^]P[
RT]caTb
B\P[[
c^f]b
AdaP[
PaTPb
0dbcaP[XP

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      46 
Gaining new qualifications or training may present challenges, especially during dryness, because of 
difficulties accessing educational or training programs, the cost of the program (especially for those 
already experiencing financial hardship), time spent away from the community and family, and the 
ability to take on new knowledge in times of stress.
The 2006 Australian Bureau of Statistics Census of Population and Housing illustrates the situation 
(using the Australian Standard Classification of Occupation 2002). For these figures, ‘farming 
population’ is defined as that portion of the population aged 15 years and over actively engaged in 
farming work, including the categories of ‘farmers and farm managers’, ‘farm specialists’ (eg shearers 
and other contractors), and farm workers (eg farm hands and labourers). For this analysis, ‘non-school 
qualification’ refers to educational attainments other than those of pre-primary, primary or secondary 
education and may be attained concurrently with school qualification.
Within the farming population, 23.5 per cent of workers had post-school qualifications compared with 
42 per cent of the Australian population generally. Of these, nearly 5 per cent of the farming population 
held a bachelor degree or post-graduate qualifications. This was less than one-quarter of the level 
attained in the Australian population (21.9 per cent). Those who held an advanced diploma, diploma 
or certificate represented 18.5 per cent of the farming population, which was 40 per cent less than the 
Australian population (30 per cent).
These figures are based on the total population of farmers across Australia and mask important 
differences between peri-urban farmers of major cities, regional centres and small towns, and 
those farmers in rural and remote areas. Nevertheless, they serve to highlight that the lower level of 
education and training within the working farming population has implications for its members’ ability 
to diversify into off-farm occupations as a risk management strategy. 
The Youth Affairs Council of Victoria, in Talking about the big dry: young people and the impact of 
drought states that data collected on post-secondary school students reveals dramatically higher 
levels of deferral of higher education placements by young people in rural and regional Victoria as 
compared with those in metropolitan Victoria. It paints a picture of a gradual increase in deferral over 
the past few years, potentially related to the impact of widespread dryness in the corresponding years.
In the Alston and Kent study, young people themselves reported:
• a lack of access to Youth Allowance because of means-testing on parental assets
• financial difficulties associated with parents being asset rich and income poor
• many families being unable to support their young people away from home
• an increased need for them to delay their entry to university in an attempt to earn the required 
amount to be classified as independent for the purposes of Youth Allowance
• the lack of unskilled full-time employment in their towns as a result of dryness, making earning this 
money difficult or impossible
• anecdotal evidence that some give up their university places because of financial pressures
• anecdotal evidence that some drop out from university because of financial and emotional 
pressures
Education

47    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
• the need to choose shorter courses to relieve the family’s financial burden and/or allow younger 
siblings access
• giving up a place at university because of family financial pressures
• a huge sense of frustration that university education is no longer available on a merit basis
A Tertiary Education Roundtable, organised in 2007 by the NSW Farmers Association, was told of 
a dramatic fall in tertiary enrolments in agriculture related courses. The Australian Farm Institute 
reported that the demand for undergraduate agriculture places fell 19 per cent from 2001 to 2006. 
They also reported a decline in the vocational level of enrolments in agriculture. With universities 
reporting a decrease in enrolments, despite strong demand by employers for agriculture and related 
graduates, the Association sees the issue as a major threat to rural industries and the communities that 
thrive on the success of this industry. In the view of the NSW Farmers Association, the length, severity 
and extent of the current dryness has acted as a deterrent to young people who may have otherwise 
sought a career in agriculture, with enrolments at an all-time low for many tertiary institutions in NSW.
With increasing demands for information technology skills or vocational certification, accessing off-
farm work may require further qualifications. Acquiring these qualifications can be difficult, especially 
during drought because of the cost of programs and the time spent away from the farm and family.
The absence of childcare facilities in rural communities can be a major obstacle to farm families 
earning off-farm income and to providing children with respite from stressed families. The Community 
Child Care Cooperative of NSW reports that childcare services in drought affected areas in that state 
are struggling to maintain viability in the face of reduced child numbers, reduced capacity to fund raise 
and difficulty in attracting trained staff. Childcare facilities are also struggling to recruit parents to 
management committees because this takes time and energy parents can no longer spare. The general 
decline in volunteer capacity in rural towns is also impacting on schools.
need for longer term, system-wide reform to enable higher education to make a major contribution to 
economic productivity and prosperity46. This review will examine and report on the future direction of 
the higher education sector, its fitness for purpose in meeting the needs of the Australian community 
and economy, and the options for ongoing reform. A key objective of the review is to widen access to 
higher education and to improve student support programs so as to promote social inclusion and 
individual opportunity. The review is also intended to help to develop a long-term vision for higher 
education into the next decade and beyond47.
Observations
The Panel consistently, across all public forums, was told of the great concern rural people hold for the 
education of their children and of the sacrifices they were prepared to make to ensure their children 
were well educated.
Lack of childcare centres in rural communities reduces the capacity for women to fully 
participate either socially or in the workforce.
Centrelink worker
Education

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      48 
Parents at several of the Panel’s forums talked about their concern that staffing numbers in schools 
were dependent on student numbers and the loss of even a small number of students in a rural school 
could result in the loss of a valuable teacher. This also often meant the loss of a school bus.
The NSW Farmers Association reports of Year 11 and Year 12 students being expected to learn via video 
conferencing because time with teachers is so limited under school funding formulas. 
Recommendation 23
State governments must consider the short to medium-term social and economic impacts, 
when dryness is a contributing factor, when assessing the viability of classes, schools and 
bus services.
Recommendation 24
Where school closure is the judicious option, state governments should assist rural fami-
lies to access other education options for their children. 
The Panel repeatedly heard of a greater frequency during periods of dryness of children arriving at 
school hungry. For example, the school principal at Bothwell in Tasmania has established a ‘breakfast 
club’ to ensure students start the day with a good meal. It is unclear whether children are hungry 
children is because of a lack of income for food or a lack of time parents can spend away from the farm 
to prepare meals for children.
In submissions and at public forums mothers described the stress of being torn between their 
responsibility to the farm and their responsibility to their children, when they need to replace hired 
labour on their properties and to become teachers for their children.
Farm families repeatedly reported on the impact of being asset rich and cash poor and having little 
accessible cash during times of dryness to meet the educational needs of their children although, 
reportedly, remaining ineligible for government assistance because of the asset test.
Our community of Wubin lost its primary school at the end of 2007 due to the 
effects of drought seasons starting in 2002. When it closed, we lost five young 
families who all made the final decision to move away and change their career 
and education prospects. This severely affects those left who want to stay and 
now do not have a school or a bus run that can take any future children to schools 
further away.
Rural Remote and Regional Women’s Network of Western AustraliaCentrelink
Education

49    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The Panel heard evidence, which is supported by numerous submissions, that high school retention 
rates have been dropping for boys. These students are taking available work in preference to staying 
on to finish high school because they were determined to relieve the family of a financial burden and 
save their parents from the additional financial stress associated with tertiary education.
Eligibility for the Youth Allowance and the Living Away from Home Allowance has been identified in 
submissions and at public forums as a barrier to rural students accessing tertiary education and as 
a major cause of stress in families. Parents reported sending high school leavers out to find a job for 
12 months so as to be deemed ‘independent’ of their parents and therefore eligible for allowances. 
There are few jobs in rural and remote communities for young people and often these are in part-time, 
insecure work, forcing children to travel further from home to work. Many parents reported that, in 
the process, their children lost their aspiration to move to higher education.
Rural universities play a key role in skill building and capacity development in rural Australia with 
regional universities also providing many economic benefits to the communities in which they are 
based. The Panel heard that the financial impacts of prolonged dryness are likely to be contributing 
to declining undergraduate enrolments in agriculture and other rural-focused courses. This decline 
suggests that skills shortages and knowledge deficits will emerge as significant constraints to 
agricultural productivity in the near future. This, in turn, results in fluctuating funding allocations 
which impact on the capacity of regional universities to maintain their facilities and staff resources. 
The Panel consider there is a role for governments to take into consideration the impact of drought in 
influencing fluctuating student numbers and to applying leniency in funding to maintain critical mass.
In 2007, the then House of Representatives Standing Committee on Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Forestry heard evidence there is a mismatch between existing tertiary agricultural facilities and what 
can be sustainably funded and maintained, as detailed in its inquiry report into rural skills training 
and research. In this situation, there is a strong argument for leadership to facilitate quality tertiary 
educational outcomes through more specialisation and partnerships.
Kids in schools are very affected. Morawa has a school psychologist who is dealing with five 
schools. She has recently been allocated another two schools which puts her work load ratio 
to 1:1800. This is absolutely impossible to meet the kids needs.
Rural Remote and Regional Women’s Network of Western Australia
Time and money constraints are putting pressures on families and are affecting the quality of 
education for those students accessing School of the Air. There is not enough money to hire 
governesses and lack of money to hire external labour means that mothers are required to be 
out working the property or undertaking off-farm work.
The Uniting Church in Australia Frontier Services, New South Wales
Education

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      50 
Rural universities and TAFE institutions could be more engaged with industry and government to 
identify areas in which education institutions can promote innovative ways of dealing with dryness in 
rural communities. Possible strategies might include:
• funding rural bonded university places (similar to medicine at some universities);
• including rural placements as core elements of relevant degrees, and;
• developing university-wide rural strategies to raise awareness of opportunities in rural areas and 
provide placement assistance to graduating students.
The South Burnett Community Development program in Queensland submitted that families are 
reluctant to encourage their young people to undertake rural studies, as they do not want the same 
hardship for their children as they have experienced during many years of dryness and uncertainty. 
They cite a study conducted by the Burnett Inland Economic Development Organisation in 2005 
which found 100 per cent of rural families involved in the study would not encourage their young 
people to engage in primary production. 
The extended period of dryness has forced many farmers to seek off-farm work to support their 
families. This can mean separation from their community when work is not available locally or when 
farmers do not have the qualifications to find jobs.
Numerous submissions and several people at the Panel’s forums raised the issue of recognising 
farmers’ existing skills or re-skilling them to better equip them to move to off-farm work. Several 
submissions pointed to skill recognition and accreditation as a way of increasing self-esteem among 
farmers severely impacted by the prolonged dryness.
The Northern Agricultural Catchment Council of Western Australia observed male farmers tend to 
amass a wide variety of skills which are in constant demand. These skills include plant operation, plant 
maintenance, welding and an array of building skills. In addition, most farmers have long experience 
in running a small business, managing staff and have an excellent work ethic. Such skills tend not to be 
formally recognised and may limit both entry and the level of entry into work outside farming. Farmers 
themselves are sometimes quick to understate their level of skill. Many say that if they were not farmers 
they do not know what else they could do.
Drought conditions impact significantly on the uptake of education and training 
for farm, and yet it is imperative that during these difficult times, they stay 
informed, engaged and connected to new learning and networking opportunities. 
There is a disjunct between the increasing challenges imposed by drought on 
farming families, and the growing need to improve business management and 
diversification skills. In times of crisis, farmers are focused on sustaining and 
maintaining farm operations rather than education and training opportunities.
Department of Primary Industries and Water, Tasmania
Education

51    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Male farmers expressed reluctance to attend training because of time or money issues. Others just 
claimed exhaustion. The Murray-Mallee Rural Financial Counselling Service expressed concern that 
reduced numbers at information or training seminars are interpreted by organisers as a lack of interest 
or need when there may be contributing physical and mental exhaustion factors. They believe an 
important aspect of education and training for farmers is to take it to the farm-gate and work with 
farmers in smaller groups, especially when farmers are affected by dryness and low incomes.
Many farmers expressed concern over the termination of the FarmBis program which was jointly 
provided assistance for primary producers and rural land managers to undertake approved training 
activities to build business and natural resource management skills. The attraction of the program 
was that it was focused on rural re-skilling and delivered at the local level. The federal/state FarmBis 
program in the Northern Territory, Queensland, Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia 
ended on 30 June 2008. The national FarmBis program in New South Wales, Victoria and the 
Australian Capital Territory ended on 29 February 2008.
Volunteering NSW has developed an online Skills Passport designed to acknowledge prior learning 
and to facilitate timely employment in a variety of industries specifically catering for temporary and 
transient local workforces.
Some state governments have initiated ‘skills store’ concepts in regional centres where farmers can 
have their current skills assessed and be given advice about vocational training. The issue with these 
systems is that while the initial advice is often free, the vocational training can be both expensive and a 
long way from the property.
Vocational programs for all those who live outside metropolitan areas should recognise that distance 
and isolation are hurdles to accessing educational opportunities and options need to be available 
taking this into account.
Network members have observed lower levels of participation in training and 
professional development, brought about by the drought. The most common 
barriers to participation and training and professional development reported 
to Network members are farmers’ inability to leave their farms (eg due to hand-
feeding; staff shortages; prohibitive petrol and diesel costs); not having the 
necessary finance to participate; and extremely limited access to childcare.
New South Wales Farmers’ Mental Health Network
Education

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      52 
Recommendation 25
There must be more flexible training delivery methods for adult learning (using adult learn-
ing principles), including providing outreach training, for farm families and people in rural 
communities who find it difficult because of dryness to attend training opportunities. This 
could be achieved by:
– vocational education and training programs aimed at assisting farm families with up-skilling or re-
skilling, including recognition of prior learning, to broaden opportunities to earn off-farm income;
–  funding for vocational education institutions to help farm families and people in rural communities 
more readily access further education opportunities.
– careful consideration of the timing and appropriateness and potential effectiveness of delivering 
education and training programs during times of stress, such as dryness.
Findings
One of the strongest messages arising from the research literature, the submissions to the Panel 
and at the public forums is that the social wellbeing of children and teenagers is suffering because of 
dryness. Young people are being denied educational and extracurricular opportunities because of 
household financial limitations resulting from dryness. In some cases this has reportedly narrowed 
children’s aspirations for further education and employment options. Education is essential to social 
and economic wellbeing, as well as to the resilience and future adaptive capacities of communities. 
This is a significant problem. 
Many teachers and parents reported that dryness is having a noticeable effect on rural parents’ 
ability to fund curricular and extracurricular activities for their children, preventing students for 
financial reasons from attending school excursions, going to school without food or taking part 
in representative events. The Panel is concerned as to why this need was spoken of so strongly by 
in dedicated Drought Assistance for Schools funding to help families with these very expenses. 
Throughout the consultation process, the Panel did not hear anyone identify or acknowledge this 
significant level of funding, despite its intention to directly benefit students suffering because of 
dryness.
In the past, children of primary school age in remote areas have had the choice of attending a small 
local school, boarding in their nearest town at a hostel or being home schooled. The drift of people 
away from rural and remote areas has resulted in the closure of small schools and the loss of school 
bus services. The lack of assistance for rural families to gain access to the same quality and choice of 
education as is available in metropolitan and large regional centres is a concern. This withdrawal of 
education services needs to be arrested, particularly in drought declared areas.
Education

53    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Recommendation 26
Further research is needed to better understand how reoccurring stressors such as 
dryness affect the education outcomes for young people.
Government decision-making can sometimes erode the social capital of rural communities with 
inflexible policies about student to teacher ratios. When the loss of people from rural communities 
results in a loss in student numbers, this not only impacts on staffing levels in schools and changes the 
social structure within a school. Rural schools are often a rich source of community facilities such as 
libraries, meeting rooms, sports areas, workshops and classrooms – spaces and places for community 
to become and to be community. These are also major point of social connection for the community 
through students, parents, teachers and volunteers.
A major issue in rural Australia is the declining opportunity for young people to access tertiary 
education. Rural families now struggle to find the money to pay for their children’s post secondary 
education. The Panel is concerned that cash poor farmers and rural businessmen, anxious their 
home allowance, are so heavily focused on the eligibility criteria and the associated asset test that 
this is forcing families to make decisions which may not be in the long-term best interest of their 
children. This is certainly causing great stress and anxiety for families. In particular, the criteria that 
deem a young person to be financially independent of their parents is having a perverse outcome as it 
influences family behaviour to gain government assistance.
and report on the future direction of the higher education sector, its fitness for purpose in meeting 
the needs of the Australian community and economy, and the options for ongoing reform. A key 
objective of this review is to widen access to higher education and to improve student support 
programs so as to promote social inclusion and individual opportunity. The review is also intended to 
help develop a long-term vision for higher education into the next decade and beyond.
Recommendation 27
education challenges facing rural Australia and specifically examine whether the nature of 
farm families income and asset circumstances disadvantages farm families accessing youth 
allowance assistance.
Older farmers are finding it difficult to get off-farm employment without a certificate even though 
they have valuable skills. Recognition of prior learning (RPL) should be made more accessible through 
waiving the relevant fees, establishing a recognised skills ‘passport’ and including an option to 
undertake practical demonstrations and not just be tested in written form.
Education

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      54 
Human capital
Background
Labour force participation in rural areas is 67.5 per cent compared to the 
Australian average of 64.5 per cent. A corollary of the high participation rates 
is low unemployment and many rural industries are now under-supplied with 
both unskilled and skilled workers. 
The National Farmers Federation report, 2008 Labour Shortage Action 
Plan, released in March 2008, also noted that many of those affected by job 
losses were said to have permanently left the industry, with some leaving 
the community altogether. The NFF and other industry organisations 
are concerned that when better seasonal conditions return, numbers of 
skilled workers will be needed. This would generate career and employment 
opportunities and the report makes strong recommendations for the early 
promotion and development of the range of skills required by the agricultural 
sector in anticipation of increasing demands for labour. This concern about the 
ability to replace skilled staff is not limited to those in the agricultural sector. 
A report by the Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics48 reviews the 
consequences for rural communities of skills shortages in a range of other 
sectors of rural and regional Australia.
The BTRE report notes that discussions about the regional impact of skills 
shortages are made more difficult by the fact that available data on the 
location and extent of skill shortages is ‘patchy at best’. In particular, there 
are few detailed reports on the geographic distribution of skill shortages. 
Although the impact of skill shortages on the economy is not well defined 
in the research, it is agreed skills shortages will have consequences for 
productivity. 
Employment in agriculture is being affected by the impacts of dryness, 
changes in the availability of and access to water, trade reform, global markets, 
productivity improvements, and more reliance upon specialised contractors 
than local labour. Overall, employment in agriculture, forestry and fishing has 
fallen by 89 300 to 346 400 in the ten years to February 2008, a 20.5 per cent 
fall. The pattern of decrease is broadly consistent across the country. In 2006, 
agriculture accounted for up to 3.1 per cent of total employment in Australia, 
down from 4.4 per cent in 199649.
The grain, sheep and beef cattle sectors dominate employment, accounting 
for 43.5 per cent of agriculture employment as at February 2008. Horticulture 
and fruit growing are second, at 22.9 per cent of employment, and services to 
agriculture are third at slightly more than 7 per cent.
Human capital

55    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Of the 17 broad industry groups, agriculture, forestry and fishing has the highest proportion of 
workers aged 45 years and over (54 per cent), compared with the average for all industries (37.2 
per cent). The industry also has the highest share of workers aged 65 years and over (13 per cent) 
compared with just 2.3 per cent for all industries. The share of younger workers, by contrast, is low for 
people aged 15 to 24 years (10.3 per cent compared with 17.7 per cent for all industries) and even more 
so for workers aged 25 to 34 years (14.4 per cent compared with 21.7 per cent).
Farm expenditure can represent more than one-third of economic activity in small towns50. When 
there is a high level of dependence on a single agricultural commodity or production system and few 
alternatives, the impacts from dryness and other pressures on the farm, small businesses and the local 
community are likely to be greater.
Generally, the population of farming regions is declining51. All of the 20 local government areas in 
Australia with the fastest population declines during the period 2006 to 2007 were in rural Australia; 
14 were in NSW, five in Queensland and one in Western Australia. Bourke in NSW had the largest fall. 
The Bourke Shire Council advised the Panel the area had lost approximately 1000 people (25 per cent) 
over the past seven years.
The pressures of dryness can also require family members to seek off-farm employment to 
supplement income, sometimes at high personal cost.
Coordinators providing farms and communities in exceptional circumstances declared areas with an 
opportunity to participate in Work for the Dole projects, provided they do not displace existing or 
potential paid employees. 
Drought Force is designed to ease the burden of dryness for farmers and their families and to make 
sure farms and properties are maintained and able to cope once a drought breaks. Drought Force 
also encourages people to remain in their local community, retaining and building local skills and 
supporting the local economy.
An additional incentive is provided under the Australian Apprenticeships Incentives program to 
encourage primary producers to continue to offer skills development and employment in exceptional 
circumstances declared areas.
Diversification of industries increases the social and employment resilience of communities, providing a 
buffer against the impacts of shocks to the community associated with any particular industry52.
If the farming sector is undergoing financial hardship, farming families spend less money. This 
leads to other small businesses in the area experiencing financial hardship. 
Gannawarra Shire Council, Kerang, Victoria
Human capital

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      56 
Recommendation 28
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must develop policies and 
initiatives to address trade and other professional skills shortages in farm families and 
rural communities. These policies and initiatives must be underpinned by regional-specific 
research on the location, extent and impact of skill shortages. Policy and initiatives should:
–  recognise that training and education of people in rural settings leads to greater retention of that 
skill base in rural communities;
– recognise the important role rural universities play in educating and training skilled workers for 
rural areas;
– promote rural-bonded scholarships as a means of addressing agriculture and rural trade and other 
professional skills shortages
Observations
Securing a strong workforce for the future, in the face of strong competition for available labour in 
rural communities, is a major challenge for the Australian agriculture and food sector. Labour and 
skills shortages, as well as recruitment difficulties, are being experienced in a wide range of agriculture 
industries in rural and regional areas. Shortages exist for core jobs in these industries, such as farm 
managers and fruit pickers, as well as for support services such as traditional trades. 
There is little hard data about what and where labour and skills shortages are occurring. Anecdotal 
evidence suggests that the extent and impact of shortages is likely to vary widely between industries 
and regions. Based on pre-drought labour requirements, the National Farmers’ Federation anticipates 
an additional 80 000–100 000 workers are required to fill employment vacancies in Australian 
agriculture when the sector emerges from this period of dryness.
Coupled with the regional location of jobs in agriculture, attracting and retaining workers in a competitive 
employment market is challenging. Complicating labour attraction for agriculture is a general perception 
of the industry having poor working conditions and low wages; long hours outside, sometimes involving 
heavy work; and lack of professional development. The ongoing drought exacerbates these diﬃ  culties, 
leading to a negative perception of the future viability of agriculture industries and contributing to 
a signiﬁ cant decline in people employed in agriculture. Having secured employment elsewhere, the 
agriculture industry may not be able to attract workers back. This is likely to impede recovery from dryness. 
Dryness has meant farmers have had to cut costs, usually through the laying off workers and spending 
less in town. In consequence, local businesses and services are declining, and skilled labour, particularly 
younger people, are moving to pursue other employment opportunities.
The Panel heard suggestions that governments should intervene to encourage or compel employers 
to establish (or stay) in rural areas. While some proposals may have merit, generally these decisions are 
best made at the enterprise level and the priority of government should be to assist communities to 
respond effectively to the new and emerging pressures.
Human capital

57    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Increasingly, families are adapting to pressures by seeking alternative dual or multiple family income 
streams, often involving both partners physically spending time away from the farm. The Panel 
strongly believes these types of arrangements need to be acknowledged as successes, and not 
deemed to be failures.
The Drought Force program which encourages unemployed farm workers to undertake on-farm work 
and help farmers maintain their property during dryness was rarely mentioned in public forums and 
mentioned in only four submissions; twice favourably and once to say it had too much red tape. 
Recommendation 29
A formative evaluation of the Drought Force program, as well as other employment pro-
grams, must be undertaken to better address the functioning of the labour market in the 
agriculture sector during periods of dryness, and to encourage people to remain in their 
local community.
A number of parents with young children on a farm raised the issue of their family’s need to take 
off-farm work to maintain income through dryness and that, at times, this placed them in a difficult 
position regarding child care and their farm work. Parents told of their concern about sometimes 
putting their own children in unsafe environments by having them stay with the parent that worked the 
farm. For example, young children spending time within the confines of a tractor cabin or the ute as 
one of the parents went about the farm work. These parents confirmed they would prefer to dedicate 
more time to their children or have child care readily available.
Findings
Many have suggested governments should intervene to create employment in rural industries and 
communities to counteract socio-economic pressures associated with declining and ageing populations. 
While there are opportunities for governments to improve health and education employment in rural 
Australia generally, the Panel considers governments are unlikely to be effective in dealing with drought-
related employment issues in a segregated manner and the desired changes should be led by industry.
Recommendation 30
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must promote and educate 
people on the rewards and risks associated with careers in agriculture and other rural 
industries.
The Panel notes that dryness appears to be straining human resources in health and education, and 
makes employment related comments in the sections addressing: health; education; services; and 
values, attitudes and policy.
Human capital

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      58 
Health and wellbeing
Health and wellbeing
Background
Mental health
Mental health is one of Australia’s National Health Priority Areas53. According to the Australian Bureau 
of Statistics (1997), almost one in five Australian adults will experience mental illness at some stage 
in their lifetime. Mental illness affects people in urban and rural areas, both sexes and all ages, with 
females accounting for 53 per cent of mental illness in 2003 and males 47 per cent54. 
Evidence is mixed as to whether rural and remote communities experience a significantly higher 
incidence of depression than urban areas55. However, there are a range of factors faced by people 
in rural and remote which may contribute to poor mental health outcomes. These include a lack of 
resources, having to travel long distances to access care, reluctance to admit there is a problem and 
reluctance to seek care because of the high visibility within a close-knit community. Rural populations 
also have a significantly lower supply of mental health services compared with capital cities and are 
disadvantaged in the distribution of specialist services such as psychiatrists and psychologists56.
With the exception of several valuable reports which target the impacts of drought on the mental 
health of specific rural populations57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63 little is known about the specific impacts of chronic 
long-term dryness on the mental health of farm families and rural communities64.
A submission by the Australian Institute of Family Studies provided results from a survey conducted 
in 2007 of 8000 people living in rural and regional families. This is one of the few quantitative studies 
containing results about the impacts of drought on the mental health of farm families and rural 
communities. The results show almost twice the rate of mental health problems in areas where survey 
respondents perceived they were currently in drought compared with areas where people perceived 
they had not been in drought during the past three years.
The Panel commissioned the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) to undertake research into the personal 
wellbeing of people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas. BRS found that, compared 
against the Australian population, people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas were:
• approximately 40 per cent more likely to report feeling less satisfied with their future;
• approximately 12 to 16 per cent less likely to be satisfied with their life as a whole and their standard 
of living;
• approximately 14 per cent less likely to feel satisfied with their future security; and
• approximately 8 per cent less satisfied with their spirituality or religion.
The Panel questioned how these findings might potentially relate to suicide rates.
Nearly 80 per cent of all suicides in Australia are males, with the highest rates occurring in males 
between 20 to 34 years65. Suicide accounts for approximately 20 per cent of deaths of males in this age

59    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
group. Recent studies examining trends in Australian suicide rates have consistently demonstrated 
male rates are higher in rural and remote areas than in major cities 66, 67, 68. Further, there is evidence 
linking suicide to drought in New South Wales, with an 8 per cent rise in the long-term mean suicide 
rate being associated with a decrease in precipitation of about 300 millimetres 69.
Access to mental healthcare services and cultural aspects such as reluctance to seek help, may be 
significant factors in the higher suicide rates in males in rural areas 70, 71, 72, 73. It has been argued men do 
not seek healthcare for a range of reasons, including:
• a tendency to use indirect sources of help;
• the perception that seeking help will show their vulnerability; 
• fear and denial;
• difficulty in relinquishing control, and ; 
• a range of systematic barriers 74.
Mental health literacy may be a particular problem for young men in rural areas because they are less 
likely to recognise or report symptoms of distress or to know what can be done to help75. These reasons 
may also apply more generally to males in other age ranges in rural areas, resulting in recommendations 
being made by some researchers for suicide prevention strategies to include referral access to help 
through trusted sources, such as rural financial counsellors and agricultural advisors76, 77, 78, 79.
Recommendation 31
There is an ongoing need to evaluate and enhance existing strategies aimed at overcoming 
reluctance by farm families to access health services in times of stress.
Physical health
There is considerable variation in health outcomes for rural and regional Australia within each 
geographical location that is masked by broad statistical patterns80. Despite this, it is possible to detect 
a number of common patterns and to identify common factors affecting the health of people living in 
rural and remote Australia. Populations in rural and remote Australia generally have poorer access to 
healthcare services and experience poorer health than people living in major cities81, 82. They also have 
higher levels of mortality, morbidity and health risk factors than those who live in major metropolitan 
areas83, 84, 85.
People in rural and remote areas also have different patterns of use of health services86 . For example, 
given the shortage of general practitioners and specialists in rural and remote areas, there is a greater 
tendency for people in these areas to use remote area nurse led clinics or rural hospital emergency 
departments as a source of primary care than people in major cities. People report postponing their 
visit to a health service until it is unavoidable, which may lead to poorer health outcomes. People living 
in rural and remote areas were also more likely to be admitted to hospital for conditions which could 
have potentially been prevented through the timely provision of non-hospital services and care.
Health and wellbeing

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      60 
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare  report, Australian Health 2008, notes it is difficult 
to measure or forecast with any precision how climate conditions or environmental hazards affect 
human health87 . This is because the links often involve indirect and complex relationships and 
the effects are often delayed or displaced. In a submission to the Garnaut Climate Change Review, 
Bambrick et al.88 also advise it is not yet possible to quantify the extent of the adverse health outcomes 
(deaths, injuries, infections, stress disorders, etc.) specifically caused by extreme climatic events. The 
submission suggests this is because methods to separate out the specific impacts of climatic events 
from co-existing health risk factors have not yet been developed.
The Panel believes its observations are consistent with findings in a report by Alston and Kent89 
on the social impacts of drought. In contrast to other reports, Alston and Kent present people’s 
perspectives as evidence of the day-to-day impacts of drought on the health and wellbeing of rural 
Australians. Most of the evidence relates to stress-related health impacts. This includes increased 
anxiety about future prospects, often leading to depression, poor sleeping patterns, and to increasing 
suicidal thoughts and actions. Some people reported their loved ones were being treated for high 
blood pressure since the onset of the drought or were drinking more heavily. It is reasonable to expect 
that there will be a rise in cardiovascular disease rates as many of the risk factors are experienced by 
individuals in stressed conditions. There is, however, a time lag from exposure to risk to the on-set of 
disease, hence the importance of robust primary healthcare services and health promotion activities.
Alston and Kent90  also found the drought represented an additional stress in dealing with pre-existing 
conditions. For some, the drought meant people could not leave the farm because livestock had to 
be hand-fed. This limited the time available for loved ones to support each other in seeking medical 
treatment.
However, the decline in farming work through drought can result in less accidents. For example, 
Coleman et al.91  suggested a downward trend in the number of fatal tractor run-overs between 1988 
and 1995 may have resulted from a reduction in farm work because of continued drought, rather than 
any changed work practices or protective structures.
Observations
Mental health
It is clear to the Panel that extended dryness has a significant negative impact on the mental health of 
farm families and others within rural communities. In particular, the Panel heard repeatedly during the 
public forums and in written submissions that the pressures of drought were leading to an increase in 
the incidence of depression, anxiety and stress in rural and remote areas.
In some cases the negative impacts of drought on the health of farm families and rural communities 
has reportedly resulted in an increase in prescription drug consumption and increasing social 
isolation. For example, a rural pharmacist informed the Panel he had seen, “a substantial increase in the 
prescribing of most psycho-active drugs during the drought”. There were also reports that drought 
can lead to an increase in alcohol consumption and illicit drug use in rural and remote areas. The Panel  
also heard of people not filling their chronic disease prescriptions because of financial pressures, 
illustrating the range of responses by individuals.
Health and wellbeing

61    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Farm families have no respite from witnessing the damage drought causes to their farming business. 
This has the potential to amplify the impact of drought on the mental health of farm families because 
the experience is constant.
The increased pressures and sadness caused by drought can permeate beyond farm families to 
throughout rural communities. Many people at the public forums spoke of drought impacting on their 
mental health by:
• increasing stresses and anxieties about finances, family and the future;
• increasing feelings of sadness at experiencing stock losses, failed harvests and dying orchards;
• increasing children’s anxieties as they witness their parent’s growing levels of stress and depression; 
and
• increasing feelings of isolation as financial constraints and depression result in them withdrawing 
from community activities and emotionally from family relationships.
People raised concerns about the psychological effects on school children from drought-affected 
families. Children are keenly exposed to the financial and emotional condition of their parents. A 
number of school teachers reported this was leading to behavioural problems in school children from 
drought-affected families. There is also a reported shortage of school psychologists in rural Australia.
and MindMatters respectively, are currently limited in their reach to rural schools. The Panel believes 
it warrants special consideration that these programs are extended to schools in drought affected 
communities, particularly those rural schools with part-time or no psychologists.
“Stress, financial hardship, lowering of self esteem, frustration, loneliness, fear 
and jealousy are some feelings I have experienced because of the drought”. 
Farmer, Walgett, New South Wales
“The sense of spirit and hope has reduced over time. Most telling is the effect 
that this is now having on the wives of farmers who until recently remained 
resilient and strong”. 
Murrindindi Shire Council, Alexandra, Victoria
“Other natural disasters like fire and flood unite communities as we all draw 
together to help one another. Drought isolates us through a slow strangulation 
leaving our moods bad, our self-esteem low and our decision-making 
difficult” 
Farmer, location withheld
Health and wellbeing

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      62 
Recommendation 32
be extended to schools in dryness affected communities, particularly those rural schools 
without existing counselling support
Some forum participants told of feeling isolated when one partner needed to pursue off-farm work 
to improve the family’s cash flow, leaving the other partner to work the farm alone. In some cases this 
situation was seen as permanently separating families. For example, where a farm was located far 
from town, one partner may move with the children into town during the week to be close to off-farm 
employment and schooling, while the other partner remained behind to work the farm. Depending on 
distance, the family may not be reunited for weeks at a time.
The Panel acknowledges this phenomenon is being driven by factors beyond drought and is not 
unique to the farming sector, with occupations such as truck drivers and fly-in/fly-out miners 
experiencing this situation as a way of life. However this isolation can exacerbate health problems 
during times of high stress brought on by the pressures of drought.
The issue of suicide was touched on in several forums and written submissions. Given that suicide 
rates for males in rural and remote areas are known to be higher than in major cities92, 93, the Panel 
was particularly concerned about the potential impact that drought may be contributing by isolating 
people and increasing financial stresses.
Physical health
The Panel heard that drought can cause deterioration in the physical health of farm families because 
of a range of reasons such as:
• increased workloads because farmers undertake more labour on the farm themselves rather than 
through employees. Farmer workloads are further increased when one farming partner is left to 
operate the farm while the other pursues off-farm employment;
• increased workloads when farmers are pursuing off-farm employment in addition to operating the 
farm;
• lack of time / financial resources leading to increased risky behaviour in seeking or continuing 
appropriate treatment for physical health conditions and injuries;
• increased physical symptoms of mental health issues relating to increased levels of stress and 
anxiety.
Health and wellbeing

63    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Findings
Despite there being a lack of research about the specific impacts of drought on mental and physical 
health, the Panel recognises a strong link between drought and health outcomes. 
Recommendation 33
To improve existing response strategies, governments must support research on the 
extent to which dryness and access to primary healthcare in rural Australia impact on the 
health and wellbeing of people.
Drought overlays other determinants of health such as mastery (control), education, employment, 
health behaviours (smoking and nutrition), access to primary and allied health-care services and impacts 
on the ability of individuals to seek help. As such, the Panel believes individuals need to become more 
health literate, aware of their own health and wellbeing needs, to be supported to focus on their ongoing 
wellbeing at all times and to understand that during times of dryness, that risk factors are heightened.
On this matter, the Panel is pleased there appears to have been remarkable progress made within rural 
communities in acknowledging the existence of mental health issues and the impact that periods of 
added stress can have. However, there are still improvements that can and should be made in assisting 
people in rural areas to recognise symptoms of health and wellbeing problems with themselves, friends 
and families and to make it easier for people to seek appropriate help in a timely way. In addition, the 
Panel notes a large number of recent health initiatives have specifically focused on the needs of rural 
men. The Panel considers it is also important that women’s health needs are recognised and supported.
The Panel strongly believes that if improvements in the wellbeing of farm families and rural communities 
can be achieved, it will result in healthier and more productive agricultural and rural businesses.
The Panel considers that rural areas need to have their own long-term strategies for building, up-
skilling, diversifying and bolstering primary and allied healthcare services rather than the current ad 
hoc approach of attempting to bring in extra resources during times of drought. This is not to say 
services employed specifically for drought are not currently assisting; the Panel believe improved 
levels of primary healthcare services would be more sustainable and better placed to scale up in times 
of dryness. It believes this would aid health protection, prevention, early intervention strategies and 
facilitate improved networks and referral pathways.
Access to primary healthcare services was described as very limited in areas where GP services were 
present but did not bulk bill for services provided.
Recommendation 34
The current ad hoc approach of bringing in extra health resources during times of dryness 
should cease and instead the capacity of existing primary and allied health care services 
in rural communities must be sustainably built upon to enable them to respond to the 
health and wellbeing of the community and the impacts of future dryness. This includes 
improving access to affordable services.
Health and wellbeing

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      64 
The Panel found there was an absence of adequate communication from governments to farm 
families and rural communities about what health services can realistically be provided and maintained 
in local areas. While it is rational that population levels will have a bearing on the services available 
locally, the absence of a better understanding in this area is causing great stress, which is compounded 
during times of dryness. Services provided by remote area nurses and nurse practitioners are 
currently indistinguishable in the national data and are not supported by mainstream primary 
care support strategies. This compounds the sense that people and families do not have access to 
adequate primary healthcare services.
Recommendation 35
Governments must make better efforts to engage with rural communities and the primary 
health-care sector, to ensure there is no continuing mismatch between needs and capac-
ity of the remote and rural primary healthcare services and local people’s expectations of 
these services.
“Many people regularly miss being supplied with their regular medications for periods of 
days or weeks because of the business demands and economic impact of the drought… For 
example, one middle-aged grazier asked me to advise him which three of his five prescribed 
PBS medicines (two for blood pressure, two for Type2 diabetes and one for cholesterol) he 
could most safely stop taking because, at an average cost of more than $25 each per month 
($125 per month total), he could only afford two of them. He had previously conducted a 
similar conversation with his doctor. When I explained that it would be unethical of me to 
provide such advice, he asked me to write down what each medicine was for so he could make 
up his own mind about which to cease.”
Pharmacist, New South Wales
“For three months, when my partner first re-started milking, he was still working full-time 
off-farm. He would not tell his boss what he was doing, because he did not want to be put off, 
as business there was quietening down… He was convinced that all he had to do was work 
harder. By Christmas I was quite beside myself, watching him push himself harder and harder, 
working longer and harder hours; never seeing him. My heart ached watching him, knowing 
there was nothing I could do. At one stage he spilt acid on his hand and the white-tail spider 
bite he had received the previous year flared up. His hand looked like it was rotting away. Even 
then, I could not convince him to see a doctor. His mother, a nurse suggested that he should 
see a doctor, but he did not have time. I had to watch and wait. I prayed. I prayed that he would 
come home each night, that there would be no accident” 
Female farmer, New South Wales
Health and wellbeing
Recommendation 35
Governments must make better efforts to engage with rural communities and the primary
health-care sector, to ensure there is no continuing mismatch between needs and capac-
ity of the remote and rural primary healthcare services and local people’s expectations of 
these services.

65    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The need to travel long distances to access specialist services can cause further stress. Some women 
reported that the absence of childcare services inhibited their ability to travel to access medical 
treatment. In this regard, the Panel believes initiatives such as Patient Assisted Travel Schemes (PATS) 
are critical for assisting farm families and people in rural communities to access specialist services 
where they are not available locally.
Recommendation 36
The Panel supports adopting the recommendations relating to Patient Assisted Travel 
Schemes outlined in the then Senate Standing Committee on Community Affairs September, 
2007 report Highway to health: better access for rural, regional and remote patients and that 
the approval for access to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes be vested in the 
providing primary healthcare professional.
The stress of drought appears to have affected whole communities in parts of rural Australia. The 
Panel found that although most people will experience short-term stress at various stages of their 
lives, the longevity of the current drought is causing sustained distress for some. The Panel believes it 
is important people understand that stress and depression should not be feared and that it is natural 
when people have feelings of grief and sadness when they are under financial pressure. What is 
essential is that people and their families can recognise these issues and are able to identify symptoms 
and have access to appropriate support at an early stage as sustained symptoms can become more 
serious.
The Panel believes it is essential there be a move away from the current crisis-framed approach to 
drought support and instead focus on the ongoing, long-term wellbeing of farm families and rural 
communities. Strategies to make genuine improvements in the areas of health and wellbeing should 
form a critical part of future planning for dryness, and must include ways to ensure adequate levels of 
primary and allied healthcare services across remote and rural Australia.
Health and wellbeing

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      66 
Recommendation 37
Existing physical and mental health services must be easily accessible and responsive to the 
needs of drought affected families. This could be achieved in a number of ways, including:
– government assistance for mental health and emotional support services for rural communities 
being examined with a view to improving and the streamlining the on-ground services available, 
including building stronger linkages and referral capacities between support services;
– offering farm families and rural people incentives and tools to enable them to become more self-
aware of their own physical and mental health needs and to focus on their ongoing wellbeing at all 
times; 
– assisting farm families to understand that during times of dryness the risk factors in determining 
health are heightened and that people have clear pathways available for them to seek appropriate 
help, with this preferably being at an early stage; 
– healthcare services in remote and rural Australia be strengthened to provide health promotion and 
regular health assessments that include risk factors (eg cardiovascular, stress) known to contribute 
loss of productivity, quality of life and premature mortality for farm families and people in rural 
communities;
– people who are employed in drought support roles being required to possess mental health 
literacy, referral and first aid skills, and;
– the professionals providing primary healthcare in rural Australia have ready access to support, 
upskilling, relief and professional networks to enable them to provide quality care.
Health and wellbeing

67    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
An improved policy for dryness must focus on preparing for dryness and planning for personal and 
family wellbeing.
Recommendation 2
Governments must make a high-level statement of commitment to a strong, healthy, vibrant and 
sustainable rural Australia.
Recommendation 3
Existing and improved policy for dryness should be based on principles that include:
3.1 integrated development of individual and family wellbeing plans consistent with farm business 
and natural resource management planning as a mutual responsibility for future public-funded 
assistance.
3.2 a transition strategy so that when current drought declarations are concluded there continues to 
be government investment to assist farm recovery and planning for future periods of dryness.
Recommendation 4
The drought support roles of federal, state and local governments should be clarified and a lead 
agency or coordinating committee be established across government and within each jurisdiction to 
ensure proper implementation of dryness-related policy.
Recommendation 5
People who provide support to farm families, rural businesses and rural communities during times 
of stress, including those working in government and non-government organisations should be 
respectful and understanding of the stress facing farm families and rural communities, and in 
particular ensure they are clear and factual in their communication and do not impose or offer their 
own value judgements.
Recommendation 6
To alleviate the stress of future dryness, governments and non-government organisations must move 
away from crisis-framed responses and:
6.1 adopt more long-term sustainable approaches based on the delivery of existing human support 
services, focused on planning for the wellbeing of farm families, rural businesses and rural 
communities prior to periods of dryness; and
6.2 provide incentives to support the development of individual and family wellbeing plans as part of a 
shift towards better preparedness for dryness. 
Recommendations

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      68 
Recommendation 7
The needs of farm families and rural communities in remote and dryness affected areas should be 
an item for consideration by the Australian Social Inclusion Board. The specific circumstances of 
Indigenous populations in such communities should be considered a priority by the Board.
Recommendation 8
To effectively prepare communities for the social impacts of future dryness, governments must 
ensure support of community development initiatives reinforce social changes that will endure. 
Community development initiatives, such as community socialising events, should have clear 
objectives aimed at linking farm families and rural communities with various human service providers 
and/or facilitate clear referral pathways.
Recommendation 9
In the light of the availability of income support, non-government organisations should carefully 
consider whether there is a genuine need for food parcels or whether other forms of support would 
provide enduring benefits.
Recommendation 10
Effective and improved policies which support farm families and rural communities to live with 
dryness should be:
10.1 delivered by appropriately qualified and supervised individuals, organisations and service 
providers;
10.2 have clear criteria and guidelines and ensure that funding provides scope for rigorous 
independent evaluation. 
Recommendation 11
To account for the needs of farm families, an improved policy for dryness must consider:
11.1 the changing demographics of farm families and rural communities
11.2 impediments to farm succession to enable effective intergenerational change
11.3 the contribution of women and youth to farming and rural communities
Recommendation 12
institutional barriers to farm succession, and whether changes could provide improved succession 
planning incentives for farmers.
Recommendation 13
Government policy should focus on encouraging farm families to properly assess and to access human 
support services.
Recommendations

69    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Recommendation 14
Further research is needed into understanding the wellbeing of farm families facing periods of 
dryness.
Recommendation 15
In planning for dryness, improved human support services, must be available and responsive to the 
needs of farm families and rural people. 
Recommendation 16
The distributors of community assistance and social services, including volunteers, should themselves 
have access to professional support.
Recommendation 17
The outreach mobility of human services to respond to rural people in times of stress, such as future 
periods of dryness, needs to be improved, with one option being an expansion of the Centrelink Rural 
Services Officer program.
Recommendation 18
An independent formative evaluation of the Rural Financial Counselling Service must occur as soon 
as practical to: assess the progress that has been made in delivering a case-management approach; 
identify the institutional barriers that exist, and; to determine any improvements and adjustments that 
may be needed.
Recommendation 19
The word “counselling” should be removed from the name of the Rural Financial Counselling Service 
and replaced by a more appropriate title, better fitting the service’s broader role.
Recommendation 20
Access to government drought assistance and services must be improved by making applications and 
referral pathways simpler.
Recommendation 21
An urgent audit should be conducted on the extent, experience and qualifications of human support 
services being implemented on-the-ground in rural Australia (government and non-government). 
Recommendation 22
Following this audit, strategies must be developed to achieve the most appropriate distribution and 
allocation of resources and linkages between human service providers, including clear hierarchies to 
facilitate better region-specific coordination and referral pathways. 
Recommendations

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      70 
These strategies should also consider:
22.1 
co-locating service providers where possible to form service hubs for rural centres;
22.2 
Providing specific mental health first aid training and health promotion for service providers to 
better identify, react and refer clients with mental health issues;
22.3 
establishing minimum standards and appropriate qualifications for human support service 
providers and their employees, including non-government organisations;
22.4 
ensuring funding terms for human support services are of an appropriate length to enable 
effective establishment, delivery and review of the services provided. 
Recommendation 23
State governments must consider the short to medium-term social and economic impacts, when 
dryness is a contributing factor, when assessing the viability of classes, schools and bus services.
Recommendation 24
Where school closure is the judicious option, state governments should assist rural families to access 
other education options for their children. 
Recommendation 25
There must be more flexible training delivery methods for adult learning (using adult learning 
principles), including providing outreach training, for farm families and people in rural communities 
who find it difficult because of dryness to attend training opportunities. This could be achieved by:
25.1 
vocational education and training programs aimed at assisting farm families with up-skilling or 
re-skilling, including recognition of prior learning, to broaden opportunities to earn off-farm 
income;
25.2  
funding for vocational education institutions to help farm families and people in rural 
communities more readily access further education opportunities.
25.3 
careful consideration of the timing and appropriateness and potential effectiveness of delivering 
education and training programs during times of stress, such as dryness. 
Recommendation 26
Further research is needed to better understand how reoccurring stressors such as dryness affect the 
education outcomes for young people.
Recommendation 27
challenges facing rural Australia and specifically examine whether the nature of farm families income 
and asset circumstances disadvantages farm families accessing youth allowance assistance.
Recommendations

71    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Recommendation 28
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must develop policies and initiatives to 
address trade and other professional skills shortages in farm families and rural communities. These 
policies and initiatives must be underpinned by regional-specific research on the location, extent and 
impact of skill shortages. 
Policy and initiatives should:
28.1  
recognise that training and education of people in rural settings leads to greater retention of 
that skill base in rural communities;
28.2 
recognise the important role rural universities play in educating and training skilled workers for 
rural areas;
28.3 
promote rural-bonded scholarships as a means of addressing agriculture and rural trade and 
other professional skills shortages.
Recommendation 29
A formative evaluation of the Drought Force program, as well as other employment programs, must 
be undertaken to better address the functioning of the labour market in the agriculture sector during 
periods of dryness, and to encourage people to remain in their local community.
Recommendation 30
Governments, along with the education and industry sectors, must promote and educate people on 
the rewards and risks associated with careers in agriculture and other rural industries.
Recommendation 31
There is an ongoing need to evaluate and enhance existing strategies aimed at overcoming reluctance 
by farm families to access health services in times of stress.
Recommendation 32
extended to schools in dryness affected communities, particularly those rural schools without existing 
counselling support
Recommendation 33
To improve existing response strategies, governments must support research on the extent to which 
dryness and access to primary healthcare in rural Australia impact on the health and wellbeing of 
people.
Recommendations

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      72 
Recommendation 34
The current ad hoc approach of bringing in extra health resources during times of dryness should 
cease and instead the capacity of existing primary and allied health care services in rural communities 
must be sustainably built upon to enable them to respond to the health and wellbeing of the 
community and the impacts of future dryness. This includes improving access to affordable services.
Recommendation 35
Governments must make better efforts to engage with rural communities and the primary health-care 
sector, to ensure there is no continuing mismatch between needs and capacity of the remote and rural 
primary healthcare services and local people’s expectations of these services.
Recommendation 36
The Panel supports adopting the recommendations relating to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes 
outlined in the then Senate Standing Committee on Community Affairs September, 2007 report 
Highway to health: better access for rural, regional and remote patients and that the approval for 
access to Patient Assisted Travel Schemes be vested in the providing primary healthcare professional.
Recommendation 37
Existing physical and mental health services must be easily accessible and responsive to the needs of 
drought affected families. This could be achieved in a number of ways, including:
37.1 
government assistance for mental health and emotional support services for rural communities 
being examined with a view to improving and the streamlining the on-ground services available, 
including building stronger linkages and referral capacities between support services;
37.2 
offering farm families and rural people incentives and tools to enable them to become more 
self-aware of their own physical and mental health needs and to focus on their ongoing 
wellbeing at all times; 
37.3 
assisting farm families to understand that during times of dryness the risk factors in 
determining health are heightened and that people have clear pathways available for them to 
seek appropriate help, with this preferably being at an early stage; 
37.4 
healthcare services in remote and rural Australia be strengthened to provide health promotion 
and regular health assessments that include risk factors (eg cardiovascular, stress) known to 
contribute loss of productivity, quality of life and premature mortality for farm families and 
people in rural communities;
37.5 
people who are employed in drought support roles being required to possess mental health 
literacy, referral and first aid skills, and;
37.6 
the professionals providing primary healthcare in rural Australia have ready access to support, 
upskilling, relief and professional networks to enable them to provide quality care.
Recommendations

73    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Glossary
Glossary and acronyms
ABARE 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics
ABS 
Australian Bureau of Statistics
ANZSIC 
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification 
BRS 
Bureau of Rural Sciences
DAFF 
EC 
Exceptional Circumstances: EC events are defined as rare and severe events that
are outside those that  farmer could normally be expected to manage using 
responsible farm management strategies. To be classified as an EC event, the 
event:
• must be rare, that is, it must not have occurred more than once on average in 
every 20 to 25 years
• must result in a rare and severe downturn in farm income over a prolonged 
period of time (eg greater than 12 months)
• must be a discrete event that is not part of long-term structural adjustment 
processes or normal fluctuations in commodity prices 
MP 
Member of Parliament
SSP 
Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences
CSIRO   
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
farmer 
encompasses male and female farmers unless specifically stated
human support 
includes all government agencies and non-government organisations 
services 
associated with the delivery of support services
peri-urban 
the area immediately adjoining an urban area; between the suburbs and the 
countryside
rural communities regional, rural and remote areas of Australia, excluding coastal centres with a 
population of more than 100 000 people

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      74 
References
1 
K.Hennessy, R.Fawcett, D.Kirono, F.Mpelasoka, D.Jones, J.Bathols, P.Whetton, M.Staffors Smith, 
M.Howden, C.Mitchell and N.Plummer, An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on the 
Nature and Frequency of Exceptional Climate Events, Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2008
2 
Garnaut.R, Garnaut Climate Climate Change Review: Draft Report, June 2008 Available: http://
www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/pages/all-reports--resources-draft-report
3 
Estlake S, An Introduction to the Australian Economy, 3rd edition, January 2006, Available: http://
www.anz.com/business/info_centre/economic_commentary/EncycAmericana(2006update).pdf
4 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics, Australian Farm Survey Results 2005-2006 
to 2007-2008,Available: www.abareconomics.com/publications.html/economy/economy.08/fsr-
08.pdf
5 
Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Drought Support: Issues Paper, Available: http://www.
pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/81880/government-drought-support-issues.pdf
6 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Economics, Australian Farm Survey Results 2005-2006 
to 2007-2008,Available: www.abareconomics.com/publications.html/economy/economy.08/fsr-
08.pdf
7 
Estlake S, An Introduction to the Australian Economy, 3rd edition, January 2006, Available: http://
www.anz.com/business/info_centre/economic_commentary/EncycAmericana(2006update).pdf
8 
cossa.csiro.au/lb/lbbook/urban/yb1.htm
9 
cossa.csiro.au/lb/lbbook/urban/yb1.htm
10 
Bureau of Rural Sciences, 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters, 
August 2008]
11 
BRS 2008c
12 
ABS 2008
13 
BRS 2008c
14 
Productivity Commission, Inquiry into Drought Support: Issues Paper, Available: http://www.
pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/81880/government-drought-support-issues.pdf
15 
Aslin H and Russell J, Social Impacts of Drought: Review of Literature for the Expert Social Panel, 
Bureau of Rural Sciences, 
16 
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to 
the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: 
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-
D%20Mental%20health.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008]
17 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear , Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas in 
Australia. in the Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7) 2004.
18 
Bureau of Meteorology, The ‘Federation Drought’ 1895-1902, Available: http://www.bom.gov.
au/lam/climate/levelthree/c20thc/drought.htm
References
References

75    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
19 
K.Hennessy, R.Fawcett, D.Kirono, F.Mpelasoka, D.Jones, J.Bathols, P.Whetton, M.Staffors Smith, 
M.Howden, C.Mitchell and N.Plummer, An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on the 
Nature and Frequency of Exceptional Climate Events, Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO, 2008
20 
Crosby E, Welfare and Support Services for farm families, rural businesses and rural communities 
Families, Changing Families, Challenging Futures, 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies 
Conference, Melbourne 1998
21 
Drought Policy Review Task Force, National drought policy, final report Volume 1. Canberra, 
22 
ibid
23 
ibid
24 
Wahlquist, A (2003) Media representations and public perceptions of drought. In: Botterill, LC 
& M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO 
Publishing.
25 
Elaine Crosby, Welfare and Support Services for farm families, rural businesses and rural 
communities Families, paper given at Changing Families, Challenging Futures, 6th Australian 
Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 1998
26 
Gamble, D, S Blunden, L Kuhn-White, M Voyce & J Loftus (1995) Transfer of the family farm business 
in a changing rural society, RIRDC Research Paper No 95/8.
27 
Hodges, A. and Goesch, T. 2006, Australian Farm families, rural businesses and rural communities: 
Natural Resource Management in 2004-05, ABARE Research Report 06.12, prepared for the 
2006 
28 
Australian Bureau of Statistics 4620.0 - Natural Resource Management on Australian Farm 
families, rural businesses and rural communities, 2006-07
29 
ABARE, 2000, Country Towns, Impact of farm families, rural businesses and rural communities 
expenditure on employment and population
30 
Hall, G & M Scheltens (2005) Beyond the drought: towards a broader understanding of rural 
disadvantage. Rural Society, 15(3): 347-58.
31 
NSW Department of Primary Industries, Press release, “Popular drought community events 
provide welcome relief to more than 117,000 families”, 4 September 2008
32 
Pers.com, at Alice Springs Forum to Expert Social Panel, National Review of Drought Policy,  21 July 
2008
33 
Stehlik, D, G Lawrence & I Gray (2000) Gender and drought: experiences of Australian women in 
the drought of the 1990s. Disasters, 24: 38-53.
34 
Lynn, M (2004) The return of community to rural human services. Rural Society, 14(3): 228-44.
35 
Green, R & B Lonne (2005) ‘Great lifestyle, pity about the job stress’: occupational stress in rural 
human service practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 252-66.
36 
Chenoweth, L (2004) Educating practitioners for integrative rural practice. Rural Society, 14(3): 
276-87.
37 
Alston, M & J Kent (2006) The impact of drought on secondary education access in Australia’s 
rural and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/4415AD4A-F3AF-40DF-
9F10-00F5DE08E855/12764/Impact_Droughtreport23Jan2006.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
References

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      76 
38 
ibid
39 
ibid
40 ibid 
41 
Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. 
Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70.
42 
Aliston and Kent (2006).
43 
ibid
44 
BRS (2008b) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Education. 
asp?prodid=13898 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
45 
ibid
46 
DEEWR (2008c) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 3: Higher Education. Department of 
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
47 
ibid
48 
BTRE (2006) Skill shortages in Australia’s regions. Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics 
Working Paper No. 68, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/publications/19/Files/wp68.pdf 
[Accessed 31 July 2008]
49 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. 
asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
50 
ABARE (2000) Country towns: impact of farmers’ expenditure on employment and population in 
Australian towns. Current Issues, 4(October): 1-6.
51 
BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
52 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. 
asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
53 
AIHW (1997) First report on national health priority areas, 1996: Cardiovascular health, cancer control, 
injury prevention and control, mental health and diabetes mellitus (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 1). Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare, Commonwealth Department of Health and Family Services.
54 
AIHW (2008b) Mental Health Services in Australia 2005-2006. Mental Health Series No. 10, Cat no. 
HSE 56. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
55 
Beyondblue National Depression Initiative (2008) Research 2001-2007: Targeted research in 
depression, anxiety and related disorders, February 2008.
56 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 
2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, 
Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
57 
Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. 
Sociologia Ruralis, 46: 154-70.
References

77    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
58 
Alston, M & J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http://
www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 
August 2008] 
59 
Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health 
outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
60 Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 
2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, 
Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
61 
Dean, J & H Stain (2007) The impact of drought on the emotional well-being of children and 
adolescents in rural and remote New South Wales. Journal of Rural Health, 23(4): 356-64
62 
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and 
expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian 
community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/
articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
63 
Stehlik, D (2003) Australian drought as lived experience: social and community impacts In: Fisher, 
M & L Botterill (Eds.) Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives. Collingwood: CSIRO 
Publishing.
64 
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to 
the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: 
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20
Mental%20health.pdf
65 
ABS (2005) Suicides, Australia, 1995-2005. Australian Bureau of Statistics (3309.0).
66 
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh & T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to 
the Garnaut Climate Change Review: ‘Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change’, Available: 
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-D%20
Mental%20health.pdf
67 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan 
areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen.
68 
DoHA (2008a) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement on ‘Mental Health - 
increased mental health services for drought-affected communities’, Available: http://www.health.
gov.au/internet/budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/
hfact19.pdf [Accessed 5 August 2008] 
69 
Nicholls, N, CD Butler & I Hanigan (2006) Inter-annual rainfall variations and suicide in New South 
Wales, Australia, 1964-2001. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(3): 139-43.
70 
Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health 
outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
71 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan 
areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
72 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 
2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, 
Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
References

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      78 
73 
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and 
expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian 
community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/
articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
74 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan 
areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
75 
ibid
76 
Alston, M & J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health 
outcomes for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
77 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan 
areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
78 
Fuller, J, B Kelly, G Sartore, L Fragar, A Tonna, G Pollard & T Hazell (2007) Use of social network 
analysis to describe service links for farmers’ mental health. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 15: 
99-106
79 
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and 
expectations for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian 
community. Rural and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/
articles/subviewaust.asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
80 AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of 
Health and Welfare.
81 
ibid
82 
Productivity Commission (2005) Australia’s Health Workforce - Research Report, 22 December 
2005. Canberra.
83 
AIHW (2007) Rural, regional and remote health: a study on mortality - 2nd edition (AIHW cat. no. 
PHE 95), [Accessed 5 August 2008]
84 
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of 
Health and Welfare
85 
AIHW (2008c) Rural, regional and remote health: indicators of health status and determinants of 
health, March 2008 (Rural Health Series no. 9, Cat no. PHE 97). Canberra: Australian Institute of 
Health and Welfare
86 
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of 
Health and Welfare
87 
ibid
88 
Bambrick, H, K Dear, R Woodruff, I Hanigan & A McMichael (2008) Submission to the Garnaut 
Climate Change Review: ‘The impacts of climate change on three health outcomes: temperature-
related mortality and hospitalisations, salmonellosis and other bacterial gastroenteritis, and 
population at risk from Dengue’, joint submission prepared by School of Medicine, University 
of Western Sydney and National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian 
National University, June 2008, Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/
WebObj/03-AThreehealthoutcomes/$File/03-A%20Three%20health%20outcomes.pdf 
[Accessed 23 July 2008] 
References

79    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
89 
Alston, M & J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http://
www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf [Accessed 1 
August 2008]
90 ibid
91 
Coleman R, L Fragar, C Morton & K Winter (1996) Profile of the health and safety of Australian 
farmers, farm families and farm workers, RIRDC Funded national Farm Injury Data Collection 
Project. Available: http://www.aghealth.org.au/tinymce_fm/uploaded/Research%20Reports/
profile_aus_farmers_families_workers_96.pdf [Accessed 25 August 2008]
92 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm & K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan 
areas in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen
93 
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 
2005, Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, 
Henry Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
Tables
1 
BRS (2008d) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Social Fabric. 
asp?prodid=13900 [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
2 
BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
3 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. 
asp?prodid=13899 [Accessed 6 August 2008]
4 
ABS (2008a) Agriculture in focus: farming families, Australia, 2006 (Cat.No. 7104.0.55.001). 
Available: http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/
7104.0.55.001Main%20Features12006?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=7104.0.55.
001&issue=2006&num=&view= [Accessed 2008a]
5 
Barr, N, K Karunaratne & R Wilkinson (2005) Australia’s farmers: past, present and future. 
Canberra, ACT: Land and Water Australia
References

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      80 
Bibliography
ABARE (2000) Country towns: impact of farmers’ expenditure on employment and population in 
Australian towns. Current Issues, 4(October): 1-6.
ABS (1997) Mental health and wellbeing: Profile of adults, Australia. Canberra: Australian Bureau of 
Statistics.
ABS (2005) Suicides, Australia, 1995-2005. Australian Bureau of Statistics (3309.0).
ABS (2008a) Agriculture in focus: farming families, Australia, 2006 (Cat.No. 7104.0.55.001). Available: 
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts 
7104.0.55.001Main%20Features12006?o
pendocumentandtabname=Summaryandprodno=7104.0.55.001andissue=2006andnum=andview= 
[Accessed 2008a] 
ABS (2008b) Housing and services in remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. Australian 
Social Trends, 4102.0: 1-10.
ABS (2008c) National Regional Profile (an interactive website of the Australian Bureau of Statistics), 
Available: http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/webpages/National+Regional+Profile [Accessed 
31 July 2008] 
Agricultural Council of Australia and New Zealand (1992) National Drought Policy, Resolution 1c. Meeting 
Number 138, Mackay, 24 July 1992.
AIHW (1997) First report on national health priority areas, 1996: Cardiovascular health, cancer control, 
injury prevention and control, mental health and diabetes mellitus (AIHW Cat. No. PHE 1). Australian 
Institute of Health and Welfare, Commonwealth Department of Health and Family Services.
AIHW (2004) Rural, regional and remote health - A guide to remoteness classifications, March 2004 
(AIHW Cat. No. PHE 53). Rural Health Series. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW (2007) Rural, regional and remote health: a study on mortality - 2nd edition (AIHW cat. no. PHE 95), 
[Accessed 5 August 2008] 
AIHW (2008a) Australia’s health 2008 - The eleventh biennial health report of the Australian Institute of 
Health and Welfare, June 2006 (Cat. No. AUS 99). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW (2008b) Mental Health Services in Australia 2005-2006. Mental Health Series No. 10, Cat no. HSE 
56. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
AIHW (2008c) Rural, regional and remote health: indicators of health status and determinants of health, 
March 2008 (Rural Health Series no. 9, Cat no. PHE 97). Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and 
Welfare.
AIHW: Begg S, V T, B B, S C, S L and L A (2007) The burden of disease and injury in Australia, 2003 - Cat. no. 
PHE 82. Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.
Alston, M (2004) Coping with crisis: human services in times of drought. Rural Society, 14(3).
Alston, M (2005) Forging a new paradigm for Australian rural social work practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 
276-83.
Bibliography

81    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Alston, M (2006) ‘I’d like to just walk out of here’: Australian women’s experience of drought. Sociologia 
Ruralis, 46: 154-70.
Alston, M and J Kent (2004) Social impacts of drought - a report to NSW Agriculture, Available: http://
www.csu.edu.au/research/crsr/ruralsoc/Social%20Impacts%20of%20Drought.pdf 
[Accessed 
1 
August 2008] 
Alston, M and J Kent (2006) The impact of drought on secondary education access in Australia’s rural 
and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/4415AD4A-F3AF-40DF-9F10-
00F5DE08E855/12764/Impact_Droughtreport23Jan2006.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Alston, M and J Kent (2008) The big dry: the link between rural masculinities and poor health outcomes 
for farming men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2): 133-47.
Alston, M and K Witney-Soanes (2008) Social impacts of drought in the Murray Darling Basin. Report 
prepared for Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, 
Institute of Land, Water and Society, Wagga Wagga.
ANTA (2003) Australia’s National Strategy for Vocational Education and Training 2004-2010. Australian 
National Training Authority, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/98206EC7-3B9A-4A58-
991F-4F28010BF825/16445/national_strategy.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
ANTA (2004) Strengthening communities and regions: ideas for action - a discussion paper. Australian 
National Training Authority, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/D4176A1D-4029-4854-
B7DA-C3162E56DA87/12064/strengtheningcommunitiesandregionsideasforactionDR.pdf [Accessed 
1 August 2008] 
Ash, A, R Nelson, M Howden and S Crimp (2008) Australian agriculture adapting to climate change: 
balancing incremental innovation and transformational change.  Outlook 2008. Canberra, ABARE.
Ashfield, J (2007) Taking care of yourself and your family: a resource book for good mental health. 
Peacock Publications for Beyondblue, the National Depression Initiative.
pmc.gov.au/social_inclusion.cfm [Accessed 30 June 2008] 
Australian Health Ministers’ Conference (2008) National Action Plan on Mental Health 2006-2011, 
Progress report 2006-2007, prepared under the auspices of the Mental Health Standing Committee 
of the Australian Health Minister’s Advisory Council and endorsed by Australian Health Ministers, 
February 2008. In: Governments, CoA (Ed.).
Bambrick, H, K Dear, R Woodruff, I Hanigan and A McMichael (2008) Submission to the Garnaut Climate 
Change Review: The impacts of climate change on three health outcomes: temperature-related 
mortality and hospitalisations, salmonellosis and other bacterial gastroenteritis, and population at 
risk from Dengue, joint submission prepared by School of Medicine, University of Western Sydney and 
National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian National University, June 2008, 
Available: http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-AThreehealthoutcomes/
$File/03-A%20Three%20health%20outcomes.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008] 
Bibliography

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      82 
Barr, N, K Karunaratne and R Wilkinson (2005) Australia’s farmers: past, present and future. Canberra, 
ACT: Land and Water Australia.
Berry, H, B Kelly, I Hanigan, J Coates, A McMichael, J Welsh and T Kjellstrom (2008) Submission to 
the Garnaut Climate Change Review: Rural Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change, Available: 
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/CA25734E0016A131/WebObj/03-DMentalhealth/$File/03-
D%20Mental%20health.pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008] 
Beyondblue National Depression Initiative (2008) Research 2001-2007: Targeted research in depression, 
anxiety and related disorders, February 2008.
BITRE (2008) Regional economic growth - BITRE’s taxable income database (an interactive database). 
Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics, Available: http://www.btre.gov.au/Info.
aspx?ResourceId=617andNodeId=13 [Accessed 31 July 2008] 
Black, A, J Duff, S Saggers, P Baines, A Jennings and P Bowen (2000) Rural communities and rural social 
issues: priorities for research. Canberra: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Botterill, L (2000) Policy approaches to farm exit: some factors influencing the efficacy of Commonwealth 
programs. Canberra: School of Social Sciences, Australian National University.
Botterill, L (2003a) Beyond drought in Australia: the way forward. In: Botterill, LC and M Fisher (Eds.) 
Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives,. Collingwood, Victoria: CSIRO Publishing.
Botterill, L and M Fisher (Eds.) (2003) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives: CSIRO 
Publishing.
Botterill, LC (2001) Rural policy assumptions and policy failure: the case of the re-establishment grant. 
Australian Journal of Public Administration, 60(4): 9-16.
Botterill, LC (2003b) Uncertain climate: the recent history of drought policy in Australia. Australian 
Journal of Politics and History, 49(1): 61-74.
Botterill, LC (2004) Valuing agriculture: balancing competing objectives in the policy process. Journal of 
Public Policy, 24(2): 199-218.
Bowes J M and R Grace (Eds) Children, families and communities: contexts and consequences, Melbourne, 
Oxford University Press [in press].
BRS (2008a) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Drought. Bureau of 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
BRS (2008b) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Education. Bureau of 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
BRS (2008c) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Employment. Bureau of 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
BRS (2008d) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters - Social Fabric. Bureau of 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
Bibliography

83    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
BRS (2008e) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural Sciences, 
August 2008] 
BRS (n.d.) Australia’s national drought policy, Available: http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/34200/20030417-
0000/www.affa.gov.au/content/output82b3.html [Accessed 28 July 2008] 
BTRE (2003) Government Interventions in pursuit of regional development: learning from experience. 
Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics Working Paper 55, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/
publications/06/Files/wp55.pdf [Accessed 31 July 2008] 
BTRE (2006) Skill shortages in Australia’s regions. Bureau of Transport and Regional Economics Working 
Paper No. 68, Available: http://www.bitre.gov.au/publications/19/Files/wp68.pdf [Accessed 31 July 
2008] 
Burke, T (2008a) Expert Panel to review social impacts of drought. Media release. Office of the Minister 
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
Burke, T (2008b) Media Release of the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Tony Burke, on 
the ‘Details of national review of drought policy’, June 2008, Available: http://www.maff.gov.au/media/
media_releases/june_2008/details_of_national_review_of_drought_policy_released [Accessed 29 
July 2008] 
Burnside, D (2007) The relationship between community vitality, viability and health, and natural resources 
and their management - Final Report, prepared for the National Land and Water Resources Audit, 
Canberra, 
Available: 
http://www.nlwra.gov.au/library/scripts/objectifyMedia.aspx?file=pdf/102/47.
pdfandsiteID=9andstr_title=URS15%20-%20CVVH%20Literature%20Review%20-%20Final%20Re
port%20(pdf).pdf [Accessed 23 July 2008] 
Caldwell, T, A Jorm and K Dear (2004) Suicide and mental health in rural, remote and metropolitan areas 
in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7): S10 to fourteen.
Centre for Rural Mental Health (2005) Depression in farmers and farming families, Project Report 2005, 
Funded by Beyondblue: the National Depression Initiative. Report prepared by Fiona Judd, Henry 
Jackson, Caitlin Fraser, Greg Murray and Garry Robins.
Chapman, L and J Greenville (2002) Profiling rural Australia: impact of changes in the agriculture sector 
on rural towns. Australian Commodities, 9(1): 234-49.
Cheers, B, R Darracott and B Lonne (2005) Domains of rural social work practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 
234-50.
Cheney, H, J Willetts and E Wilson (2004) It’s more than the money: the relationship between social 
values and demographic change in sustaining a rural general practitioner workforce. Rural Society, 
14(3): 256-74.
Chenoweth, L (2004) Educating practitioners for integrative rural practice. Rural Society, 14(3): 276-87.
Coleman R, L Fragar, C Morton and K Winter (1996) Profile of the health and safety of Australian farmers, 
farm families and farm workers, RIRDC Funded national Farm Injury Data Collection Project. Available: 
http://www.aghealth.org.au/tinymce_fm/uploaded/Research%20Reports/profile_aus_farmers_
families_workers_96.pdf [Accessed 25 August 2008]
Bibliography

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      84 
Crosby, E (1998) Succession and inheritance on Australian farms. Paper presented at Changing families, 
challenging futures: 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 
1998. Available http://www.aifs.gov.au/institute/afrc6papers/crosby2.html [Accessed 7 September 
2008]
Crosby, E (1998) Welfare and support services for farm families. Paper presented at Changing families, 
challenging futures: 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies Conference, Melbourne 25-27 November 
1998. Available http://www.aifs.gov.au/institute/afrc6papers/crosby.html [Accessed 7 September 
2008]
Fisheries and Forestry], Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/agriculture-food/drought/ec/background 
[Accessed 29 July 2008] 
DAFF (2008b) Information handbook - Exceptional Circumstances. Guide to the policy and assistance 
Fisheries and Forestry, February 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0013/150322/ec-handbook.pdf [Accessed 25 July 2008] 
Dean, J and H Stain (2007) The impact of drought on the emotional wellbeing of children and adolescents 
in rural and remote New South Wales. Journal of Rural Health, 23(4): 356-64
DEEWR (2008a) 2007-08 Drought Assistance for Schools measure funding, Available: http://www.
dest.gov.au/sectors/school_education/programmes_funding/programme_categories/rural_and_
regional_assistance/das/eligible_schools_funding_amounts.htm [Accessed 14 August 2008] 
DEEWR (2008b) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 2: School education. Department of 
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR (2008c) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 3: Higher Education. Department of 
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR (2008d) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 7: Labour Market Assistance - Individuals 
have access to income support and socially inclusive labour market programs which further economic 
development. Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of 
Australia.
DEEWR (2008e) DEEWR 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 8: Workforce participation - Policies and 
strategies are developed to assist disadvantaged Australians to increase their skills and workforce 
participation through enhanced employment services and employer engagement. Department of 
Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Commonwealth of Australia.
DEEWR 
(2008f) 
Drought 
Assistance 
for 
Schools, 
Available: 
http://www.dest.
gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/9D974659-8846-4E82-B17C-1E3FA367983B/20497/
DroughtAssistanceGuidelinesforGovernmentSchools26F.pdf [Accessed 14 August 2008] 
Department of Transport and Regional Services (2005) Drought impacts beyond the farm gate: Two 
regional case studies. Canberra: Department of Transport and Regional Services.
Bibliography

85    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
DEST (2004) Review of the higher education equity programme (HEEP) - Department of Education, 
Science and Training discussion paper examining the current position of disadvantaged students, , 
Available: 
http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/2CE01D3E-5CC4-43CE-ABA1-E7D43E446B3B/2389/
discussion.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
DETYA (1999) Equity in higher education (Department of Education, Training and Youth Affairs 
Occasional papers series 99A), Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/occpaper/99A/
equityhe_all.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Diniz, F (2006) Inclusive education: Cross cultural perspectives. Inclusion, participation and democracy: 
What is the purpose? : Springer, Netherlands.
DoHA (2008a) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement on ‘Mental Health - increased 
mental health services for drought-affected communities’, Available: http://www.health.gov.au/
internet/budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/hfact19.pdf 
[Accessed 5 August 2008] 
DoHA (2008b) Department of Health and Ageing 2008 Budget Statement, Outcome 11: Mental Health- 
Improved mental health care for all Australians, [Accessed 6 August 2008] 
DoHA (2008c) Department of Health and Ageing: budget statement on ‘Mental health - increased mental 
health services for drought-affected communities’, Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/
budget/publishing.nsf/Content/D3F5EFBD4B4B7819CA2572D40013B28E/$File/hfact19.pdf [Accessed 
5 August 2008] 
DoHA (2008d) Health topic quickview: rural health services - [A collection of rural health services-related 
information on the Department of Health and Ageing website], Available: http://www.health.gov.au/
internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/portal-Rural%20health%20services [Accessed 4 August 2008] 
DoHA (2008e) Programs: Mental Health Services in Rural and Remote Areas program [Website of the 
Department of Health and Ageing], Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/
Content/mental-rural [Accessed 4 August 2008] 
DoHA (2008f) Programs: Mental Health Support for Drought Affected Communities [Website of the 
Department of Health and Ageing], Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/
Content/mental-drought [Accessed 4 August 2008] 
DoHA (2008g) Report on the Audit of Health Workforce in Rural and Regional Australia, prepared by 
the Department of Health and Ageing, April 2008, Available: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/
publishing.nsf/Content/4F3A981914316A11CA257434008189EC/$File/ruraud.pdf [Accessed 4 August 
2008] 
Drought Review Panel (2004) Consultations on national drought policy - preparing for the future, 
Available: http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/41566/20040427-0000/www.affa.gov.au/corporate_docs/
publications/pdf/innovation/drought/drought_report_complete.pdf [Accessed 25 July 2008] 
Edwards, B, M Gray and B Hunter (2008) Social and economic impacts of drought on farm families and 
rural communities. Report prepared for Australian Institute of Family Services.
Bibliography

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      86 
Employment and Skills Council - NBEET (1994) Cultivating the human factor: employment and skills in 
Australia’s rural industries: small business employment and skills supplementary report. This report 
complements and supplements the Employment and Skills Formation Council’s (ESFC) “The Shape 
of Things to Come”. Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/0561B1CE-D119-4B41-ACC2-
6A834783B9A5/3945/94_35.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Expert Social Panel (2008) Drought policy review Expert Social Panel: assessment of the social impacts 
of drought and related government and non-government social support services - Issues paper, June 
2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/710644/social_panels_isues_
paper.pdf [Accessed 2 July 2008] 
Feldman, DL (2008) Barriers to adaptive management: lessons from the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-
Flint Compact. Society and Natural Resources, 21: 512-25.
Fincher, R (1999) New geographies of disadvantage: implications for service delivery. Australian Journal 
of Public Administration, 58(3): 55-60.
Foskey, R (2005) Older farmers and retirement. Canberra, ACT: Rural Industries Research and 
Development Corporation.
Fuller, J, B Kelly, G Sartore, L Fragar, A Tonna, G Pollard and T Hazell (2007) Use of social network analysis 
to describe service links for farmers’ mental health. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 15: 99-106.
Funnell, B (2004) On being bold and brave when neither comes naturally. CRUcial Times. Brisbane: 
Community Resource Unit, Disability Services.
Gamble, D, S Blunden, L Kuhn-White, M Voyce and J Loftus (1995) Transfer of the family farm business in a 
changing rural society, RIRDC Research Paper No 95/8.
Garlick, S (2000) Engaging universities and regions: knowledge contribution to regional economic 
development in Australia, A report prepared for the Department of Education, Training and Youth 
Affairs, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/eippubs/eip00_15/00_15.pdf [Accessed 1 
August 2008] 
Government of Ireland (2007) National Action Plan for Social Inclusion 2007-2016, Available: http://www.
socialinclusion.ie/documents/NAPinclusionReportPDF.pdf [Accessed 12 June 2008] 
Green, R and R Gregory (2004) Rural and remote social welfare practice: differences and similarities in 
the Australian context. Rural Society, 14(3): 245-55.
Green, R and B Lonne (2005) ‘Great lifestyle, pity about the job stress’: occupational stress in rural human 
service practice. Rural Society, 15(3): 252-66.
Hall, G and M Scheltens (2005) Beyond the drought: towards a broader understanding of rural 
disadvantage. Rural Society, 15(3): 347-58.
Higgins, V (2001) Calculating climate: ‘advanced liberalism’ and the governing of risk in Australian drought 
policy. Journal of Sociology, 37(3): 299-316.
Higgins, V and S Lockie (2001) Getting big and getting out: government policy, self-reliance and farm 
adjustment. In: Lockie, S and L Bourke (Eds.) Rurality bites: the social and environmental transformation 
of rural Australia. Sydney: Pluto Press.
Bibliography

87    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Hogan, A, M Hanslip, R Kancans and B Maguire (2008a) Climate risk and adaptation among primary 
producers: topline results focusing on primary producers reporting the effects of adverse seasonal 
conditions. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Hogan, A, B Maguire and P Stakelum (2008b) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: a comparative 
analysis of farmers and people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas and the Australian 
population using the Personal Wellbeing Index. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Hogan, A, C Polidano and P Stakelum (2008c) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: an analysis of 
the household, income and labour dynamics in Australia (HILDA) study. Canberra: Bureau of Rural 
Sciences.
Holmes, J (2006) Impulses towards a multifunctional transition in rural Australia: gaps in the research 
agenda. Journal of Rural Studies, 22: 142-60.
IPCC (2007) Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.
James, R, J Wyn, G Baldwin, G Hepworth and and others (1999) Rural and isolated school students and 
their higher education choices: a re-examination of student location, socioeconomic background, and 
educational advantage and disadvantage, Report no. 62 prepared for the Higher Education Council, 
National Board of Employment, Education and Training, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/
rdonlyres/140EAEEA-EF88-4A12-A5BB-5973E7AA7751/3959/99_11.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Jones, RG (2001) Identifying higher education students from low socio-economic status backgrounds 
and regional and remote areas, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/eippubs/eip02_4/
index.htm [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Lindblom, CE (1959) The science of ‘muddling through’. Public Administration Review, 19: 79-82.
Lynn, M (2004) The return of community to rural human services. Rural Society, 14(3): 228-44.
Maguire, B and S Cartwright (2008) Assessing a community’s capacity to manage change: a resilience 
approach to social assessment. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
McLennan, J and Birch, A  2005, Recruiting and Retaining Australia’s Volunteer Firefighters, Bushfire CRC, 
La Trobe University.
McMichael, A, R Woodruff, P Whetton, K Hennessy, N Nicholls, S Hales, A Woodward and T Kjellstrom 
(2003) Human health and climate change in Oceania: A risk assessment, 2002. Department of 
Communications, Information Technology and the Arts.
Mlcek, S (2005) Paucity management addresses the limit - situations of human services delivery in rural 
Australia. Rural Society, 15(3): 297-311.
Nelson, R, PR Brown, T Darbas, P Kokic and K Cody (2007) The potential to map the adaptive capacity 
of Australian land managers for NRM policy using ABS data. Canberra: CSIRO, Australian Bureau of 
Agricultural and Resource Economics, prepared for the National Land and Water Resources Audit.
Nelson, R, P Kokic, L Elliston and J King (2005) Structural adjustment: a vulnerability index for Australian 
broadacre agriculture. Australian Commodities, 12(1): 171-9.
NFF (2008a) 2008 Labour Shortage Action Plan, National Farmers’ Federation, March 2008.
Bibliography

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      88 
NFF (2008b) Annual Review, 2007-2008. Barton: National Farmers Federation 
Nicholls, N, CD Butler and I Hanigan (2006) Inter-annual rainfall variations and suicide in New South 
Wales, Australia, 1964-2001. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(3): 139-43.
NSW Department of Health (2008) NSW Drought Mental Health Assistance Package, February 2008, 
Available: http://www.health.nsw.gov.au/pubs/2008/pdf/drought_package.pdf [Accessed 5 August 
2008] 
Paton, S and C Cuckson (2004) Meeting the needs of rural families in times of crisis. Rural Society, 14(3): 
288-99.
PIMC (2008) Communique of the Primary Industries Ministerial Council - Meeting held in Melbourne, 
17 April 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/625624/pimc-13.pdf 
[Accessed 25 July 2008] 
PMSEIC Independent Working Group (2007) Climate change in Australia: regional impacts and adaptation 
- managing the risk for Australia, Report prepared for the Prime Minister’s Science, Engineering and 
Innovation Council, June 2007, Available: http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/CE5D024E-8F58-
499F-9EEB-D2D638E7A345/17397/ClimateChangeinAustraliareport.pdf [Accessed 1 August 2008] 
Posselt, H (2000) Socio-economic disadvantage across urban, rural and remote areas. In: Australian 
Population Association 10th Biennial Conference. Melbourne.
Pretty, G, B Bishop, A Fisher and C Sonn (2006) Psychological sense of community and its relevance to 
wellbeing and everyday life in Australia. Melbourne: The Australian Psychological Society Ltd.
Productivity Commission (2005) Australia’s Health Workforce - Research Report, 22 December 2005. 
Canberra.
Productivity Commission (2008) Inquiry into government drought support. Productivity Commission 
Issues Paper. Canberra: Productivity Commission.
Rodriguez, VB, M Watson and C Mues (2006) National Farmer Survey 2006. A report by the Australian 
Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics to the Rural Policy and Innovation Division of the 
data/assets/pdf_file/0003/186942/national_farmer_survey_2006.pdf [Accessed 30 July 2008] 
Sartore, G, B Hoolahan, A Tonna, B Kelly and H Stain (2005) Wisdom from the drought: recommendations 
from a consultative conference. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 13(5): 315-20.
Sartore, G, B Kelly and H Stain (2007) Drought and its effect on mental health. Australian Family Physician, 
36(12): 990-3.
Sartore, G, B Kelly, HJ Stain, G Albrecht, N Higginbotham (2008) Control, uncertainty, and expectations 
for the future: a qualitative study of the impact of drought on a rural Australian community. Rural 
and Remote Health 8 (online), 2008:950. Available: http://www.rrh.org.au/articles/subviewaust.
asp?ArticleID=950 [Accessed 22 August 2008]
Senate Standing Committee on Rural and Regional Affairs (1992) A national drought policy: appropriate 
government responses to the recommendations of the Drought Policy Review Task Force - final report. 
Canberra: Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Bibliography

89    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Slootweg, R, F Vanclay and M van Schooten (2001) Function evaluation as a framework for the integration 
of social and environmental impact assessment. Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal, 19(1): 
19-28.
Spanswick, S, G Roth, T Drew and P Jones (2007) The impact of drought on small business - a pilot study 
on Wee Waa (summary only). Cotton Catchment Communities CRC.
Stafford Smith, M (2003) Linking environments, decision-making and policy in handling climatic variability. 
In: Botterill, LC and M Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: 
CSIRO Publishing.
Steffen, W, J Sims and J Walcott (2006) Farming profitably in a changing climate: a risk-management 
approach. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Stehlik, D (2003) Australian drought as lived experience: social and community impacts In: Fisher, M and L 
Botterill (Eds.) Beyond Drought: People, Policy and Perspectives. Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing.
Stehlik, D (2004) Guest editorial: towards a 21st century form of practice in rural communities. Rural 
Society, 14(3): 208-9.
Stehlik, D, I Gray and G Lawrence (1999) Drought in the 1990s: Australian farm families’ experiences. 
Canberra: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Stehlik, D, G Lawrence and I Gray (2000) Gender and drought: experiences of Australian women in the 
drought of the 1990s. Disasters, 24: 38-53.
Stewart, J (2006) Value conflict and policy change. Review of Policy Research, 23(1): 183-95.
Thacher, D and M Rein (2004) Managing value conflict in public policy. Governance: an International 
Journal of Policy, Administration, and Institutions, 17(4): 457-86.
The Australian Centre for Agricultural Health and Safety (2007) Managing the Pressures of Farming 
Manual, Fourth Edition.
Tichagwa, W (1994) The effects of drought on the condition of women. Focus on Gender, 2(1): 20-5.
Tonts, M and A Black (2002) Changing farm business structures and the sustainability of rural communities 
and regions: issues for research. Sustaining Regions, 1(2): 17-23.
Truss, W (2000) Agriculture - Advancing Australia, Statement by the Honourable Warren Truss MP, 
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 9 May 2000, [Accessed 28 July 2008] 
Vanclay, F (2002) Conceptualising social impacts. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 22: 183-211.
Wahlquist, A (2003) Media representations and public perceptions of drought. In: Botterill, LC and M 
Fisher (Eds.) Beyond drought: people, policy and perspectives. Collingwood, Vic.: CSIRO Publishing.
Walker, B and D Salt (2006) Resilience thinking: sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing world, 
Washington D.C.: Island Press.
Watson, AS (2000) Australian agriculture: persistent myths and current realities and/or current myths 
and persistent realities. In: Australian values - rural policies. Organised by the Rural Industries Research 
and Development Corporation, Synapse Consulting and the University of Queensland. Canberra, ACT.
Webb, T, J Cary and P Geldens (2002) Leaving the land: a study of Western Division grazing families in 
transition. Canberra, ACT: Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation.
Bibliography

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      90 
Western, J, R McCrea and R Stimson (2007) Quality of life and social inclusion. International Review of 
Sociology, 17(3): 525-37.
Western Research Institute (2006) The impact of the current drought on the Bourke economy and 
community. Prepared for the Department of Transport and Regional Services. Bathurst: Charles Sturt 
University.
White, D and B O’Meagher (1995) Coping with exceptional droughts in Australia. Drought Network News, 
(June, 1995).
Wilson, L (2006) Developing a Model for the Measurement of Social Inclusion and Social Capital in 
Regional Australia. Journal Social Indicators Research, 75(3): 335-60.
Bibliography

91    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Acknowledgements
A review of this kind cannot be conducted effectively without the assistance of a wide range of 
individuals and organisations. The Drought Policy Review, Social Expert Panel, ‘the Panel’, wishes to 
thank all who attended the public forums and who provided written submissions. Forum participants 
and authors of the submissions may be assured their views have been taken into account in compiling 
this report. 
The contribution of various academics and representatives from industry organisations, government 
agencies, non-government organisations and community groups is appreciated. The views, 
recommendations and information provided were extremely valuable and enabled the Panel to 
undertake an informed and comprehensive review.
The Panel acknowledges the assistance provided by Centrelink National Support Officers and Rural 
Services Officers who attended the public forums and assisted with visit arrangements and the 
Social Assessment Secretariat.
Appendix 1

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      92 
Appendix 2
Terms of reference
 Assessment of the social impacts of drought
Background
Government assistance for drought events is guided by the current National 
Drought Policy (NDP). Under the NDP, drought assistance or support is 
intended to be a short-term measure to help farmers prepare for, manage and 
recover from drought. The objectives of the NDP are to:
• encourage primary producers and other sections of rural Australia to 
adopt self-reliant approaches for managing a changing climate 
• maintain and protect Australia’s agricultural and environmental resource 
base during periods of extreme climate stress; and 
• ensure early recovery of agricultural and rural industries, consistent with 
long-term sustainable levels. 
Although self-reliance is a key objective, the NDP also recognises there are 
rare and severe events beyond the ability of even the most prudent farmer to 
communities under the Exceptional Circumstances (EC) arrangements and 
other drought programs. The state and territory governments also participate 
in the NDP and provide support measures of their own.
To be classified as an EC event, the event must be rare, that is, it must not 
have occurred more than once on average in every to years. Australia is 
experiencing a drought unprecedented in its geographic extent, length and 
severity. Some areas have been drought declared for of the past  years, leading 
to some receiving EC assistance since 2002.
Climate change brings with it significant challenges for Australian agriculture. 
Australia’s changing climate is expected to increase the frequency, severity 
and length of drought periods in the future. It will also have impacts on rural 
communities dependent on primary industries.
Australian primary industries ministers have agreed that, in the context of a 
changing climate, current approaches to drought and EC are no longer the 
most appropriate. They agree that drought policy must be improved to create 
an environment of self-reliance and preparedness, and to encourage the 
adoption of appropriate climate change management practices.

93    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
To improve drought policy, ministers agreed to consider:
• relevant social dimensions and policy responses to drought and Exceptional Circumstances 
• the provision of accessible social welfare support, including eligibility criteria 
• the effectiveness of business support payments 
• the effectiveness of financial risk management strategies, including Farm Management Deposits 
• the effectiveness of preparedness policies; and 
• cost-benefit analysis of state and federal drought assistance. 
This assessment, by an expert Panel, will analyse the social dimensions of the impacts of drought 
and the range of current government and non-government social support services available to farm 
families and rural communities during periods of stress and change. It will also take into consideration 
the cultural and social issues that may impact on the capacity of farm families and rural communities 
to improve self-reliance and preparedness and to better manage change.
This assessment, as part of a review of drought policy, will support the Productivity Commission’s 
inquiry into the appropriateness of current government drought business support and income 
support measures. The Commission’s inquiry will also be supported by an assessment by the Bureau 
of Meteorology and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation of what a 
changing climate means for drought in Australia and the appropriateness examining using the concept 
of exceptional climatic circumstances to trigger the availability of assistance measures.
Scope of the assessment
This assessment will report on:
•1 The social dimensions of the impacts of drought on farm families and rural communities. 
non-government social support services, including counselling and advisory services, available to 
farm families and rural communities during periods of stress and change such as drought. 
government social support services for mitigating the impacts of stress and change, such as 
drought, on farm families and rural communities. 
•1 Possible additional social support services for mitigating the impacts of stress and change, such as 
drought, on farm families and rural communities. 
This assessment will not examine the appropriateness, effectiveness or efficiency of government 
drought business support and income support measures.
Appendix 2
93   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      94 
Nature of the assessment
Extensive public consultation, throughout rural Australia, will be a key aspect of the expert Panel’s 
work. The Panel will consult government and non-government agencies, including those with social 
and community responsibilities.
In undertaking this assessment, the Panel will draw on existing research and may consult social 
researchers. The Panel will have the capacity to engage analytical support as appropriate. The 
The Panel will provide a final report to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry in September 
Appendix 2
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     94

95    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 3
The Panel
The members of the Panel
Mr Peter Kenny (Chair)
Mr Peter Kenny was elected President of AgForce in October 2004. In this capacity, Peter chairs the 
AgForce State Council and State executive committee. In, he was elected to the board of the National 
Farmers’ Federation, and has been a councillor and the secretary of the Cattlemen’s Union of Australia. 
He is a keen advocate for adopting ‘big picture’ approaches to agripolitics and has driven projects such 
as the Every family needs a farmer campaign and the Blueprint for the bush. He has always been closely 
associated with the land and has owned and managed properties in different industries including 
cattle, dairying, orchards, lucerne and piggeries.
Ms Sabina Knight
Ms Sabina Knight is an Associate Professor in Remote Health Practice, a recent Council of Remote 
Area Nurses of Australia (CRANA) research fellow, and is an advocate for remote and rural health. 
She is a foundation member and past president of CRANA, and the foundation deputy chair and then 
chair of the National Rural Health Alliance (NRHA). She has been awarded the Louis Ariotti Award for 
excellence and leadership in rural health, and the CRANA Aurora Award for leadership and outstanding 
contribution to remote health. She is a Fellow of the Australian Rural Leadership Foundation and 
the Royal College of Nursing Australia. She is a member of the Regional Women’s Advisory Council, 
the Northern Territory Health Minister’s Advisory Council, a director of the board of the Rural 
Health Education Foundation and is a commissioner on the National Health and Hospital Reform 
Commission.
Mr Mal Peters
Mr Mal Peters owns and operates a 13 500 acre wool, cattle and grain property in northern New South 
Wales with his wife. He is the Director of the Australian Farm Institute, the NSW Rural Assistance 
Authority and the Border Rivers Catchment Management Authority. He is also a member of the NSW 
Ministerial Agricultural Advisory Committee, and a former President of the NSW Farmers’ Association. 
He is a passionate defender of the rural way of life and a strong advocate for developing innovative 
strategies to grow rural Australia.
Professor Daniela Stehlik
Professor Daniela Stehlik is Foundation Chair of the Research Centre for Stronger Communities, 
Curtin University of Technology. As inaugural director, she leads a team of social scientists working in 
sustainability and conservation, strengths-based practice models and place and community resiliency. 
In the late 1990s, she was a member of a team that conducted the first study of the impact of drought 
on farm families in Australia. She is particularly interested in the generative capacity of women’s 
energy and enthusiasm as an important component of community resiliency.
95   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      96 
Mr Barry Wakelin
Mr Barry Wakelin is the former Federal Member for the electorate of Grey, a position he held 
for approximately 15 years, and the former Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing 
Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs. He has strong links with rural communities, 
having been a farmer, shearer and bank clerk in rural South Australia before he entered politics. He is 
actively interested in the long-term success and sustainability of Australia’s agriculture industry.
Ms Sue West
Ms Sue West is a former Senator for New South Wales, who held the position of Deputy President of 
the Senate from May to August. She grew up on the family farm in central NSW and is a registered nurse 
having worked in both city and rural areas. She the Chair of Anglicare Western NSW and is a Member 
of the Board of the Australian Centre for Christianity and Culture. She is also a member of the Greater 
Western Health Advisory Heath Council, the Ministerial Advisory Council on Hearing, the Regional 
Communities Consultative Council and the Anglican Provincial Community Services Commission NSW.
Mrs Lesley Young
Mrs Lesley Young is the National President of the Country Women’s Association of Australia, having 
been an active member of the association for more than 35 years. She is a mixed farming operator in 
Tasmania in partnership with her husband. She was an inaugural member of the Tasmanian Women in 
Agriculture executive, and is the former Chairman of the Board of Rural Financial Counselling Service 
Tasmania. She understands the difficulties of being isolated, and has been actively involved in trying 
to improve the conditions of women in remote areas, as well as for women and families in all rural 
communities.
Appendix3
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     96 
Social Expert Panel (from left to right)
Lesley Young, Barry Wakelin, Daniela Stehlik,           
Peter Kenny (Chair), Sabina Knight, Mal Peters, Sue West

97    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Background and 
assessment process
Background
Dryness has affected the farm families, rural businesses and rural communities across Australia for 
most of this decade. 
On 23 April 2008, following discussions with state and territory ministers, the Federal Minister for 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, the Hon. Tony Burke MP, announced the details of a comprehensive 
national review of drought policy to help prepare farmers, rural businesses and local communities for 
climate change.
On 2 June 2008, Minister Burke appointed an Expert Social Panel, the authors of this report, to assess 
the social impacts of dryness on farm families, rural businesses and rural communities and to identify 
areas where improvements could be made. 
The Panel was asked to report, from a social perspective, on how dryness has contributed to and/or 
exacerbated mental and physical health and family relationship issues of farm families, rural businesses 
and rural communities. Specifically the Panel was asked comment on individuals’ ability to access 
education and training, employment opportunities and the cohesion and functioning of local 
communities. The Panel was also asked to look at options for mitigating the impacts of stress and 
change and to identify gaps in government and non-government social support services designed to 
help people cope with dryness.
Assessment process
The Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) was engaged to provide the Panel with social research findings to 
use in assessing the social impacts of dryness on farm families, rural businesses and rural communities. 
Information comprised three surveys on the social wellbeing of rural Australians, a literature review 
revealing a range of concepts and frameworks to help understand the impacts of dryness and how 
rural people and communities respond to it and a Social Research Workshop attended by 23 academic 
experts on the social aspects of dryness and drought policy from around Australia.
The following process was chosen to capture the widest sample of views possible in the time available.
The Panel embarked on 25 regional consultation forums across rural Australia, which commenced on 
21 July 2008 and concluded on 27 August 2008. The forums attracted more than 1000 participants, 
allowing the Panel to hear the views of primary producers, small business owners and rural people 
generally.
Appendix 4

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      98 
The Chairman of the Panel opened each forum by seeking a word or phrase from the audience which 
represented how people felt about this period of ongoing dryness. Words like desperate, stressed, 
frustrated, depressed and tired were familiar phrases expressed.
Initially attendees who on arrival had registered to provide an oral submission to the Panel were heard. 
Local government representatives, counsellors, outreach workers and small business operators 
typically set the scene by providing views of how communities have adapted to a decline in income, 
an increase in debt, a shortage of labour, dwindling education numbers, the overall deterioration of 
mental, physical and emotional health of people and the flow-on effects this has had on the farm and 
right across the community.
On hearing these initial discussions, the Chairman of the Panel invited participation from attendees 
who had not spoken. It was at this time that a majority of the forum attendees chose to speak. The 
forums became very emotional at times. The Panel believe this process allowed rural people, for what 
might have been the first time, to publicly reveal how they are truly coping. Many neighbours admitted 
they had no true idea before then about how each other was feeling or coping with the dryness.
The Panel also conducted nine meetings with key stakeholders and interested parties in capital cities 
representatives and non-government organisations provided insight to program funding and services 
available at a regional level and/or their organisation’s representative views.
The Panel also received  more than 230 written submissions over a period of less than six weeks. This 
extraordinary response was a powerful statement of the level of interest on the part of communities 
and key stakeholders. Submissions came from all parts of the community, social and professional 
spectrum, including a variety of individuals within farming and rural communities, from state and local 
governments, service providers, health care professionals, financial institutions, non-profit, charitable 
and national organisations, councils and peak bodies.
Submissions for which permission has been given are available at the website www.daff.gov.au/
droughtpolicyreview
Appendix 4

99    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 5
Public forums
Northern Territory 
Approximately
Monday 21 July 2008 
Alice Springs  
Crowne Plaza Alice Springs 
77 attendees
New South Wales
Thursday 24 July 2008
Inverell  
RSL Club 
4545 attendees
Friday 25 July 2008 
Bourke  
Bourke Bowling Club 
4543  attendees
Monday 18 August 2008 
Gilgandra  
Gilgandra Services Club 
50 4550 attendees
Tuesday 19 August 2008 
Forbes  
Forbes Services Memorial Club 
50 4550 attendees
Thursday 21 August 2008 
Griffith  
Catholic Club Yoogali 
6060 attendees
Friday 22 August 2008 
Goulburn  
Goulburn Workers Club 
775 attendees
Western Australia
Monday 28 July 2008 
Esperance  
Esperance Bay Yacht Club 
1515 attendees
Tuesday 29 July 2008 
Morawa  
Morawa Town Hall 
3232 attendees
Wednesday 30 July 2008 
Wongan Hills  
Wongan Hills Hotel 
1818 attendees
Wednesday 30 July 2008 
Merredin  
Regional Community and Leisure Centre 
2828 attendees
Victoria
Monday 4 August 2008 
Shepparton  
Shepparton Club 
9999 attendees
Tuesday 5 August 2008 
Birchip  
Birchip Leisure Centre 
7575 attendees
Monday 25 August 2008 
Colac  
Colac Bowling Club 
34 attendees
Tuesday 26 August 2008
Mildura  
Mildura Settlers Club 
37 attendees
99   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      100 
Appendix 5
Tasmania
Wednesday 6 August 2008 
Bothwell  
Castle Hotel 
53  attendees
Queensland
Monday 11 August 2008 
Gatton  
Bowling Club 
2020 attendees
Monday 11 August 2008 
Dalby  
Dalby RSL Club – ANZAC Room 
25 25 attendees
Tuesday 12 August 2008 
Charleville  
Racecourse Complex  
30 30 attendees
Wednesday 13 August 2008 
Longreach  
the Longreach Civic Centre 
27 27 attendees
Wednesday 13 August 2008
Emerald  
Emerald Town Hall 
40 40 attendees
South Australia
Monday 25 August 2008  
Keith  
Keith Football Club 
55 attendees
Tuesday 26 August 2008 
Gawler  
Arms Hotel 
46 attendees
Wednesday 27 August 2008
Orroroo  
Blacksmith’s Chatter – Blacksmith’s Shed 
37 attendees
Wednesday 27 August 2008
Wudinna  
Wudinna Community Club 
39 attendees
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     100

101    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 6
List of individuals and 
organisations consulted 
by the Panel
 AgForce
Aussie Helpers 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE)
Australian General Practice Network
Beyond Blue
Bureau of Rural Sciences  
CANEGROWERS 
Central Land Council 
Central West Gippsland Division of General Practice Drought Community Support 
     Worker 
Centralian Land Management Association
Centrelink
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
Country Womens’ Association
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
Department of Health and Ageing
Department of Health-South Australia
Department of Human Services
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government
Department of Primary Industries – New South Wales
Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries-Queensland
Department of Primary Industries and Resources-South Australia 
Department of Primary Industries and Water — Tasmania
Department of Primary Industry, Fisheries and Mines – Northern Territory
Lyn Fragar,  Associate Professor, University of Sydney

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      102 
Appendix 6
Frontier Services
Growcom
Hindmarsh Shire Council 
Horticulture Australia Council
Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association 
Lee Kernaghan 
Lifeline 
Mensline Australia 
National Farmers Federation
New South Wales Farmers Association
Northern Territory Cattlemen’s Association 
Productivity Commission
Queensland Dairyfarmers’ Organisation 
Queensland Farmers Federation
Relationships Australia
Royal Flying Doctor Service
Rural Finance Corporation of Victoria
Rural Youth Organisation of Tasmania Inc
Salvation Army
South Australia Farmers Federation 
St Vincent De Paul Society Australia
Sustainable Farm Families 
Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association 
Tasmanian Institute of Agricultural Research
Victorian Farmers Federation 
Victorian Government Department of Primary Industries
Western Australian Farmers Federation
Women in Agriculture

103    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 7
List of submissions
National organisations  
Australian Dairy Industry Council  
Australian General Practice Network  
Australian Institute of Family Studies 
Australian Land Management Group 
Australian Processing Tomato Research Council  
Australian Redcross  
Beyondblue  
Carers Australia  
Centrelink 
Crisis Support Services 
Horticulture Australia Council 
Horticulture Australia Ltd 
Isolated Children’s Parents Association of Australia 
Motor Association of Australia 
National Farmers Federation  
National Rural Advisory Council 
Ricegrowers’ Association of Australia Inc 
Rural Education Forum Australia 
Rural Social Workers Action Group  
Uniting Care in Australia - Frontier Services  
Uniting Church in Australia 
Westpac Banking Corporation  
Queensland 
Agforce Queensland  
Brisbane
Allen, D and T 
Mitchell
Brown, K 
Not Given
Centacare South Burnett 
Kingaroy
Centre for Rural and Remote Mental Health  
Cairns
Freeman, L 
Gladstone
Growcom 
Fortitude Valley
Groves, W 
Not Given
Lemon, R 
Brisbane
Liz Cunningham MP - Member for Gladstone 
Gladstone
Neilson, K 
Boulia
Queensland Farmers Federation 
Brisbane
Queensland Government 
Brisbane
Schmidt, K 
Cunnamulla
Standen, K 
Burpengary 
Meadows
New South Wales 
Ash, E 
Forestville
Ash, S 
Forestville
Baker, B 
Wagga Wagga
Balranald Regional Action Group 
Balranald
Beer, J 
Bourke
Benalla Rotary Club 
Benalla

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      104 
Appendix 7
Benalla Rural City Council 
Benalla
Biddle, A 
Glen Innes
Bigga Drought Support Group  
Bigga
Bogan Shire Council 
Nyngan
Bourke Rural Financial Counselling Service 
Bourke
Bourke Shire Council 
Bourke
Busby, R 
Jacks Creek
Cash, A 
Pilliga
Cavanagh, J 
Bourke
Clancy, T 
Bourke
Community Child Care Co-Operative 
Marrickville
Contact Inc 
Millers Point
Coonamble Shire Council 
Coonamble
Cooney, N 
Bugaldie 
Copeland, A 
Dunedoo
Corowa Shire Council 
Corowa
Counsellors and Psychotherapists Association of NSW 
Sydney
Country Women’s Association of NSW 
Potts Point
Cowles-Kosef, M 
Coonamble
Crothers, P 
Bourke
Dawe, K 
Nyngan
Day, G 
Ardlethan
Dean, J 
Wagga Wagga
Downey, R 
Pilliga
Dr Mike Kelly AM MP - Member for Eden Monaro 
Not Given
Ellis, S and Martin, S 
Wakool 
Evers, J 
Young
Franklin, N 
Brindabella
Galvin, M 
Yeronga Creek
Gilgandra Shire Council 
Gilgandra
Grady, G 
Queanbeyan
Greater Southern Area Health Service 
Queanbeyan
Liverpool Plains Land Management Committee 
Gunnedah
Local Government Association of NSW and Shires 
  Association of NSW 
Not Given
Lord, C 
Dubbo
Lukins, T 
Condobolin
Mackenzie, S 
Walgett
Mann, L 
Shepparton
McDowell, R 
Pilliga
McKeown, M 
Longview
Miller, D 
Howlong
Moore, B 
Inverell
Murrumbidgee Irrigation 
Griffith
Northern Region Rural Financial Counselling Service 
  Local Advisory Committee 
Inverell
NSW Farmers Association 
Sydney
NSW Farmers Association Oxley/Booligal Branch 
Hay
NSW Farmers Mental Health Network 
Sydney
New South Wales Government 
Sydney
Oldfield, J 
Bourke
Overeem, J 
Tamworth
Pastoralist’s Association of West Darling  
Broken Hill
Priestley, C and C 
Walgett
Richard, C 
Coolah

105    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 7
Riverina Citrus  
Griffith
Roach, C 
Tamworth
Rogers, H and G 
Booligal
Rural Financial Counselling Service of NSW Northern Region 
Inverell
St Mary’s Central School, Parents and Friends Association 
Wellington
Staggs, J 
Gilgandra
Tomlinson, E 
Narrabri
Uebergang, J 
Moree
Wallace, P 
Albury
Wise, G 
Bourke
Women’s Health Goulburn 
Goulburn
YWCA NSW  
Sydney
Australian Capital Territory 
McMichael, Prof.T 
Acton
Victoria 
Albury Wodonga Regional General Practice Network  
Wodonga
Alpine Shire Council 
Bright
Anglicare Victoria  
Collingwood
Argiro, C 
Yelta
Barker, T 
Yarraville
Bate, Y 
Red Cliffs
Bennett, N 
Quambatook
Buchanan, A 
Mirboo
Campaspe Drought Network 
Echuca
City of Greater Bendigo Council 
Bendigo
Congues, J 
Nathalia
Davis, M 
Dergholm
Department of Justice - Emergency Services Commissioner 
Melbourne
Donald 2000 
Donald
Donald Chamber of Commerce and Industry  
Donald
Family Care - Drought Support Program 
Shepparton
Fenton, M and C 
Kerang
Fraser, B 
Tallangatta
Gannawarra Shire Council  
Gannawarra
Gibson, W 
Donald
Goulburn Murray Hume Agcare 
Wodonga
Gow, C 
Not Given
General Practice Alliance South Gippsland  
Inverloch
Greater Shepparton City Council  
Shepparton
Heintze, C 
Minyip
Hindmarsh Shire Council 
Nhill
Honeysuckle and Spring Creek Landcare Group 
Tallangatta
Horsham Rural City Council  
Horsham
Hudson, R and A 
Merbein South
Integrated Primary Mental Health Service  
Wangaratta
Kendell, G 
Kerang
Kerang Presbyterian Inland Mission 
Kerang
Kilsyth Presbyterian Inland Mission 
Kilsyth
Kirk, P 
Tallangatta
Loddon Murray Community Leadership Program  
Castlemaine
Mallee Sustainable Farming Inc 
Mildura

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      106 
Mallee Track Health and Community Service 
Ouyen
Mildura Rural City Council 
Mildura
Moira Shire Council  
Cobram
Murray Dairy  
Kyabram
Murrindindi Shire Council 
Alexandra
Nelson, P 
Kyabram
Nichols Presbyterian Inland Mission 
Nichols
North Central Local Learning and Employment Network 
Charlton
North East Victorian Division of General Practice  
Benalla
Northern Grampians Shire Council 
Stawell
Quambatook Tractor Pullers Association  
Quambatook
Raleigh, I 
Tatura
RMCG 
Melbourne
Rotary District – Drought Relief Committee 
Ballarat
Rotary International District 9800 
Melbourne
Rural City of Wangaratta 
Wangaratta
Smith, F 
Not Given
Solly, P 
Rainbow
Southern Grampians and Glenelg Primary Care Partnership 
Hamilton
Southern Mallee Primary Care Partnership  
Swan Hill
Spicer, L 
Kyabram
Strathbogie Shire Council  
Euroa
Sunraysia Citrus Growers Inc 
Mildura
Sunraysia Rural Financial Counselling Service - Murray Mallee 
Mildura
Swan Hill Municipality  
Swan Hill
Turpin, R 
Echuca
Upper Hume Primary Care Partnership  
Wodonga
Victorian Farmers Federation  
Merbein South
Victorian Relief Foodbank  
Yarraville
Wells, B 
Boho South
Welsh, L 
Calivil
West Wimmera Shire Council 
Horsham
Wimmera Development Association Inc  
Horsham
Wimmera Uniting Care 
Horsham
Zanker, M 
Not Given
Tasmania 
Archer, A 
Bothwell
Bealey, G 
Launceston
Clark, H 
Baden
Edgell, H 
Bothwell
Fowler, D 
Bothwell
Tasmanian Department of Primary Industries and Water  
Hobart
Tasmanian Women in Agriculture  
Northern Territory 
Webster, H 
Parap
Appendix 7

107    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 7
South Australia  
Alexandrina Council 
Goolwa
Altus, S 
Tarlee
Armstrong, S 
Waikerie
Baldock, H 
Kimba
District Council of Orroroo Carrieton 
Orroroo
District Council of Tumby Bay 
Tumby Bay
Eyre Peninsula Drought Task Force 
Cleve
Eyre Peninsula Local Government Association 
Port Lincoln
Faulkner, D 
Minlaton
Halsey, Dr J 
Adelaide
Johns, G 
Streaky Bay
Jones, G 
Not Given
King, D 
Adelaide
Koch, M 
Booleroo Centre
Kuerschner, G 
Orroroo
Morgan, B 
Jamestown
Murraylands Regional Tourist Association  
Murray Bridge
Piper, A and K 
Port Lincoln
Rangelands Drought Task Force  
Clare
Richards, M 
Minlaton
Roe, A 
Naracoorte
Rural City of Murray Bridge 
Murray Bridge
Scholz, E 
Wudinna
South Australian Farmers Federation 
Adelaide
Adelaide
Staehr, J 
Barmera
Warwick, R 
Carrieton
Western Australia 
Beacon Progress Association  
Beacon
Brown, D 
Burracoppin
Brown, G 
North Burracoppin
Country Women’s Association of WA 
Perth
Falconer, F and D 
Coorow
Maddock, G and J 
Moorine Rock
Northern Agriculture Catchment Council 
Perenjori
Rural Remote and Regional Women’s Network  
South Perth
Smith, B 
Merredin
Tatasciore, L 
Murchison
South Perth
Western Australian Farmers Federation  
Perth
Unknown Origin 
Burgis, M
Klinge, D
McMaster, E 
O’Mally, P
Robinson, D
Robson Thomas, S
Slater, C

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      108 
Appendix 8
Timetable of newspaper 
advertisements
Forum location 
State 
Publication 
Date
Esperance 
WA 
Esperance Express 
25-Jul
Morowa 
WA 
The Geraldton Guardian 
25-Jul
28-Jul
Shepparton 
VIC 
Shepparton News 
25-Jul
1-Aug
Birchip 
VIC 
Donald Buloke Times 
29-Jul
1-Aug
Bothwell 
TAS 
Hobart Mercury 
30-Jul
2-Aug
Gatton 
QLD 
Gatton Star 
6-Aug
Dalby 
QLD 
Dalby Herald 
8-Aug
Charleville 
QLD 
Charleville Western Times 
7-Aug
Longreach 
QLD 
Longreach Leader 
1-Aug
8-Aug
Emerald 
QLD 
Central Queensland News 
6-Aug
8-Aug
Gilgandra 
NSW 
Gilgandra Weekly 
5-Aug
12-Aug
Forbes 
NSW 
Forbes Advocate 
14-Aug
16-Aug
Griffith 
NSW 
Griffith Area News 
15-Aug
18-Aug
Goulburn 
NSW 
Goulburn Post 
13-Aug
20-Aug
Colac 
VIC 
Colac Herald 
18-Aug
20-Aug
Keith 
SA 
Bordertown Chronicle 
14-Aug
21-Aug
Mildura 
VIC 
The Sunraysia Daily 
18-Aug
23-Aug
Gawler 
SA 
Gawler Bunyip 
13-Aug
20-Aug
Orroroo 
SA 
The Transcontinental 
13-Aug
20-Aug
Wudinna 
SA 
West Coast Sentinel 
14-Aug
21-Aug
Wudinna 
SA 
Eyre Peninsula Tribune 
21-Aug
Call for submissions 
State 
Publication 
Date
NAT 
Australian 
26-Jul
NSW 
The Land 
31-Jul
VIC 
Weekly Times 
31-Jul
VIC 
Stock and Land 
31-Jul
QLD 
Queensland Country Life 
31-Jul
SA 
Stock Journal 
31-Jul
WA 
Farm Weekly 
31-Jul
TAS 
Tasmanian Country 
1-Aug

109    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
 Climate risk and adaptation 
among primary producers: 
Topline results focusing on primary producers 
reporting the effects of adverse seasonal 
conditions
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Anthony Hogan, Michael Hanslip, Robert Kancans, Jacqui Russell and Brigit Maguire
September 2008
© Commonwealth of Australia 2008
reproduced by any process without prior written permission from the Commonwealth. Requests and 
Administration, Attorney General’s Department, Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT 
2600 or posted at http://www.ag.gov.au/cca.
and skill in the preparation and compilation of the information and data set out in this publication. 
Notwithstanding, the Bureau of Rural Sciences, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, 
including liability for negligence, for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person 
as a result of accessing, using or relying upon any of the information or data set out in this publication 
to the maximum extent permitted by law.
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      110 
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     110
Key findings
Background
This report is one of three prepared by the Social Sciences Program (SSP), Bureau of Rural Sciences 
(BRS), to support investigations of the social impacts of drought as part of the National Review of 
Drought Policy.
The report is based on a survey of 3300 primary producers conducted by the SSP in mid 2008 on 
issues around climate change and industry adaptation. It compares primary producers who reported 
that they have been affected by adverse seasonal conditions (i.e., drought or frost) with those who 
report they have not been affected.
On-farm risk management 
Primary producers who reported that they were affected by adverse seasonal conditions (i.e., drought 
or frost) reported a higher number of on-farm risk factors than those who were not affected by 
adverse conditions.
Landuse factors
Dryland croppers (84 per cent) were more likely than other agricultural sectors to report they were 
affected by adverse weather conditions such as drought or frost and appear most affected by adverse 
weather conditions.
Viability
Primary producers reporting the effects of adverse seasonal conditions are more likely to report that 
the financial viability of their properties and business was being threatened. 
Size matters
‘Size of farm business’ (based on annual gross turnover) has a significant influence on farm business 
profit. Those with an annual gross turnover of less than $400 000 are less likely to report an annual 
farm business profit. Lifestyle property owners are more likely to have on-farm 
incomes of less than $100 000.
Appendix 9

111    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
List of acronyms
ABARE 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics
ABS 
Australian Bureau of Statistics
ANZSIC 
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification 
BRS 
Bureau of Rural Sciences
DAFF 
EC 
Exceptional Circumstances: EC events are rare and severe events that are outside those  
that a farmer could normally be expected to manage using responsible farm management 
strategies. To be classified as an EC event, the event:
• must be rare, that is it must not have occurred more than once on average in every 20 to 
25 years
• must result in a rare and severe downturn in farm income over a prolonged period of time 
(e.g. greater than 12 months)
• must be a discrete event that is not part of long-term structural adjustment processes or 
normal fluctuations in commodity prices 
MP 
Member of Parliament
SSP 
Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      112 
Contents
Key findings 
110
List of acronyms 
111
Background 
113
Method 
114
Topline results 
115
Farm business profitability and viability 
121
References 
123
Appendix
A 
Scale development and analysis 
124
Figures
1 
Net on-farm income, financial year ending 30 June 2007 
119
2 
Perceived farm business viability 
120
3 
Farm business profit by state for financial years ending 30 June,  
2002 to 2007 
121
4 
Farm business profit by size of farm business for financial 
years ending 30 June, 2002 to 2007 
122
Tables
1 
An Index of on-farm risk 
115
2 
Use of risk management activities by primary producers 
115
3 
 Proportion of respondents reporting adverse weather 
conditions by industry 
116
4 
Perceptions of climate change and climate variability 
116
5 
Primary producer perceptions on whether environmental 
events may be 
caused by climate change 
117
6 
Indicators of social capital and self-efficacy 
117
7 
Use of or participation in various programs, percentage 
of respondents 
118
8 
Types of government assistance that might be helpful 
118
Appendix 9

113    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
 Background
In June 2008, the Social Sciences Program (SSP) of the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) was asked 
examine the social impacts of drought on farm families and rural communities as part of its National 
Review of Drought Policy (The Hon. Tony Burke MP 2008a). This review follows on from the Primary 
Industries Ministerial Forum in Cairns earlier in 2008, where ministers agreed that current approaches 
to drought and Exceptional Circumstances (EC) might no longer be the most appropriate in the 
context of a changing climate (PIMC 2008, The Hon. Tony Burke MP 2008b). Ministers saw that 
drought policy needed to be improved to create an environment of self-reliance and preparedness, 
and to encourage the adoption of appropriate climate change management practices.
As part of the review process the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry appointed a seven 
member Expert Social Panel (2008) to:
• assess the social impact of drought on farm families and rural communities
• identify gaps and areas for improvement in Australian, state and territory government social 
support services that are designed to mitigate the impact of drought on farm families and rural 
communities.
To support the work of the Expert Social Panel, the SSP was asked by the Drought Review Branch to:
• provide an analysis of the social circumstances, perceptions, and behaviour of farmers (including 
issues of concern, risk management, perceptions of drought, management of challenges) from the 
June 2008 SSP climate change and industry adaptation survey of farmers
• provide an analysis of the Quality of Life survey of farmers and farm workers in drought areas 
(compared with the total Australian community) using the recognised Deakin Wellbeing Index 
(based on a national Newspoll survey conducted in mid July 2008) (Hogan et al. 2008a)
• provide an analysis of the social circumstances of rural people and communities (compared with 
urban communities) based on previously unanalysed dimensions from the Household Income and 
Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey (Hogan et al. 2008b).
This report responds to the first of these requests. It draws on data from a broader study conducted 
by the SSP in mid 2008 concerned with primary producer perceptions of climate risk and adaptation. 
113   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      114 
Method
Results presented in this report are based on the responses of 3300 primary producers who 
participated in the 2008 Bureau of Rural Sciences’ quantitative study on climate risk and adaptation. 
These producers had an estimated value of agricultural output of $5000 per year or more. The data 
are the result of a postal survey undertaken by the SSP in 2008. A valid response rate of approximately 
51% was obtained. The trends reported in this paper are based on preliminary data. This report 
provides a thematic representation of trends in the dataset which are subject to confirmation in 
the study’s final report. Statistical differences are reported at the 0.05 level. Since a large number of 
comparisons are reported in this preliminary report, it is possible that some results will be significant 
as a result of chance alone. 
The survey contained 126 questions on a range of topics such as on-farm risks, self efficacy and social 
capital. These data are reported as summary scales. Readers interested in the analysis behind the 
development of these scales are referred to Appendix A of this report. 
For the purposes of this analysis, respondents’ were classified into one of two groups, depending on 
whether or not they reported adverse seasonal conditions (such as frost or drought) as being a risk 
factor on their property. 
A profile of producer perceptions of their financial viability in the context of the size of their 
enterprise (business profitability) has been constructed from the SSP survey data. These analyses are 
supplemented with data available from the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics 
(ABARE) on business profitability. 
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     114 
Appendix 9

115    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Topline results
Survey respondents were asked to report the extent to which a series of issues were a problem for 
them in managing their property. Risk factors included low commodity prices, high input costs, 
physical risks (such as water and soil quality) and personal health. An index of risk was developed from 
these items (for more details please refer to Appendix A). The index can be understood on a 1 to 5 scale 
where a score of 1 means no risks and 5 means a very high level of risk on this property. Respondents’ 
average scores for the risk index are presented in Table 1. A statistically significant difference (*) in the 
level of risk can be seen between those reporting adverse weather conditions on their property and 
those not. Notably, those reporting such events also have a higher risk index. 
Respondents were asked to indicate activities 
they were considering or actually doing to 
manage risk on their property using a rate scaling 
of 1 to 4 where 1 means not doing now and don’t 
plan to, 2 means not doing now and considering, 
3 means doing now as part of seasonal risk 
management, and 4 means doing now as part of 
long-term management. 
Mean scores are presented in Table 2 and statistical differences (*) noted. The results suggest that 
those affected by adverse seasonal conditions are more likely to be taking strategic action than those 
not affected. It is noted, however, that mean scores generally fall within the range of contemplating 
action rather than taking action. 
1 
An Index of on-farm risk
Adverse 
weather  
No adverse
conditions 
conditions
Risk index 
3.2* 
2.6
2 
Use of risk management activities by primary producers 
Activity 
Adverse weather conditions 
No adverse conditions
Use operational management plan 
2.70 * 
2.40
Improve financial situation  
2.52 * 
2.21
Develop risk management strategies for natural hazards 
2.50 * 
2.26
Develop business management plan 
2.41 * 
2.17
Scale back operations 
2.37 * 
1.97
Add new technologies 
2.34 * 
2.11
Undertake succession planning 
2.23 
2.15
Undertake training to improve on-farm income 
2.01 * 
1.81
Diversify into other forms of production 
1.84 * 
1.74
Intensify or expand current operations  
1.82 
1.76
Undertake training to improve off-farm income 
1.81 * 
1.62
Sell or lease part of property 
1.64 
1.62
Exit the industry 
1.53 
1.49
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      116 
Respondents were asked to indicate the main areas of primary production on their property and to 
report whether they were affected by adverse weather conditions (Table 3). Dryland croppers were 
more likely than other agricultural sectors to report they were affected by adverse weather conditions 
such as drought or frost (84 per cent). 
Respondents were asked to report their perceptions regarding climate change and climate variability 
using a rating scale of 1 to 5 where 1 means that the statement is false, 2 that the statement is probably 
false, 3 neither true nor false, 4 probably true, and 5 true (see Table 4). Mean scores are presented and 
statistical differences (*) noted. 
Table 4 shows that the financial viability of primary producers who reported adverse weather 
conditions such as drought is perceived by these respondents to be more at risk than for those 
producers not working in such conditions.
4 
Perceptions of climate change and climate variability
Issue 
Adverse weather conditions 
No adverse conditions
Changes in weather patterns are part of a natural cycle 
4.2  
4.2
Changesz in weather patterns are hurting my business 
4.2 * 
2.8
The community has a moral responsibility to reduce 
  greenhouse gas emissions 
4.1  
4.1
Climate change is both man-made and natural 
4.1  
4.0
Climate patterns really are changing  
3.9 * 
3.7
Some farming practices generate greenhouse gas emissions 
3.8  
3.8
I have a responsibility to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
3.8  
3.8
Carbon emissions worsen the effects of natural climate cycles 
3.7  
3.6
It’s the government’s responsibility to legislate to reduce 
  greenhouse gas emissions 
3.5  
3.4
Greenhouse gas emissions cause climate change 
3.4  
3.4
Climate change is threatening the viability of my property 
3.3 * 
2.5
The increased intensity of droughts, storms and floods is 
  a result of climate change 
3.3 * 
3.2
Normal weather patterns will soon return 
3.2  
3.2
Enough is known about climate change to justify action  
3.2  
3.1
There is no such thing as climate change 
2.4  
2.4
3 
Proportion of respondents reporting adverse weather conditions by 
industry
Industry sector 
Adverse weather conditions  
No adverse conditions
% 
%
Dryland cropping 
  (e.g. cereals and legumes)  
84 
16
Dairy 
76 
24
Livestock 
75 
25
Intensive agricultural purposes 
  (e.g. feedlots, piggery and poultry sheds) 
73 
27
Irrigated crops (e.g. vegetables, horticulture, fruit, 
  nuts, rice, cotton, grapevines and nurseries) 
71 
29
Forestry plantation 
68 
32
Appendix 9

117    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Table 5 reports respondents’ perceptions of weather events using a 1 to 5 scale where 1 meant strongly 
disagree and 5 meant strongly agree. A middle score of 3 was used to indicate that the respondent was 
unsure about their response to an item. These items are listed in Table 5. Mean scores are presented 
below and statistical differences (*) noted. Table 5 shows that primary producers affected by adverse 
weather conditions were more likely to agree 
that all of the items listed in Table 5, except 
rising sea levels, were caused by or made worse 
by climate change. The reduced availability of 
water on my property was the variable with the 
greatest difference between the two groups. 
Survey respondents were asked to report on 
their capacity to manage a series of challenges. 
Their responses to these items have been 
computed into scales on social capital and self 
efficacy (for more details on the development of these scales please refer to Appendix A) where 
higher scores (between 1 and 5) reflect better outcomes. Table 6 indicates that both groups report 
positive scores on social capital and self efficacy and that there are few, if any, substantive differences 
between them. However, a small but statistically significant difference is evident between respondents 
on self-efficacy, with respondents adversely affected by weather conditions reporting a lower score.
Respondents were asked if they had used or participated in any of a series of government programs 
or activities in the past 12 months. Percentages are presented in Table 7 and statistically significant 
differences (*) noted. The table shows that those reporting the impact of adverse seasonal conditions 
were more likely to be receiving government assistance through drought relief programs.
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of 1 (not helpful) to 5 (most helpful) the extent to which 
a range of possible government programs might be helpful to them in managing the impacts of 
climate and weather. In Table 8, mean scores are presented for responses and statistically significant 
5 
Primary producer perceptions on whether environmental events may be 
caused by climate change 
Events 
Adverse weather conditions 
No adverse conditions
The melting of icebergs and glaciers 
3.5 * 
3.3
Local changes in weather (e.g. less rain; more dust storms; 
  warmer local average temperatures) 
3.4 * 
3.2
Reduced availability of water on my property 
3.4 * 
2.9
Extreme weather events (e.g. major floods, heat waves)  
3.3 * 
3.1
Shift in seasons (e.g. earlier/later frosts) 
3.3 * 
3.1
Rising sea levels 
3.3  
3.3
6 
Indicators of social capital and 
self-efficacy 
Adverse 
No adverse
Issue 
weather conditions 
conditions
% 
% 
Social Capital 
3.9 
3.9
Self-efficacy 
3.6 * 
3.7
* Statistically significant differences.
117   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      118 
differences (*) noted. The table shows that those reporting the impact of adverse seasonal conditions 
indicated a higher desire for government assistance than those not reporting adverse conditions. 
7 
Use of or participation in various programs, percentage of respondents
Issue 
Adverse weather conditions  
No adverse conditions
% 
%
Agricultural extension programs 
  (professional advice on farming practices) 
50 * 
42
Landcare program/ Caring for Our Country 
39  
36
Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment 
32 * 
13
Exceptional Circumstances interest rate subsidy  
29 * 
12
Non-government groups e.g. MLA, AWI, Greening Australia, 
  World Wildlife Fund  
28  
28
Industry programs 
24 * 
20
Regional NRM/CMA programs 
19 * 
12
Professional advice and planning through Exceptional 
  Circumstance program 
19 * 
9
Rural financial counselling 
13 * 
5
Irrigation Management Grant 
11 * 
4
8 
Types of government assistance that might be helpful
Issue 
Adverse weather conditions 
No adverse conditions
Provide me with direct financial assistance to manage 
 current problems (e.g. Exceptional Circumstances 
 assistance for drought) 
4.1 * 
3.3
Provide me with direct financial assistance to enable
  me to invest in the property’s long-term future 
 (e.g. farm infrastructure, succession planning) 
4.0 * 
3.4
Provide me with an incentive to purchase more 
 fuel efficient machinery  
3.9 * 
3.6
Provide me with research results on current issues 
 (e.g. drought resistant crops)  
3.9 * 
3.5
Provide resources to support local groups (e.g. water and Landcare) 
3.7 * 
3.6
Enable me to access advice and support for farm and 
 natural resource management  
3.7 * 
3.4
Enable me to develop more sustainable farming practices 
3.7 * 
3.4
Provide me with direct financial assistance to enable me to 
 seek advice and/or training for managing climate risk 
3.6 * 
3.5
Provide me with training on managing climate change  
3.4 * 
3.0
Provide me with information on water allocations and availability  
2.8 * 
2.6
Improve/better manage my water trading arrangements  
2.5 * 
2.3
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     118 
Appendix 9

119    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Analysis of farmers’ income and their perceptions of 
viability
The Expert Social Panel asked whether the size of an enterprise affects its financial viability. Although 
this question fell outside the scope of the study of primary producer climate perceptions and 
adaptation, it was possible to undertake a limited analysis of this question using SSP data. This analysis 
is presented and is supplemented by analysis of ABARE farm survey data.
The SSP has conducted seven landholder surveys since 2002 (Byron et al. 2004a, b, 2006a, b, 
Hanslip et al. 2008a, Hanslip et al. 2008b, Kancans et al. 2008). To enable comparability between 
these landholder surveys and the survey 
of primary producer perceptions of, and 
adaptation to, climate change, income 
groupings for the current SSP survey were 
drawn from the landholder surveys. In 
the landholder surveys, income groups 
were broken down into $20 000 income 
groups with the top group being ‘$100 
000 and above’. Figure 1 reports net on-
farm income by those affected by adverse 
seasonal conditions (e.g. drought, frost) 
and those not affected by adverse seasonal 
conditions. Producers affected by adverse 
seasonal conditions were more highly 
represented (33 per cent versus 26 per 
cent) among those reporting a loss or zero 
income.
Producers were also asked whether they perceived their property to be financially viable based on 
their performance over the previous five years. Producers affected by adverse seasonal conditions 
were more likely to report (43 per cent versus 37 per cent) that they did not consider themselves to be 
viable. Further analysis was conducted to compare producers with on-farm income of less than $100 
000 and those with an on-farm income of more than $100 000. The results of this analysis show that 
those with an income of less than $100 000 were:
• More likely to: 
– have smaller properties
– have livestock on their properties
– say their property was primarily a  lifestyle property.
• Less likely to:
– have dryland cropping on their properties
– have irrigated crops on their properties
– have dairying on their properties
– have intensive agriculture on their properties
– say their property was primarily a business.
]^PSeTabTR^]SXcX^]b
PSeTabTR^]SXcX^]b
$

 $
!
!$
"
=Tc^]
UPa\X]R^\TUX]P]RXP[hTPaT]SX]V
"9d]T!&


0[^bb
iTa^
X]R^\T
 
!
! 
#
# 
%
% 
'
' 
 
\^aT
cWP]
 
=Tc^]
UPa\X]R^\T
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      120 
• As likely to have:
– irrigation on their properties
– forestry on their properties.
Respondents were also asked to indicate whether their average primary production income over the 
past five years was:
• definitely not enough to keep the farm viable
• not quite enough to keep the farm viable
• enough to break even on the farm
• just enough to keep the farm viable
• more than enough to keep the farm viable.
Respondents whose on-farm income was above $100 000 were 
more likely to indicate that their production income was enough 
to keep their farm viable (Figure 2).
Those who indicated that their property was not viable 
(definitely not enough to keep the farm viable and not quite 
enough to keep the farm viable) were:
• More likely to:
– have smaller properties
– have livestock on their properties
– say their property was primarily a lifestyle property.
• Less likely to: 
– have dryland cropping on their properties
– have dairying on their properties
– have intensive agriculture on their properties.
• As likely to:
– have irrigated crops on their properties
– have forestry on their properties
– have irrigation on their properties.
Of those respondents who indicated that their property was not viable, 35 per cent had a total income 
(on-farm and off-farm income) of less than $100 000 for 2005-06. 
=^ceXPQ[T
EXPQ[T
!

#
%
'
;TbbcWP] 
<^aTcWP] 
?TaRTXeTSUPa\QdbX]Tbb
eXPQX[Xch
!
Appendix 9

121    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Farm business profitability and 
viability
To support the response to the question by the Expert Social Panel about whether the size of an 
enterprise affects the financial viability of farms, the following sections present farm profitability data 
derived from ABARE farm surveys for broadacre agricultural enterprises across Australia for financial 
years ending 30 June, between 2002 and 2007.
Broadacre is defined as ‘all cropping and livestock’ activities and is comprised of the following 
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC) industries:
• Wheat and other crops industry (ANZSIC Class 121) – farms engaged mainly in growing cereal grains, 
coarse grains, oilseeds and/or pulses
• Mixed livestock–crops industry (ANZSIC Class 122) – farms engaged mainly in running sheep or beef 
cattle and growing cereal grains, coarse grains, oilseeds and/or pulses 
• Sheep industry (ANZSIC Class 124) – farms engaged mainly in running sheep 
• Beef industry (ANZSIC Class 125) – farms engaged mainly in running beef cattle
• Sheep–beef industry (ANZSIC Class 123) – farms engaged mainly in running both sheep and beef 
cattle.
Excluded from the data are agricultural 
establishments coded to Nursery and 
Floriculture production (011); Mushroom 
and Vegetable Growing (012); Fruit and Tree 
Nut Growing (013); Other Crop Growing 
(015), which includes Sugar and Cotton; 
Poultry Farming (017); Deer Farming (018); 
and Other Livestock farming (019), which 
includes pig farming. Based on 2005-06 
estimates, 42 per cent of farming businesses 
fall into these categories (ABS 2008).
Farm business profit
Figure 3 presents farm business profit of 
Australian agricultural businesses (farms) by 
=BF
EXR
@[S
B
0
F
0
CPb
0dbcaP[XP
µ%
0¹
µ!
µ'
µ 
µ#
!
%
#
'
5Pa\QdbX]Tbb_a^UXcQhbcPcTU^aUX]P]RXP[
hTPabT]SX]V"9d]T


"
!!
!"
!#
!$
!%
!&
Appendix 9
121 It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      122 
state for the financial years ending 30 June, between 2002 and 2007. Farm business profits fell sharply 
between 2002 and 2003 and have generally fallen across Australia over the past two financial years.
Note: All estimates are farm averages. All financial estimates are expressed in 2006-07 dollars. Farm 
business profit equals farm cash income plus build-up in trading stocks, less depreciation expense, less 
the imputed value of the owner manager, partner(s) and family labour. 
Farm business profit by size of business
Figure 4 presents a cross-tabulation of ‘size of farm business’, which is determined by the value of 
‘gross turnover’ (total cash receipts plus build-up of trading stocks), and ‘farm business profit’ (net 
farm cash income plus build-up in trading stocks, less depreciation expense, less the imputed value of 
the owner manager, partner(s) and family labour), to provide an estimate of ‘farm business profit’ at 
varying levels of ‘size of farm business’ over time in Australia.
The sizes of farming businesses have been categorised as: less than $100 000; $100 000 to $200 000; 
$200 000 to $400 000; and more than $400,000. Figure 4 indicates that the size of farming businesses 
is strongly related to farm business profit. Farms 
in the greater than $400 000 category have a 
higher ‘farm business profit’ than those in the 
smaller farm business size categories. These 
results indicate that larger farms may be able to 
achieve greater efficiencies than smaller ones 
and that such efficiencies affect ‘farm business 
profit’.
* ‘Size of farm business’ is defined as gross 
turnover, which is total cash receipts plus 
build up of trading stocks. All estimates are 
per farm averages. All financial estimates are 
expressed in 2006-07 dollars. Farm business 
profit equals farm cash income plus build-up 
in trading stocks, less depreciation expense, 
less the imputed value of the owner manager, 
partner(s) and family labour.
;TbbcWP] 
 µ!
!µ#
\^aTcWP]#
µ 
µ$
0¹
$
 $
!
!$
5Pa\QdbX]Tbb_a^UXcQhbXiT^UUPa\QdbX]Tbb
U^aUX]P]RXP[hTPabT]SX]V"9d]T
#
BXiT^UUPa\QdbX]Tbb
!!
!"
!#
!$
!%
!&
Appendix 9
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness 122

123    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
References
ABS (2008) Business Demographics 2005-2006, Unpublished data. Canberra: Australian Bureau of 
Statistics.
Byron, I, A Curtis and J MacKay (2004a) Providing social data to underpin catchment planning in the 
Glenelg Hopkins region. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Byron, I, A Curtis and J MacKay (2004b) Providing social data to underpin catchment planning in the 
Queensland Murray Darling region. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Byron, I, A Curtis and J MacKay (2006a) Benchmarking community attitudes towards natural resource 
management in the Lachlan Catchment. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Byron, I, A Curtis and J MacKay (2006b) Providing social and economic data to support regional natural 
resource management in the Burnett Mary. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Expert Social Panel (2008) Drought policy review Expert Social Panel: assessment of the social impacts 
of drought and related government and non-government social support services - Issues paper, June 
2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/710644/social_panels_isues_
paper.pdf [Accessed 2 July 2008] 
Hanslip, M, R Kancans, B Maguire and I Byron (2008a) Improving outcomes for landholders in the South 
West NRM region - Survey 2006. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Hanslip, M, B Maguire and I Byron (2008b) Understanding natural resource management from a 
landholder’s perspective - Northern and Yorke Landholder Survey 2006. Canberra: Bureau of Rural 
Sciences.
Hogan, A, B Maguire, J Russell and P Stakelum (2008a) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: A 
comparative analysis of farmers and people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas and 
the Australian population using the Deakin Personal Wellbeing Index, Report prepared for the 
September 2008. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Hogan, A, C Polidano, J Russell and P Stakelum (2008b) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: an 
analysis of the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) study, Report prepared 
Forestry, September 2008. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Kancans, R, M Hanslip and I Byron (2008) Understanding Natural Resource Management from a 
landholder’s perspective in the Southern Region of Tasmania: Results of the 2006 Landholder Survey. 
Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
PIMC (2008) Communique of the Primary Industries Ministerial Council - Meeting held in Melbourne, 
17 April 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/625624/pimc-13.pdf 
[Accessed 25 July 2008] 
The Hon. Tony Burke MP (2008a) Expert Panel to review social impacts of drought. Media release. 
Office of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
The Hon. Tony Burke MP (2008b) Primary Industries Ministerial Forum Communique, Cairns, 28-29 
February 2008, Available: http://www.maff.gov.au/media/media_releases/february_2008/primary_
industries_ministerial_forum_communique [Accessed 2 September 2008] 
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      124 
Appendix a
Scale development and analysis 
Much of the work of social scientists is to identify and report on social attitudes, motivations, values 
and behaviours. While behaviours (e.g. voting behaviour) and social indicators (e.g. annual income) can 
be independently observed, attitudes and motivations are things that exist inside peoples’ heads and 
as such, are more difficult to observe and report on. A number of analytical techniques were reported 
in this study. Techniques such as reliability analysis and factor analysis are commonly used in social 
science research to assess the extent to which larger numbers of survey items work well together to 
assess higher level constructs. These analyses are important to ensure that the data reported are 
statistically reliable and robust. In this section, typical methods used to assess the quality of social 
surveys are reported. This summary is intended to aid the reader in understanding how the analysis of 
data in this paper has been approached by the research team.
Constructs
It is rare that an attitude, value or motivation (henceforth referred to as attitudes) is determined by 
just one thing. Typically in survey work, attitudes are measured as constructs, higher level concepts 
made up of a variety of factors that go together to form an overall whole. The construct is usually 
informed by a theoretical framework that the researchers have brought to bear on the project. 
Extensive psychometric work goes into the development of a reliable survey instrument including 
qualitative research, cognitive testing, survey piloting, construct testing and cross validation of survey 
results. Given this amount of work, researchers are reluctant to change an item in a validated survey 
without repeating this series of studies.
Background on psychometric analysis 
In this paper a number of statistical tests were applied to the survey data to ensure that the variables 
behaved properly in psychometric terms. The psychometric tests applied to the data are briefly 
discussed below.
Factor analysis
Factor analysis is a statistical method that is used to reduce a large number of survey items about a 
particular attitude or behaviour into a few underlying new variables or factors. The way it does this 
is to look for covariance across the responses; that is, by identifying questions for which the answer 
patterning is the same. An important research factor for farmers managing climate change is that they 
actively plan to manage their on-farm risks. This idea or factor could be made up of a larger number 
of different attitudes or behaviours such as succession planning, use of an operational management 
plan and development of a business management plan. Factor analysis brings common variables such 
as these together in the dataset and reduces them to a single new variable (or factor) while losing as 
little of the response detail as possible. This new variable can then be used to more easily examine the 
question since one can focus on just one item (e.g. actively plan to manage their on-farm risks) rather 
than needing to think about a lot of variables all at the same time. In social sciences a factor score of 
Appendix 9

125    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
30 per cent – 40 per cent of variance explained is acceptable, but ideally one would like to see factor 
scores of 70 per cent. The higher score indicates that less information has been lost in bringing the 
items together and that together, these items explain much of what is going on with the behaviours of 
interest. 
Reliability analysis
Reliability analysis tests whether or not the survey items work together to make a coherent scale. If 
they do, an analyst may calculate a summary scale variable and use this instead of the larger number 
of survey items used in the original study. Once again, this makes reporting the data simpler and more 
coherent. 
While there are some similarities between reliability analysis and factor analysis, reliability analysis can 
produce much more finely focused on assessing one central theme from a set of items, whereas than 
factor analysis can deal with multiple themes at the one time. Reliability analysis is concerned to ensure 
that respondents respond to survey questions in a similar way such that a set of items could be said 
to make up a consistent scale. Reliability analysis tests these items to see if they go well together as a 
scale and if they do, an analyst can compute a summary variable for the scale that is made up of these 
variables (by using the average for each item for example). When the new scale variable is produced it 
retains the survey’s original scale (for example scores of 1 to 5 where 1 means strongly disagree and 5 
means strongly agree). A common statistic produced by this routine is called the Cronbach Alpha. Like 
factor analysis, one looks for a score of around 70 per cent (or 0.7) to be satisfied that the items are 
working well together. 
Psychometric analysis of scales used in this study 
Index of risk
Reliability analysis was used to develop the risk index reported in this study. In Question 1 of the survey, 
respondents were asked to report the extent to which 16 issues were a problem in managing their 
property, using a rating scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means not at all a problem and 5 means a major problem. 
These issues were:
1 
low commodity prices
2 
input costs (e.g. fuel, energy and fertiliser costs)
3 
interest rates
4 
cash flow
5 
not enough farm income to support family
6 
debt levels
7 
labour (availability and/or cost)
8 
not enough access to community services (e.g. banks, schools, healthcare)
9 
lack of access to training or professional services
10 
cost of training or professional services
11 
water (e.g. allocations for irrigation)
Appendix 9

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      126 
12 
water quality (e.g. salinity, pH, nutrients)
13 
adverse seasonal conditions (e.g. frosts, drought)
14 
soil (e.g. erosion, salinity, pH)
15 
pests or diseases
16 
my health/fitness.
The Cronbach’s Alpha for the risk index was a reliable 0.83.
Social capital and self efficacy scales
Reliability analysis was used to develop the scales for social capital and self efficacy. Respondents were 
asked to report whether they (strongly) agreed or (strongly) disagreed with a series of statements 
taken from the literature and field work concerning aspects of social capital and self-efficacy. 
The aspects of social capital that were included in the SSP survey instrument related to community 
cohesion and support were:
• could ask someone to help them when problems arise
• was a member of a local community group (e.g. farmers’ co-op, church, sports club, school 
committee, etc.)
• had carried out unpaid work for a community group in the past 12 months
• felt part of their local community
• felt that local people were willing to help each other.
The Cronbach’s Alpha for the self efficacy scale was a reliable 0.74
Self-efficacy is concerned with a person’s sense of their own competence to manage a range of 
stressful situations. The survey included questions about the degree to which the respondent:
• believed that they had the capacity to handle unforeseen situations
• could rely on their coping abilities to remain calm when facing difficulties
•  believed they had the ability to think of good solutions when facing difficulties.
The Cronbach’s Alpha for the self efficacy scale was a reliable 0.80.
Appendix 9

127    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The social wellbeing of rural 
Australians: 
An analysis of the Household, Income and Labour 
Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) longitudinal dataset
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Anthony Hogan, Cain Polidano, Jacqui Russell and Patrick Stakelum
September 2008
This paper uses unit record data from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia 
Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA) and is 
managed by the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research (MIAESR). The findings 
and views reported in this paper, however, are those of the authors and should not be attributed to 
either FaHCSIA or the MIAESR.
© Commonwealth of Australia 2008
reproduced by any process without prior written permission from the Commonwealth. Requests and 
Administration, Attorney General’s Department, Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT 
2600 or posted at http://www.ag.gov.au/cca.
and skill in the preparation and compilation of the information and data set out in this publication. 
Notwithstanding, the Bureau of Rural Sciences, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, 
including liability for negligence, for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as 
a result of accessing, using or relying upon any of the information or data set out in this publication to 
the maximum extent permitted by law.
Postal address:
Bureau of Rural Sciences
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT 2601
Appendix 10
127   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      128 
Key findings
Background 
This report is one of three prepared by the Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences, to 
support investigations of the social impacts of drought as part of the National Review of Drought 
Policy. It reports on the social wellbeing of rural Australians using the Household, Income and Labour 
Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) dataset.
The HILDA dataset 
The HILDA Survey is a national study that asks a wide range of questions covering matters such as 
financial and emotional wellbeing, health-related quality of life and social connectedness. In this study, 
rural people are those living in rural areas and small towns with fewer than 1000 people.
Rural people report being more satisfied with some aspects of their lives 
HILDA data show that rural people express greater satisfaction across a variety of measures 
(satisfaction with relationships and financial situation) compared with urban people. Levels of 
connectedness are similar between communities.
Rural people are less satisfied with access to services than people in urban areas 
Rural people are significantly less satisfied with access to services than urban people. This difference 
between urban and rural people is the most marked of the indicators.
Rural people report poorer physical health  Rural peoples’ summary quality of life scores show 
higher levels of physical pain and reduced body functioning. Mental health scores for rural people are 
marginally better than for urban people.
Rural people face higher transport costs  
Motor vehicle and fuel costs are higher for rural people. Urban people score at both extremes (low and 
high) of the index of social disadvantage. 
Rural people are happier at work but their workplace stress is increasing 
Rural people are more likely to report higher levels of control over their daily work than urban people. 
However, over the period of the study, rural people moved from being less stressed than urban people 
to being equally stressed by their work. 
Limitations of this analysis 
People living in remote areas, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in particular, are under-
represented in HILDA data. Wave 6 of the data (collected in 2006) was not available at the time of this 
analysis. Comparative analysis of wealth and social capital would be possible with use of Wave 6 data.
Appendix 10
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     128

129    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
List of acronyms
ABARE 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics
ABS 
Australian Bureau of Statistics
ANZSIC 
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification 
BRS 
Bureau of Rural Sciences
DAFF 
EC 
Exceptional Circumstances: EC events are rare and severe events that are outside those 
that a farmer could normally be expected to manage using responsible farm management 
strategies. To be classified as an EC event, the event:
• must be rare, that is it must not have occurred more than once on average in every 20 to 
25 years
• must result in a rare and severe downturn in farm income over a prolonged period of time 
(e.g. greater than 12 months)
• must be a discrete event that is not part of long-term structural adjustment processes or 
normal fluctuations in commodity prices 
MP 
Member of Parliament
SSP 
Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences
Appendix 10

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      130 
Contents
Key findings 
128
List of acronyms 
129
Background 
132
Methods 
133
Findings 
134
Satisfaction with life 
134
Connectedness 
134
Access to services 
135
Health status 
135
Disadvantage in rural communities 
136
Financial issues 
137
Workplace issues 
138
References 
140
Appendix A: Scale development and analysis 
141
Figures
1 
Comparison of satisfaction with life for rural and urban 
populations, 2005 
134
2 
Comparison of social and economic disadvantage (SEIFA scores), 
2005 
136
3 
Ratio of income to living expenses, 2005 
137
4 
Annual household motor vehicle fuel costs, 2005 
138
5 
Annual household motor vehicle maintenance costs, 2005 
138
6 
Financial stressors, 2001 to 2005 
139
7 
Job latitude, 2005 
139
Appendix 10

131    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Tables
1 
Indicators of social connectedness (per cent agreeing), 2005 
135
2 
Adequacy of access to services (per cent), 2002 
135
3 
Health-related measures of quality of life (SF 36) (per cent), 2005 136
4 
Workplace stressors (per cent), 2005 
139
Appendix 10
131   It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      132 
Background
In June 2008, the Social Sciences Program (SSP) of the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) was asked 
examine the social impacts of drought on farm families and rural communities as part of its National 
Review of Drought Policy (The Hon. Tony Burke MP 2008a).This review follows on from the Primary 
Industries Ministerial Forum in Cairns earlier in 2008, where Ministers agreed that current approaches 
to drought and Exceptional Circumstances (EC) might no longer be the most appropriate in the 
context of a changing climate (PIMC 2008, The Hon. Tony Burke MP 2008b). Ministers saw that 
drought policy needed to be improved to create an environment of self-reliance and preparedness, 
and to encourage the adoption of appropriate climate change management practices.
As part of the review process the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry appointed a seven 
member Expert Social Panel (2008) to:
• assess the social impact of drought on farm families and rural communities
• identify gaps and areas for improvement in Australian, state and territory government social 
support services that are designed to mitigate the impact of drought on farm families and rural 
communities.
To support the work of the Expert Social Panel, the SSP was asked by the Drought Review Branch to:
• provide an analysis of the social circumstances of rural people and communities (compared with 
urban communities) based on previously unanalysed dimensions from the Household Income and 
Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey 
• provide an analysis of the social circumstances, perceptions, and behaviour of farmers (including 
issues of concern, risk management, perceptions of drought, management of challenges) from the 
June 2008 SSP climate change and industry adaptation survey of farmers (Hogan et al. 2008a)
• provide an analysis of the Quality of Life survey of farmers and farm workers in drought areas 
(compared with the total Australian community) using the recognised Deakin Wellbeing Index 
(based on a national Newspoll survey conducted in mid July 2008) (Hogan et al. 2008b).
This report responds to the first of these requests in relation to the social wellbeing of rural 
Australians using the HILDA dataset.
Appendix 10
It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness     132

133    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Methods
The HILDA survey is a longitudinal household-based study that began in 2001. The same respondents 
in each household are surveyed each year, regardless of whether they have moved to another 
residence. The survey is funded by the Commonwealth Department of Families, Housing, Community 
Services and Indigenous Affairs (FaHCSIA). HILDA has the following features: 
1 it collects information about economic and subjective wellbeing, as well as labour market and 
family dynamics
2 the study has funds for twelve annual surveys, or ‘waves’
3 special thematic modules are included in each wave
4 Wave 1, conducted in 2001, consisted of 7682 households and 19 914 individuals. Interviews are 
conducted annually with all adult members of each household.
The HILDA survey asks respondents a wide range of questions covering matters such as financial and 
emotional wellbeing, health-related quality of life and social connectedness. 
The analysis in this paper is concerned with a comparison of social and economic wellbeing between 
urban and rural Australians. Within the HILDA dataset, individuals can be defined as being of urban 
or rural domicile, using one of several variables. For the purposes of this study, the Section of State 
(HHSOS) was the derived spatial variable that was used to assign respondents to a group as either 
Urban or Rural. The HHSOS classification is a standard geographic classification used by the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics and is employed in the HILDA studies.1 Within HHSOS, respondents can be coded 
as major urban, other urban, bounded locality or rural balance.
In this report, a new variable was created that consisted of ‘urban’ (major and other urban) and ‘rural’ 
(bounded locality and rural balance, which includes people living in small towns, villages and rural areas 
with fewer than 1000 people). These two groupings constituted 84 per cent and 16 per cent of the 
sample respectively. In 2006, ‘rural’ comprised 12 per cent of the total Australian population (2.3 million 
people) (BRS 2008).
The sample size in the designated rural areas enables comparisons to be made between the social 
circumstances of people living in rural areas and those living in urban areas. However, it should be noted 
that the people living in rural areas (in places with fewer than 1000 people) include a range of different 
occupations, including working on farms, working in small towns, and people of retirement age. 
The data from five annual surveys or waves (2001 to 2005) were available for this analysis. Not all 
questions were asked in all waves. For example, questions on access to services were only asked in 
Wave 2. Although not available at the time of the analysis, the inclusion of Wave 6 data would enable 
a comparison of respondents’ changes in wealth between 2002 and 2006. In addition, Wave 6 data 
contain more in-depth information on social capital.
The aim of this analysis is to provide information to the Expert Social Panel (the Panel) on the wellbeing 
of rural Australians. Sets of items within the HILDA surveys likely to be of interest to the Panel were 
identified. 
Appendix 10

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      134 
Thematically these are:
1 Satisfaction with life
2 Connectedness
3 Access to services
4 Health status
5 Disadvantage in rural communities
6 Financial issues
7 Workplace issues.
Since many of these sections of HILDA contained a number of survey questions, scaled variables were 
derived from the data for life satisfaction, financial stress, disposable income and workplace stress. 
Details on how these scales were derived can be found in Appendix A. The following sections in this 
report compare the various social circumstances of people living in rural areas with those of people 
living in urban communities. Statistically significant differences are reported for differences between 
urban and rural populations where differences were less than 0.05.
Findings
Satisfaction with life
Satisfaction with life is reported as a summary 
scale with comparisons made between rural 
and urban communities. Figure 1 illustrates the 
finding for 2005. 
People living in rural areas were more highly 
satisfied with their life than those in urban 
areas. For the higher levels of life satisfaction 
(score of 8 or more), 39.6 per cent of people 
living in rural areas were satisfied, compared 
with 28.5 per cent of people living in urban 
areas. These differences were statistically 
significant. 
Connectedness
Respondents in the HILDA study were asked 
to report on a series of questions concerned 
with their connection with others in the community. These data are an indicator of social capital and 
social inclusion. The questions were concerned with levels of perceived loneliness, sufficiency of 
friends and visitors, and the perceived level of help available. Table 1 reports these indicators of social 
connectedness by rural and urban populations for 2005.
AdaP[
DaQP]
$

 $
!
2^\_PaXb^]^UbPcXbUPRcX^]fXcW[XUTU^a
adaP[P]SdaQP]_^_d[PcX^]b!$


 
[TPbc
!
"
#
$
%
&
'
(
 
\^bc
bPcXbUPRcX^]fXcW[XUT
B^daRT)7X[SP!$
Appendix 10

135    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The were no statistically significant differences between the scores of rural and urban communities on 
these indicators. 
Access to services
It is often stated that people living in rural areas have a lower level of access to services, compared 
with people living in urban areas. The 2002 HILDA dataset contains a series of questions on peoples’ 
living and lifestyle situations, including items concerned with the adequacy of transport and access to 
services. HILDA does not define the nature of services to which people seek access.
This analysis of the HILDA data quantifies a marked difference in the adequacy of access to services 
and transport for rural people. Fewer than one in ten people living in rural areas reported that they had 
adequate access to services or transport, compared with people living in urban areas where 40 per 
cent reported adequacy of services and transport. 
Although not quantified in the HILDA survey, reduced access to services can result in reduced health 
care options for people living in rural communities (Berry 2008). Access to the latest forms of mental 
health assistance, for example, may be hampered by something as simple as reduced access to mobile 
telephone coverage preventing the delivery, for example, of SMS communication-based interventions. 
Health status
The HILDA dataset contains results on the internationally recognised health-related quality of life 
measure, the SF 36. This scale provides data on 8 measures of health, including aspects of both physical 
health and mental health. These are:
1 Physical health
i 
physical functioning (i.e. level of mobility, e.g. ability to climb stairs or walk a certain distance)
ii role-physical (i.e. the level of difficulty in mobilising)
iii bodily pain (i.e. the magnitude of pain and/or level of interference with tasks)
iv general health (i.e. a person’s perception of their health status).
2 Mental health
i 
vitality (i.e. the sense of ‘energy’ versus ‘fatigue’ experienced)
ii social functioning (i.e. the extent of and amount of time spent engaging in social relations)
Appendix 10
2 
Adequacy of access to services,
2002 
Rural  
Urban
% 
% 
Adequate access to services 
9.1 
40.0
Adequate transport 
8.2 
42.4
Source: HILDA 2002.
 1
 Indicators of social connectedness 
(per cent agreeing), 2005 
Measures of connectedness 
Rural  
Urban
% 
% 
Have enough friends 
45.9 
46.6
People visit me as often as I would like 
30.7 
30.7
I often feel very lonely 
19.0 
19.7
Have enough help 
12.4 
12.5
Source: HILDA 2005.

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      136 
iii role-emotional (i.e. perceptions of ability to accomplish tasks or degree of care taken in a
ccomplishing tasks)
iv mental health (i.e. a person’s sense of their mental health, e.g. ‘down in the dumps’ or ‘happy’).
The raw scores on the SF 36 are transformed to a 0 – 100 scale where the higher score reflects better 
health. 
Table 3 shows that overall there were no statistically significant differences between people in urban 
and rural communities on indicators of general health (e.g. ability to walk to the corner with a bag of 
groceries). Over the five years of data, people living in rural areas consistently showed slightly better 
mental health status than those in urban areas, with this difference being statistically significant. 
People living in rural areas reported statistically significant poorer health outcomes for physical 
functioning and bodily pain. Table 3 illustrates the differences in responses for 2005.
Disadvantage in rural 
communities
The HILDA dataset contains a series of 
indicators developed by the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics (ABS) on relative social 
disadvantage. One such indicator is the 
SEIFA10, an index of the Relative Socio-
economic Disadvantage of individuals, 
derived from ABS Census variables related 
to disadvantage such as: low income; low 
educational attainment; unemployment; and 
access to motor vehicles. The highest relative 
disadvantage is associated with the lowest 
decile rating on the Socio-Economic Indexes 
for Area10 (SEIFA10). Higher scores reflect 
lower levels of disadvantage.
3 
Health-related measures of quality of life (SF 36) (%), 2005 
SF 36 measure 
Rural  
Urban  
Rural compared with urban (p<.05)
Role-emotional 
83.8 
82.4 
Better outcome
Social functioning 
82.6 
81.7 
Better outcome
Physical functioning  
82.3 
83.0 
Poorer outcome
Role-physical 
76.9 
79.1 
Poorer outcome
Bodily pain  
71.7 
73.9 
Poorer outcome
Mental health 
75.6 
73.7 
Better outcome
General health  
68.8 
69.1 
No statistical difference
Vitality  
60.7 
60.3 
No statistical difference
Source: HILDA 2005.
AdaP[
DaQP]
$

 $
!
2^\_PaXb^]^Ub^RXP[P]STR^]^\XR
SXbPSeP]cPVTB4850bR^aTb!$


!
[^fTbc !]S
"aS
#cW
$cW
%cW
&cW
'cW
(cW
WXVWTbc
3TRX[Tb
B^daRT)7X[SP!$
\^aTSXbPSeP]cPVTS
[TbbSXbPSeP]cPVTS
Appendix 10

137    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Figure 2 illustrates the differences in the levels of disadvantage calculated using the SEIFA10 index for 
2005. 
Figure 2 shows that people living in rural areas are proportionately more highly represented from the 
third to the eighth deciles of the SEIFA scores. They are less likely than urban people to rank amongst 
the most disadvantaged or least disadvantaged people. These differences were persistent over time.
Financial issues
Expenditure patterns in households 
The HILDA dataset contains information on annual household income and expenditure. From these 
data a ratio was derived (see Appendix A) of the level of expenditure relative to available income. It is an 
indicator of the relative cost of living. Expenditures included in the ratio are:
1 Groceries
2 Alcohol
3 Cigarettes
4 Public transport and taxis
5 Meals eaten out, hobbies
6 Sports, gambling, and entertainment
7 Motor vehicle fuel 
8 Clothing and footwear 
9 Telephone rent and calls (excluding internet charges) 
10 Holidays and holiday travel 
11 Private health and accident insurance 
12 Health Care 
13 Home repairs/renovations/maintenance 
14 Motor vehicle repairs/maintenance 
15 Education fees
16 Electricity bills, gas bills and other heating 
fuel.
Figure 3 shows the differences in the ratio of 
income to expenses calculated for 2005.
Statistically significant differences can 
be observed between urban and rural 
communities. Rural people are more likely than 
urban people to spend a higher proportion of 
their income on living expenses. Of particular 
interest, there is a higher proportion of people 
living in rural areas whose costs of living are 
Appendix 10
AdaP[
DaQP]

APcX^^UX]R^\Tc^[XeX]VTg_T]bTb!$

"
#
!
%
'
- 
APcX^^UX]R^\Tc^[XeX]VTg_T]bTb
B^daRT)7X[SP!$
!
"
#
$

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      138 
either equal to or in excess of their income. 
At a summary level it can be said that people 
living in rural areas are over-represented when 
the ratio of costs to income is 80 per cent or 
greater (approximately 27 per cent versus 20 
per cent).
Expenditure on motor vehicle fuel 
and vehicle running costs
Comparative data were available on annual 
household expenditure on motor vehicle fuel 
for 2005 (Figure 4). Notably, these data were 
collected prior to the recent spike in global 
fuel prices. People living in rural communities 
were statistically significantly more likely to 
expend more than $3000 each year on fuel 
than people living in urban communities 
(37.1per cent compared with 23.8 per cent, 
respectively). 
Figure 5 shows that people living in rural 
communities were also more likely to 
expend more than $1000 a year on motor 
vehicle maintenance than people living in 
urban communities (47.8 per cent compared 
with 38.8 per cent). 
Overall financial hardship
The HILDA dataset contains measures of 
items about the ability of respondents to 
pay bills, feed and house themselves and 
similar matters (see Appendix A for further 
details on these items). These data are 
presented in Figure 6. In all cases, urban 
people were more financially stressed than 
rural people, with the least difference in 
2005.
Workplace issues
The HILDA dataset contains a series of items on workplace wellbeing (i.e. the Karasek workplace stress 
items) that are taken from the British Whitehall employment study (Ferrie 2004, Karasek and Theorell 
1990). These items relate to job latitude, job security, job stress and fairness of pay as set out below:
Appendix 10
AdaP[
DaQP]

0]]dP[W^dbTW^[S\^c^aeTWXR[TUdT[R^bcb
!$
#
[TbbcWP]
(((
 
µ (((
!
µ!(((
"
µ"(((
#
µ#(((
\^aTcWP]
$
0]]dP[UdT[R^bcb
B^daRT)7X[SP!$
 $
$
!
!$
"
"$
AdaP[
DaQP]
 $
$

!
!$
"
"$
0]]dP[W^dbTW^[S\^c^aeTWXR[T
\PX]cT]P]RTR^bcb!$
$
[TbbcWP]
#((
$
µ(((
 
µ (((
!
µ!(((
\^aTcWP]
"
0]]dP[eTWXR[T\PX]cT]P]RTR^bcb
B^daRT)7X[SP!$

139    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
i 
Job latitude:
• I have a lot of freedom to decide how I do my own work
• I have a lot of say about what happens on my job
• I have a lot of freedom to decide when I do my work.
ii Job security:
• I have a secure future in my job
• The company I work for will still be in business five years from now
• I worry about the future of my job.
4 
Workplace stressors, 2005 
7 point rating scale 
Job security 
Job latitude 
Job stress
Rural 
Urban 
Rural 
Urban 
Rural 
Urban
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
%
Low 
0.7 
0.7 
5.2 
4.5 
1.7 
1.9
1.9 
1.7 
10.6 
11.4 
6.0 
5.5
6.1 
7.0 
16.0 
16.8 
11.0 
11.7
17.0 
16.0 
21.8 
21.8 
20.0 
19.0
24.8 
26.4 
20.7 
21.6 
20.8 
20.8
28.6 
28.7 
15.7 
15.8 
23.9 
26.1
High 
21.0 
19.6 
10.0 
8.1 
16.6 
15.1
Source: HILDA 2005 (highlighted differences are statistically significant).
Appendix 10
R^d[S]^c_PhQX[[b^]cX\T
ca^dQ[TfXcWaT]c
\^acVPVT
PbZTSU^aUX]P]RXP[WT[_Ua^\UaXT]Sb
$

 $
!
5X]P]RXP[bcaTbb^ab! c^!$
%
5X]P]RXP[bcaTbb^ab
B^daRT)7X[SP! 
$
DaQP]
AdaP[
DaQP]
AdaP[
DaQP]
AdaP[
DaQP]
AdaP[
DaQP]
AdaP[
! 
!!
!"
!#
!$
AdaP[
DaQP]
$

 $
!
!$
9^Q[PcXcdST!$
&
[^f
WXVW
Y^Q[PccXcdST

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      140 
iii Job stress:
• My job is complex and difficult
• My job often requires me to learn new skills
• My job is more stressful than I had ever imagined
• I fear that the amount of stress in my job will make me physically ill.
iv Fairness of pay:
• I get paid fairly for the things I do in my job.
Figure 7 and Table 4 indicate that rural workers were statistically more likely than urban workers to 
report slightly higher levels of latitude in their jobs (20 per cent more likely). Initially rural workers 
reported being less stressed than urban workers, however, over the course of 2001 to 2005 this gap 
closed. There were no statistical differences in relation to job security and fair pay.
References
Berry, H (2008) Personal communication. National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, 
Australian National University.
BRS (2008) 2008 Social Atlas of Rural and Regional Australia: Country Matters. Bureau of Rural 
[Accessed 6 August 2008] 
Expert Social Panel (2008) Drought policy review Expert Social Panel: assessment of the social impacts 
of drought and related government and non-government social support services - Issues paper, June 
2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/710644/social_panels_isues_
paper.pdf [Accessed 2 July 2008] 
Ferrie, JE (Ed.) (2004) Work, Stress, Health: The Whitehall II Study: Department of Epidemiology and 
Public Health, International Centre for Health and Society, University College London [Available: 
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/whitehallII/findings/Whitehallbooklet.pdf ].
Hogan, A, M Hanslip, R Kancans, J Russell and B Maguire (2008a) Climate risk and adaptation among 
primary producers: Topline results focusing on primary producers reporting the effects of adverse 
Sciences.
Hogan, A, B Maguire, J Russell and P Stakelum (2008b) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: A 
comparative analysis of farmers and people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas and 
the Australian population using the Deakin Personal Wellbeing Index, Report prepared for the 
September 2008. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
Appendix 10

141    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Karasek, R (1979) Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: implications for job redesign. 24: 
285-307.
Karasek, R and T Theorell (1990) Healthy work: stress, productivity, and the reconstruction of working 
life, New York: Basic Books.
PIMC (2008) Communique of the Primary Industries Ministerial Council - Meeting held in Melbourne, 
17 April 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/625624/pimc-13.pdf 
[Accessed 25 July 2008] 
The Hon. Tony Burke MP (2008a) Expert Panel to review social impacts of drought. Media release. 
Office of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
The Hon. Tony Burke MP (2008b) Primary Industries Ministerial Forum Communique, Cairns, 28-29 
February 2008, Available: http://www.maff.gov.au/media/media_releases/february_2008/primary_
industries_ministerial_forum_communique [Accessed 2 September 2008] 
Appendix a
Scale development and analysis 
Much of the work of social scientists is to identify and report on social attitudes, motivations, values 
and behaviours. While behaviours (e.g. voting behaviour) and social indicators (e.g. annual income) can 
be independently observed, attitudes and motivations are things that exist inside peoples’ heads and 
as such, are more difficult to observe and report on. A number of analytical techniques are reported 
in this study. Techniques such as reliability analysis and factor analysis are commonly used in social 
science research to assess the extent to which larger numbers of survey items work well together to 
assess higher level constructs. These analyses are important to ensure that the data reported are 
statistically reliable and robust. In this section, typical methods used to assess the quality of social 
surveys are reported. This summary is intended to aid the reader in understanding how the analysis of 
data in this paper has been approached by the research team.
Constructs
It is rare that an attitude, value or motivation (henceforth referred to as attitudes) is determined by 
just one thing. Typically in survey work, attitudes are measured as constructs, higher level concepts 
made up of a variety of factors that go together to form an overall whole. The construct is usually 
informed by a theoretical framework that the researchers have brought to bear on the project. 
Extensive psychometric work goes into the development of a reliable survey instrument including 
qualitative research, cognitive testing, survey piloting, construct testing and cross validation of survey 
results. Given this amount of work, researchers are reluctant to change an item in a validated survey 
without repeating this series of studies.
Appendix 10

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      142 
Reliability analysis
In this paper a reliability analysis was applied to the survey data to ensure that the variables behaved 
properly in psychometric terms. Reliability analysis tests whether or not the survey items work 
together to make a coherent scale. If they do, an analyst may calculate a summary scale variable and 
use this instead of the larger number of survey items used in the original study. Once again, this makes 
reporting the data simpler and more coherent. 
While there are some similarities between reliability analysis and factor analysis, reliability analysis 
is much more finely focused on assessing one central theme from a set of items, whereas factor 
analysis can deal with multiple themes at the one time. Reliability analysis is concerned to ensure that 
respondents respond to survey questions in a similar way such that a set of items could be said to make 
up a consistent scale. Reliability analysis tests these items to see if they go well together as a scale and, 
if they do, an analyst can compute a summary variable for the scale that is made up of these variables 
(by using the average for each item for example). When the new scale variable is produced it retains 
the survey’s original scale (for example scores of 1 to 5 where 1 means strongly disagree and 5 means 
strongly agree). A common statistic produced by this routine is called the Cronbach Alpha. Like factor 
analysis, one looks for a score of around 70 per cent (or 0.7) to be satisfied that the items are working 
well together. 
Psychometric analysis of scales used in this study
Life satisfaction scale
Within the HILDA dataset, a variety of variables are used to describe life satisfaction. These items 
included satisfaction with partner, children, financial situation and life generally. Respondents rated 
their satisfaction for each item on a score of 0 (totally dissatisfied) to 10 (totally satisfied). To simplify 
reporting, a life satisfaction scale was derived from these data using reliability analysis. The Cronbach 
Alpha for this scale was an acceptable 0.67.
Disposable income
The HILDA dataset contains information on a wide range of household expenses such as food, 
clothing, fuel, and holidays. It also contains information on annual household income. To simplify 
reporting on these data a ratio of disposable income was calculated as a ratio of expenses over 
income. 
Financial stress
The HILDA dataset contains information on a range of variables concerned with financial stress. These 
questions related to:
1 the ability to pay electricity, gas or telephone bills on time
2 the ability to pay the mortgage or rent on time
3 the need to pawn or sell something
4 going without meals
5 ability to heat the home
Appendix 10

143    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
6 requests for financial help from friends or family
7 requests for help from welfare/community organisations.
Reliability analysis was used to develop a scale of financial hardship. The scale showed good internal 
reliability with an acceptable Cronbach Alpha of 0.70.
Conditions at work
The HILDA dataset contains information on a range of variables concerned with wellbeing at work. 
These items have been drawn from the internationally recognised Whitehall study of workplace stress 
(Ferrie 2004, Karasek 1979) and include constructs such as job security, job latitude and job stress. 
Reliability analysis was used to check the internal reliability of these scales.
i 
The job security scale consisted of the following items:
• I have a secure future in my job
• The company I work for will still be in business in 5 years’ time
• I (do not) worry about the future of my job.
The Cronbach Alpha for this scale was an acceptable 0.64.
ii The job latitude scale consisted of the following items:
• I have a lot of freedom to decide how I do my own work
• I have a lot of say about what happens on my job
• I have a lot of freedom to decide when I do my work.
The Cronbach Alpha for this scale was an acceptable 0.82.
iii The job stress scale consisted of the following items:
• My job is complex and difficult
• My job often requires me to learn new skills
• My job is more stressful than I had ever imagined
• I fear that the amount of stress in my job will make me physically ill
The Cronbach Alpha for this scale was an acceptable 0.79.
Appendix 10

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      144 
The social wellbeing of rural 
Australians: 
A comparative analysis of agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas and the Australian population 
using the Deakin Personal Wellbeing Index
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Anthony Hogan, Brigit Maguire, Jacqui Russell and Patrick Stakelum
September 2008
© Commonwealth of Australia 2008
reproduced by any process without prior written permission from the Commonwealth. Requests and 
Administration, Attorney General’s Department, Robert Garran Offices, National Circuit, Barton ACT 
2600 or posted at http://www.ag.gov.au/cca.
and skill in the preparation and compilation of the information and data set out in this publication. 
Notwithstanding, the Bureau of Rural Sciences, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, 
including liability for negligence, for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as 
a result of accessing, using or relying upon any of the information or data set out in this publication to 
the maximum extent permitted by law.
Postal address:
Bureau of Rural Sciences
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT 2601
Appendix 11

145    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Key findings
Background 
This report is one of three prepared by the Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences, to 
support investigations of the social impacts of drought as part of the National Review of Drought 
Policy.
The paper reports on a comparison of wellbeing of two populations:
• a sample of 500 agricultural workers in drought-affected areas 
• a nationally representative sample of 1203 individuals of the Australian population aged 18 years and 
over.
Methods 
This study used the Deakin Personal Wellbeing Index, which contains eight items of life satisfaction or 
wellbeing measures, each one corresponding to a quality of life domain: 
• standard of living
• health
• achieving in life
• personal relationships
• safety
• community-connectedness
• future security
• spirituality or religion.
It also contains a ninth summary question on overall wellbeing (life as a whole). A series of standard 
Newspoll Omnibus survey questions was also asked to both populations. These included gender, age, 
educational levels, and household income.
Comparing wellbeing 
For eight of the nine wellbeing measures, there was a significant difference between agricultural 
workers in drought-affected areas and the Australian population. Agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas were less satisfied with their lives as a whole. There was no statistical difference 
between the two samples in satisfaction with what they are achieving in life.
For people working in agriculture in drought-affected areas, both white-collar workers (e.g. farm 
managers), and blue-collar workers (e.g. farm labourers), had similar measures of wellbeing.
Agricultural workers in drought-affected areas are less satisfied with their future security 
The most striking finding from the study is that agricultural workers in drought-affected areas were up 
to 40 per cent more likely to report feeling less satisfied with their future security than Australians in 
general.
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      146 
Descriptive statistics 
There are fewer young people (under 34) working in drought-affected areas compared with the 
Australian population as a whole. 
In comparison to the Australian population in general, agricultural workers in drought-affected areas 
were more likely to:
• have children
• be married or living together
• finish school in Year 10
• have a diploma or certificate from a college or TAFE (including an apprenticeship) but less likely to 
have a degree or diploma from a university. 
List of acronyms
ABARE 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics
ABS 
Australian Bureau of Statistics
ANZSIC 
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification 
BRS 
Bureau of Rural Sciences
DAFF 
EC 
Exceptional Circumstances: EC events are rare and severe events that are outside those  
that a farmer could normally be expected to manage using responsible farm management 
strategies. To be classified as an EC event, the event:
• must be rare, that is it must not have occurred more than once on average in every 20 to 
25 years
• must result in a rare and severe downturn in farm income over a prolonged period of 
time (e.g. greater than 12 months)
• must be a discrete event that is not part of long-term structural adjustment processes 
or normal fluctuations in commodity prices 
MP 
Member of Parliament
SSP 
Social Sciences Program, Bureau of Rural Sciences 
Appendix 11

147    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Contents
Key findings 
145
List of acronyms 
146
1 
Background 
149
2 
Methods 
150
3 
Comparing wellbeing 
152
4 
Descriptive statistics 
155
References 
159
Appendix A: Details on statistical analyses 
conducted in this study 
160
Figures
1 
Agricultural workers in drought-affected areas and the Australian 
population by age 
155
2 
The number of adults in households of agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas compared with households of the 
Australian population 
156
3 
The number of children in households of agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas compared with the Australian population 157
4 
Level of school education of agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas compared with the Australian population 157
5 
Level of post-school education of agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas compared with the Australian population 157
6 
Marital status of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas 
compared with the Australian population 
158
7 
Household income of agricultural workers in drought-affected 
areas compared with the Australian population 
158
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      148 
tables
1 
Wellbeing of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas 
compared with the Australian population 
152
2 
Wellbeing of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas 
compared with the Australian population 
153
3 
Agricultural workers in drought-affected areas and the Australian 
population by gender 
155
4 
Ages of children in households of agricultural workers in
drought-affected areas compared with households of the 
Australian population 
156
5 
Comparison of number of white collar and blue collar workers 
(per cent) 
157
Appendix 11

149    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Background
In June 2008, the Social Sciences Program (SSP) of the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) was asked 
examine the social impacts of drought on farm families and rural communities as part of its National 
Review of Drought Policy (The Hon. Tony Burke MP 2008a). This review follows on from the Primary 
Industries Ministerial Forum in Cairns earlier in 2008, where Ministers agreed that current approaches 
to drought and Exceptional Circumstances (EC) might no longer be the most appropriate in the 
context of a changing climate (PIMC 2008, The Hon. Tony Burke MP 2008b). Ministers saw that 
drought policy needed to be improved to create an environment of self-reliance and preparedness, 
and to encourage the adoption of appropriate climate change management practices.
As part of the review process the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry appointed a seven 
member Expert Social Panel (2008) to:
• assess the social impact of drought on farm families and rural communities
• identify gaps and areas for improvement in Australian, state and territory government social 
support services that are designed to mitigate the impact of drought on farm families and rural 
communities.
To support the work of the Expert Social Panel, the SSP was asked by the Drought Review Branch to:
• provide an analysis of the Quality of Life survey of farmers and farm workers in drought areas 
(compared with the total Australian community) using the recognised Deakin Wellbeing Index 
(based on a national Newspoll survey conducted in mid July 2008) 
• provide an analysis of the social circumstances of rural people and communities (compared with 
urban communities) based on previously unanalysed dimensions from the Household Income and 
Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey (Hogan et al. 2008b)
• provide an analysis of the social circumstances, perceptions, and behaviour of farmers (including 
issues of concern, risk management, perceptions of drought, management of challenges) from the 
June 2008 SSP climate change and industry adaptation survey of farmers (Hogan et al. 2008a).
This paper responds to the first of these requests, reporting on the wellbeing study of agricultural 
workers in drought-affected areas, and compares their wellbeing with that of a nationally 
representative sample of Australians aged 18 years and over. It provides findings in relation to the 
question of whether the quality of life of people and communities in drought-affected areas differs 
from that of Australians in general.
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      150 
Methods
This study was provided to the Drought Review Branch in response to a request by the Expert Social 
Panel (the Panel) that a study be undertaken on the social wellbeing of agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas, and to compare their wellbeing with that of Australians in general. There was a specific 
request by the Panel that the comparison be based upon the Deakin Personal Wellbeing Index (PWI).
The PWI was developed from the Comprehensive Quality of Life Scale (ComQol) by Cummins et 
al. (2005, 1994). The method underpinning the ComQol focused on the interaction of how happy a 
person is with aspects of life that are important to them.
The PWI scale contains eight items of satisfaction, each one corresponding with a quality of life 
domain.
The index asks:
Thinking about how satisfied you are with particular aspects of your life. Using a scale from 0 to 
10, where 0 is not at all satisfied and 10 is extremely satisfied, how satisfied are you with each of the 
following:
1 your standard of living
2 your health
3 what you are achieving in life
4 your personal relationships
5 how safe you feel
6 feeling part of your community
7 your future security
8 your spirituality or religion.
A ninth item measures overall wellbeing:
Thinking now about your own life and personal circumstances, using a scale from 0 to 10, where 0 is 
not at all satisfied and 10 is extremely satisfied, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole?
The PWI provides a reliable measure of social wellbeing. Details about the robustness of the measure 
can be found in Appendix A. The appendix also provides an explanation of statistical tests used in the 
study. 
In this study, respondents completed the study in two groups:
1 as part of a national telephone Omnibus study conducted by Newspoll on a nationally 
representative sample of Australians aged 18 years and over (n=1203)
2 as part of a nationally representative telephone sample of Australians aged 18 years and over, who 
were working in agriculture (including farm owners and farm workers) in 23 drought declared areas 
in Australia (n=500). 
Appendix 11

151    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
In addition to the PWI, a series of standard Newspoll Omnibus survey questions was also asked of 
both populations. These included gender, age, educational levels, and household income. Reliability 
and factor analysis were conducted on the data (see Appendix A for further details). These analyses 
confirmed that the data are robust. 
In the national survey, interviews were conducted between 18 and 20 July 2008 by fully trained and 
personally briefed interviewers. The study of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas was 
conducted the following week. A system of call backs was put in place so as to include those people 
who were frequently away from home. To reflect the population distribution, results were post-
weighted to Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data on age, highest level of schooling completed, 
gender and area. Analysis was conducted on both weighted and unweighted datasets. There was 
very little difference between the two analyses. However, as the weights for each study are calculated 
differently it is not possible to simply put the datasets together. Certain statistical routines can 
become problematic when using weighted data (e.g. for regression). For these reasons the results 
reported in this paper are for unweighted data. The data reported compare outcomes for agricultural 
workers (farmers and farm workers) in drought-affected areas with the Australian population. For 
ease of reading, the data from agricultural workers in drought-affected areas in this report is at times 
referred to as ‘drought-affected’ and is compared with ‘the Australian population’. 
The data are reported in three sections. First, respondents’ mean scores on the PWI items are 
reported by sub-group (agricultural workers in drought-affected areas and the Australian population), 
and statistical differences are reported. Second, since perceptions of wellbeing can be influenced by 
social factors, these results are subjected to further analysis that controls for the effects of age and 
income. Logistic regression is used for this analysis, comparing outcomes for the two samples—those 
in drought-affected areas and the national sample. Third, the demographics are reported for the two 
samples.
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      152 
Comparing wellbeing
This section reports on respondents’ replies to the questions in the PWI. Table 1 provides a 
comparison of responses for agricultural workers in drought-affected areas with the Australian 
population. Statistical tests were used to assess whether there was a significant difference between 
agricultural workers in drought-affected areas and the Australian population on measures of wellbeing 
and these results are reported in Table 1.
For eight of the nine wellbeing measures there was a statistically significant difference between 
respondents working in drought-affected areas and the Australian population. While these differences 
in mean scores are small, in real terms, they may translate into many people having different levels 
of satisfaction, which may indicate a slightly higher demand for services at a population level. Berry 
(2008) advises that constructs such as safety mean different things in urban and rural communities. 
The nature of violence, for example, is different in rural communities where assaults (e.g. sexual or 
domestic violence) may be perpetrated by people known to the victim, whereas assaults in urban 
centres are more likely to be committed by people not known to the victim. For reasons such as this, 
urban people may feel less safe (i.e. their environment is less predictable) than people living in rural 
communities. 
The difference between the two samples in respondents’ satisfaction with what they are achieving 
in life was not statistically significant, although agricultural workers in drought-affected areas had a 
lower score.
Agricultural workers in drought-affected areas had significantly lower levels of satisfaction with their 
life as a whole and their standard of living. 
1 
Wellbeing of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas compared 
with the Australian population 
Agricultural workers 
Australian 
Significant
Item of satisfaction 
in drought-affected areas 
population 
difference?
(p≤0.05)
Mean (SD) 
 Mean (SD) 
how safe you feel 
8.4 
 (1.7) 
7.9  
(1.8) 
Yes
your personal relationships 
8.3  
(1.8) 
8.0  
(2.3) 
Yes
your health 
7.7  
(1.8) 
7.4  
(1.9) 
Yes
life as a whole 
7.5  
(1.8) 
7.7  
(1.7) 
Yes
your standard of living 
7.4  
(1.7) 
7.8  
(1.7) 
Yes
feeling part of your community 
7.4  
(1.9) 
7.0  
(2.0) 
Yes
what you are achieving in life 
7.2  
(1.8) 
7.4  
(1.9) 
No
your future security 
6.7  
(2.1) 
7.1  
(2.0) 
Yes
your spirituality or religion 
6.5  
(2.8) 
6.9  
(2.8) 
Yes
Appendix 11

153    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
Results of regression analysis
The eight significant PWI items were examined for differences between agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas and the Australian population. Table 2 provides the results for the model 
(further details of the analysis can be found in Appendix A). It includes odds ratios and confidence 
intervals that give an indication of the strength of the result. The percentage likelihood column is 
derived from the odds ratio and is included for ease of interpretation. A positive percentage figure 
indicates that agricultural workers in drought-affected areas are X per cent less likely to be satisfied 
than those in the Australian population. A negative percentage figure indicates that agricultural 
workers in drought-affected areas are X per cent more likely to be satisfied than those in the Australian 
population.
The results show that in comparison with the Australian population (controlling for age and income), 
agricultural workers in drought-affected areas are approximately 14 to 16 per cent less likely to be 
satisfied with their life as a whole and their standard of living. They are 10 to 15 per cent more likely 
to be satisfied with their health, personal relationships and to feel part of the community. They are 
approximately 31 per cent more likely than the Australian population to feel safe and five per cent less 
satisfied with their spirituality or religion. Similarly, they are 18 per cent less likely to feel satisfied with 
their future security. In this model, ‘income’, explained approximately two per cent of the difference 
between the two groups.
Without taking into account the influence of other variables, agricultural workers in drought-affected 
areas were approximately 40 per cent more likely to report feeling less satisfied with their future than 
Australians in general. This is a notable difference in the results for the two groups.
2 
Wellbeing of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas compared 
with the Australian population*
Lower 
Upper
Percentage 
 confidence interval 
confidence
Item of satisfaction 
likelihood Odds Ratio  
(for odds ratio) 
interval (for odds ratio)
life as a whole 
16% 
1.159 
1.067 
1.259
your standard of living 
14% 
1.136 
1.044 
1.236
your health 
–11% 
0.899 
0.839 
0.963
your personal relationships 
–15% 
0.873 
0.820 
0.929
how safe you feel 
–31% 
0.766 
0.709 
0.828
feeling part of your community 
–10% 
0.907 
0.850 
0.966
your future security 
18% 
1.176 
1.101 
1.257
your spirituality or religion 
5% 
1.049 
1.011 
1.088
*Ð2=145.230 (10); p<0.001 (controlling for age and income)
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      154 
Respondents in drought-aﬀ ected areas who were dissatisﬁ ed with their future security were more likely to:
• be over 40 years of age
• be male (although this may be because of the greater proportion of males in the drought-affected 
sample)
• have two adults in the household
• not have children
• work full time
• have Year 11 or 12 education
• be married
• earn under $30 000
• have no post-school qualifications.
It is possible that there may be some differences in wellbeing between farm owners and managers, and 
farm workers. This question was explored for the drought-affected respondents only, using white/blue 
collar coding according to the Australian Standard Classification of Occupations (ASCO). 
Independent samples t-tests on agricultural workers in drought-affected areas revealed no significant 
differences between white-collar respondents and blue-collar respondents on measures of wellbeing. 
This result was confirmed using regression analysis controlling for income and gender.
Appendix 11

155    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
3 
Agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas and the Australian 
population by gender
Agricultural 
workers in 
Australian
Gender 
drought-affected areas 
population
% 
%
Male 
73 
50
Female 
27 
50
Descriptive statistics
The survey results provide descriptive information about the respondents, including:
• age
• gender
• household structure
• school education
• post-school education
• marital status
• work status
• blue/white collar workers
• household income.
These variables can be used to compare the respondents who were agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas and respondents from the nationally representative sample of Australians.
Since the drought sample was specifically 
targeted at people employed in the 
agricultural sector and not the general 
rural population, it is not appropriate to 
statistically compare this sample with the 
randomly collected Australian population 
sample on demographic items. Rather, 
general trends are described to illustrate 
differences between the respondents 
working in agriculture in drought-affected 
areas and the Australian population 
generally.
Figure 1 shows that there are 
proportionately fewer young people 
(under 34 years) working in the agricultural 
sector of drought-affected areas than in 
the Australian population. It also shows 
that there is a greater proportion of 
people between 35 and 64 years working 
in agriculture in drought-affected areas, 
reflecting an ageing profile of agricultural 
workers. The biggest difference depicted in 
Figure 1 is for people aged over 65 years. These 
differences may be explained by the different 
characteristics of the two populations being 
compared; the ‘drought-affected population’ 
refers to respondents who identified that 
Appendix 11
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]

0VaXRd[cdaP[f^aZTabX]Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTS
PaTPbP]ScWT0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]QhPVT
 
PVT
 '
 ( !
!#
!$
!( "
"# "$
"( #
## #$
#( $
$# $$
$( %
%#
%$
$
 $
!$
!

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      156 
they were working in the agricultural sector, 
whereas the ‘Australian population’ refers 
to a nationally representative sample of 
individuals of the Australian population aged 
18 years and over. 
Table 3 reports respondents by gender. The 
population sample used quotas to ensure 
equal representation by gender. The sample 
of respondents working in agriculture in 
drought-affected areas targeted only those 
employed in agricultural work and results in 
an anticipated gender split of males to female.
Figure 2 shows that respondents working 
in agriculture in drought-affected areas 
are more likely than respondents in the 
Australian population in general to report 
two adults in their households, reflecting the 
demographics of farming occupations. 
Figure 3 shows that respondents working in agriculture in drought-affected areas are more likely to 
report that they had children than the Australian population in general.
Table 4 provides further information about 
the respondents who indicated that they had 
children. The table shows the proportion 
of respondents who indicated that they 
had children in each of five age categories. 
These categories do not add to 100 per cent 
because respondents may have more than 
one child in any given age category.
The table shows that the ages of children in 
the households of agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas did not differ greatly 
from the ages of children in households 
across the general Australian population.
Figure 4 indicates that the number of agricultural workers in drought-affected areas who finished 
schooling in Year 9 or below was similar to the Australian population. Agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas have a greater proportion of respondents with a Year 10 school education, but a lower 
proportion of respondents with school education including Years 11 or 12. This is consistent with the 
lower educational attainment of people working in agricultural occupations.
4 
Ages of children in households of 
agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas compared with 
households of the Australian 
population
Agricultural 
Age of 
workers in 
Australian
children 
drought-affected areas 
population
% 
%
4 years or under 
18 
13
5–9 
18 
15
10–12  
14 
10
13–15 
14 
10
16–17 
10 
8
Appendix 11
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
#
!

%
'
CWT]d\QTa^UPSd[cbX]W^dbTW^[Sb^U
PVaXRd[cdaP[f^aZTabX]Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTS
PaTPbR^\_PaTSfXcWW^dbTW^[Sb^UcWT
0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
!
]d\QTa^UPSd[cb_TaW^dbTW^[S
!
"
#
$
%

157    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
The post-school education data show that 
agricultural workers in drought-affected 
areas are more likely to have a diploma or 
certificate from a college or TAFE (including 
an apprenticeship) but less likely to have a 
degree or diploma from a university (Figure 
5). Agricultural workers in drought-affected 
areas are also more likely than those from 
the Australian population to select the ‘no, 
none of these’ category.
Figure 6 shows that the greatest proportion 
of respondents in both the sample of 
agricultural workers in drought-affected 
areas and the Australian population 
in general are married. However, this 
proportion is higher for respondents 
working in agriculture in drought-affected 
areas than in Australia more generally. 
Conversely, agricultural workers in drought-
affected areas are less likely to have never 
been married, to be separated, divorced or 
widowed. This is consistent with the overall 
demographic and household structure of 
people working in agricultural occupations.
More generally, 85 per cent of respondents 
working in agriculture in drought-affected 
5 
Comparison of number of white 
collar and blue collar workers 
Agricultural 
Type of 
workers in 
Australian
worker 
drought-affected areas 
population
% 
%
White collar 
87 
51
Blue collar 
13 
49
Appendix 11
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
CWT]d\QTa^URWX[SaT]X]W^dbTW^[Sb^U
PVaXRd[cdaP[f^aZTabX]Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTS
PaTPbR^\_PaTSfXcWcWT0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
"
]d\QTa^URWX[SaT]_TaW^dbTW^[S
!
"
#
$
]^]T
%
!

$
#
"
&
%
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]

;TeT[^UbRW^^[TSdRPcX^]^UPVaXRd[cdaP[
f^aZTabX]Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTSPaTPbR^\_PaTS
fXcWcWT0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
#
[TeT[^UbRW^^[TSdRPcX^]
hTPa(^aQT[^f
hTPa 
hTPa  ^a !
"
!
$
#
&
%
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
!

"
$
#
;TeT[^U_^bc
bRW^^[TSdRPcX^]^UPVaXRd[cdaP[
f^aZTabX]Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTSPaTPbR^\_PaTS
fXcWcWT0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
$
_^bc
bRW^^[TSdRPcX^]
0SX_[^\P^aRTacXUXRPcT
Ua^\PR^[[TVT^a
C054X]R[dSX]VP]P__aT]cXRTbWX_
STVaTT^aSX_[^\P
Ua^\Pd]XeTabXch
]^]T^UcWTbT

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      158 
areas were married or living together, 
compared with only 63 per cent of 
Australians.
Thirty-nine per cent of respondents from 
the general Australian population were 
not working. Nineteen per cent worked 
part time and 42 per cent worked full 
time. Due to the nature of the collection 
methodology for respondents working 
in agriculture in drought-affected areas, 
there were no respondents in this sample 
who were unemployed. Consistent with 
the predominantly full-time working 
patterns for people in agricultural 
occupations, 81 per cent of these 
respondents worked full time, while 19 per 
cent worked part time.
Table 5 provides data on employment status by white and blue collar worker. The white/blue collar 
coding refers to whether the main income earner of the household has been classified as a white 
collar or a blue collar worker according to the Australian Standard Classification of Occupations 
(ASCO) system. Within this classification system, farm owners and farm managers are considered to 
be ‘management’ and are therefore coded as white collar workers. For this reason there is a greater 
proportion of white collar workers in drought-affected areas compared with the general population.
Figure 7 presents data on household 
income for the Australian population 
compared with agricultural workers in 
drought-affected areas. Respondents who 
did not know their household income or 
who refused to answer the question were 
not included in the analysis of household 
income. Respondents working in agriculture 
in drought-affected areas were less likely 
than the general Australian population to 
be in either of the two extreme categories 
of high (above $100 000) or low (under 
$30 000) income. This means there were 
higher proportions of respondents from 
drought-affected areas in the middle income 
categories (from $30 000 to 
$99 999).
Appendix 11
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
!

"
 $
$
!$
7^dbTW^[SX]R^\T^UPVaXRd[cdaP[f^aZTab
X]Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTSPaTPbR^\_PaTSfXcWcWT
0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
&
W^dbTW^[SX]R^\T
[Tbb
cWP]
"
(
µ(((((
'
µ'((((
&
µ&((((
%
µ%((((
$
µ$((((
#
µ#((((
"
µ"((((
\^aT
cWP]
 
Sa^dVWcPUUTRcTSPaTPb
PdbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]

<PaXcP[bcPcdb^UPVaXRd[cdaP[f^aZTabX]
Sa^dVWc
PUUTRcTSPaTPbR^\_PaTSfXcWcWT
0dbcaP[XP]_^_d[PcX^]
%
\PaXcP[bcPcdb
]TeTa
\PaaXTS
STUPRc^^a
[XeX]V
c^VTcWTa
\PaaXTS
bT_TaPcT
Qdc]^c
SXe^aRTS
SXe^aRTS
fXS^fTS
#
!
'
%

159    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
References 
Cummins, RA, R Eckersley, E Okerstrom, SK Lo, M Davern, B Hunter and J Woerner (2005) The Australian 
Unity Wellbeing Index: 2004 update. Available: http://www.deakin.edu.au/research/acqol/Conferences/
abstracts_papers/2004/Cummins_AWI_update.ppt#1Australian, Centre on Quality of Life - Deakin 
University.
Cummins, RA, MP McCabe, Y Romeo and E Gullone (1994) The Comprehensive Quality of Life Scale: 
Instrument development and psychometric evaluation on tertiary staff and students. Educational and 
Psychological Measurement, 54: 372-82.
Expert Social Panel (2008) Drought policy review Expert Social Panel: assessment of the social impacts 
of drought and related government and non-government social support services - Issues paper, June 
2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/710644/social_panels_isues_
paper.pdf [Accessed 2 July 2008] 
Hogan, A, M Hanslip, R Kancans, J Russell and B Maguire (2008a) Climate risk and adaptation among 
primary producers: Topline results focusing on primary producers reporting the effects of adverse 
Sciences.
Hogan, A, C Polidano, J Russell and P Stakelum (2008b) The social wellbeing of rural Australians: an 
analysis of the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) study, Report prepared 
Forestry, September 2008. Canberra: Bureau of Rural Sciences.
PIMC (2008) Communique of the Primary Industries Ministerial Council - Meeting held in Melbourne, 
17 April 2008, Available: http://www.daff.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/625624/pimc-13.pdf 
[Accessed 25 July 2008] 
The Hon. Tony Burke MP (2008a) Expert Panel to review social impacts of drought. Media release. Office 
of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
The Hon. Tony Burke MP (2008b) Primary Industries Ministerial Forum Communique, Cairns, 28-29 
February 2008, Available: http://www.maff.gov.au/media/media_releases/february_2008/primary_
industries_ministerial_forum_communique [Accessed 2 September 2008]
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      160 
Appendix a 
Details on statistical analyses 
conducted in this study
Much of the work of social scientists is to identify and report on social attitudes, motivations, values 
and behaviours. While behaviours (eg voting behaviour) and social indicators (e.g. annual income) can 
be independently observed, attitudes and motivations are things that exist inside peoples’ heads and 
as such, are more difficult to observe and report on. A number of analytical techniques were reported 
in this study. Techniques such as reliability analysis and factor analysis are commonly used in social 
science research to assess the extent to which larger numbers of survey items work well together to 
assess higher-level constructs. These analyses are important to ensure that the data reported are 
statistically reliable and robust. In this section, typical methods used to assess the quality of social 
surveys are reported. This summary is intended to aid the reader in understanding how the analysis of 
data in this paper has been approached by the research team.
Constructs
It is rare that an attitude, value or motivation (henceforth referred to as attitudes) is determined by 
just one thing. Typically in survey work, attitudes are measured as constructs, higher level concepts 
made up of a variety of factors that go together to form an overall whole. The construct is usually 
informed by a theoretical framework that the researchers have brought to bear on the project. 
Extensive psychometric work goes into the development of a reliable survey instrument including 
qualitative research, cognitive testing, survey piloting, construct testing and cross validation of survey 
results. Given this amount of work, researchers are reluctant to change an item in a validated survey 
without repeating this series of studies.
Psychometric analysis used in this study
In this paper a number of statistical tests were applied to the survey data to ensure that the variables 
behaved properly in psychometric terms. The psychometric tests applied to the data are briefly 
discussed below.
Factor analysis
Factor analysis is a statistical method that is used to reduce a large number of survey items about a 
particular attitude or behaviour into a few underlying new variables or factors. The way it does this 
is to look for covariance across the responses; that is, by identifying questions for which the answer 
patterning is the same. An important research factor for farmers managing climate change is that they 
actively plan to manage their on-farm risks. This idea or factor could be made up of a larger number 
of different attitudes or behaviours such as succession planning, use of an operational management 
plan and development of a business management plan. Factor analysis brings common variables such 
as these together in the dataset and reduces them to a single new variable (or factor) while losing as 
Appendix 11

161    It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness
little of the response detail as possible. This new variable can then be used to more easily examine the 
question since one can focus on just one item (e.g. actively plan to manage their on-farm risks) rather 
than needing to think about a lot of variables all at the same time. In social sciences a factor score of 
30 per cent—40 per cent of variance explained is acceptable, but ideally one would like to see factor 
scores closer to 70 per cent. The higher score indicates that less information has been lost in bringing 
the items together and that together, these items explain much of what is going on with the behaviours 
of interest. 
Factor analysis of the PWI explained 40 per cent of variance
Reliability analysis
Reliability analysis tests whether or not the survey items work together to make a coherent scale. If 
they do, an analyst may calculate a summary scale variable and use this instead of the larger number 
of survey items used in the original study. Once again, this makes reporting the data simpler and more 
coherent. 
While there are some similarities between reliability analysis and factor analysis, reliability analysis can 
produce much more finely focused on assessing one central theme from a set of items, whereas than 
factor analysis can deal with multiple themes at the one time. Reliability analysis is concerned to ensure 
that respondents respond to survey questions in a similar way such that a set of items could be said 
to make up a consistent scale. Reliability analysis tests these items to see if they go well together as a 
scale and if they do, an analyst can compute a summary variable for the scale that is made up of these 
variables (by using the average for each item, for example). When the new scale variable is produced 
it retains the survey’s original scale (for example scores of 1 to 5 where 1 means strongly disagree and 
5 means strongly agree). A common statistic produced by this routine is called the Cronbach’s Alpha. 
Like factor analysis, one looks for a score of around 70 per (or 0.7) to be satisfied that the items are 
working well together.
The Cronbach’s Alpha for the PWI was a reliable 0.75.
Readers interested in further information on the psychometric properties of the scale are referred to 
the survey manual.  The manual reports that:
• the survey produces consistent results over time
• it consistently measures the same construct 
• respondents respond to the questions in quite similar ways
• it can detect differences between groups with differing levels of wellbeing.
Appendix 11

It’s about people: Changing Perspectives on Dryness      162 
Regression analysis
Regression analysis is a statistical tool that is used to measure the extent to which a set of variables 
predict a certain outcome. Standard regression analysis works well when the outcome variable is a 
continuous variable. However, when the outcome variable is an either/or variable a slightly different 
form of regression analysis is used. This is called logistic regression. Through the use of some 
complicated mathematics, logistic regression replicates the kind of data variability one can get 
with continuous variables so that the analysis can be conducted. Moreover, within this technique, 
it is possible to use an advanced statistical routine (called backward conditional regression) which 
eliminates from the analysis, any variable not directly contributing the prediction of the outcomes. 
Specifically, the application of the logistic regression routine to the data in this study enabled:
• analysis of the question of interest (e.g. to analyse the differences in wellbeing between those in 
drought-affected areas and Australians generally)
• bringing all the variables of interest into the analysis
• taking into account the extent to which the variables influence each other
• producing a result that highlights variables that are influencing the outcome, if they exist.
Gender was excluded from the analysis in this study because the two samples were not comparable 
by gender. The model for this analysis (controlling for age and income) (see Section 3) was statistically 
significant (χ2=145.230 (10); p<0.001). The explanatory power of the model on the overall differences 
between drought-affected and the Australian population was between eight per cent and 11 per cent. 
This is a useful result given that only ‘one’ concept (wellbeing) was examined for differences between 
the groups. Overall, only one variable was eliminated in the analysis (satisfaction with achievement in 
life). Notably, the PWI manual identifies this variable as being problematic, possibly because it is a multi-
dimensional item, meaning different things to different people.
Appendix 11