An agreement between: 
• 
the Commonwealth of Australia and 
• 
the states and territories, being: 
o New South Wales 
o Victoria 
o Queensland 
o Western Australia 
o South Australia 
o Tasmania 
o the Australian Capital Territory 
o the Northern Territory.

Context 
Droughts are part of Australia's landscape and managing drought is a feature of Australian 
agriculture. Australian farming businesses and farming communities are adopting increasingly 
sophisticated and effective strategies to deal with drought and respond to climate change 
and variability. 
This agreement continues to build on drought policy reform including moving away from 
Exceptional Circumstances arrangements and associated lines on maps to qualify for drought 
support. 
It prioritises objectives and outcomes that enhance long-term preparedness, sustainability, 
resilience and risk management for farming businesses and farming communities in Australia. 
It describes the way Commonwealth, state and territory governments will cooperate and 
collaborate on drought-related issues and outlines responsibilities when supporting 
farming businesses, farming families and farming communities. 
The agreement provides a framework to enable consistency of drought policy and reform 
objectives and complementarity of drought preparedness, response and recovery 
programs. 
This agreement also complements other measures taken by jurisdictions to promote 
adaptation to climate change. 
Preliminaries 
1. This agreement replaces the 2013 Intergovernmental Agreement on National Drought 
Program Reform. 
2. This agreement is between the Commonwealth of Australia (the Commonwealth) and 
the states and territories. Where the terms 'jurisdictions' or 'parties' are used these 
refer to the Commonwealth, states and territories. 
3. 
In entering this agreement, the jurisdictions recognise their common interest in 
continuing to reform drought-related programs and the need to work together to help 
farming businesses, farming families and farming communities manage and prepare for 
future challenges and risks in a variable and changing climate. 
4. This agreement will commence as soon as the Commonwealth and one other state or 
territory signs this agreement and is scheduled to expire on 30 June 2024. 
5. This agreement will also apply to any other drought-related programs introduced by 
jurisdictions within the term of this agreement. 
Objectives 
6. This agreement is intended to: 
provide a framework for jurisdictions to ensure: 
i. 
collaboration in drought preparedness, response and recovery; 
ii. consistency of drought policy and reform objectives; 
iii. complementarity of drought preparedness, response and recovery 
programs; and 
Page 2 of 9

Outcomes 
iv. efforts are not unnecessarily duplicated or critical issues overlooked. 
b. 
enable farming businesses, farming families and farming communities 
to manage and prepare for drought, climate change and variability, by 
supporting their long-term sustainability and resilience, the adoption of 
robust risk management practices and sound natural resource 
management. 
c. 
increase the adoption by farming businesses and the farming sector of 
self-reliant, sustainable and resilient approaches to manage business 
risks, through improved skills and business decision-making, and the 
adoption of new knowledge and tools from research and development. 
d. 
ensure services to mitigate the effects of drought on health and 
wellbeing are accessible to farming families and farming communities. 
e. 
ensure support measures are accessible and clear information is 
available for those in need, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders. 
f. 
provide decision makers, industry and the public with access to 
common sources of quality, drought-related data to improve policy and 
business decision making. 
7. This agreement will facilitate achievement of these outcomes: 
farming businesses have an improved capability to manage business 
risks and the tools to implement sustainable and resilient risk 
management practices. 
b. farming businesses, industry service providers, agri-finance, community 
organisations and local government are partners of government and 
support rural communities to prepare for, and respond to, drought. 
c. 
farming businesses, farming families and farming communities are 
supported in times of hardship and have an increased understanding of, 
and access to, available support. 
d. 
roles and responsibilities of jurisdictions in responding to drought: 
i. are clear; 
ii. promote consistency of drought policy and reform objectives; 
iii. complement drought preparedness, response and recovery programs; 
and 
iv. reduce gaps and unnecessary duplication. 
e. 
improved sharing, and quality, of common sources of data and information 
across jurisdictions to strengthen policy and business decision making. 
f. 
future programs related to the objectives of this agreement are consistent 
with the principles for reform at Attachment A. 
g. 
future programs providing temporary in-drought support are consistent with 
the principles and processes at Attachment B. 
Page 3 of9

Roles and responsibilities 
8. To realise the objectives and outcomes in this agreement, each party has specific roles 
and responsibilities, as outlined below. 
Role of the Commonwealth 
9. The Commonwealth is responsible for: 
funding and delivering a time-limited household support payment 
based on individual and farming family needs, including: 
i. 
reciprocal obligations that encourage resilience; and 
ii. case management to support reciprocal obligation requirements. 
b. 
establishing and operating a Future Drought Fund, to enhance drought 
preparedness and resilience. 
c. 
providing continued access to incentives that support farming 
businesses' risk management, including taxation concessions, the 
Farm Management Deposit Scheme and concessional loans. 
d. 
improving and maintaining national, regional and local predictive and 
real time drought indicator information, drawing on the Bureau of 
Meteorology's (BOM) observation network and forecasting. 
Role of the states and territories 
10. Each state or territory is responsible for: 
encouraging the delivery and uptake of capability-building programs to 
improve farming businesses' skills and decision making that are flexible 
and tailored to farming businesses' needs. 
b. 
ensuring animal welfare and land management issues are managed 
during drought. 
Shared roles and responsibilities 
11. The Commonwealth, states and territories are responsible for: 
developing, designing, implementing and funding drought 
preparedness, response and recovery programs that are consistent with 
this agreement, encourage robust risk management and seek to avoid 
market distortions. 
b. 
developing capability-building programs, tools and technologies to 
inform and improve farming businesses' decision-making and promote 
resilience. 
c. 
provision of rural financial counselling services. 
d. support to mitigate the effects of drought on the health and wellbeing 
of farming families and farming communities. 
e. 
sharing, coordinating, collaborating and communicating information on 
drought preparedness, response and recovery policies and programs 
being developed and implemented. 
f. 
ensuring information on assistance for drought preparedness, response 
and recovery is accessible and readily available. 
Page 4 of 9

g. 
ensuring consistency of drought policy and reform objectives and 
complementarity of drought preparedness, response and recovery 
programs. 
h. contributing to the development of quality, publicly available data, including 
but not limited to: 
i. weather, seasonal and climate forecasts; 
ii. regional and local predictive real time drought indicator information; 
iii. a consistent early warning system for drought; and 
iv. an improved understanding of fodder crops and holdings across 
Australia. 
Monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
12. The parties will report against their roles and responsibilities and performance of 
drought related programs annually to Agriculture Senior Officials Committee (AGSOCL 
and as agreed by all parties. 
13. The AGSOC members, or their representatives, will discuss this agreement annually, or 
as agreed by all parties, to ensure its effective and efficient implementation and the 
execution of roles and responsibilities. 
14. AGSOC will report annually to the Agriculture Ministers' Forum (AGMIN) and as 
required, on progress in implementing this agreement. 
15. The parties will develop a progress reporting framework to be agreed by AGMIN. 
Each year AGMIN will publicly release a report on progress implementing this 
agreement. 
Governance arrangements 
Implementation 
(COAGL and as required, on progress on implementing this agreement. 
Enforceability 
17. The parties do not intend any of the provisions of this agreement to be legally 
enforceable. However, that does not lessen the parties' commitment to this 
agreement. 
Review 
18. This agreement will be reviewed approximately two years before expiry with AGMIN 
responsible for determining the terms of reference, timing and methodology for the 
review. 
Variation 
19. This agreement may be amended or extended at any time by written agreement 
between all parties. 
20. Any party may terminate its participation in this agreement at any time by notifying all 
other parties in writing. 
Page 5 of 9

Dispute resolution 
21. Any party may give notice of a dispute to any or all other parties. 
22. Officials of relevant parties will attempt to resolve any dispute in the first instance. 
23. If officials cannot resolve a dispute, it may be escalated to relevant ministers and if 
necessary to COAG. 
Page 6 of 9

The parties have confirmed their commitment to this agreement: 
n behalf of the 
Prime Minister 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of New South Wales by 
~/\ 
-~ 
~ 
......... \.'=,/~ ... ~ 
...... . 
The Honourable Gladys Berejiklian MP 
Premier of New South Wales 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
The Honourable Annastacia Palaszczuk MP 
Premier of Queensland 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of South Australia by 
CS·/"'." n n 
... : ............ ~ 
...... ~ 
.... . 
The Honourable Steven Marshall MP 
Premier of South Australia 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
Australian Capit~ Territory by 
// 
& 
Andrew Barr MLA 
Chief Minister of the Australian Capital Territory 
12 December 2018 
Premier of Vic oria 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
ate of Vestern Australia 
tUV 
The Honourable Mark 
£Jbwan MP 
Premier of Western Australia 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of Tasmania by 
The Honourable Will Hodgman MP 
Premier of Tasmania 
12 December 2018 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
Northern Territory by 
jl; 
/ 
"""'/"""""" ............................... . 
The Honourable Michael Gunner MLA 
Chief Minister of the Northern Territory 
12 December 2018 
Page 7of9

Attachment A: 
Principles for reform 
The principles underpinning this agreement are: 
1. government policies and programs should support farming businesses, farming 
families and farming communities to prepare for drought and enhance their long-
term sustainability and resilience. 
2. drought is just one of a number of hardships that can adversely impact farming 
businesses. 
3. 
programs and assessments for eligibility for programs need to be streamlined to 
remove red tape and deliver timely assistance to farming businesses, farming 
families and farming communities. 
4. recognition of the important role of farming businesses as the nation's food and 
fibre producers and important export revenue earners. 
5. future farm family welfare assistance should require a level of mutual responsibility. 
6. for access to the income support system, farming families should have the same 
access rights as the wider community, acknowledging that a different and temporary 
assets test would apply. 
7. policies and programs should assist farming businesses plan and prepare for the 
future. 
8. support will be based on a willingness by farming businesses to prepare for the 
impacts of increased climate variability and climate change. 
9. policies and programs should recognise the important role of farming businesses in 
maintaining strong and cohesive rural communities. 
10. policies and programs should recognise the importance of maintaining and 
supporting the natural resource base during drought and climate change. 
11. there should no longer be Exceptional Circumstances declarations and associated 
lines on maps. 
Page 8 of 9

Attachment B: 
Principles and processes for in-drought support 
Principles 
The principles and processes listed in this attachment have been identified as criteria to 
guide the provision of in-drought support. 
Where a jurisdiction(s) decides to implement an in-drought support measure, the measure 
should: 
1. be consistent with principles for reform and complementary to measures already in 
place. 
2. occur where there is a clear role for government and deliver a net public benefit. 
3. encourage robust risk management and seek to avoid creating market distortions. 
4. address recognised social welfare needs .. 
5. encourage good farm business decision-making and facilitate adjustment in the 
agriculture sector. 
6. enable links with other measures or between service providers. 
7. avoid government being positioned as the business 'lender of last resort'. 
8. recognise the importance of maintaining the natural resource base and safeguarding 
animal welfare. 
Process 
1. In-drought support should be provided through a phased approach to allow 
governments to tailor the type or level of support provided as conditions change. 
The phases are: 
measures available at all times 
b. 
existing measures increased to address growing demand 
c. 
measures introduced to address identified needs. 
Page 9 of9