We support the employment and career development of people with disability.
Our department’s Disability Action Plan details the steps we will take to improve attraction, recruitment and retention of people with disability (at all levels), in addition to creating a more accessible and inclusive workplace culture and is aligned to the Australian Public Service Disability Employment Strategy 2020-25.
We support the implementation of workplace adjustments for our staff with disability to ensure they can work safely and productively in their role.
The department is a member of the Australian Network on Disability (AND) which provides support to organisations to create an accessible and inclusive workplace for people with disability.
The department has a partnership with JobAccess who provides funding support through the Employment Assistance Fund (EAF) to implement workplace adjustments for staff with disability.
RecruitAbility scheme
We participate in the RecruitAbility scheme. This means we will progress applicants with disability to a later stage in the selection process if they meet minimum requirements for the job.
The RecruitAbility scheme is an Australian Public Service (APS) initiative which aims to build the confidence of people with a disability to compete for APS vacancies.
You can opt into the scheme in the diversity section of our job application form.
Find out more:
- RecruitAbility scheme: a guide for applicants (Australian Public Service Commission)
- disabilities covered under the RecruitAbility scheme (Australian Public Service Commission).
Care and Ability Network (CAN)
The CAN provides an opportunity for staff with disability, carers, and advocates to connect, share experiences with their colleagues, and progress initiatives for disability inclusion in the workplace. Membership of the network is open to all staff.
The network celebrates several days of significance throughout the year with their main event being International Day of People with Disability.
Mental Health Awareness Network (MHAN)
The MHAN provides staff with mental health and wellbeing support. It is an opportunity to share experiences with colleagues and progress initiatives for mental health awareness. Membership of the network is open to all staff.
The network celebrates several days of significance throughout the year with their main event being World Mental Health Day.