Be part of a team with a unique and globally significant mission. We are seeking future leaders to join our entry programs.
Our entry programs are your pathway to grow your skills and kick-start your career in the Australian Public Service (APS).
Our programs
Find out more about our programs.
Grow your career with us
Our staff provide vital services to protect and support Australian communities and industries.
We:
- protect Australia’s environment, industries and way of life from biosecurity risks
- support farmers to prepare for changing markets and climates
- work with industry to support growth and resilience.
Our staff work across the country. We’re looking for people in a range of locations, including our Canberra office.
I've always loved food and been interested in where it comes from. And our department has so many touch points with the food industry. I also wanted my work to actually make a difference to those around me, which is why I decided to become a public servant. I'd say if you're passionate about maintaining and protecting Australia's agricultural industry, then the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is a great place to start your career. I've had the opportunity to meet lots of new people, travel and work on interesting topics that provide benefit to Australians and our mob. We have such interesting people working here who truly care about what they do. The department makes space for you to explore and to undertake new projects of interest. I love my job. I'm constantly learning about all the work our department is doing to help farmers and industries across Australia and how we all contribute to one DAFF. If you're thinking about joining DAFF through one of our entry pathways, you should definitely do it. The grad program opens so many new doors. You just have to take a step through it.
Our culture
We’re proud of our diverse and inclusive workforce.
We support our staff through our workplace culture and Core 4 values:
- Working together
- Courage
- Diversity
- Excellence
Career change
You don’t need to be starting your career to explore our entry programs. We welcome applications from people who are changing careers.
We value your prior experience. Whether you have private, public, community sector experience, or ran your own business. There are always opportunities for people to apply their skillsets to our work.
Eligibility
To work with us, you must:
- be an Australian citizen
- successfully complete a probation period
- complete a pre-employment medical assessment
- pass character and police checks
- pass reference checks
- to have formal qualifications checks, if applicable
Hear from us
Campbell
My name is Campbell Jones. I'm a business partner in our Financial Management and Investments division, which involves a great deal of stakeholder engagement with meat inspectors, overseas counsellors, residue testing and policy program areas. I wanted to join a graduate program after I finished university and I was captivated by the department. I was lucky enough to be successful and I joined as a graduate in December. There is an incredibly broad range of jobs on offer in the department. The beauty of a graduate program is you get to experience a range of those areas before you choose where you want to start your career. Now that I've finished the graduate program, I like to think of my role as being a problem solver for different areas. I help them find the information they need, whether it be a report, answering finance queries or connecting them with another team that can help.
There is a huge amount of professional expertise in the department, so I'm constantly learning. The people are so welcoming and happy to share their knowledge. I feel like there are unending opportunities for me to grow and learn. Knowing my work makes Australia better through our biosecurity operations and our agricultural support is incredibly important to me. I get to see the real tangible difference we make each day and that makes me proud to do the work that I do. I love my job. I'm constantly learning about all the work our department is doing to help farmers and industries across Australia and how we all contribute to One DAFF.
Montana
My name is Montana Hickey and I work as a plant pathologist in the operational science and surveillance team. My work focuses on the diagnosis of plant pathogenic organisms as well as the identification of plant and seed material coming through the Australian border. Every day is different and I am always learning something new. The majority of what we look at is from overseas, so we see a lot of species that you wouldn't usually encounter here in Australia. Growing up, I always loved the Australian Biosecurity TV show and through my university studies I grew a strong love for understanding and investigating diseases of plants. To have those two worlds collide in my current role has been a very cool experience. We have such interesting people working here who truly care about what they do. The department makes space for you to explore and to undertake new projects of interest and to learn from other teams or industry professionals. I found the graduate program to be a really valuable experience for me, to learn from a broad range of people and to work across the department. I started as a plant pathologist in Brisbane, then moved to Canberra to start the graduate program where I worked in a policy officer role looking at import conditions and permit assessments for fresh produce. Followed by a rotation with the emergency preparedness and response team before then offered my current role in Sydney as a plant pathologist. Working in all of these groups has given me a really valuable insight into all the various stages of Australia's biosecurity continuum and how our work across the department fits together for the purpose of creating a sustainable, secure Australia.
Greg
My name is Gregory Kwok. I'm a Human Resources graduate in the Enterprise Bargaining Team. My work consists of engaging with multiple teams to provide fair and clear work conditions and environments for the employees within the department. My role is to make sure the employees in that department are operating under favourable working conditions. If the employees are satisfied, then the work they do will be more effective and the department will become more efficient. I've been with the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry for about three months having entered through the APS HR graduate program. I've always loved food and been interested in where it comes from and our department has so many touch points with the food industry. I also wanted my work to actually make a difference to those around me, which is why I decided to become a public servant. The department has so many functions and programs in place to help overcome not only career challenges but any challenge. If I'm suddenly interested in learning a new skill, the department will look for ways to facilitate my learning of that skill. The work the department handles is so important to the economy of Australia. If there was to be a biosecurity risk or there are issues with agriculture, the consequences have a ripple effect on our nation and on the globe. Our teams are working day and night to ensure that risks are mitigated and to resolve the issues before they impact the public. There are so many opportunities that the department offers in professional development. If you're lucky enough to be accepted into the graduate program, you'll be joining with a cohort of people who are all passionate and supportive. The grad program opens so many new doors. You just have to take a step through it.
Savannah
Hi, I'm Savannah. I joined the Department through the Indigenous Apprenticeship Program back in 2020. I'm now a senior policy and program officer within the Agricultural Traceability Branch. I wanted to find a job that offered me opportunities to try new things and grow my ability. The DAFF Indigenous Apprenticeship Program has offered me that in spades. Since joining DAFF I've worked with our biosecurity and trade areas.
I've had the opportunity to meet lots of new people, travel and work on interesting topics that provide benefit to Australians and our mob.
After completing the Indigenous Apprenticeship Program, I have gone on to work with the National Security Committee to deliver Australia's first ever national biosecurity strategy, which I received a 2023 Australia Day award for. I'm now working in collaboration with agricultural industries and state and territory governments to implement national traceability reforms to strengthen our systems and better protect Aussie farmers from pests and disease. DAFF's inclusive and supportive culture has supported me to try new things and build my skills and capability, all while making positive impact for Australian farmers, businesses and communities. There are lots of different entry pathways available for joining DAFF, with so many exciting opportunities available. If you're thinking about joining DAFF through one of our entry pathways, you should definitely do it.
Elena
My name is Elena Theodorus, and I'm a HR advisor at the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. As a HR advisor, I support all employees and management by assisting with general work, enterprise agreement related queries, and providing expert advice on a range of topics. I became interested in the role after hearing about how great the government sector is, the amount of support and care they put into their staff. I've been in the department for about three months now, and it's been great to experience it for myself. I had finished my studies in community service before joining the department, and I was unsure if I wanted to continue studying or look into work in the private sector. I wanted a new work culture that would motivate me to excel, but also enhance my learning. The best part of working in the department is getting to work with people who have so much insight, knowledge, and guidance when learning new skills. The department's objective is important, as they have a focus on supporting the industry's growth, strengthening our national biosecurity system, and increasing the contribution to agriculture to keep Australia safe. I'd say if you're passionate about maintaining and protecting Australia's agricultural industry, then the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is a great place to start your career.
Testimonials
Jaye
My role at DAFF is an auditor in imports. My day-to-day duties vary from working in the Perth office doing administration duties to travelling somewhere in Australia to conduct audits. Plus I help bring awareness and project manage events for our social club, First Nations Network and Pride Network where I am the proud WA ambassador.
My journey first started in 2021 through the Indigenous Apprenticeship Program in the Technical Response and Management team as a technical officer. Over 2.5 years in the team, I worked my way up from APS 3 to an acting APS 6 before winning a permanent APS 5 auditor role.
My ambitions before joining DAFF were to travel and do something more for my country, I just didn’t know how. I found this by joining the department as an auditor.
Besides enjoying auditor duties on a range of commodities and classes, I actually really enjoy being a part of the social club and the culture, inclusion and diversity networks. I can practice and improve my project management skills to help plan and run events to bring staff together in and out of work, creating a positive work culture and friendships.
The best part of working here is the flexibility and job security. Coming from private a corporation, especially after the COVID era, I know I have protection in keeping my job during tough times and the flexibility of work hours and days to suit my lifestyle and needs.
The support and encouragement I have received from all people I have worked closely with is the reason I feel I have achieved so much. Their encouragement has made me believe in myself and their support helped me to overcome any challenge I face in the government world. I’m so lucky to be working with positive and caring peers.
The opportunities to grow and keep upskilling are ongoing. I'd never had such job satisfaction before joining DAFF.
Lauren
I am a proud Palyku woman and a valued team leader of the Client Contact Group (CCG). We are a national team, answering questions from clients and the public helping to educate and protect Australia from biosecurity risk.
I came in as an apprentice with the Indigenous apprenticeship program. After completing my diploma, I was promoted and have since done multiple leadership trainings. I was given the opportunity to act as a team leader and I have been in that role now for nearly 2 years.
My team have encouraged me to stretch myself and supported me to engage in work that contributes to DAFF’s broader culture.
I have a passion for promoting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander inclusion and have been the regional ambassador the First Nations Staff Network for the last 5 years. I have used my ambassador role as an opportunity to contribute to the culture, diversity, and inclusion within the department and in my community. It has allowed me to provide my non-First Nations colleagues with a better understanding of First Nations heritage.
In my role I have organised several events including Reconciliation Week, Mabo Day, and NAIDOC Week. Each event gives me the opportunity to share my knowledge and cultural understanding with non-First Nations colleagues. I was honoured to receive a NAIDOC award this year for my contributions towards these events for the last 5 years.
Last year I had the opportunity to share my experience and knowledge while I mentored a colleague who’d recently joined us under the Indigenous apprenticeship program.
Joining DAFF was the best thing I did for my career.
Sean
I’m a trainee in the cloud governance team. We assist with providing cost effective and mature cloud solutions that host our data and applications.
I joined at the start of February 2024 through the Digital Traineeship Program co-ordinated by the APSC. Before joining DAFF, I was a game designer and game design teacher. This program gave people an opportunity to transition into the Data and Digital profession within the APS. I’m a big believer in the public service being here to improve the lives of Australians while enabling the country to be a good global citizen.
DAFF plays a pivotal role in helping to protect the unique plants and animals we have here as well as assisting our farmers get their amazing produce to the world. When I was offered the opportunity I jumped because the work DAFF does is so varied, the career possibilities are endless. I’m proud to play my part in supporting the people and systems delivering those services.
The people are great here, relaxed and yet still professional. Being older means I have a lot of experience from other jobs that I can refer back to. My team are always willing to help me and explain things when I ask. They’ve all been keen to ensure I get all the training they feel will help me settle into the job.
No matter where you end up, the APS graduate program offers you a number of rotations within your home department so you can see different areas. You may discover one you love that you never knew existed. In the end you get to do something that can have an impact on potentially millions of Australians.
Contact us
To talk to someone about our programs, email entryprograms@aff.gov.au.