Imported goods for industrial or environmental purposes poses a high biosecurity risk. It can provide a direct pathway for exotic pests and diseases that can harm humans, animals, crops and the environment.
- Goods have an industrial purpose when they are imported to be used in manufacturing, construction or processing (examples glues, waterproofing or ropemaking agents and mining compounds).
- Goods have an environmental purpose when they are imported for localised or unrestricted dispersal through the environment (examples include herbicides, insecticides, pesticides, fertilisers, bioremediation products, enzymes, baits, lures, attractants and poisons).
The department works with industry offshore and onshore in Australia to manage the biosecurity risks associated with imported animal feed to keep our biosecurity protected. For detailed information on how import risk analyses are completed, please see: Conducting an import risk analysis.
Check if you need an import permit
For the purposes of risk management, an import permit must be obtained for goods being imported, unless they are a commodity with import conditions listed in the Biosecurity (Conditionally Non-prohibited Goods) Determination 2021.
Before importation you must search and confirm the biosecurity import conditions of your goods to determine if your item can be imported into Australia and whether an import permit is required.
For commodity requirements, please search your commodity by intended end uses in BICON.
If your goods require a permit, an import permit will need to be approved prior to the import of goods. If the department is unable to grant an import permit as the goods do not meet Australia’s appropriate level of protection or the manufacturer has not provided sufficient information, the goods cannot be imported.
Goods requiring a permit that arrive without a permit may be re-exported or destroyed at the importers expense.
Production questionnaires
Animal consumption and environmental purposes
To import goods for industrial or environmental purposes, you will need to ask relevant persons to complete our questionnaires. You will then need to submit the questionnaire as part of your import permit application in the BICON system.
All facilities that manufacture or export your product need to complete the animal consumption and environmental purposes production questionnaire . The facility must complete the form within 6 months of your application.
Microalgae
If your product contains microalgae, relevant parties need to complete the microalgae questionnaire. The facility must complete the form within 6 months of your application.
Manufacturers may either complete the microalgae questionnaire or the animal consumption and environmental purposes production questionnaire.
The third-party facility questionnaire only covers storage, handled or further processing at third-party facilities.
Third-party facility questionnaire
The third-party facility questionnaire must be completed by the third-party facility where the goods are stored, handled or further processed. If the facility conduct additional manufacturing steps (e.g. Addition of materials, further refining) this questionnaire is not suitable, and the manufacturer must complete the Animal consumption and environmental purposes production questionnaire. The facility must complete the form within 6 months of your application.