The Australian Export Meat Inspection System (AEMIS) is an integrated set of controls specified and
verified by government that provides confidence in the safety, suitability and integrity of Australian
meat and meat products. Underpinning AEMIS are objective hygiene and performance standards which
are continually monitored and reported.
mortem inspection and verification of post-mortem inspection.
Post-mortem inspection is delivered by a regulatory team consisting of departmental officials called
under the direction of the department On Plant Veterinarian. AAOs are non-government employees but
are legally bound to the department to perform inspections in accordance with a detailed set of
departmental controlled instructions. FSMAs and AAOs are subject to ongoing performance verification
against nationally agreed performance standards and the results are recorded in a national database.
2.1 Scope
The Independent Employer of AAOs Accreditation Scheme (scheme) applies to independent employers
of AAOs where those AAOs undertake post-mortem inspection duties as part of the department’s
regulatory team on EU-listed export registered abattoirs.
The scheme does not apply to service providers supplying AAOs to non-EU listed export registered
abattoirs.
2.2 Eligible Parties
All independent employers of AAOs that meet the requirements to be accredited under this scheme will
be included on the approved Independent AAO Employer Schedule.
This will be made available on the department’s website.
There are no limits on the number of independent employers under this scheme.
2.3 National Accreditation requirements
The scheme described in this document commenced on 1 March 2014.
The accreditation scheme applies to independent employers of AAOs contracted under an arrangement
between the independent employer and an export registered abattoir.
Any export registered abattoir seeking EU listing must ensure they continue to comply with EU
requirements, including the use of AAOs, where AAOs undertake post-mortem inspection on EU-listed
export registered abattoirs.
Establishments and employers of AAOs may apply the scheme to engage AAOs for purposes other than
to meet EU requirements.

If the applicant provides services, or is intending to provide services,
to any…
then the
applicant…
EU- listed export registered abattoirs
Non-EU listed export registered abattoir
3.1 Application
3.1.1 An applicant seeking to be approved as an Independent AAO Employer must first make an
application for approval to:
AAO Coordinator
Meat Exports Branch
Exports and Veterinary Services Division
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601
or email aao@awe.gov.au
using the form in Annex 1 of this document.
3.1.2 An applicant seeking to be recognised as an approved Independent AAO Employer must make
available any documentation that the department requests to verify their compliance with the
conditions of this scheme.
3.1.3 Applications must include:
a completed application form, and
evidence that the applicant is an Australian registered company, and
for approval to provide services to a EU- listed export registered abattoir, evidence of current
accreditation against this scheme to the current International Standard ISO/IEC 17020 for a type
A establishment.
3.2 Assessment
3.2.1 The department will issue the applicant with a determination, in writing.
A determination may be approved or not approved.
A determination is defined as meeting the criteria of suitability of approval to provide AAO
inspection services.
The register on the department’s website will only display those companies who have
achieved full accreditation under the Scheme.
3.2.2 Determination - Approved
The department will issue approval to an applicant where the requirements in clause 3.1.3 are
met.
◦ 
◦ 

The applicant must provide the department with a current certificate of accreditation issued by
the National Accreditation against this scheme
The department will advise the applicant of the determination and publish the applicant’s details
on its website.
3.2.3 Determination – Not approved
The department will not approve an application where an applicant does not meet the
requirements of clause 3.1.3.
The applicant may request a review of the determination. Refer to section 5.7.
4.1 Approval of quality manual
4.1.1 An organisation intending to become an independent AAO Employer must submit their quality
management system manual for review by a National Accreditation Body.
The National Accreditation Body may defer to a technical assessor nominated by the department
for advice prior to the Independent AAO Employer commencing services.
Proposed amendments to an existing quality manual
4.1.2 The Independent AAO Employer must be able to demonstrate that any proposals to amend their
existing quality manual meet legislative requirements.
A proposal, including any reports on outcomes of trials, must be provided formally, in writing, to
the Area Technical Manager of the geographical region where the export registered abattoir is
located to the Independent AAO Employer for consideration.
4.2 Responsibilities
4.2.1 The Independent AAO Employer must:
be a company registered under the Corporations Act 2001.
ensure that all personnel performing services on behalf of the department have been appointed as
ensure that the AAOs provided to an establishment are authorised to work with the species the
AAO was appointed to work with by the department.
provide completed applications to change the employment details of the AAO(s) transferring
from the employment of an establishment to the department prior to the AAO(s) commencing
duties under the employ of the independent AAO employer.
an application form for changing the details of an AAO is available on the department’s
website.
Click on AEMIS – Australian Export Meat Inspection System > Application to change
details of an AAO.
an application form for changing the details of an AAO is available on the 
◦ 

provide continual professional development to their AAOs to ensure that their AAOs maintain
currency of knowledge, skills, behaviours and qualifications to meet departmental requirements.
comply with all lawful directions and reasonable requests issued by the department, including
documented work instructions, including the requirement to not alter, reformat or rebrand any
materials published or issued by the department for use.
ensure that all necessary corrective and preventive actions raised by the export registered abattoir
and the department are taken to resolve performance issues of individual AAOs.
disclose to the department any event or information which relates to, or may affect, the
department’s satisfaction that the AAO is a suitable person to be appointed as an Australian
Government Authorised Officer.
an Independent AAO Employer must ensure that all personnel under their employment do
not have a conflict of interest or any pecuniary interest at an export registered
establishment at which they may be placed.
clearly display the original approved notice of determination, as issued by the department, in the
main business office of the Independent AAO Employer.
notify the department of any proposed or updated information relating to the operations of the
Independent AAO Employer at an establishment where they provide services. An Independent
AAO Employer must:
ensure that the scope of operations as reflected in their notice of determination is accurate.
notify the department via the email address provided in section 3.1.1 of this document of
any proposal to significantly modify services or conduct trials outside the scope of the
required service at an export registered abattoir, prior to including in their quality manual.
discuss any queries or proposals with the applicable On Plant Veterinarian, who in turn
may escalate to their Area Technical Manager for a decision.
review the Independent AAO Employer’s quality manual which may be conducted by a
technical assessor nominated by the department.
effectively demonstrate that the number of AAOs provided to their client at that establishment is
sufficient to perform inspection and any related duties properly.
state in their contract with the client for that establishment the number of agreed AAOs
performing inspection duties at any one time.
4.3 Conditions of accreditation
4.3.1 In order to remain an Independent AAO Employer, and without limiting specific provisions of this
Scheme, an Independent AAO Employer must meet the following requirements:
provide proof of complying with the scheduled conformity assessment by the National
Accreditation Body against the requirements of this Scheme.
meet and maintain type A inspection body requirements of Clause A.1of ISO/IEC 17020:2012
the applicant must immediately notify the department and the abattoir of any changes to
their scope of accreditation against ISO/IEC 17020:2012 and this Scheme or any other
changes that may reasonably be expected to impact on the competency of the Independent
AAO Employer to supply sufficient authorised personnel.
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦

deliver a fully managed inspection service that provides personnel that are qualified, competent,
capable and authorised by the department to perform the required inspection tasks and apply
dispositions as an authorised officer in relation to the processing of meat and meat products
under the Export Control Act 2020 (Cth).
make records readily available to the National Accreditation Body.
provide all reasonable support and assistance to allow the personnel to perform the services in
accordance with the department's Standard Operating Procedures and Work Instructions issued
by the department from time to time.
comply with applicable Commonwealth, State or Territory work health and safety legislation.
must be independent to company management responsibility, control or an interest in that
abattoir or company and maintain continual compliance to this requirement.
for the purpose of being an Independent AAO Employer, a person is taken to have
management responsibility in an abattoir or company if he or she has:
authority to direct the operations, or an important or substantial part of the
operations; or
authority to direct a person who has, or would have, authority of the kind referred to
in paragraph i. above in the exercise of that authority.
For the purpose of being an Independent AAO Employer, a person is taken to have an
interest in an entity if the person:
is a director
is a shareholder of the entity or has the ability to exercise, or control the exercise, of
the right to vote in respect of voting shares or other form of voting equity
has the ability to dispose or exercise control over the disposal of shares or other form
of equity
has the ability to remove directors
has the ability to cast votes at the meetings of the board of directors
has any other means, direct or indirect, of influencing the decision and financial or
operating policies of the company
has the ability, directly or indirectly, through a position of management, of affecting
operations of the company.
for the purpose of being an Independent AAO Employer, a person is taken to have management
responsibility in an abattoir or company if he or she has:
ensure that AAOs provided by the Independent AAO Employer will perform their inspection tasks
according to work instructions issued by the department.
agree to be audited by an Australian registered National Accreditation Body against this
document and the requirements of the Australian Export Meat Inspection System.
5.1 Conformity Assessments
An applicant intending to become, or maintain status as, an Independent AAO Employer must avail
themselves to a conformity assessment by an Australian registered National Accreditation Body against
this scheme.
5.1.1 All costs in relation to maintaining accreditation are to be met by the Independent AAO Employer
◦ 
▪ 
▪ 
◦ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 
▪ 

5.1.2 Accreditation of Independent AAO Employers requires assessment of management systems,
quality programs and nominated departmental technical requirements by a National Accreditation
Body
5.1.3 A National Accreditation Body will conduct an assessment on the company requesting
accreditation to this Scheme
5.1.4 Witness assessments may be undertaken by a National Accreditation Body on one or more sites
that use the Independent AAO Employer
5.1.5 The frequency of conformity assessments will be determined by a National Accreditation Body
5.1.6 Assessments may also include review of AAO monitoring and verification activity reports
undertaken by the department
5.1.7 Verification of assessment outcomes may be required by the department or importing country
reviewers.
5.2 Accreditation Witness Assessments
5.2.1 Where witness assessments are required the technical assessors must have the following minimum
qualifications:
a current Meat Processing Certificate IV in Meat Processing (Meat Safety), a degree in Veterinary
Science, or equivalent tertiary qualifications in meat inspection, and
at least three years in the previous five years’ experience on export abattoirs conducting,
supervising, auditing or teaching meat inspection or equivalent experience, and
a current workplace assessor skillset from the Training and Education training package, or
equivalent.
5.2.2 Technical assessors must declare any association or conflict of interest with the abattoir being
provided the service.
5.2.3 Where possible, a technical assessor should not assess the same Independent AAO Employer on
more than two consecutive rounds of the accreditation audits.
Due to geographical responsibilities, this may not always be possible.
5.3 Assessment Findings
5.3.1 Assessment findings must be discussed with the authorised representative for the Independent
AAO Employer on the day of the assessment, including reference to all non-conformities and applicable
requirements.
5.3.2 Corrective Action Requests (CARs) must be issued in accordance with the requirements of the
National Accreditation Body’s documented procedures and include a time frame in which the

Independent AAO Employer is required to demonstrate that the corrective action has been
implemented.
5.3.3 Assessment findings will generally follow a ranking procedure agreed to by the assessment team.
Non-conformities and observations should be ranked as follows:
Observation (O) – A satisfactory outcome. May also include an observation, suggestion or a
recommendation or a reminder or flag for follow-up/review at the next assessment.
Minor Non-conformity (M) - Description of the action taken or intended must be provided in the
time negotiated for response. Includes any opportunities for improvement to the system.
Supporting evidence of this action will not be required as it will be reviewed at the next
assessment. The Independent AAO Employer is encouraged to include the Minor Non-
Conformity in their corrective action and internal audit program.
Major Non-Conformity (N/C) - Response on action taken is required with supporting evidence of
this action. This must be provided in the time that has been negotiated for response.
5.3.4 The National Accreditation Body must provide a copy of the final assessment findings, in writing,
to the auditee at the exit meeting.
5.4 Assessment Reports
5.4.1 The final assessment report will be provided by the National Accreditation Body to the authorised
representative for the Independent AAO Employer and the department as soon as practicable after the
assessment.
5.4.2 Independent AAO Employers must:
take the required corrective actions within the agreed time frame
provide the National Accreditation Body with supporting documentation demonstrating that
corrective actions have been addressed.
5.4.3 The National Accreditation Body must ensure that:
corrective actions are carried out by the Independent AAO Employer in the agreed time frame
on request, provide the department with any supporting documentation provided by an
Independent AAO Employer in relation to corrective actions.
5.4.4 The National Accreditation Body may extend the time allowed for corrective actions where the
National Accreditation Body is satisfied that progress is being made in implementing corrective actions
and that the non-conformity will not impact on the reliability of any inspection.

5.5 Suspension/Revocation of Accreditation
5.5.1 The National Accreditation Body must issue a show cause notification, in writing, to an
Independent AAO Employer if the National Accreditation Body is reasonably satisfied that the
Independent AAO Employer:
has breached its obligations to meet all the requirements of this Scheme.
has breached its obligations to maintain accreditation through services provided by the National
Accreditation Body (e.g. non- payment of fees).
has a conflict of interest in relation to the delivery of the services required in this Scheme, as
described in clause 4.2.1(h).
is not competent in any aspect of its work that would reasonably be expected to impact on the
reliability of inspection services.
ceases to be registered as a company under the Corporations Act 2001 or comes under one of the
forms of external administration referred to in Chapter 5 of the Corporations Act 2011 or
equivalent provisions in State or Territory legislation in relation to incorporated associations.
5.5.2 A show cause notification may allow for the completion of existing services until a new
Independent AAO Employer can be sourced, but the Independent AAO Employer must not enter into
any new arrangements or agreements for the provision of services while the accreditation is suspended.
5.5.3 The National Accreditation Body will provide a copy of the report including the show cause
notification of suspension or removal to the department.
The department will review the National Accreditation Body’s report and take any necessary
action.
5.5.4 The Independent AAO Employer has the right to request a review by the department of any
determination prior to immediate suspension by the National Accreditation Body (section 5.7).
5.5.5 The National Accreditation Body will withdraw accreditation against the Scheme if there is
sufficient evidence to confirm a breach of requirements of this Scheme.
5.5.6 The National Accreditation Body will notify the department that it has withdrawn accreditation
against the Scheme.
5.5.7 The department will withdraw approval status of the applicant upon notification of advice from
the National Accreditation Body and update the advice on the department’s website.
5.6 Follow up Assessment
5.6.1 Follow-up assessments will be required to verify the implementation of corrective actions that
have arisen as a result of the outcomes of the assessment.
5.6.2 The time frame for follow-up assessments will be discussed with the Independent AAO Employer
at the time of the assessment. Where corrective actions have been implemented, the National
Accreditation Body will issue notification to re-accredit the company as an Independent AAO Employer.

5.6.3 Follow-up assessment reporting will follow the same protocols as outlined in section 5.4.
5.7 Review of Determination
Disputed preliminary determination
5.7.1 If the applicant does not accept a determination made by the department the applicant may,
within 7 days of receiving the determination, apply to the Director, Export Meat Program to review the
determination.
5.7.2 If within 7 days of receiving the determination:
the applicant does not apply for a review of the determination; or
the applicant and the department do not complete a memorandum of agreed intent, then the
department’s determination is deemed to be a memorandum of agreed intent.
Revised determination
5.7.3 If the applicant decides to implement recommendations contained in the department’s and/or the
National Accreditation Body’s advice, the Director, Export Meat Program, Meat Exports Branch must
make a revised determination and give the applicant written notice of the revised determination.
Agreed revised determination
5.7.4 If the applicant accepts the Director’s revised determination, the department and the applicant
must complete a memorandum of agreed intent in the form approved by the department.
Disputed revised determination
5.7.5 If the applicant does not accept the Director’s revised determination, the applicant may, within 7
days of receiving the Director’s revised determination, apply to the Assistant Secretary, Meat Exports
Branch for reconsideration. Refer to clause 5.7.3.
6.1 Authorisation of individual AAOs
All AAOs who are to be employed by an Independent AAO Employer must be individually authorised
under the Export Control Act 2020 by the department, prior to commencing duties as an AAO.
6.1.1 Information about the application process is available at on the department's website.
6.2 Inspection Standard
The legal specification for inspection is outlined within the following Australian Standards:
6.2.1 The outline of inspection for meat intended for export is specified within Schedule 2 of the
Australian Standard for the Hygienic Production and Transportation of Meat and Meat Products for
Human Consumption (AS 4696) and the Manual for Importing Country Requirements (Micor)

6.2.2 The outline of the disposition of inspected meat intended for export is specified within Schedule 3
of the Australian Standard for the Hygienic Production and Transportation of Meat and Meat Products
for Human Consumption (AS4696)
6.2.3 The outline of inspection for wild game meat intended for export is in Appendix B to H of the
Australian Standard for the Hygienic Production of Wild Game Meat for Human Consumption
(AS4464:2007)
6.2.4 The outline of the disposition of inspected wild game meat intended for export is specified within
Appendix A of the Australian Standard for the Hygienic Production of Wild Game Meat for Human
Consumption (AS4464:2007).
6.3 Inspection Instruction
6.3.1 To ensure that inspection is conducted consistently, the department has published a suite of
instructional material for post-mortem inspection that will be made available to Independent AAO
Employers, approved Registered Training Organisations and National Accreditation Bodies.
6.4 Department On-plant Staff
6.4.1 On plant staff must cooperate with all Independent AAO Employer personnel.
6.4.2 On plant staff must not interfere with commercial agreements made between the Independent
AAO Employer and establishment management on how AAOs operate at the establishment.
6.4.3 On plant staff must not issue recommendations or directives to an Independent AAO Employer or
its employees that contradicts prescribed documented material issued, or referred to, by the
Commonwealth through legislation, guidelines or work instructions.
6.4.4 The On Plant Veterinarian is responsible for the performance management of an AAO.
Performance will be measured against prescribed work instructions issued by the
Commonwealth.
Feedback on the performance of the AAO, satisfactory or otherwise, must be provided in writing
to the employer of the AAO.
Where the On Plant Veterinarian cannot resolve an issue raised on the performance of an
AAO with the employer of the AAO, the On Plant Veterinarian must contact their Area
Technical Manager in the first instance.
If required, the Area Technical Manager may need to escalate matters to one or more
members of the Meat Exports Senior Leadership Team for a decision.
◦ 
◦

6.5 Post-mortem inspection verification of product and procedure
6.5.1 The verification of AAOs undertaking post-mortem inspection against post-mortem inspection
performance standards is conducted by a department veterinarian who may be assisted by a FSMA.
Performance standards, as incorporated into departmental work instructions as applied by the
On Plant Veterinarian, will be made available to an Independent AAO Employer once the
applicant is approved as an Independent AAO Employer by the department.
6.5.2 Verification assesses both inspection procedures and inspected product in a defined, random
sample of production. The post-mortem verification instructional materials define non-compliance and
outline action taken where non-compliance is detected.
6.5.3 Where the AAO does not comply with performance standards, the department On Plant
Veterinarian will notify the non-compliance(s) to the abattoir owner or operator and the supervisor of
the AAO.
6.5.4 The On Plant Veterinarian will take appropriate action to maintain the outcomes of the Export
Control (Meat and Meat Products) Rules 2021.
6.5.5 Non-compliances identified and provided to the abattoir must also be provided, in writing, to the
Independent AAO Employer to take appropriate action to ensure any issues advised to the Independent
AAO Employer are rectified.
7.1 Liability coverage of AAOs for operations
7.1.1 An AAO is covered by the Commonwealth of Australia for liability under Section 430 the Export
Control Act 2020.
7.1.2 AAOs are appointed under Section 291 (6) of the Export Control Act 2020.
As part of the On-Plant Regulatory Team, AAOs are appointed under the Act to make post-
mortem deposition decisions under the Export Control (Meat and Meat Products) Rules 2021.
The AAO is a non-government employee but is legally bound to the department to perform
inspections in accordance with a detailed set of departmental controlled work instructions.
7.1.3 The scope of Commonwealth liability of operations will be restricted to:
only prescribed inspection activities and decisions undertaken by an AAO as defined in their roles
and responsibilities as an AAO under Section 9 of this scheme and
incidents defined in (i) arose out of where the AAO acted reasonably, responsibly and in good
faith.

7.2 Liability coverage of Independent AAO employers for operations
7.2.1 For the term of accreditation, the Independent AAO Employer must ensure it maintains adequate
public and product liability, professional indemnity and workers compensation insurances or reserves
to cover liabilities arising from its operations.
7.2.2 The Independent AAO Employer must comply with and observe the terms of the insurance
policies and must not do anything which could result in any such policy being avoided or unenforceable
or which may entitle the insurer to limit or reduce the amount otherwise payable under the policy. The
provisions of this clause survive the expiration or earlier termination of Accreditation Scheme.
8.1 Approved Arrangement
8.1.1 The export registered abattoir’s Approved Arrangement (AA) must be modified to effectively
demonstrate that:
the AAO is responsible to the department for the performance of their official regulatory
functions
company staff must support and not interfere with the AAO in the performance of their official
functions
establishment management will not compromise or be perceived to compromise the duties of the
AAO while performing official regulatory functions
establishment management will not permit any establishment employee to perform official
inspection duties unless the employee is an AAO
official inspection duties on product intended for the EU market are only being performed by
either an AAO sourced from an Independent AAO Employer and is wearing the required uniform
or a Commonwealth employed meat inspector
the name and credentials of the approved Independent AAO Employer(s) operating at the
establishment is current
the independence of the approved Independent AAO Employer(s) from the abattoir and the
continual compliance to this requirement is maintained
if required, that on-site access to National Accreditation Body teams will be allowed to conduct
witness assessments.
8.1.2 For establishments using a regulatory model where company employed AAOs perform post-
mortem inspection for non-EU runs, control and segregation of runs and product must be clearly
articulated in the Approved Arrangement on the basis of importing country requirements.
8.2 Relief Arrangements
8.2.1 The export registered establishment may use other people from an Independent AAO Employer
who are not exclusively performing the meat inspection function of an AAO, provided:
any additional duties carried out by the person do not create a conflict of interest or compromise
importing country requirements

the establishment’s Approved Arrangement reflect the relief arrangements implemented
the person performing the duties of an AAO is not nominated in a position of management or
control within the export registered establishment.
9.1 AAO Duties
9.1.1 The AAOs primary function is to perform meat inspection activities.
9.1.2 While performing meat inspection AAOs may undertake tasks that can be reasonably considered
to be associated with meat inspection on the basis that:
inspection is the primary function
additional functions do not compromise the conduct of inspection.
Examples of acceptable additional activities include but are not limited to:
preparing material for inspection
trim defects
age animals through dentition
dispose of inspected material.
9.2 AAO Responsibilities
9.2.1 An AAO must be paid by the Independent AAO Employer at all times for whatever work they do at
a meat establishment and cannot at any time work directly for or be paid by the meat establishment.
9.2.2 The AAO must comply with all requirements and directives stipulated (including all relevant
training packages, standard operating procedures and work instructions) in the Deed of Obligations
that is between the AAO and the department and the responsibilities that are specified in clause 9.1.2.
9.2.3 The AAO must inform the Independent AAO Employer of the species that he or she is authorised
to work with as per their appointment to an AAO, and provide a copy of their appointment to the
Independent AAO Employer.
9.2.4 The person performing the duties of an AAO is not nominated in a position of management and
control within the export registered establishment.
9.2.5 The person performing the duties of an AAO must declare all conflicts of interest or pecuniary
interests, real or perceived, to their Independent AAO Employer.
Application for listing approval as an independent AAO employer for the provision of on line meat
certification:
Part 1: Company Information
Company Name National Accreditation Body Name
Accreditation/Site number
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦

Business Address
Business Postal Address
Name of person responsible for AAO
approvals/QA e.g. manager/QA manager
Email, phone and fax numbers at
Business
Name of person responsible for Inspection
List of AAOs (also cite AAO Identification number and species)
(Note: list may be attached if not sufficient space)
I …………………………………………….(insert name and position) wish to apply for the above named
company with the ACN …………………. (insert Australian Companies Number) to be listed as an
approved Independent AAO Employer for the purpose of providing on line meat inspection of carcase
and offal at export registered abattoirs.
I ………………………………………………..(insert name and position) consent to the company’s details as
provided in Part 1 of this form will be published on the department’s website, if approval is granted by
the department.
Part 2: Conditions
By signing the declaration on the following page:
I understand that providing false or misleading statements to the Commonwealth is an offence
and is covered by the Crimes Act 1914.
I have read and understood the protecting your privacy information detailed in part 3 of this
form.
I consent to the company’s details as provided in Part 1 of this form will be published on the
department’s website, where approval is granted.
I confirm that this company is financially viable to deliver a fully managed inspection service, can
provide personnel that are qualified, competent, capable and authorised by the department to
perform the required inspection tasks and disposition as an authorised officer in relation to the
processing of meat and meat products under the Export Control Act 2020 (Cth).
I confirm and can demonstrate that this company has an ISO/IEC 17020:2012 equivalent
operating quality and inspection management system.
I further declare that this company will grant the department access to the records relevant to the
inspections conducted for the purpose of review of the accreditation system. This includes
granting access to importing country reviewers as nominated by the department.
access to the National Accreditation Body (identified above) records relevant to its accreditation
in relation to inspection of export meat and meat products, including, but not limited to, results
of assessments by the National Accreditation Body.

I agree that this company will report relevant inspection results to the department at the same
time that they are reported to the Food Business Operator (export registered meat
establishment), this will be documented in the company quality assurance manual.
I understand that persons listed in management positions of the company will be subject to a fit
and proper person check in accordance with the Export Control (Prescribed Goods - General)
Rules 2021.
I declare that that company will never make or imply that being an approved Independent AAO
Employer is an endorsement by the department of its performance in relation to inspection
outside the inspection carried out under the Accredited Independent AAO Employer Scheme.
I understand that failure to meet any of the requirements may result in suspension or revocation
of approval and subsequent removal from the schedule of approved Independent AAO employers.
I declare that I will meet, and maintain compliance to, all the conditions outlined in the
Independent Employer of AAO s Accreditation Scheme and commit to fulfilling the requirements
outlined in section 3.2 of the Scheme from the outset.
Part 3: Protecting your privacy
Personal information means any information or opinion about an identified, or reasonably identifiable,
individual.
Sensitive personal information means any information or opinion about an individual’s racial or ethnic
origin, political opinion or association, religious beliefs or affiliations, philosophical beliefs, sexual
preferences or practices, trade or professional associations and memberships, union membership,
criminal record, health or genetic information and biometric information or templates.
Authorised Officer application form is for the purposes of determining your eligibility for appointment
related purposes. If the relevant personal information requested in this application form is not provided
by you, the department will be unable to assess your eligibility for appointment as an Australian
Government Authorised Officer.
Personal information may be disclosed to other Australian agencies, including the Australian Taxation
Office, Australian Federal Police and the Department of Home Affairs, persons or organisations where
necessary for these purposes, provided the disclosure is consistent with relevant laws, in particular the 
Privacy Act 1988. Your personal information will be used and stored in accordance with the Privacy
Principles.
By completing and submitting this form you consent to the collection of all personal information,
including sensitive personal information, contained in this form.
information is available on the departmental website at privacy.

I have attached:
Evidence that the applicant is an Australian registered company, and
For approval, evidence of current accreditation against the “Independent Employer of AAOs
Accreditation Scheme” by a National Accreditation Body from 1 March 2014.
DECLARED BY:
Signature: ……………………………………………………….. (signature)
Date: ………………… (Day Month Year)
Witness: ……………………………………………………….… (Insert name and position)
Witness Signature: ………………………………………...... (signature)
Date: ………………… (Day Month Year)
Applications should be sent to: aao@awe.gov.au or AAO Coordinator, Meat Exports Branch,
Applications will be held in the strictest confidence and comply with the Information Privacy Principles
in the Privacy Act 1988 (Commonwealth).
To contact the department about your personal information or to make a complaint:
Telephone: Switchboard +61 2 6272 3933
Email: privacy@awe.gov.au
Post: Privacy Contact Officer,
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601.
The following table details the published date and amendment details for this document.
Version Date
Amendment details
1
18/02/14
First publication of document
1.1
01/07/14
Minor updates to content to reflect updated names of internal business areas of
department, email and webpage addresses references in document
1.2
01/10/15
Minor updates to content to reflect the change of department name to
2.0
18/11/2016
The following amendments were made:
The following clauses been added to the document:
The following section has been added to the document:
3.0
17/2/2021 Updated to reflect change to new Export Control Act 2020

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/meat/elmer-3/independent-employer-of-
aaos-accreditation-scheme/independent-employer-of-aaos-accreditation-scheme