1
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
A Framework to Guide Future Effort and Investment 
to Support Sustainable Primary Production
ADELAIDE HILLS 
ADELAIDE HILLS 
FLEURIEU
FLEURIEU
KANGAROO ISLAND
KANGAROO ISLAND 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan​ 
DROUGHT
RESILIENT
ADELAIDE HILLS
FLEURIEU PENINSULA
KANGAROO ISLAND

2
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

3
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Drought Resilience Steering Committee 
acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of the land on which we work, live and play and 
their continuing connection to land, sea, culture and community. We pay respect to Elders 
past and present, and we extend that respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
people in our community. 
In particular, we acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and 
Kangaroo Island region covered by this Plan, including the Kaurna, Peramangk, Ngarrindjeri 
and Ramindjeri peoples. 
Acknowledgement of Country

4
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
​Acknowledgement of Country	
	
	
 
01 Introduction 	 	
	
	
	
	
 
02 Summary of goals	
	
	
	
	
 
03 The AHFKI region	
	
	
	
	
 
04 Drought	
	
	
	
	
	
 
05 Other drivers of change	
	
	
	
 
06 Drought resilience	
	
	
	
	
 
07 The Drought Resilience Strategy	
	
	
 
08 Implementation, monitoring and evaluation	
	
 
09 Glossary	
	
	
	
	
	
10 References
11 Appendix A
Contents
January 2025.
This plan has been prepared by URPS for the Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island (AHFKI) Regional Drought Resilience Steering 
Committee. The Steering Committee was chaired by Steve Shotton, Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu & Kangaroo 
Island (RDA AHFKI) with members including Brett Mayne (RDA AHFKI), Graeme Martin (Southern and Hills LGA), Jo Sullivan (Kangaroo 
Island Landscapes Board), Lyn Doyle (PIRSA), John Butler (Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board) Stephanie Wurst (RDA AHFKI Board), Tom 
Cosentino (RDA AHFKI Board) and Tony Randall (SA Drought Hub)
PHOTO CREDITS – all images licensed to RDA AHFKI. 
This project is jointly funded through the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund and the 
Government of South Australia
3
6 
8 
10 
20 
28 
30 
36
48
50
52
56

5
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

6
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 
(AHFKI) region produces world-renowned food, 
fibre and wine and its scenic landscapes attract 
significant numbers of tourists. The diverse and highly 
productive agriculture, horticulture and viticulture 
industries established early in the settlement of 
South Australia depends on reliable winter rainfall 
and warm, dry summers. Recent decades have seen 
declines in annual, winter and spring rainfall across 
the region and an increase in average maximum 
temperatures. Climate projections indicate these 
trends will continue to the end of the century, 
including more time spent in drought.
Drought resilience refers to the ability of individuals, 
communities, industries, or environments to adapt, 
reorganise or transform in response to changing 
temperature, increasing variability and scarcity 
of rainfall, and changed seasonality of rainfall, to 
maintain or improve economic, environmental, or 
social wellbeing. 
Building, maintaining and enhancing drought 
resilience as the climate changes and rainfall patterns 
change and become more variable and unpredictable 
is essential for the future of the region’s agriculture 
and supporting industries and communities. Actions 
to strengthen drought resilience need to reflect the 
diversity in the region’s landscapes, community and 
climate and the unique challenges their communities 
face. 
In the last 10 years, the region has been impacted by 
significant disruptions. Drought during 2018-19 was 
followed by bushfires that burnt across the Adelaide 
Hills and nearly half of Kangaroo Island (2019-20). The 
ensuing COVID-19 pandemic saw further disruption to 
the economy and community. 
Enhancing drought resilience will also help the AHFKI 
region prepare for, respond to, and recover from 
other stresses or pressures.
This Plan has been prepared as a framework or 
prospectus to guide future efforts and investments 
in regional drought resilience. It focuses on primary 
production and allied industries, communities and 
landscapes. Its preparation has been led by the 
Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island (AHFKI) 
Regional Drought Resilience Steering Committee 
and informed by the ideas and experiences of 
stakeholders from across the region.  
Introduction
01

7
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
1.1 Preparing this Plan
This Plan was informed by information collated 
through the following tasks: 
•	
Literature review. 
•	
Regional in-person engagement with 55 people 
across the AHFKI region. 
•	
Key informant interviews with 12 local subject 
matter experts 
•	
Key informant interviews with drought resilience 
planners from other regions 
•	
Regular Steering Committee meetings.  
All parts of this Plan have been informed by the 
literature review and engagement. The key findings 
of these tasks have been analysed, summarised and 
integrated to prepare the content of the plan and set 
out a robust vision for a more drought resilient AHFKI 
region. Further detail and findings from all tasks are 
described in the Background Paper (included as an 
attachment to this Plan). 
The regional engagement helped the project team to 
understand: 
•	
How has/does drought impact the AHFKI region? 
•	
What makes individuals, communities, and 
regions resilient to drought? 
•	
How can the resilience of the AHFKI region to 
drought be maintained and enhanced? 
Community members and stakeholders shared a wide 
diversity of perspectives, experiences and priorities. 
These are summarised in the Engagement Summary 
Report that is included as an Appendix to the 
Background Paper and embedded through this Plan. 
Quotes from community members and stakeholders 
collected through the engagement activities are 
included in the green speech bubbles throughout this 
Plan reflecting personal experiences and views of 
drought in their own words.

8
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Our vision for the AHFKI region
Primary Production
Environmental 
Management
Community Health 	
and Wellbeing
Infrastructure & Services
Drought Plan Governance
Innovative, diversified and sustainable 
primary producers prepared for a variable 
and changing climate.
Healthy and resilient soil, water and biodiversity 
that sustain productive landscapes.
Strong, healthy individuals and connected 
communities learning and working together for 
a positive future.
Infrastructure and services that support 
businesses and communities to connect, function 
and thrive.
Effective resilience building initiatives that reflect the 
region’s unique needs, led locally and are informed 
by local knowledge and community input.
Our Goals
Primary producers that understand drought risks and are taking 
action to build drought resilient farms, communities, economies 
and environments.
Summary of Goals
02
Financial Management
Business owners managing climate and 
other risks for long term financial success, 
contributing to regional economic growth.

9
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

10
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The AHFKI Region
03
The AHFKI Regional Drought Resilience Plan covers the Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu Peninsula, 
McLaren Vale and Kangaroo Island as shown in Figure 1 below. 
The following pages summarise key features of the AHFKI region that influence its resilience to drought. 
Please refer to Attachment 1 Background Report for more information about these features.
The Adelaide Hills’ cooler climate provides ideal 
growing conditions for vineyards and apple, pear 
and cherry orchards. The Adelaide Hills’ picturesque 
agricultural, natural landscapes, high-quality local 
food and wine production attract tourists from around 
the world. Significant population growth has occurred 
over the past decade and further growth particularly 
around Mount Barker is projected. 
On the Fleurieu Peninsula vineyards and the wine 
regions of McLaren Vale, Langhorne Creek and 
Currency Creek, cropping and dairy and livestock 
farms flourish alongside a thriving tourism industry. 
The Fleurieu Peninsula’s population has grown at a 
rate double the state average over the past decade.
Kangaroo Island, Australia’s third-largest island, 
lies off the coast of Fleurieu Peninsula. The island 
is noted for its wildlife, conservation areas, and 
agriculture, particularly sheep, grain and beef cattle 
farming. The island is separated from the Fleurieu 
Peninsula by Backstairs Passage, requiring a ferry 
transfer or plane flight to access from the mainland. 
Parndana
Kingscote
Victor Harbor
Strathalbyn
Lobethal
Mount Compass
McLaren Vale
Yankailla
KANGAROO ISLAND
ADELAIDE 
HILLS
FLEURIEU 
PENINSULA
Figure 1 Location Map

11
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.1 Key features of the AHFKI region 
Through research and engagement, a number of key 
features of the AHFKI region relating to agriculture 
and communities have been identified. These are 
summarised below and described further in the 
following sections. 
•	
A growing population – growing faster than the 
rest of the State and projected to continue to 
grow until 2041.
•	
Low rates of unemployment. 
•	
Higher rates of volunteering, particularly on 
Kangaroo Island. 
•	
A diverse economy at a regional scale but 
Kangaroo Island in particular is less diverse 
where 21% of employment is in the agricultural 
sector, and 33% of economic output is from 
agriculture.
•	
44% of land in the region used for livestock 
farming. 
•	
Very high proportions of State apple, pear, cherry 
and strawberry production, established and 
reliant on milder climates, irrigation and reliable 
rainfall. 
•	
Internationally renowned grape growing and 
wine production, in scenic landscapes attracting 
significant numbers of tourists. 
•	
Significant cropping production including wheat, 
canola, beans, barley and oats. 
•	
Declining annual rainfall and increasing average 
maximum temperatures from the period 1964-
1983 to 1984-2023. 
•	
Although crop yields are generally better when 
growing season rainfall is high, there have been 
some seasons when other factors contributed to 
higher yields despite lower rainfall. 
•	
Mainland communities are generally well serviced 
by electricity, water, telecommunications and 
transport infrastructure however Kangaroo Island 
communities are less well serviced. 
•	
Kangaroo Island industries are highly reliant on 
road and ferry transport which can be disrupted 
by extreme weather and mechanical issues.

12
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.2 People and economy 
The region’s population varies between sub-regions. 
The Adelaide Hills’ proximity to the city means 
residents can work in Adelaide and live in the hills. 
The population is larger and younger than other sub-
regions, with higher levels of education and higher 
average income. The Fleurieu Peninsula has an older 
population with a larger proportion of the population 
needing assistance with core activities, and high 
projected growth. Kangaroo Island has a smaller 
population, high rates of volunteering and lower 
income. 
The economy of the sub-regions is similarly diverse, 
dominated by household service industries, 
agriculture, construction, and manufacturing.
Agriculture, forestry, & fishing is the top industry of 
employment on Kangaroo Island, accounting for 
21% of jobs and nearly 33% of economic output. The 
sector provides 8% of jobs in the Fleurieu Peninsula 
and 6.3% of jobs in the Adelaide Hills. 7.7% of jobs 
in McLaren Vale are within agriculture, forestry and 
fishing. 
Adelaide 
Hills
Fleurieu 
Peninsula
Kangaroo 
Island
McLaren 
Vale
Total 
AHFKI region 
South 
Australia
Resident 
population 2021
79,723 people
50,704 
people
4,894 
people
13,677 
people
148,998 people
1,781,516 
people
Projected 
population 2021 
- 2041 – medium 
growth scenario 
34.5% 
increase 
37.1% increase 
20.0% 
increase 
Not available 
for this area
35.0% increase 
(excluding 
McLaren Vale)
22.0% 
increase
Median age
42 years
56 years
50 years
47 years
47 years
14.1% 
Volunteering rate
19.7%
19.6%
27.7%
18.1%
19.8%
14.1%
Employment in 
agriculture, forestry 
and fishing 
1,440 (6.3% 
of sub-region 
labour force)
1,508  
(7.9%)
486  
(21.2%)
553 
(7.7%)
3,987 
5.7% of region
31,637 
Table 1 Key demographics for the AHFKI region and SA 1,2,3

13
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.3 Agriculture, horticulture and viticulture
Agriculture is a significant contributor to the 
region. Viticulture, horticulture, livestock and 
cropping contribute through both their outputs and 
employment and the reputation of the area as a 
premier food and wine destination. Around 57% of 
the region’s land is used for agricultural purposes. 
Viticulture and horticulture across the Adelaide Hills 
and Fleurieu rely on irrigation from groundwater, 
surface water captured and stored in dams, recycled 
water and water pumped from watercourses.
There is very little irrigated agriculture on Kangaroo 
Island, however irrigated production of certified 
disease-free seed potatoes supplies 25% of the 
Australia’s total seed potato production4. 
In 2021/22, the sector generated $1.47 billion in 
gross revenue across the region, accounting for 
11.2% of total regional output (Table 2). On Kangaroo 
Island, the sector contributes one-third of regional 
output.
Livestock, wool and dairy
Sheep and lambs (for meat and wool) and beef cattle are raised on farms across the region, with a number of 
dairy farms (cows), mostly on the Fleurieu Peninsula and a small number of goat dairies. In 2022/23 there were 
86 dairy farms in the Central region (Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu Peninsula, Murray Swamps & Meningie Lakes) 
producing 34% of the State’s milk production.6 Other livestock raised in the region include poultry and pigs.   
Adelaide Hills
Fleurieu Peninsula
Kangaroo Island
Agriculture, forestry and fishing output ($) 
$595.96 million
$647.12 million
$227.74 million
Agriculture as proportion of regional output 
7.4%
14.8%
33.0%
Table 2 Output from agriculture, forestry & fishing 2021-22 5

14
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Grapes
The AHFKI includes six recognised wine grape 
growing regions: 
•	
Adelaide Hills 
•	
McLaren Vale 
•	
Southern Fleurieu  
•	
Currency Creek 
•	
Langhorne Creek 
•	
Kangaroo Island.  
These regions produce grapes for internationally 
recognised wines. The differing climate between 
regions results in different varieties planted and 
different strengths and challenges. Historically, 
irrigation water supply for vines in McLaren Vale 
relied on groundwater however alternate supply of 
treated wastewater from the Willunga Basin Water 
Company now supplies around 65% of irrigation 
demand.7
Cropping 
The most common dryland (non-irrigated) crops 
produced in the region include wheat, canola, beans, 
barley and oats, predominantly on Kangaroo Island 
and the eastern Fleurieu Peninsula. 
Apples, pears, cherries and strawberries 
Centred on the Lenswood Valley, the Adelaide Hills 
region is South Australia’s most important and longest 
established apple growing area, with nearly 80% of 
the State’s growers in this region.8 The Adelaide Hills 
is also the main region for pear orchards in South 
Australia.9
The Adelaide Hills region produces 90-95% of South 
Australia’s cherry production. Microclimate variations 
across the Hills mean maturity can vary for the same 
variety which is beneficial as cherries are picked ripe 
and cannot be stored as long as apples and pears.
Nearly all strawberries grown in South Australia are 
grown within the region, with a number of farms in the 
Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu.
Food and wine manufacturing 
Across the AHFKI region food and wine 
manufacturing using regional produce creates wine, 
gin, beer, juice, milk products, jams and condiments, 
bakery products and more for local, national and 
international markets.10

15
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.4 Climate
Rainfall 
The region experiences a Mediterranean climate 
characterised by warm, dry summers and mild wet 
winters. The Adelaide Hills, due to its elevation, 
tends to be cooler and wetter compared to 
the coastal areas, with more significant rainfall 
supporting vegetation and agriculture. The Fleurieu 
Peninsula enjoys a moderate climate, with coastal 
areas benefiting from proximity to the ocean which 
moderate temperatures and provides consistent 
rainfall. Kangaroo Island’s climate is similarly 
moderated by the surrounding ocean, leading to mild 
temperatures year-round and historically reliable 
winter rainfall. 
Rainfall reduces moving east across the region due 
to the influence of the Mt. Lofty Ranges, with annual 
rainfall in Langhorne Creek less than half of that at 
Parawa. 
Figure 2 shows the average monthly rainfall at four 
locations in the region from 1964 to 2023. Winter 
rainfall is significantly lower at Langhorne Creek.
Figure 2 Average monthly rainfall 1964 to 2023 
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
JAN
Langhorne Creek
Parndana
Parawa
Charleston
FEB
MAR
APRIL
MAY
JUN
JULY
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC

16
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Rainfall has been decreasing in recent decades. Data from myclimateview.com.au shown in Table 3 
shows rainfall has reduced from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-2023. 
Temperature  
The AHFKI region experiences moderate temperatures, with most of the region experiencing average 
annual maximum temperatures of approximately 19-22°C.12 
Temperature has been increasing in recent decades. Table 4 shows the increase in average annual 
maximum temperature from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-2023. 
Table 3 Rainfall change 1964 to 202311
Table 4 Temperature change 1964 – 202310
Location
Average annual rainfall 
1964 – 1993 (mm)
Average annual rainfall 
1994 – 2023 (mm)
Change 
(mm)
Change 
(%)
Langhorne Creek
373
335
38
-10.2%
Parndana
672
634
38
-5.7%
Parawa
838
787
51
-6.1%
Charleston
794
743
51
-6.4%
Location
Average annual 
maximum temperature 
1964 – 1993 (°C) 
Average annual maximum 
temperature 1994 – 2023 
(°C) 
Change 
(°C)
Change 
(%)
Langhorne Creek
21.6
22.2
+0.6
+2.7
Parndana
18.7
19.3
+0.6
+3.2
Parawa
18.4
18.9
+0.5
+2.7
Charleston
19.2
19.9
+0.7
+3.6

17
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

18
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Table 5 Water resources – key features and characteristics
Water resource
Key features and characteristics
Surface water
Surface water is used extensively through the region for stock and domestic use and irrigation of 
pastures, grapes and horticulture. Farm dams are important to many farms, allowing for storage of 
surface water for stock use and irrigation, and often supplemented with groundwater.  
The Onkaparinga and Torrens Rivers in the Adelaide Hills are key sources of water for the 
Adelaide population. Their catchments include large water storage reservoirs fed by catchment 
inflows and supplemented by water piped from the River Murray. The River Murray, in addition to 
its drinking water supply, provides irrigation water along the River and Lower Lakes.   
Groundwater13,14
Groundwater is an important irrigation water source in the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula 
particularly in areas where surface water availability is limited. The Eastern Mount Lofty Ranges 
contain aquifers that are utilised for both agricultural and domestic purposes. The McLaren Vale 
region historically relied upon groundwater resources for irrigation however expansion of the 
irrigated area has driven a need for an alternate supply to supplement the use of groundwater.
Groundwater resources on Kangaroo Island are limited and generally saline.
Wetlands
Wetlands in the region play critical roles in biodiversity conservation and water purification. The 
Fleurieu Peninsula is home to nationally and internationally significant wetlands such as Fleurieu 
Swamps and parts of the Ramsar-listed Coorong and Lower Lakes system. Kangaroo Island has 
15 wetlands of national significance including the Flinders Chase River Systems, American River 
Wetland System, and Murray Lagoon.
3.5 Water resources
Water resources are critical to support agricultural 
and other economic, community and environmental 
needs in the region. Table 5 summarises key 
features and characteristics of water resources in 
the AHFKI region. The taking of surface water and 
groundwater is controlled through several water 
allocation plans that apply to Western Mount Lofty 
Ranges (WMLR) and Eastern Mount Lofty Ranges 
Water Resource Areas (EMLR) and Prescribed Wells 
Areas (PWAs) including Angas-Bremer, McLaren Vale 
(partly), Central Adelaide (partly). Water resources on 
Kangaroo Island are not prescribed, but are managed 
through a Water Affecting Activities Control Policy.

19
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Figure 3 The AHFKI ‘system’ 
3.6 The AHFKI ‘system’
The AHFKI region is a complex system of connections 
and interactions between people, industries and 
the natural environment. These connections and 
interactions mean that when one feature is impacted, 
flow-on effects will be experienced by other features 
in the system. Considering these connections and 
interactions is called ‘systems thinking’. Systems 
thinking helps to identify the factors that make the 
system resilient or vulnerable to change.
Figure 3 illustrates key features and interactions of 
the AHFKI system as they apply to drought resilience. 
Water resources are a critical feature, reflied on by 
primary production, the environment and community. 
In turn, primary production supports employment, 
exports and tourism. Healthy soil is critical to enabling 
productive cropping and livestock, and healthy 
biodiversity contributes to good soil health. River 
Murray water from outside the region supplies some 
areas, as well as providing inflows to the Lower 
Lakes, some of which is used for irrigation. 
When one of these features is impacted by drought, 
these impacts can then be felt through the system. 
Similarly, when one feature’s resilience to drought is 
strengthened, this will benefit the wider system. This 
is particularly apparent on Kangaroo Island where the 
agricultural system plays a larger role in the wider 
economy, community and landscape.
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
EXPORTS
EXPORTS
EMPLOYMENT
EMPLOYMENT
COMMUNITY
COMMUNITY
CROPPING
CROPPING
SOIL
SOIL
TOURISM
TOURISM
BIODIVERSITY
BIODIVERSITY
LIVESTOCK
LIVESTOCK
RIVER MURRAY 
WATER
RIVER MURRAY 
WATER
FOOD
FOOD
WATER
WATER
OUTSIDE THE SYSTEM
HORTICULTURE 
& VITICULTURE
HORTICULTURE 
& VITICULTURE

20
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.7 Strategic context
The AHFKI Regional Drought Resilience Plan has been prepared to align with and complement other regional 
strategic plans. Planning for the implementation of the opportunities in this Plan will consider alignment with 
these other plans to maximise efficiency and minimise duplication of effort.
Implementation of the Plan will lean into the strengths and focus of each Steering Committee member 
organisation. Organisations will lead actions that most closely align with their areas of expertise which are 
summarised below. 
AHFKI Regional 
Drought 
Resilience Plan
AHFKI RDA 
Strategic 
Regional Plan 
Hills and 
Fleurieu 
Landscape 
Plan 
Kangaroo 
Island 
Landscape 
Plan 
Southern & 
Hills LGA 
Strategic Plan
Resilient Hills 
& Coasts – 
Regional 
Action Plan 
Water 
Allocation 
Plans
Greater 
Adelaide 
Regional Plan 
Kangaroo 
Island 
Regional Plan
Local 
Government 
strategic plans
Steering Committee member
Impact
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, 
Fleurieu & Kangaroo Island (RDA AHFKI)
Regional economic development
Southern and Hills LGA
Service and leadership for councils to serve their community
Kangaroo Island Landscape Board
Sustainable natural resource management
Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board
Sustainable natural resource management
Department of Primary Industries and 	 	
Regions South Australia (PIRSA)
Primary industries and regions
SA Drought Hub
Drought resilience of farmers and regional communities

21
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

22
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Drought
04
Drought is not simply low rainfall. Drought is a comparatively dry period compared to normal 
conditions, when people, businesses and the environment that rely on that water are affected.  
For this plan, drought is defined as:  
A period of abnormally dry conditions that 
impacts negatively on a region’s water 
availability, the environment and agricultural 
production and, consequently, impacts 
negatively on the economy and the health and 
wellbeing of its residents.

23
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

24
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
4.1 Drought in the AHFKI region
Drought in the AHFKI region is caused by several 
natural atmospheric conditions including the 
Positive Indian Ocean Dipole and El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation. Anthropogenic climate change is also 
projected to influence drought conditions. 
The Background Paper in Attachment 1 summarises 
information on these climate drivers developed by 
the Bureau of Meteorology.  
Before European colonisation, the region would 
have experienced numerous drought periods. 
Since meteorological records began, the region 
has experienced a number of significant declared 
droughts including:15
•	
The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902 
•	
The 1914 to 1915 drought  
•	
The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945 
•	
The 1965 to 1968 drought (particularly affecting 
the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula)  
•	
The 1982 to 1983 drought
•	
The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009 
•	
The 2017 to 2019 drought (the Tinderbox 
drought).
The 2017 to 2019 drought, whilst one of the shortest 
on record, was severe in eastern South Australia 
including the AHFKI region. The region experienced 
rainfall deciles that were very much below average 
and high temperatures. The drought caused 
significant stress on water resources, agriculture, and 
natural ecosystems in the area. The hot conditions 
further combined with the dry landscape and strong 
winds to produce dangerous fire weather conditions 
from December 2019 into early January 2020, 
including the 2020 Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo 
Island bushfires.
Green Drought  
From February 2024 to May 2024 as this plan was 
being prepared, rainfall across the region was well 
below average. Average rainfalls through June were 
enough for green cover to establish however below 
average rain fell in July leading to conditions referred 
to as a green drought.
A green drought can occur when there is enough 
rainfall to grow grass, but there is not enough deep-
soil moisture for crop and pasture growth.16
New green growth with high water content does 
not provide adequate nutrition for stock, especially 
young and breeding animals. Although the land may 
look green, supplementary feeding to meet nutrition 
needs may be required for some time until pastures 
mature. 
“The drought led to 
high stress
and eventually forced 
me to cease business 
operations”

25
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
4.2 Drought impacts on the AHFKI region
Through the stakeholder engagement undertaken for this project, 	
	
the impacts of drought on the region described in Table 6 were identified. 
Refer to Attachment 1 for a more comprehensive summary of these impacts, 
including Section 3.3 and 3.5 of the Key Insights Paper and Section 2.2 of the 
Engagement Summary Report. 
Theme
Impact
Social impacts
Reduced self-confidence, increased anxiety and mental stress, leading to physical health issues, 
increased family and relationship breakdowns, and higher suicide rates. 
Withdrawal from community settings which leads to reduced social interaction and division within 
the community. 
Reduced feelings of positivity and optimism associated with living in a drought affected 
landscape. 
Decrease in holidays and time off, with people working seven days a week, leading to increased 
workload and burnout and less time for friends and family. 
Agricultural impacts 
Decrease in water availability for stock consumption, irrigation, milking shed hygiene and 
potential increase in salinity of water sources. 
Livestock health deteriorates due to inadequate feed and water. 
Exacerbated impacts of heat, resulting in increased fruit/crop damage from extreme heat and 
reduced yields. 
Increased spending on buying feed, trucking water, and other essential resources and lower 
income can lead to debt and reduced financial stability, making it difficult to manage regular 
expenses and invest in future operations. 
Farmers often engage in ‘fire sales’ to get rid of stock and then have to buy back at a premium or 
have lost herd genetic diversity. 
Environmental 
impacts 
Changes in distribution and number of pest plants and animals and increased grazing pressure. 
Increase in bushfire risk caused by dry vegetation. 
Adverse impacts on the condition of native plants and animals. 
Reduced land cover leads to increased erosion risk, a decrease in topsoil and a decline in 	 	
soil health. 
Decrease in quality and availability of surface water, reduced flows and impacts on native plants 
and animals 
Increase in wildlife and human interaction, increase in biosecurity risk. 
Economic impacts
Lower farm incomes lead to decreased spending in local shops and businesses that provide 
services and supplies to farms. 
Increase in the need for off farm jobs. 
Job losses in primary production, with people leaving the area to seek employment elsewhere. 
Serious strain on Kangaroo Island’s logistics, affecting the transport of goods and resources. 
Infrastructure impacts
Damage to farm infrastructure and equipment from poor roads 	 	
	
	
worsened by drought conditions.  
Deterioration of infrastructure due to compounding natural 	
	
	
	
hazards following drought, including bushfire and floods. 
Decrease in on-farm capital and repairs. 
Table 6 Drought impacts 
“The drought caused
signiŻcant Żnancial
costs, stree and
mental health
challenges”
“Drought taught me 
a huge lesson. It 
was a very hard 
time”

26
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
In late December 2019, catastrophic bushfires 
started in Cuddlee Creek (Adelaide Hills) and 
Kangaroo Island which had significant impacts on 
the environment and regional economy. Research 
following these events and other bushfires across 
eastern Australia at the same time has investigated 
the impacts of weather conditions leading to the fires. 
The research concluded that:
“the drought and heatwave 
conditions experienced in 
the lead up to and during 
the Kangaroo Island 
fires were a key factor in 
priming the landscape for 
extreme fire behaviour, but 
local weather conditions 
were also important when 
combined with the very dry 
vegetation.”17

27
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
4.3 Climate projections and drought
Climate projections describe what the future climate 
could be, sourced from multiple climate models, and 
based on numerous assumptions about the factors 
that influence climate and the trajectory of change in 
greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. Each 
model uses different assumptions and algorithms to 
project how climate variables such as temperature, 
rainfall and evapotranspiration will respond in 
different emissions scenarios over different time 
frames. The projections presented in online tools and 
viewers each use a different combination of global 
climate models and show slightly different results.
For this Plan, we have used the regional projections 
described by the CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology 
in Climate Change in Australia. Location specific 
projections have been taken from MyClimateView 
which downscales these regionals projections to 
provide location specific projections.  
Climate change is projected to increase time spent in 
drought in the region. Annual rainfall is projected to 
decrease, and temperatures to increase. 
Climate Change in Australia provides the following 
climate projection statements for large “cluster” areas 
across Australia. Most of the AHFKI region (including 
western Adelaide Hills, western Fleurieu Peninsula 
and Kangaroo Island) is within the Southern and 
South-Western Flatlands East sub-cluster which has 
the following climate projections.  
Table 7 Climate projections for the AHFKI region18 
Weather event
Projection
Confidence*
Rainfall
Annual rainfall
Decreasing annual rainfall 
High
Winter rainfall
Decreasing winter rainfall
High
Spring rainfall
Decreasing spring rainfall
High
Summer and 
autumn rainfall
Unclear, although downscaling results suggest a continuation of 
the observed autumn declines.
Low
Drought
Increasing time spent in drought
High
Extreme rainfall events
Increasing intensity of extreme rainfall events
High
Average, maximum and 
minimum temperatures
Substantial increase in mean, maximum and minimum 
temperatures
Very High
Hot days and heatwaves
More hot days and warm spells
Very High
Frost
Fewer frost risk days
High
Potential evapotranspiration
Increased potential evapotranspiration in all seasons
High
Bushfire 
Harsher fire-weather climate
High
*NOTE – Climate Change in Australia refers to confidence in a climate projection as a measure of how 
plausible the projected range of change is for a given emission scenario. High agreement of numerous, 
high-quality lines of evidence is needed to have high confidence. 
“During drought,
everyone takes 
a hit”

28
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
A portion of the eastern Adelaide Hills and eastern 
Fleurieu Peninsula are captured within the Murray-
Basin sub-cluster. Key climate projection messages 
for this cluster include:  
•	
Time spent in drought is projected, with medium 
confidence, to increase over the course of the 
century. 
•	
By late in the century, less rainfall is projected 
during the cool season, with high confidence. 
There is medium confidence that rainfall will 
remain unchanged in the warm season. 
•	
Increased intensity of extreme rainfall events is 
projected, with high confidence.
•	
More hot days and warm spells are projected 
with very high confidence. 
Climate projections for particular locations in the 
region can be sourced from myclimateview.com.au.  
Rainfall and temperature projections for four locations 
in the region in the 2050s using RCP 8.5 are shown 
in Table 8.
Table 8 Selected climate projections for three AHFKI region locations  
Climate variable
Langhorne Creek
Parndana
Parawa
Charleston
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
average
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
average
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
average
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
average
Total annual rainfall  
373 mm
335 mm
634 mm
591 mm
787 mm
731 mm
743 mm
737 mm
Summer rainfall  
64 mm
52 mm
68 mm
54 mm
91 mm
75mm
86 mm
75mm
Autumn rainfall
90 mm
82 mm
140 mm
139 mm
174mm
161mm
151mm
149mm
Winter rainfall
130 mm
120 mm
294 mm
275 mm
343 mm
331 mm
329 mm
337 mm
Spring rainfall
98 mm
86 mm
130 mm
122 mm
178 mm
162 mm
177 mm
172 mm
Average maximum 
temperature
22.2°C
23.6°C
19.3°C
20.4°C
18.9°C
20.1°C
19.9°C
21.3°C
Annual hot days 
(over 35°C)
17 days
24 days
5 days
6 days
5 days
8 days
11 days
18 days
An increasing frequency and intensity of drought will 
further exacerbate regional drought impacts, with 
flow on impacts on productivity, yield and profitability. 
Various agricultural practices that are currently 
considered leading edge will provide some measure 
of adaptation in the short term. However, long-
term adaptation may require more transformational 
responses.

29
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

30
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Other drivers of 
changes
05
Global, national and regional influences are driving changes in markets, technology, governance 
arrangements, values, and social factors. Key drivers and their implications for the AHFKI region are 
described in Table 9 Drivers of change, with additional information available in the Background Report. 
Global drivers 19,20,21 
Climate change and 
decarbonisation
Responding to climate change requires a shift in the global economy to reduce carbon emissions 
and Australia has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. In the region, agriculture 
and transport are key sources of emissions that are likely to see transformation change over the 
next thirty years.
Technological 
disruption
A digital world provides opportunities for online work and study, telehealth, commerce and digital 
currency. A greater reliance on technology for work, business and study means that outages and 
service issues can have a significant impact on operations. 
Trade disruptions 
Sudden and unexpected widespread trade disruptions brought through global pandemics, 
conflict, geopolitical tensions, or similar events can have significant impacts on supply chains, 
demand, and commodity prices. The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on the tourism 
industry and agriculture globally, with impacts also felt across the whole region. 
Consumer focus
Globally there is a strong consumer push for decision-makers to consider trust, transparency, 
fairness, and environmental and social governance. Demand for sustainable meat is growing and 
in response, the Australian red meat and livestock industry has set a target to be carbon neutral 
by 2030. On Kangaroo Island their GM-free status allows them to access Japan's high-priced 
market for GM-free grain22 (Hough, 2020).
Increased demand for 
meat 
As many developing countries become wealthier and individuals receive more income, demand 
for meat is increasing. In the AHFKI region, pastoralists have the opportunity to contribute to 
meeting this demand. 
Table 9 Drivers of change

31
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
National and state drivers 23,24  
Increased cost of 
living 
Increasing costs of living is placing pressure on Australians to fund their everyday needs. There 
is high variability in the income security of the AHFKI community and this driver will be felt 
differently in different communities. 
Health challenges
One in five Australians report high or very high levels of psychological distress. Responding to 
our health risks and improving health outcomes is becoming more and more important. The 
research and engagement for this project highlighted the significant adverse impacts on the 
mental health of the people and communities experiencing drought and the need for increased 
services. 
Regional drivers 25,26,27,28 
Ageing population 
and labour force 
shortage
There is a growing demand for highly qualified workers and healthcare professionals, driven by 
the increasing need to support an ageing population. The COVID-19 outbreak positively impacted 
population growth, but there is a risk of losing younger working-age residents as cities draw 
people back. 
Increased tourism
Tourism is a key contributor to the region’s economy however tourists also place increased 
pressure on natural resources, landscapes and infrastructure. Tourism visitation to the region is 
increasing twice as fast as the state average. Ensuring infrastructure improvements keep up with 
growing visitation is critical to the sustainability of the region. 
Export-oriented 	
industry growth
The region has experienced strong growth in its highly competitive export-oriented industries 
including agriculture and food and beverage manufacturing, which has increased job creation, 
economic value, and productivity. 
Education and 
training
The region benefits from a diverse educational landscape, including a blend of public and 
private secondary schools. Additionally, the presence of TAFE campuses in Mount Barker and 
Victor Harbor, a Flinders University campus and a university study hub at Victor Harbor, and the 
availability of online courses provide valuable opportunities for vocational and skills training, 
supporting the region’s educational and workforce development needs.
Managing bushfire 	
risks and recovery
Catastrophic bushfires are an increasing risk in the AHFKI region. Managing this risk without 
compromising biodiversity values requires careful and strategic changes in land and fire 
management.
Demand for transport 
and freight
The AHFKI region, particularly Kangaroo Island, is experiencing increasing demand for transport 
and freight services. Investment in transport infrastructure and logistics is crucial to support the 
region’s economic growth and connectivity with broader markets.
Urbanisation and 
population growth
The entire region is projected to experience an increase in population. This growth, particularly in 
the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula, will result in an increased demand for residential and 
commercial land.

32
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Drought resilience
06
6.1 A definition of drought resilience
The term ‘resilience’ is used in numerous domains, from health and wellbeing to natural 
resources and the economy. For this Plan, drought resilience is defined as the following: 
Drought resilience means the ability to 
adapt, reorganise or transform in response 
to changing temperature, increasing 
variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed 
seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, 
environmental and social wellbeing.29 
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In some 
cases, disruption can be seen as an opportunity 
to move in a new direction, not just recover back 
to a previous state. Resilience is about proactively 
changing in order not to be changed involuntarily.
Building resilience will help the AHFKI region to 
endure droughts with fewer negative impacts and 
recover from them sooner.
The AHFKI Drought Resilience Plan is focused on 
drought resilience. However, enhancing drought 
resilience will help the region respond to and recover 
from other stresses or pressures such as bushfires, 
flooding rains, pandemics, and economic market 
changes.
6.2 The importance of drought resilience 
Past droughts have had major consequences for jobs 
and income, mental health and wellbeing, agricultural 
productivity, and the health of the environment. With 
climate projections predicting more frequent and 
more intense droughts, building resilience is crucial.
Resilience is about taking action to try to avoid or 
minimise these negative impacts before they happen 
rather than waiting until they do occur to act or 
just focusing on recovery. Building resilience can 
help to create economic, social, and environmental 
development opportunities.

33
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
“Planning from previous 
experiences helps as well 
as on farm strategies such 
as conŻnement, paddock 
subdivison &  water 
infrastructure.”

34
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
6.3 Characteristics of drought resilience
It is important to consider resilience at a variety of scales from the individual to the community and the whole 
region. Resilience looks different for every community depending on its unique experience, attributes, risks, 
and characteristics. Common attributes of drought resilience identified by stakeholders, community (see 
Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary Report) and the literature are described below:30,31,32
Drought resilient individuals are or have:  
•	
Strong social connections, networks and relationships with friends, family, and the wider 
community, having multiple touch points. 
•	
Willingness to try doing things differently, learn from past droughts and adapt to different 
conditions. 
•	
Diverse sources of household or farm income, long-term financial planning and capacity 
to save for more difficult times.
•	
Embracing innovation and implementation of new techniques, tools, and technology. 
•	
Implementing soil water efficiency practices and increasing soil carbon. 
•	
Understand drought is likely to occur and proactively prepare for it 
•	
Access to good education, healthcare, and digital connectivity.
Drought resilient communities are or have: 
•	
Strong, connected, caring communities that help each other in times of need. 
•	
Access to regional centres with health, education, and support services. 
•	
Sharing knowledge and celebrating sustainable practices. 
•	
Investment in projects that give good return to the community and employ local people. 
•	
Local employment opportunities that support people to stay in the community. 
•	
Community spaces that enable people to come together. 
•	
Access to efficient community services and affordable commodities. 
•	
Good education and career pathways in agriculture. 
•	
Efficient transportation and special needs services during crises. 
•	
Place-based collaborative, long-term approaches and support from external agencies in 
ways that meet the unique needs of each community. 
•	
Implementing community-led initiatives with engagement at all levels.
Drought resilient regions are or have: 
•	
Strategic investment in infrastructure (e.g., water, transport, power, telecommunication, etc.). 
•	
Access to a good platform for information and updates on drought including weather 
forecasting. 
•	
Diverse economies  
•	
Low populations of pest/overabundant animals through proactive management before 
drought. 
•	
Workers attracted to and retained in the region.
•	
Strategic and proactive preparation for drought. 
•	
Policies that reflect regional needs and support community-driven solutions.

35
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
6.4 A new approach to resilience through the National Drought Agreement
In the past, the Government of South Australia made 
declarations of drought with associated Exceptional 
Circumstances support and focused the majority of 
their drought programs on the ‘during’ and ‘after’ 
phases of drought.  
This approach has recently changed, through the 
new National Drought Agreement (2024-2029).33
All Australian, state and territory governments have 
agreed to and signed this Agreement which explains 
how they are working together to help Australian 
agriculture better withstand drought. 
A key feature of the agreement is a greater focus 
on enhancing drought resilience before drought, 
to enable farms, people, businesses and the 
environment to minimise the impact of drought rather 
than waiting until drought hits to act.   
Another is the elimination of drought and Exceptional 
Circumstances declarations. Previous drought 
declarations necessitated the drawing of lines on 
maps to identify regions in drought. Community and 
stakeholders recognised that this approach was 
challenging, in many cases inaccurate, and resulted 
in farmers in need being ineligible to access support. 
The new approach recognises that support needs 
are highly variable, and eligibility should be based on 
need, not activated by drought declarations.34
The development of this Plan is consistent with the 
Agreement’s objectives to prioritise objectives and 
outcomes that enhance long-term preparedness, 
sustainability, resilience and risk management for 
farming businesses and farming communities in 
Australia.
The AHFKI region, communities and individuals 
already display many of these characteristics. The 
way this looks differs across the region. Those 
communities and businesses with connection to 
mains water are generally less vulnerable to drought. 
Many people who work in the region live outside the 
region or vice versa, impacting on the way drought 
affects their lives. Close proximity to the infrastructure 
and services found in metropolitan Adelaide can 
enhance aspects of resilience, while also reducing 
sense of community and self-reliance.
Kangaroo Island has a number of characteristics that 
make it more vulnerable to drought and other shocks. 
These include its isolation from the mainland and 
subsequent reliance on ferry services and shipping, 
less infrastructure and services, lack of ability to 
source water from other regions, and less diverse 
economy with a higher reliance on agriculture. 
However, their smaller community, prominent 
community leaders and ability to be self-reliant 
enhance their drought resilience in other ways.
Particularly in the Adelaide Hills, primary producers 
have not historically considered themselves as 
particularly drought prone. While the region has 
experienced periods of reduced rainfall, extreme 
droughts have not been common. This means that 
lived drought experience in the region is limited, 
influencing their level of resilience to drought. 
However, drier conditions over the last few years 
have helped the region to better recognise drought 
as a threat to the primary production industry in the 
Adelaide Hills. Awareness, experience and research 
and development in this area continues to increase. 
“Drought resilient farmers have 
the ability to gather and 
collaborate with other farmers, 
get support from service 
providers, industry bodies and 
suppliers - to help understand 
the conditions being 
experienced.”

36
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The Drought 
Resilience Strategy
07
Vision
The AHFKI region’s vision is for: 
Primary producers that understand drought 
risks and are taking action to build drought 
resilient farms, communities, economies and 
environments.
Delivery principles 
Through community and stakeholder engagement, a number of ideas were consistently raised and have been 
used to inform the following drought resilience planning and delivery principles, all of which are consistent with the 
principles of the National Drought Agreement:
The region is diverse, and communities have different needs. Planning, design and delivery of drought 
resilience building projects must be tailored to each community or landscape, reflecting their unique 
characteristics and needs. Local community involvement facilitated through active and ongoing 
engagement is key to providing each community with what they need to be resilient.  
Communication and collaboration are critical to success and means the region can take advantage of 
existing networks. There are many organisations, associations, groups and agencies working on projects 
that can contribute to drought resilience. Ensuring all these groups are working together and there is no 
duplication of effort means more can be done with the resources available.  
Investment in drought resilience projects will focus on enhancing long-term preparedness and resilience. 
Resilience building outcomes will be optimised when project delivery occurs when times are good and 
the community has energy and focus. 
Support will be available to everyone who needs it. Sometimes even the most prepared and resilient 
need support and they will not be disadvantaged.

37
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

38
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Delivery arrangements 
It is proposed that the AHFKI Regional Drought 
Resilience Steering Committee established to 
develop this plan will lead the implementation of the 
opportunities identified in this Plan. Individual leads 
will be identified once the plan is approved and 
ongoing governance arrangements confirmed. 
Goals, strategies and opportunities 
The goals, strategies and opportunities to build 
drought resilience in the AHFKI region are 
described in the following sections. The strategies 
seek to leverage existing strategic planning and 
avoid duplication of effort by referring to the 
implementation of other regional plans. Strategies 
are high level to provide flexibility to accommodate 
changing circumstances, new evidence and evolving 
knowledge while remaining accountable to stated 
goals, vision, and regional values. 
The vision and goals were developed collaboratively 
by the Steering Committee using information 
collected through the first phase of engagement. 
These were then tested with the community through 
the second phase of engagement.
The strategies and opportunities for action have 
been developed directly from the ideas raised by 
stakeholders and the community throughout the 
engagement, as the actions they believe will be 
most effective for their region. These have been 
supplemented and strengthened by the literature 
review and discussion with the Steering Committee. 
While targeted at the impacts of drought, this support 
provides co-benefits for broader resilience and 
adaptation. 
The goals, strategies and opportunities are presented 
under the following themes: 
Primary production 
Community health and wellbeing 
Financial management 
Environmental management 
Infrastructure and services 
Drought plan governance

39
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Priority strategies 
Priority strategies that have the potential 
to have the greatest influence in building 
drought resilience are identified with a star 
icon. These priorities have been identified 
by stakeholders through engagement on 
the draft plan and refined by the Steering 
Committee.
Individual action 
Opportunities in the plan have been 
scoped as actions to be taken at an 
organisational, regional or sub-regional 
level. However, many of these can also 
be progressed at an individual level. For 
example, while regional organisations may 
provide training and grants for household 
income diversification, farms and families 
would also be able to diversify their 
income themselves without external 
support. These sorts of actions are 
identified with a person icon.  
New initiatives
Many of the strategies relate to work that 
is already underway, and either needs 
to be extended, expanded, promoted 
or accelerated to have greater benefit. 
Other strategies present opportunities 
that are limited in their current application 
or are not at all part of current action 
in the region. These present new 
opportunities that could lead to significant 
or transformational change for the region 
and are flagged with a lightbulb icon.
Timing 
The timing for delivery of each opportunity has been categorised according to when it would fit within the 
drought cycle: 
Before
During
After
Ongoing
The Plan places a focus on actions to be undertaken 
before drought hits. By focusing effort and investment 
in this phase, farmers, communities, businesses 
and environments across the region will be better 
set up to minimise the impacts of drought, rather 
than bearing them when they come. This approach 
will help to support the long-term preparedness, 
sustainability and resilience of farm businesses and 
communities. Nonetheless, it is recognised that 
support will still be needed during and after drought, 
and this plan will help deliver this support particularly 
during extended severe droughts.

40
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
       Primary production
Seasonal variability and extreme weather have 
always influenced primary production in the region. 
Different sectors have adapted differently however 
managing soil health, water use efficiency monitoring 
and selecting drought resilient varieties are common 
to most.
Holistic land management approaches that aim 
to enhance sustainability and resilience, such 
as regenerative, biodynamic and permaculture 
farming, are being applied across the region and 
demonstrating improvements in soil and livestock 
conditions. Regenerative agriculture aims to protect 
and enhance topsoil by regenerating key landscape 
functions.35
The World Economic Forum and the United 
Nations have identified biodiversity loss as a major 
risk to businesses and financial capital.36 Global 
conservation organizations, institutes, and business 
and finance coalitions are seeking a target of nature-
positive by 2030.37 A market for biodiversity credits is 
emerging and may present opportunities for regional 
landholders to receive financial benefits from taking 
nature-positive action.
Agriculture and transport are the two highest 
greenhouse gas emitting sectors in the region. For 
the region to contribute to state emission reduction 
targets, action to reduce or avoid emissions 
generation must accelerate. In 2020 Meat and 
Livestock Australia set a target to be carbon neutral 
by 2030, recognising the multiple benefits that 
can be achieved through action to deliver carbon 
neutrality including improved drought resilience.38 
Carbon farming projects are being initiated across 
South Australia that include practices that increase 
the amount of carbon stored in soil and vegetation 
(sequestration) or avoid or reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions. These can be achieved through 
revegetation or rotational grazing with extended rest 
spells that allow vegetation cover to recover. Carbon 
farmers can receive revenue from carbon farming 
by selling carbon credits through the Australian 
Government’s Emissions Reduction Fund or to private 
investors or businesses, providing an opportunity for 
alternative on-farm income.39
Landscapes SA (Hills and Fleurieu and Kangaroo 
Island), PIRSA and the Drought Hub all have a role 
to play in providing education and support to land 
managers to build drought resilience, through 
supporting and delivering capacity-building and 
promoting research and innovation. 
Implementation of the opportunities for this theme 
will benefit from partnerships with organisations, 
associations and groups including Adelaide Hills 
and McLaren Vale Wine Regions, Wine Grape 
Council of SA, Grain Producers SA, Livestock SA, SA 
Dairyfarmers’ Association, Apple and Pear 
Growers Association of 
SA, Horticulture 
Coalition of SA, 
regenerative 
agriculture farmer 
groups, and 
Landcare groups. 
GOAL: Innovative, diversified and sustainable primary producers prepared for a variable and changing climate 
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Support capacity 
building, planning 
and implementation 
of farm and land 
management actions 
that build resilience
Support primary producers to prepare property/farm management plans that 
guide land management and resource use efficiency to deliver profitable 
production, including triggers or thresholds to support decision-making 
leading into and during drought and actions to prepare for, respond to and 
recover from drought and other adverse weather events (eg frost, heatwave, 
bushfire or flood)
Before
Support, promote and build the capacity of land managers to implement 
techniques that will enhance productivity and resilience including pest and 
overabundant native plant and animal and disease control, planting low 
water use or more drought resilience varieties, establishing shelterbelts 
and native vegetation corridors, adoption of alternate farming systems, clay 
spreading and biochar application.
Before
Support fodder management practices that increase resilience, for example 
sowing permanent pastures and summer fodder crops, rotational grazing 
and resting paddocks with net zero grazing losses, feed budgeting, and 
increasing fodder stores, for example through silage or hay storage. 
Before
“Financial assistance 
and support for 
creating a drought 
preparation plan 
would be useful.”
“Long-term resource 
planning and careful 
water management 
helped me get through 
the drought.”

41
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
GOAL: Innovative, diversified and sustainable primary producers prepared for a variable and changing climate 
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Support land managers to improve on-farm data measurement and 
monitoring to make informed decisions and identify opportunities for 
improvement, for example installing soil moisture monitoring and seasonal 
evaluation of crop performance.
Before
Provide support including financial incentives, extension programs and research and 
development to assist farmers to improve on-farm water security through installation 
of water tanks and other innovative water storage options to reduce reliance on 
pumping from watercourses and dams.
Before
Provide support, including financial incentives for other infrastructure improvements 
that enhance drought resilience, such as environmental covers and netting, farm-
scale water infrastructure, containment feedlots, on-farm crop and grain storage, 
on-farm weather stations or renewable energy generation and storage.
Before
Facilitate opportunities to learn from previous drought experiences, including 
documenting case studies, compiling research findings and holding events to share 
experiences and connect more and less experienced primary producers.
Before 
and after
Investigate opportunities for the production of new crops or varieties to meet 
current or changing market demand and consumer preferences and, support 
research, trials and application.
Before
Investigate and support on-farm circular economy opportunities including reuse of 
waste products.
Before
Support the development of tourism and food and beverage manufacturing that add 
value to the region’s primary production and support diversification.
Before
Undertake local 
research and 
development
Identify and communicate research and development priorities and support 
research, extension and application of action to adapt or improve productivity, 
including relating to plant/crop varieties, agronomic management and better use of 
weather forecasts to develop solutions to frost, heat stress and drought.
Ongoing 
Enhance 
integration of 
biodiversity-
positive land 
management
Investigate and support the uptake of agricultural practises that increase 
biodiversity and take advantage of emerging opportunities to benefit from 
biodiversity credits and nature positive outcomes.
Before
Support opportunities 
to transition to net 
zero that deliver 
environmental and 
financial benefits
Investigate and support primary producers to measure their farm emissions profile 
and develop strategies to reduce emissions.
Before
Support the adoption of technologies that deliver emissions reduction and benefit 
primary producers, for example, renewable energy generation and storage, use of 
methane-reducing supplements and fertiliser efficiency.
Before
Build carbon farming literacy through the delivery of workshops, demonstration sites 
and accessible information.
Before
Develop community 
cooperatives and 
shared infrastructure
Investigate models for new community cooperatives and collaborative and shared 
farm infrastructure such as community-owned and run feed storage facilities, that 
reduce costs and benefit communities.
Before
Share and celebrate 
stories about 
resilience building
Celebrate farming and community successes, promoting good practices that are or 
will strengthen drought resilience.
Ongoing
“Using strategies from 
previous experiences, such 
as conŻnement, paddock 
subdivison and improving 
water infrastructure, has 
been eŸective”

42
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
       Community health and wellbeing
The AHFKI region is home to nearly 150,000 
residents. On Kangaroo Island and further from 
Adelaide, more residents have lived in their local 
area for many years, often following generations of 
family members. In these areas, communities have 
higher rates of volunteering and strong connections, 
characteristics of a resilient community. 
The Cuddlee Creek and Kangaroo Island bushfires 
had a profound impact on local communities, with 
homes, livelihoods and the environment damaged 
and destroyed. Through the fires and in their 
aftermath, individuals and groups came together 
to support each other through the crisis and the 
recovery process.
Community and stakeholders across the region 
shared the lasting impacts of droughts on the 
community and acknowledged that drought-breaking 
rains do not mean the impacts of drought are 
immediately reduced. Recovery can take significant 
time – individuals, families and businesses can still be 
recovering well after the environment has recovered. 
The LGA and councils, and RDA all have a role to 
play in maintaining and strengthening community 
connections and supporting community health and 
wellbeing. Implementation of the opportunities 
for this theme will benefit from partnerships with 
organisations, associations and groups including the 
local community, sporting and special interest groups, 
schools and other education services and health 
services.
“Talking with others 
aŸected and seeking 
support from the local 
council has helped”

43
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
GOAL: Strong, healthy individuals and connected communities learning and working together for a 	
positive future
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Foster community 
collaboration and 
strengthen social 
connection
Work with community groups and organisations to prepare and deliver a program of 
free or low-cost events and activities that bring the community together, tailored to 
community needs and different audiences, for example workshops, presentations, 
comedy shows, family fun days, sport and art initiatives.
Ongoing
Foster coordination and collaboration between organisations in the region including 
not-for-profit organisations, government agencies, health and education service 
providers and financial institutions.
Ongoing
Support local sport and cultural events in the region during drought periods and 
ensure ongoing maintenance of community infrastructure.
During
Support mental health 
and wellbeing before, 
during and after 
drought
Build and strengthen initiatives to support mental health and create awareness of 
support options for the whole community. 
Ongoing
Promote the importance of self-care during drought, including available counselling 
or support services and importance of physical and mental health, exercise, sleep, 
and time away from work.
During
Develop and implement a communications strategy that promotes support, 
initiatives or resources that can contribute to drought resilience, including 
government and industry programs, business information and resources, community 
health services
Before 
and 
ongoing
Foster and support 
community leaders
Invest, support and promote community leadership programs that empower 
community leaders to take proactive roles in strengthening connections and 
supporting communities during and after drought.
Ongoing

44
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
        Financial management 
The long termlong-term economic success of the 
region relies on the financial sustainability of regional 
businesses. Businesses that understand the risks, 
including climate risks, to their operations, supply 
chains and markets, and take proactive steps to 
prepare for shocks or market changes will be better 
able to get through when challenges arise.
Through the engagement for this project, primary 
producers from across the region talked about 
the benefits of being able to access independent 
financial advice and the difficulties for many people 
to access this. While the Australian Government’s 
free Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) is 
available to primary producers experiencing, or at risk 
of, financial hardship, proactive business planning 
advice is needed earlier. 
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, 
Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island (RDA AHFKI) has a 
key role to play in developing a more successful, 
resilient and sustainable economy through their 
work in supporting existing businesses and attracting 
new business and infrastructure investment. The 
RDA’s Strategic Plan identifies agriculture, tourism 
and manufacturing as the three most competitive 
industries in the region and a focus for effort.
Implementation of the opportunities for this theme 
will benefit from partnerships with organisations, 
associations and groups including councils, industry 
groups and associations, business and commerce 
groups and networks, and individual businesses.
GOAL: Business owners managing climate and other risks for long term financial success, contributing to 
regional economic growth
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Enhance regional 
business’ financial 
and risk management 
literacy and planning
Support and promote education and training initiatives to enhance primary 
producers and related businesses’ financial and business management skills with an 
aim to prepare a business plan that addresses risk management, debt reduction, tax 
management and forward and succession planning, for example through the ‘Our 
Farm Our Plan’ project.
Before
Support programs to increase the digital literacy of people employed in primary 
production and related businesses
Before
Support the provision of independent financial advice and counselling services to 
enable farms and other businesses to make timely business decisions 
Ongoing
Support networking of industry, businesses, and the financial sector to focus on 
drought preparedness, building reserves and building greater adaptability to 
seasonal conditions.
Before
Advocate for 
changes to financial 
mechanisms and  
Support provision 
of business advice 
for communities and 
businesses
Advocate for changes to financial mechanisms including mechanisms to build 
savings and manage tax.
Before
Advocate for expansion of the Rural Financial Counselling Service and its ongoing 
provision after June 2026.
Before
Support regional finance representatives in understanding drought impacts on 
individuals, supporting customers with high drought risk and adopting different roles 
during drought stress periods, including business planning guidance and direction 
to mental health support.
Ongoing

45
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
       Environmental management
The AHFKI region’s natural environment includes 
a diversity of forests, shrub lands,  and grasslands, 
and coastlines that create a unique and ecologically 
rich environment that supports both biodiversity and 
primary production. The Mount Lofty Ranges is one 
of Australia’s 15 biodiversity hotspots and Kangaroo 
Island is home to more endemic plant species than 
any other region in the state. 
Biodiversity can contribute to drought resilience. 
Biodiverse landscapes can have more efficient 
nutrient cycling and improved soil health, water 
retention and greater resilience to pests and diseases 
and provide habitat for agricultural crop pollinators. .
The Kangaroo Island and Hills and Fleurieu 
Landscape Boards plays a key role in managing the 
region’s natural resources. Working in partnership 
with Landscape Groups, local organisations and 
landholders and Traditional Owner groups, the 
Boards delivers programs and projects to improve 
land and water management, biodiversity and 
pest animal and plant control. The Department 
for Environment and Water through the National 
Parks and Wildlife Service are responsible for the 
management of the 77 conservation reserves and 
national parks that cover just over 15% of the region. 
Biodiversity is also protected on private land through 
Heritage Agreements and on a number of privately 
owned or managed reserves and sanctuaries. 
GOAL: Healthy and resilient soil, water and biodiversity that sustain productive landscapes
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Manage pest and 
over-abundant native 
plants and animals
Implement a regional approach to pest plant and animal management (including 
insects) that impacts primary production and the environment, including the 
provision of bait for pest animals, support for netting or environmental covers, and 
culling of overabundant native species.
Ongoing
Build resilience of 
biodiversity and 
valued natural and 
cultural sites 
Increase awareness and build respect for cultural and spiritual values of Country 
and take action to protect areas of significance from drought impacts.
Before
Support action to minimise threats to and build resilience of biodiversity to maintain 
ecologically healthy communities during drought
Before
Support regional 
bushfire risk 
management
Monitor vegetation condition, drying and fuel loads to inform vegetation (fuel load) 
management that balances biodiversity conservation and asset protection.
Ongoing

46
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
        Infrastructure and services
The resilience of the AHFKI region is dependent on 
infrastructure that can function effectively, deliver 
essential services and support supply chains under all 
conditions.  
Infrastructure provision for essential services 
(power, water and telecommunications) is 
generally good however opportunities to improve 
telecommunications and water security on Kangaroo 
Island have been identified and are being progressed 
through SA Power Network’s construction of an 
undersea fibre optic cable from Cape Jervis to 
Kangaroo Island, and SA Water’s construction of a 
desalination plant at Penneshaw. 
There are multiple organisations with responsibility 
for regional infrastructure. Implementation of the 
opportunities for this theme will require the region 
to advocate for or work in partnership with these 
organisations.
GOAL: Infrastructure and services that support businesses and communities to connect, function and thrive
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Improve regional 
water security
Support work to enhance water security, through initiatives to augment water 
storage and delivery infrastructure, demand management and identification of 
alterative alternative water sources.
Before
Optimise the use of fit for purpose water by industries and communities including 
wastewater reuse in towns to irrigate green spaces
Before
Advocate for policy that requires cost-benefit analysis for regional water 
infrastructure to consider future climate and water quality implications.
Before
Ensure water resource planning at all scales considers recent trends in rainfall, 
runoff and water demand with future projections of rainfall, and is evaluated against 
scenarios of increased time spent in drought. 
Ongoing
Improve regional 
weather and soil 
moisture data 
collection and 
forecasting
Advocate for interpretation of available short- and long-term weather forecasts that 
support agricultural decision-making in the region.  
Before
Expand the soil moisture monitoring network and make data available to all land 
managers to inform decision-making.
Before
Improve the services 
and infrastructure that 
support and maintain 
communities
Communicate with service providers and infrastructure owners about emerging 
drought issues and implications for effective service function and delivery. 
Before
Explore opportunities to expand localised, reliable, renewable energy generation 
and storage
Before
Provide efficient road networks and reliable and cost-effective freight services, 
including strategies to increase capacity and subsidies for sea freight during critical 
periods.
Before 
and 
during
Advocate for improved communications infrastructure to support reliable region-
wide digital access 
Before

47
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
        Drought plan governance
Successful implementation of this plan will require 
effective governance that facilitates efficient 
and effective resource use without duplication 
of effort. With clear leadership, coordination and 
communication the plan can deliver on its goals 
in a way that delivers what is most needed on the 
ground. Engagement with communities to understand 
what they need and how to deliver this in a way that 
suits them is central to this. Continuing the Drought 
Resilience Steering Committee is a vital mechanism 
for this.
Effective resilience building initiatives that reflect the region’s unique needs, led locally and informed by local 
knowledge and community input. 
Strategy
Opportunity for action
Timing
Establish effective 
drought governance 
to support drought 
plan implementation 
and local decision-
making 
Continue the AHFKI Drought Resilience Steering Committee and explore 
opportunities to expand membership to include the health sector and regional 
climate partnership. Drive implementation, monitoring and evaluation of this plan 
including:  
•	
Advocate for and support long-term funding, review, learning and improvement 
processes to ensure partner organisations and agencies learn from drought 
experiences. 
•	
Collaborate with other government agencies, not-for-profit organisations and 
private companies to identify opportunities for resource sharing and inter-
agency implementation of this plan, particularly where organisations have 
shared/common goals. 
•	
Engage with and obtain support from regional primary production and other 
stakeholder groups to implement this plan. 
•	
Regularly review, identify learnings, revise and report on the Drought Plan
Ongoing
Seek funding for a project officer to coordinate and support the delivery of 
drought resilience project funding applications and project delivery, and improve 
the coordination and funding of programs from different agencies to maximise 
efficiency and effectiveness. 
Ongoing
Clarify and document accountabilities, shared responsibilities, regional governance 
and coordination arrangements and share with the community
Before
Prepare a communications strategy to build awareness of drought, share 
information about drought resilience projects, promote investment and support 
during drought for example through campaigns to support local businesses.
Before
Understand 
opportunities to work 
in partnership with 
First Nations to build 
drought resilience  
Engage and collaborate with First Nations individuals and groups to understand 
their needs and what would assist in enhancing the drought resilience of the 
environment and support the delivery of identified projects.
Ongoing
“Our region has missed out 
on support in the past due 
to being a high rainfall 
region despite having been 
greatly impacted by dry 
conditions”

48
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Implementation, 
monitoring and 
evaluation
08
8.1 Implementation
This Plan has been prepared as a framework or 
prospectus to guide future effort and investment in 
regional drought resilience. 
The opportunities identified in this Plan are unfunded 
and some may only be progressed with further 
investment. It is the intention that the implementation 
of this Plan will be addressed by several different 
delivery partners. The AHFKI community will be 
able to address some, while others will require 
coordination and cooperation between government 
agencies, non-government organisations and the 
private sector. 
Through the engagement to support the 
development of this Plan we have heard clearly that 
farmers and communities want to be involved in the 
decisions that affect them. Planning the delivery 
of all projects will include the community from the 
start, to get buy-in and support and more beneficial 
outcomes. 
8.2 Governance
It is proposed that the AHFKI Regional Drought 
Resilience Steering Committee established to 
develop this plan will continue to coordinate and 
support project funding applications and project 
delivery to avoid duplication of effort and maximise 
local and regional benefits. Additional membership 
may be investigated, particularly to support 
community health and wellbeing projects.  
Steering Committee organisations will take the 
lead/oversight role for all of the actions in the Plan. 
This means they will lead and coordinate funding 
applications, identify delivery partners and report 
back to the Drought Resilience Steering Committee. 
The lead organisation may or may not be involved 
in the on-ground delivery, and will in many instances 
partner with others for this. 
It is proposed the group meets regularly to maintain 
an ongoing shared understanding of emerging issues 
as well as being ready to support funding applications 
from any available source.
8.3 Monitoring, evaluation and reporting
This Plan and its implementation will be monitored, 
evaluated and reported on according to the Regional 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Guide prepared 
by the Department for Primary Industries and Regions 
for the South Australian Regional Drought Resilience 
Plans. 
Monitoring and evaluation are essential parts of 
delivering any plan, project, or program. Undertaking 
monitoring and evaluation will help the Steering 
Committee, stakeholders and the community 
understand if the vision and goals are being 
progressed. An adaptive learning approach will 
be taken, with successes and limitations of past 
and current actions reviewed and used to assist 
in refining future approaches to optimise project 
outcomes. It also ensures accountability and provides 
information to share with partners and stakeholders 
to demonstrate program value. 
The Steering Committee will coordinate monitoring, 
evaluation, learning and reporting processes. Delivery 
partners will provide data and insights to support this. 
Findings will be looped back to delivery partners to 
inform their future actions. 
This monitoring and evaluation framework is 
based on a program logic approach. Program logic 
illustrates cause and effect relationships to provide 
an understanding of how program resources are 
used to produce outputs and deliver outcomes in the 
short to long term. The model also acknowledges the 
interaction of assumptions and external factors with 
outputs and outcomes. The elements of the program 
logic model shown in Figure 4 is defined below.

49
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Outputs: measurement of the direct actions taken, 
for example the activities and events delivered, 
the services provided, and the funds spent. Output 
measures include both activities and associated 
participation. 
Assumptions: the expectations we have that the 
actions we take, and the participants involved will 
lead to the outcomes or change we seek to achieve. 
Outcomes: the desired results of direct actions on 
individuals, groups, communities, organisations and 
the environment in the short-medium and medium-
long term. Outcomes in the medium-long term are 
often influenced more by external factors (actions 
undertaken by others or changes in environmental, 
social or governance factors). 
External Factors: the uncontrollable factors in the 
wider environment surrounding our programs that 
may interact with and influence outcomes. 
The program logic and monitoring indicators for the 
priority strategies of the AHFKI Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan are provided in Appendix A. This will 
be reviewed and revised as projects are funded and 
planning for delivery commences.  
As projects are scoped for funding and then 
implemented, an evaluation process will be 
established that will consider: 
•	
How effective was the project/program in 
achieving its intended outputs and outcomes?
•	
To what extent did the project/program contribute 
to the relevant goals, and what other things 
helped or hindered its implementation?
Once implementation commences, a biannual 
evaluation of the AHFKI Drought Resilience Plan itself 
will be initiated that will consider: 
•	
To what extent has the Plan been implemented 
and has impacted on regional stakeholders’ 
capacity and resources to better plan, manage 
and recover from drought? 
•	
What changes/support are/is needed to 
ensure that the Plan best provides an effective 
framework for action and that stakeholders can 
effectively work together towards implementing 
those actions?
Figure 4 Program logic model for the delivery of the Plan 
Inputs
What we 
invest 
Funds, staﬀ 
Community,
stakeholders
Actions
1-5 years
impact
5-20 years
impact
Who we
reach
What we
do
Short
medium 
term
Short
long
term
Outputs
Assumptions
Monitoring and evaluation
Outcomes
External
Factors

50
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Glossary
09
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to 
actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability 
and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
Climate projection
A scenario of future climate, generally resulting from running a global climate 
model with a specified greenhouse gas concentration scenario (or RCP). A 
projection differs from a prediction in that it is conditional on the representation 
of a particular global climate model and the uncertain assumptions of the model 
inputs (primarily the greenhouse gas concentration scenario, or RCP).41
Carbon farming
Carbon farming includes:
•	
sequestering carbon in the landscape through regeneration and planting 
of native vegetation; farm and plantation forestry; and improving soil 
management to ensure that carbon inputs exceed outputs 
•	
reducing emissions, such as livestock methane emissions; fertiliser 
emissions and through manure management.42
Decarbonisation
The removal or reduction of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases output 
into the atmosphere.
Drought
A period of abnormally dry conditions that impacts negatively on water 
availability and agricultural production in a region and, consequently, impacts 
negatively on the economy and environment of the region and the health and 
wellbeing of its residents.
Drought resilience 
The ability of communities, economies and environments to withstand the 
impacts of drought and adapt and find new and potentially transformational 
ways of doing things, enabling functions and values to be sustained over the 
longer term.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
El Niño refers to the extensive warming of the central and eastern Pacific Ocean 
that leads to a major shift in weather patterns across the Pacific. In Australia 
(particularly eastern Australia), El Niño events are associated with an increased 
probability of drier conditions.43
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups 
and agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be formally 
institutionalised, or informal.

51
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Indian Ocean Dipole
The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) is defined by the difference in sea surface 
temperatures between the eastern and western tropical Indian Ocean. A 
negative phase typically sees above average winter-spring rainfall in Australia, 
while a positive phase brings drier than average seasons.44
Transformational change
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different 
structure, functions, feedbacks and identity.
Trigger point
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management 
intervention. Trigger points are usually defined in the planning phase.

52
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
References
10
1 REMPLAN Economy 2021, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://app.remplan.com.au/rdahc/economy >.
2Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021, Search Census data, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area>.<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-
data/search-by-area>.
3 REMPLAN Community 2023, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://app.remplan.com.au/rdahc/community >.
4Abbot, E, 2022, Kangaroo Island seed potato shed back in action, Indaily Mar 16, 2022, 	
	
	
	
<https://www.indaily.com.au/events/regional-news/2022/03/16/kangaroo-island-seed-potato-shed-back-in-action>. 
5REMPLAN Economy 2021, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, 	
	
	
	
	
	
<https://app.remplan.com.au/rdahc/economy><https://app.remplan.com.au/rdahc/economy>.
6Dairysafe 2023, 2022-2023 Annual Report, Dairy Authority of South Australia, South Australia, 	
	
	
<https://dairy-safe.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Dairy-Authority-of-SA-2022-2023-Annual-Report.pdfhttps://dairy-
safe.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Dairy-Authority-of-SA-2022-2023-Annual-Report.pdf>.
7coNEXA 2023, Homepage, coNEXA Willunga Basin Water, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://wbwc.com.au/>.
8Aussie Apples n.d., About, Aussie Apples, viewed 11 July 2024, 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
<https://www.aussieapples.com.au/about/#region-sa><https://www.aussieapples.com.au/about/#region-sa>.
9Australian Pears 2019, About Australian Pears, Australian Pears, viewed 11 July 2024, 	
	
	
	
<https://australianpears.com.au/about-australian-pears/><https://australianpears.com.au/about-australian-pears/>.
10Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 2022a, Regional Economic Health 
Update April 2022, South Australia, <https://rdahc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/RDA-AHFKI-Regional-
Economic-Health-Update.pdfhttps://rdahc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/RDA-AHFKI-Regional-Economic-
Health-Update.pdf>.
11CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, My Climate View website, viewed 22 July 2024 <www.myclimateview.com.au>.
12Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2023, My Climate View, My Climate View, viewed 25 July 2024, 
<https://myclimateview.com.au/><https://myclimateview.com.au/>.
13Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board 2021, Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Plan 2021-2026, Landscape SA, viewed 18 
June 2024, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/hf/hf_landscape_plan_2021-26.pdf>	
	
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/hf/hf_landscape_plan_2021-26.pdf>.
14Kangaroo Island Landscape Board 2021, Kangaroo Island Landscape Plan 2021–2026, Landscape SA, viewed 18 
June 2024, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ki/kangaroo_island_landscape_plan_2021-2026.
pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ki/kangaroo_island_landscape_plan_2021-2026.pdf>.
15Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, 	
	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.http://www.bom.gov.au/
climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.
16Bureau of Meteorology 2019, Explainer: what is drought?	
	
	
	
	
	
	
<https://media.bom.gov.au/social/blog/2179/explainer-what-is-drought/ >.

53
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
17Natural Hazards Research Australia 2023, Understanding the Black Summer bushfires through research: a 
summary of key findings from the Bushfire and Natural Hazards CRC, report, available at 	 	
	
	
<https://www.naturalhazards.com.au/black-summer>. 
18CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Climate Change in Australia website, Regional Climate Change Explorer 		
<https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/regional-climate-change-explorer/super-clusters/ >.
19CSIRO 2022, Seven megatrends that will shape the next 20 years, CSIRO, viewed 26 July 2024, 	 	
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-20-yearshttps>.
20PwC 2022, Megatrends - Five global shifts reshaping the world we live in, Price Waterhouse Coopers, viewed 
14 February 2024, <https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.htmlhttps://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/
megatrends.html>.
21Taylor, B, Walton, A, Loechel, B, Measham, T & Fleming, D 2017, Strategic foresight for regional Australia: 
Megatrends, scenarios and implications, CSIRO and the Australian Government Department of Infrastructure, 
Regional Development and Cities, Canberra, Australia, 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
<https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:EP175665>.
22Hough, C 2020 GM-free applications from 11 councils rejected by South Australian Government, ABC Rural, 
viewed 12 July 2024, <https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2020-11-02/sa-councils-application-to-remain-gm-free-
rejected/12839636 >.
23CSIRO 2022, Seven megatrends that will shape the next 20 years, CSIRO, viewed 26 July 2024, 		
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-20-yearshttps>.
24Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021, Table Builder, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 26 July 2024, 	 	
<https://tablebuilder.abs.gov.au/webapi/jsf/dataCatalogueExplorer.xhtml>.
25Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board 2021, Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Plan 2021-2026, Landscape SA, viewed 
18 June 2024, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/hf/hf_landscape_plan_2021-26.pdf>.https://cdn.
environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/hf/hf_landscape_plan_2021-26.pdf>.
26Kangaroo Island Landscape Board 2021, Kangaroo Island Landscape Plan 2021–2026, Landscape SA, viewed 18 
June 2024, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ki/kangaroo_island_landscape_plan_2021-2026.
pdfhttps://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ki/kangaroo_island_landscape_plan_2021-2026.pdf>.
27Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 2022a, Regional Economic Health 
Update April 2022, South Australia, <https://rdahc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/RDA-AHFKI-Regional-
Economic-Health-Update.pdf>.
28Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 2022b, Strategic Regional Plan 2022-
2025, South Australia, <https://rdahc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Strategic-Regional-Plan-2022-2025.pdf>.
29Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 2020, Future Drought Fund Future Drought Fund 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework, Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment, Canberra, 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>.
30Walker B. 2020. Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecology and Society, vol 25, no 2, 	
	
	
	
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_not>.
31Council of Australian Governments 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience, Commonwealth of Australia, 
<https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/national-strategy-disaster-resilience.pdf>.
32South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission 2019, South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 
2019-2024, viewed 27 June, <https://resources-production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20
Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINET%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdf>.
33Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024, National Drought Agreement, Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry, viewed 25 July 2024, <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/
drought/drought-policy/national-drought-agreement#:~:text=Droughts%20can%20happen%20anywhere%2C%20
anytime,Agreement%20(2024%2D2029)>.

54
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
34Drought Agreement 2022, Review of the National Drought Agreement, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries 
and Forestry, Canberra, December. CC BY 4.0, <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/nda-
review-report.pdf>.
35Landscape SA Hills and Fleurieu 2024, Regenerative Agriculture, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/hf/
landscapes-hills-and-fleurieu-stewardship-program/care-for-soils/connect-with-regenerative-agriculture-groups/
regenerative-agriculture-2>.
36World Economic Forum 2023, 50% of the global economy is under threat from biodiversity loss, 	 	
	
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/02/biodiversity-nature-loss-cop15/>.
37Nature Positive Initiative, 2024, What is Nature Positive, <https://www.naturepositive.org/what-is-nature-positive/ 
https://www.naturepositive.org/what-is-nature-positive/>.
38Meat and Livestock Australia 2020, The Australian Red Meat Industry’s Carbon Neutral by 2030 Roadmap, 
<https://www.mla.com.au/globalassets/mla-corporate/research-and-development/program-areas/environment-and-
sustainability/2689-mla-cn30-roadmap_d3.pdf>.
39Government of South Australia 2022, Carbon Farming Road Map, <https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0007/428893/carbon-farming-roadmap.pdf>.
40Barraclough, K.A., Carey, M., Winkel, K.D., Humphries, E., Shay, B.A. and Foong, Y.C. 2023, Why losing Australia's 
biodiversity matters for human health: insights from the latest State of the Environment assessment. Med J Aust, 
218: 336-340. <https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.51904>.
41Department for Environment and Water 2022, Guide to Climate Projections for Risk Assessment and Planning 
in South Australia 2022, Government of South Australia, through the Department for Environment and Water, 
Adelaide, <https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20
for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf>.
42Government of South Australia 2022, Carbon Farming Road Map, <https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0007/428893/carbon-farming-roadmap.pdf>.
43Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Australian Water Information Dictionary, <http://www.bom.gov.au/water/awid/id-180.shtml>. 
44Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Climate Driver Update, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/enso/#tabs=Indian-Ocean>.

55
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan

56
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Appendix A
11
Program logic and monitoring indicators for priority strategies 
The table below describes the program logic for the priority strategies in the Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu 
and Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan and identifies proposed monitoring indicators for 
outputs and outcomes.
Program logic illustrates cause and effect relationships to provide understanding of how program 
resources are used to produce outputs and deliver outcomes in the short to long term. The elements of 
the program logic model are shown in the figure below.  
Inputs
What we 
invest 
Funds, staﬀ 
Community,
stakeholders
Actions
1-5 years
impact
5-20 years
impact
Who we
reach
What we
do
Short
medium 
term
Short
long
term
Outputs
Measurement of the direct actions 
taken, for example the activities and 
events delivered, the services 
provided and the funds spent. 
The desired results of direct actions on 
individuals, groups, communities, organisations 
and the environment. Medium-long term 
outcomes are often inﬂuenced more by external 
factors (actions undertaken by others or changes 
in environmental, social or governance factors) 
than shorter term outcomes.
Assumptions
Monitoring and evaluation
Outcomes
External
Factors

57
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
PRIORITY STRATEGY - SUPPORT CAPACITY BUILDING, PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF FARM AND 
LAND MANAGEMENT ACTIONS THAT BUILD RESILIENCE
Opportunities for action
•	
Property/farm management planning courses or support
•	
Land management capacity building activities
•	
Support fodder management practices
•	
Improve on-farm data monitoring
•	
Support installation of drought-resilient infrastructure 
•	
Facilitate learning from drought experiences
•	
Investigate new crops and circular economy opportunities
•	
Support tourism and value-added production
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of farm 
management plans 
developed by primary 
producers
•	
Percentage of land 
managers implementing 
learned practices.
•	
Number and value of 
infrastructure grants or 
subsidies provided
•	
Number of regional forums 
or conferences facilitated.
•	
Number of capacity 
building workshops and 
training sessions held.
Innovative, diversified and 
sustainable primary producers 
prepared for a variable and 
changing climate
•	
Pest and 
overabundant species 
populations and 
distribution (target 
decrease) 
•	
Adoption of resilient 
fodder practices 
(target increase) 
•	
Farms using soil 
moisture monitoring 
systems (target 
increase)
•	
Circular economy 
practices adopted by 
farms (target increase)
•	
Agritourism ventures 
and revenue (target 
increase)
•	
Grain research (target 
increase)
•	
Farm productivity and 
profitability (target 
increase)
•	
Soil health (target 
increase) 
•	
Condition and extent 
of biodiversity on 
private land (target 
increase)

58
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
PRIORITY STRATEGY - FOSTER COMMUNITY COLLABORATION AND BUILD SOCIAL CONNECTION
Opportunities for action
•	
Organise program of regional community events and activities  
•	
Provide opportunities for regional organisations to come together and identify opportunities to collaborate 
•	
Support local sport and cultural events
•	
Invest in community infrastructure
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of community 
events held and 
attendance at events
•	
Number of meetings or 
networking opportunities 
facilitated  
•	
Investment in community 
clubs and organisations
•	
Investment in community 
infrastructure 
Strong, healthy individuals 
and connected communities 
learning and working together 
for a positive future.
•	
Number of people 
participating in 
targeted community 
events (target 
increase)
•	
Collaborative project 
delivery involving 
multiple partners 
(target increase)  
•	
Community 
satisfaction with local 
events and facilities 
(target increase).
•	
Community 
volunteering  (target 
maintain or increase)
•	
Community physical 
and mental health 
(PHIDU* self-reported 
(target increase)
*Public Health 
Information 
Development Unit – 
Torrens University
PRIORITY STRATEGY - ENHANCE BUSINESS, FINANCIAL AND RISK MANAGEMENT LITERACY AND 
PLANNING
Opportunities for action
•	
Provide education and training to build business owners’ financial management skills
•	
Provide education and training in digital literacy
•	
Provide independent financial advice
•	
Support industry networking for drought preparedness
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of businesses 
accessing education and 
training 
•	
Number of businesses 
adopting new digital tools 
and practices
•	
Increase in collaborative 
initiatives or partnerships 
resulting from networking
Business owners managing 
climate and other risks for 
long term financial success, 
contributing to regional 
economic growth.
•	
Number of primary 
production businesses 
implementing business 
management plans 
(target increase)
•	
Adoption of digital 
tools and practices 
among businesses 
(target increase)
•	
Business confidence 
in financial decision-
making and risk 
management (target 
increase)
•	
Participation in 
drought preparedness 
networks and forums 
(target increase)
•	
Small business 
closures (target 
decrease)
•	
Business financial 
failures or insolvencies 
(target decrease)
•	
Industry collaboration 
supporting drought 
preparation, response 
and recovery (target 
increase)
•	
Business owners 
accessing Rural 
Financial Counselling 
Service or similar 
programs (target 
decrease)

59
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
PRIORITY STRATEGY - ESTABLISH EFFECTIVE DROUGHT GOVERNANCE TO SUPPORT DROUGHT PLAN 
IMPLEMENTATION AND LOCAL DECISION-MAKING
Opportunities for action
•	
Continue and expand AHFKI Drought Resilience Steering Committee
•	
Secure funding for a project officer
•	
Document and socialise drought roles, responsibilities and governance 
•	
Prepare and implement  drought communications strategy
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of Steering 
Committee meetings held 
annually
•	
Number of advocacy 
submissions
•	
Increase in community and 
stakeholder awareness 
of drought management 
efforts
•	
Number of funding 
applications submitted
Effective resilience building 
initiatives that reflect the 
region’s unique needs, led 
locally and informed by local 
knowledge and community 
input. 
•	
Funding applications 
and value of funding 
received (target 
increase)
•	
Community and 
stakeholder 
satisfaction with 
project delivery 
and support (target 
increase)
•	
Success of drought 
resilience project 
delivery on time and 
on budget
•	
Reputation of cross-
agency group to 
support, deliver and 
advocate (target 
increase)
•	
Community informed 
and engaged in 
drought resilience 
efforts (target increase)

60
Adelaide Hills Fleurieu Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan
DROUGHT
RESILIENT
ADELAIDE HILLS
FLEURIEU PENINSULA
KANGAROO ISLAND

Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu & Kangaroo Island Drought Resilience Steering Committee 
January 2025 
 
ATTACHMENT 1 
Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and 
Kangaroo Island Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan –  
Background Report

Background Report 
8 January 2025 
Lead consultant 
URPS 
27 Halifax Street 
Enter via Symonds Pl 
Adelaide SA 5000 
(08) 8333 7999
urps.com.au
In association with 
Richardson Consulting 
Prepared for 
Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu & Kangaroo Island Drought 
Resilience Steering Committee 
Consultant Project Manager 
Anna Pannell, Associate Director 
apannell@urps.com.au 
URPS Ref 
24ADL-0489 
Document history and status 
Revision 
Date 
Author 
Reviewed 
Details 
V1 
12/07/24 
R. Liew, A Pannell
A. Pannell
Draft report for Steering Committee review 
V2 
30/08/24 
R. Liew, A Pannell
Steering Committee, 
E. Mansfield
Final report following Steering Committee review 
V3 
08/01/2025 
R. Liew, A Pannell
E. Mansfield
Minor updates following CSIRO review

Contents | i  
Contents 
Acknowledgement of Country................................................................................ iii 
 
Introduction ............................................................................................... 1 
 Regional drought resilience planning ............................................................................. 1 
 
Preparing the Background Report .............................................................................. 1 
 
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region ............................... 3 
 
Population ............................................................................................................... 5 
 
Economy ................................................................................................................. 7 
 
Agriculture, horticulture and viticulture ...................................................................... 9 
 
Natural environment............................................................................................... 12 
 
Climate .................................................................................................................. 16 
 
Assets and infrastructure ........................................................................................ 24 
 
Governance ........................................................................................................... 26 
 
Defining features of the AHFKI Region .................................................................... 29 
 
Drought ................................................................................................... 30 
 
A definition of drought............................................................................................ 30 
 
Causes of drought .................................................................................................. 30 
 
Past droughts ........................................................................................................ 33 
 
Future climate and drought projections ................................................................... 36 
 
Impacts of drought on water availability .................................................................. 40 
 
Other drivers of change ............................................................................. 43 
 
Global drivers of change ......................................................................................... 43 
 
National and state drivers of change ....................................................................... 44 
 
Drought resilience ..................................................................................... 45 
 
A definition of resilience ......................................................................................... 45 
 
The importance of drought resilience ...................................................................... 48 
 
Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, and regions .................. 48 
 
Approaches to drought resilience planning ................................................. 51 
 
Learnings from other planning regions .................................................................... 51 
 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework ..... 52 
 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy .......................................................... 54

Contents | ii  
 
Types of change .................................................................................................... 54 
 
Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience ........................................... 55 
 
Opportunities from other regions ............................................................................ 55 
 
Opportunities in stakeholder plans and projects ....................................................... 58 
 
Opportunities identified through regional engagement .............................................. 62 
 
References ............................................................................................... 69 
Appendix A Regional Engagement Summary Report ............................................. 74

Acknowledgement of Country | iii  
Acknowledgement of Country  
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Drought Resilience Steering Committee acknowledge 
Aboriginal people as the First Peoples and Nations of the lands and waters we live and work upon. 
We pay our respects to Elders past, present and emerging. We acknowledge and respect the deep 
spiritual connection and the relationship that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have to 
country and commit to working with the First Nations people of the region as we deliver the Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan.

Introduction | 1  
 Introduction 
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island (AHFKI) region has diverse and highly productive 
agriculture, horticulture and viticulture, established in a temperate climate which has had generally reliable 
winter rainfall and warm, dry summers. This production and the agricultural landscape support world-
renowned food, fibre and wine manufacturing and significant tourism activity.  
Recent decades have seen declines in annual, winter and spring rainfall across the region and an increase in 
average maximum temperatures. Climate projections indicate these trends will continue to the end of the 
century with increasing frequency and duration of drought conditions. 
Drought resilience refers to the ability of individuals, communities, industries or environments to adapt, 
reorganise or transform in response to changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall, 
and changed seasonality of rainfall, to maintain or improve economic, environmental or social wellbeing.  
Building, maintaining and enhancing drought resilience as the climate changes and rainfall patterns change 
and become more variable and unpredictable is essential for the future of the region’s agriculture and 
supporting industries and communities. 
In last 10 years the region has been impacted by significant disruptions. Drought during 2018-19 was 
followed by bushfires that burnt across the Adelaide Hills and nearly half of Kangaroo Island in 2019-20. The 
ensuing COVID-19 pandemic saw further disruption to the economy and community.  
Enhancing drought resilience will also help the AHFKI region prepare for, respond to and recover from other 
stresses or pressures. 
 
Regional drought resilience planning 
The Australian Government established the Future Drought Fund (FDF) to provide secure, continuous 
funding for drought resilience initiatives. Through the FDF, the Australian Government is working with the 
South Australian Government to support the AHFKI region in developing a Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
to prepare for and manage future drought risks. 
The AHFKI Drought Resilience Steering Committee is guiding the preparation of the Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan for the AHFKI region. URPS has been engaged to work with the Steering Committee to 
develop the Plan. 
The AHFKI Drought Resilience Plan will document how the region’s agricultural sector might be impacted by 
drought, describe a desired future or vision that acknowledges more frequent or severe drought and greater 
rainfall variability, and identify strategies and actions to build resilience to ensure agricultural production and 
farming landscapes are maintained and economic and social development opportunities are optimised. 
This Background Report will be the foundation for preparing the AHFKI Drought Resilience Plan. 
 
Preparing the Background Report 
This Background Report was prepared through the following tasks:

Introduction | 2  
• Literature review: collation and synthesis of published information about the region and shared values, 
challenges, and opportunities through review of regional plans and strategies and other relevant regional 
documents. The review also looked at literature on leading resilience practice, planning and 
implementation from elsewhere to identify ‘lessons learnt’ or ideas for action. The literature review 
considered a range of sources from peer-reviewed scientific articles to regional, state and federal 
strategic plans, website articles and technical reports. These sources have been referenced throughout 
the Background Paper.  
• Regional engagement with 55 people across the AHFKI region to understand how drought has or 
could impact the agricultural sector, what makes people, communities and regions resilient to drought, 
and what actions or initiatives could be put in place to increase drought resilience in the region. 
Workshops were held in the following locations at the end of June 2024: 
‒ Charleston  
‒ Parndana 
‒ Strathalbyn  
‒ Mount Compass  
• Key informant interviews with local subject matter experts to understand how drought has 
impacted the AHFKI region in the past, what programs have worked well to build drought resilience and 
how the Regional Drought Resilience Plan can best be implemented.  
• Key informant interviews with drought resilience planners from other regions to learn from 
the experiences of other regions and gain insights into how the Regional Drought Resilience Plan can be 
prepared most effectively.  
Appendix A contains the Regional Engagement Summary Report

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 3  
 The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region 
The AHFKI Regional Drought Resilience Plan covers the Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu Peninsula, McLaren Vale and 
Kangaroo Island as illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1 Location map 
The Adelaide Hills’ cool climate and rolling terrain make it ideal for viticulture and apple, pear and cherry 
orchards. The Mount Lofty Ranges to the east provide a natural boundary from metropolitan Adelaide. The 
Adelaide Hills attracts visitors with its picturesque agricultural and natural landscapes and high-quality local 
food and wine production. Significant population growth has occurred over the past decade and further 
growth particularly around Mount Barker is projected.  
The Fleurieu Peninsula is home to dairy and livestock farms, viticulture including the wine regions of 
Langhorne Creek and McLaren Vale, and a thriving tourism industry. The Fleurieu Peninsula population has 
grown at a rate double the State average over the past decade. 
Kangaroo Island, Australia’s third-largest island, lies off the coast of Fleurieu Peninsula. It features natural 
wilderness, broadacre grazing and stunning coastal scenery. The island is separated from the Fleurieu 
Peninsula by the Backstairs Passage, requiring a ferry transfer or plane flight to access from the mainland. 
Kangaroo Island is noted for its unique wildlife, conservation areas and sustainable agriculture, particularly in 
sheep, grains, beef, horticulture and viticulture.  
Further information on the region is provided in the following sections.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 4  
NOTES on demographic data and economic data 
Demographic and economic data is presented for the AHFKI region as a whole (except where specified), as 
well as for Adelaide Hills (the area within the Adelaide Hills Council, Mount Barker Council), Fleurieu 
(Alexandrina Council, District Council of Yankalilla and the City of Victor Harbor), Kangaroo Island and 
McLaren Vale. 
Demographic data for the McLaren Vale Character Preservation District has been approximated from the 
three Statistical Areas Level 2 (SA2s) (Clarendon, McLaren Vale and Willunga) that comprise the majority of 
the district as illustrated in Figure 2. SA2s are medium-sized geographic areas used by the Australian Bureau 
of Statistics (ABS) for the Census and other statistical purposes. They are designed to represent a 
community that interacts socially and economically, such as a town, suburb or a group of neighbouring 
suburbs. 
Figure 2 McLaren Vale Character Preservation District, approximated by using demographic data from the 
Clarendon, McLaren Vale and Willunga SA2s

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 5  
 
Population 
The region’s population varies between sub-regions. Key features of the region’s population include: 
• A growing population – growing faster than the rest of the State and project to continue to grow to 2041. 
• An older population overall compared to South Australia. 
• An older population on the Fleurieu Peninsula with a greater proportion of residents requiring assistance 
with core activities. 
• A greater proportion of younger people in the Adelaide Hills, with a greater proportion of the population 
with university qualifications and more households in high income brackets.  
• A less culturally and linguistically diverse community than the State as a whole.  
• A low proportion of residents identifying as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander. 
• Low rates of unemployment. 
• Higher rates of volunteering, particularly on Kangaroo Island. 
Key demographic statistics from the Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021 Census and REMPLAN Community 
have been summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1 Key demographics for the AHFKI region and SA (REMPLAN Community 2021; ABS 2021) 
 
Adelaide 
Hills 
Fleurieu 
Peninsula 
Kangaroo 
Island 
McLaren 
Vale 
Total 
AHFKI 
region 
(including 
McLaren 
Vale) 
South 
Australia 
Resident 
population 
2021 
79,723 
people 
50,704 
people 
4,894 people 
13,677 
people 
148,998 
people 
1,781,516 
people 
Population 
change 2011 
- 2021 
17.1% 
increase  
20.9% 
increase  
10.8% 
increase  
17.5% 
increase  
18.2% 
increase  
11.6% 
increase  
Projected 
population 
2041 – 
medium 
growth 
scenario 
(PlanSA) 
35.8% 
increase  
39.5% 
increase  
22.6% 
increase  
Not available 
36.4% 
increase 
(excluding 
McLaren 
Vale) 
22.0% 
increase  
Median age 
42 years 
56 years 
50 years 
47 years 
47 years 
41 years 
Ages cohorts 
as compared 
to SA 
Higher 
proportion 
of 0-19 
Lower 
proportion of 
Lower 
proportion of 
Higher 
proportion of 
young people 
Lower 
proportion of 
labour force 
N/A

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 6  
 
Adelaide 
Hills 
Fleurieu 
Peninsula 
Kangaroo 
Island 
McLaren 
Vale 
Total 
AHFKI 
region 
(including 
McLaren 
Vale) 
South 
Australia 
years and 
people 
aged 40-74 
years  
Lower 
proportion 
of 20-39 
years and 
older 
people 
aged 75+ 
people aged 
0-54.  
Higher 
proportion of 
people aged 
55+  
 
people aged 
0-49 years  
Higher 
proportion of 
older people 
aged 50-84 
years  
aged 5-19 
years and 
people aged 
45-84 years 
Lower 
proportion of 
labour force 
aged 20-44 
years and 
people aged 
85+ 
aged 20 to 
44 
Higher 
proportion of 
people aged 
45 to 84  
Aboriginal 
and Torres 
Islander 
peoples 
1.0% 
1.6% 
1.7% 
0.9% 
1.2% 
2.4%  
Households 
where a non-
English 
language is 
spoken 
7.2% 
11.5% 
5.3% 
4.3% 
4.3% 
19.0%  
Most 
common 
language 
other than 
English used 
at home 
German 
(0.6%) 
German 
(0.4%) 
German 
(0.6%) 
Italian 
(0.8%) 
German 
(0.5%) 
Mandarin 
(1.8%)  
Highest level 
of education  
   Bachelor 
degree level 
and above 
   Certificate 
III & IV 
Level 
   Year 12 
   Year 10  
 
 
27.8% 
 
18.3% 
 
14.2% 
7.6% 
 
 
13.1% 
 
17.7% 
 
36.4% 
17.6% 
 
 
17.2% 
 
19.3% 
 
13.4% 
10.0% 
 
 
19.1% 
 
16.9% 
 
45.1% 
12.6% 
 
 
18.8% 
 
16.2% 
 
43.2% 
13.4% 
 
 
22.7% 
 
17.6% 
 
15.2% 
9.4% 
Labour force 
(includes 
42,406 
people 
20,097 
people 
2,375 people 
7,169 people 
72,047 
people 
887,193 
people

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 7  
 
Adelaide 
Hills 
Fleurieu 
Peninsula 
Kangaroo 
Island 
McLaren 
Vale 
Total 
AHFKI 
region 
(including 
McLaren 
Vale) 
South 
Australia 
employed 
and 
unemployed) 
Unemployme
nt rate  
3.5% 
1.9% 
3.6% 
1.9% 
1.9% 
5.4% 
Population 
that needs 
assistance 
with core 
activities  
4.5% 
8.4% 
4.4% 
4.6% 
5.8% 
6.7% 
Volunteering 
rate 
19.7% 
19.6% 
27.7% 
18.1% 
19.8% 
14.1%  
Proportion of 
households 
earning less 
than $650 
per week 
13.3% 
24.6% 
27.1% 
14.0% 
18.2% 
19.6% 
Proportion of 
households 
earning 
more than 
$3000 per 
week 
25.8% 
9.8% 
10.2% 
23.3% 
19.0% 
17.7% 
2.1.1 First Nations people 
The First Nations of the AHFKI region include Peramangk, Kaurna and Ngarrindjeri. Just over 1% of the 
region’s population identifies as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander.  
 
Economy 
The economy of the region as a whole is diverse, however on Kangaroo Island nearly 25% of employment is 
in the agricultural sector, and nearly 33% of economic output is from agriculture.  
The AHFKI region’s economy is dominated by household service industries, agriculture, construction, and 
manufacturing. The agriculture industry ranked sixth in employment and second in economic value 
generation. This agricultural focus not only supports local employment but also draws tourists, further 
supporting the region’s economic stability. Notably, the agriculture and tourism industry's share of total 
economic value in the region was significantly higher than the South Australia average (Regional 
Development Australia (RDA) AHFKI 2022a).

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 8  
The economic data provided in Table 2 is taken from the RDA Adelaide Hills Fleurieu & Kangaroo Island April 
2022 Regional Economic Health Update and REMPLAN Economy unless otherwise specified.  
Table 2 Economic characteristics of the AHFKI region (RDA AHKFI 2022a, ABS Census 2021, Profile.id 
2021, REMPLAN Economy 2023) 
 
Adelaide Hills  
Fleurieu 
Peninsula 
McLaren Vale 
(Onkaparinga) 
Kangaroo 
Island 
Total AHFKI 
Region 
Top 3 
industries of 
employment 
(and 
agriculture) 
Source: ABS 
Census 2021, 
REMPLAN 
Economy 2023 
Health care & 
social assistance 
(13.5), retail 
trade (12.7%) 
and 
accommodation &
food services 
(10.1%) 
Agriculture, 
forestry & 
fishing – 7th 
(6.3%) 
Health care & 
social 
assistance 
(17.1%), retail 
trade (12.1%) 
and agriculture, 
forestry, & 
fishing (11.0%) 
Health care & 
social 
assistance 
(17.1%), retail 
trade (9.7%) 
and 
construction 
(8.4%) 
Agriculture, 
forestry & 
fishing – 17th 
(1.1%) 
Agriculture, 
forestry, & fishing
(24.0%), 
accommodation 
& food services 
(11.8%) and 
health care & 
social assistance 
(9.5%) 
Health care & 
social assistance 
(14.6%), retail 
trade (12.3%) 
and 
accommodation & 
food services 
(10.4%) 
Agriculture, 
forestry & 
fishing – 6th 
(8.9%) 
Gross 
Regional 
Product 
(GRP) 
Source: 
REMPLAN 
Economy 2023, 
Profile.id 2021 
$4.1 billion 
(2.9% of SA’s 
GSP) 
$2.4 billion 
(1.7% of SA’s 
GSP) 
Not available  
$362 million  
(0.3% of SA’s 
GSP) 
$6.8 billion 
Excluding 
McLaren Vale 
(4.8% of SA’s 
Gross State 
Product) 
GRP per 
capita 
Source: 
REMPLAN 
Economy 2023 
$51,201 per 
capita 
$50,703 per 
capita 
Not available 
$73,894 per 
capita 
$50,405 per 
capita 
GRP per 
worker 
Source: 
REMPLAN 
Economy 2023 
$160,434 per 
worker 
$160,615 per 
worker 
Not available 
$162,243 per 
worker 
$160,591 per 
worker

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 9  
 
Agriculture, horticulture and viticulture  
Agriculture is a significant contributor to the region. Viticulture, horticulture, livestock and cropping 
contribute through both their outputs and employment and the reputation of the area as a premier food and 
wine destination.  
2.3.1 Livestock, w ool and dairy 
Sheep and lambs (for meat and wool) and beef cattle are raised on farms across the region, with a number 
of dairy farms (cows) mostly on the Fleurieu Peninsula and a small number of goat dairies. In 2022/23 there 
were 86 dairy farms and 23,2000 cows in the Central SA region (Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu Peninsula, Murray 
Swamps & Meningie Lakes) producing 34% of the State’s milk production (Dairysafe 2023). Other livestock 
raised in the region include poultry (for meat and eggs) and pigs. 
Agriculture on Kangaroo Island is predominantly centred around sheep, with two-thirds of local farmers 
engaged in wool production. The Island is home to over 500,000 sheep, 73,300 poultry birds, 20,000 cattle, 
and other livestock (Authentic Kangaroo Island 2024).  
2.3.2 Cropping 
The AHFKI region contributes 116,670 tonnes of crops to South Australia's total production, representing 
approximately 1.3% of the State's overall crop yield. The most common dryland (non-irrigated) crops 
produced in the region include wheat, canola, beans, barley and oats, predominantly on Kangaroo Island 
and the eastern Mount Lofty Ranges. 
In the Central Hills and Fleurieu area, cropping primarily involves wheat, canola, and barley, covering over 
29,400 hectares. This area is known for its high-quality cereal grains, which yield around 55,500 tonnes 
annually (PIRSA 2024a). 
Kangaroo Island is known for its pure grain production, with a strong commitment to remaining free from 
genetically modified crops. The Island specialises in canola, wheat, and barley, with about 18,300 hectares 
under cultivation. The Island's cropping sector generates around 36,000 tonnes annually, bolstered by 
favourable conditions for canola production (PIRSA 2024a). 
2.3.3 Grapes  
The AHFKI region includes six recognised winegrape growing regions.  
The Adelaide Hills wine region is one of the coolest and most elevated regions in Australia, allowing grapes 
to ripen slowly. The higher rainfall benefits grape production however rainfall and humidity can lead to 
greater pest and fungal disease than in drier areas (Adelaide Hills Wine Region 2024). 
The McLaren Vale wine region was the first area in South Australia to be planted with vines. The 
Mediterranean climate with moderate winters and warm summers and moderating influence of the Mount 
Lofty Ranges and Gulf St Vincent on climate extremes has allowed the region to develop an international 
reputation for premium red grape varieties. In recent years Mediterranean alternative red and white varieties 
have been planted, many of which have a lower water demand (McLaren Vale Wine 2024). Historically, 
irrigation water supply for vines in McLaren Vale relied on groundwater. However, alternate supply of treated 
wastewater from the Willunga Basin Water Company now supplies around 65% of irrigation demand 
(coNEXA 2023).  
Further south from McLaren Vale, the Southern Fleurieu wine region experiences a long, cool growing 
season and like the other regions, the Gulf St Vincent and the Southern Ocean provide natural protection

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 10  
from excessive heat (South Australian Wine Industry Association (SAWIA) 2024b). The Currency Creek 
wine region has a slightly cooler climate than McLaren Vale. Lake Alexandrina and the Southern Ocean 
moderate climate extremes. The region’s lower rainfall is supplemented by irrigation from the River Murray 
and groundwater (SAWIA 2024a). 
The Langhorne Creek wine region has a similar climate to Currency Creek, moderated by cool summer and 
autumn breezes that come across Lake Alexandrina. In winter and spring, flood waters often flow down the 
Angus and Bremer Rivers, providing excellent deep irrigation for the following growing seasons (Langhorne 
Creek Wine Region n.d.). 
The Kangaroo Island wine region is relatively new, being officially registered as a wine region by 
Geographic Indication in the year 2000. Like the other Fleurieu Zone wine regions, the temperate climate 
and moderating ocean influences ensure long, slow ripening of the grapes.  
2.3.4 Apples, pears, cherries and straw berries 
Centred on the Lenswood Valley, the Adelaide Hills region is South Australia’s most important and longest 
established apple growing area, with nearly 80% of the State’s growers in this region (Aussie Apples n.d.). 
The Adelaide Hills is also the main region for pear orchards in South Australia (Australian Pears 2019).  
The Adelaide Hills region produces 90-95% of South Australia’s cherry production. Microclimate variations 
across the Hills mean maturity can vary for the same variety which is beneficial as cherries are picked ripe 
and cannot be stored as long as other fruits.  
Almost all South Australian strawberries are grown in the region, with a number of farms in the Adelaide 
Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula. 
2.3.5 Food and w ine manufacturing 
Across the AHFKI region, food and wine manufacturing using regional produce creates wine, gin, beer, juice, 
dairy products, jams and condiments, bakery products and more for local, national and international markets 
(RDA AHFKI 2024a).  
2.3.6 Economic contribution of the agriculture sector 
In 2021/22, the agricultural sector generated $1.47 billion in gross revenue across the region, accounting for 
11.2% of total regional output. On Kangaroo Island, the sector contributes one third of regional output. 
Table 3 summarises the value of the agriculture, forestry and fishing sector’s outputs in 2021. This data has 
been sourced from REMPLAN (RDA Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island) with data for the McLaren 
Vale Character Preservation District sourced from the City of Onkaparinga’s economic profile (.id 
community).  
NOTE – figures for the McLaren Vale Character Preservation District have assumed all agricultural production 
in the City of Onkaparinga occurs within this area.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 11  
Table 3 Value of agriculture, forestry, and fishing industry sector output / gross revenue generated by 
businesses/organisations in $ millions (REMPLAN Economy 2023; profile.id 2021) 
Outputs 
(product) 
Adelaide 
Hills 
Fleurieu 
Peninsula 
Kangaroo 
Island 
Total AHFKI 
region 
(excluding 
McLaren Vale) 
McLaren Vale) 
2020/21 
Sheep, 
Grains, Beef 
and Dairy 
Cattle 
$200.9M 
(2.5% of 
Adelaide Hills 
output) 
$419.1M 
(9.6% of 
Fleurieu 
output) 
$171.3M 
(24.8% of 
Kangaroo 
Island output) 
$791. M 
(6.0% of 
regional output) 
$1.4M (excluding 
Milk) 
$2.3M (including 
Milk) 
Other 
Agriculture 
$302.7M 
$153.7M 
$4.3M 
$460.6M 
$60.9M 
Poultry & 
Other 
Livestock 
$34.5M 
$26.9M 
$17.7M 
$79.2M 
$4.8M 
Forestry & 
Logging 
$28.3M 
$0 
$9.1M 
$37.5M 
N/A 
Fishing, 
Hunting & 
Trapping 
$0 
$9.2M 
$4.2 
$13.5M 
N/A 
Agriculture, 
Forestry & 
Fishing 
Support 
Services 
$26.2M 
 
$36.3M 
$10.4M 
$72.9M 
N/A 
Aquaculture 
$3.4M 
$1.9M 
$10.7M 
$16.0M 
N/A 
Totals 
$596.0M 
(7.4% of 
Adelaide Hills 
output) 
$647.1M 
(14.8% of 
Fleurieu 
output) 
$227.7M 
(33.0% of 
Kangaroo 
Island output) 
$1,470.8M 
(11.2% of total 
regional output) 
$68.5M 
 
The proportion of residents employed in agricultural industries varies from 3% of Adelaide Hills residents, to 
18% of Kangaroo Island residents. Table 4 shows the top five agricultural sectors of employment for each of 
the subregions.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 12  
Table 4 Number of regional residents employed in the agricultural industry (top five) (REMPLAN Economy 
2023; ABS 2021) 
Sector 
Rank 
Adelaide Hills 
Fleurieu 
Peninsula 
Kangaroo 
Island 
Total AHFKI 
region 
(excluding 
McLaren Vale) 
McLaren Vale 
(Onkaparinga 
Economic id) 
1 
Beef Cattle 
Farming 
(Specialised) (179 
people) 
Beef Cattle 
Farming 
(Specialised) (242 
people) 
Sheep Farming 
(Specialised) (203 
people) 
Beef Cattle 
Farming 
(Specialised) (441 
people) 
Grape growing 
(301 people) 
2 
Grape Growing 
(171) 
Dairy Cattle 
Farming (226) 
Grain-Sheep or 
Grain-Beef Cattle 
Farming (44) 
Sheep Farming 
(Specialised) 
(402) 
Other Agriculture 
and Fishing 
Support Services 
(56) 
3 
Agriculture, nfd* 
(157) 
Grape Growing 
(177) 
Sheep-Beef Cattle 
Farming (43) 
Grape Growing 
(348) 
Agriculture, nfd 
(38) 
4 
Apple and Pear 
Growing (119)  
Agriculture, nfd 
(142) 
Agriculture, nfd 
(38) 
Agriculture, nfd 
(335) 
Nursery 
Production 
(Outdoors) (37) 
5 
Vegetable 
Growing 
(Outdoors) (85) 
Sheep Farming 
(Specialised) 
(131) 
Poultry Farming 
(Eggs) (21) 
Dairy Cattle 
Farming (281) 
Beef Cattle 
Farming 
(Specialised) (17) 
* nfd = Not further defined – refers to inadequately described or non-specific responses (ABS Census 
Dictionary 2021) 
2.3.7 Land use 
The region includes a total of 494,500 hectares of land used for agricultural purposes, comprising 57% of 
the total region. 
Agricultural land 
use 
(Data SA 2023) 
 
Area (ha) 
% of region 
Livestock and pasture 
379,702  
44% 
Agriculture 
72,957  
8% 
Horticulture (inc viticulture) 
41,818  
5% 
 
 
Natural environment 
The AHFKI region’s environment is made up of a blend of forests, coastlines, and agricultural land that 
creates a unique and ecologically rich environment that supports both biodiversity and agriculture. Farmers 
play a key role in maintaining biodiversity, with many farmers allocating significant areas of their property to 
native vegetation retention and revegetation. Key features and characteristics of the region’s natural 
environment are described in Table 5.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 13  
Table 5 Natural environment - key features and characteristics (Data SA 2020, NatureMaps 2024) 
Theme 
Key features and characteristics 
Protected areas 
 
77 conservation reserves and national parks, accounting for 16% of the 
region 
Species with 
conservation 
status 
 
• 49 flora species and 61 fauna species with national conservation ratings) 
under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 
1999 
• 362 flora species and 144 fauna species with state conservation ratings 
under the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972 
 
2.4.1 Water resources 
The AHFKI region contains several sources of water that supports primary production including: 
• 
surface water (e.g. River Murray, local watercourses and dams) 
• 
groundwater 
• 
desalinated water and 
• 
recycled water. 
Table 6 summarises key features and characteristics of water resources in the AHFKI region.  
Table 6 Water resources – key features and characteristics  
Water 
resource 
Key features and characteristics 
Groundwater 
 
Groundwater is a vital resource in the AHFKI region, supporting agricultural 
activities. The region contains several aquifers, with groundwater reserves found 
in (for example) fractured rocks of the Adelaide Hills, Permian Sands on the 
Fleurieu and limestone aquifers in the Angas-Bremer and McLaren Vale regions. 
• 
The Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula areas rely heavily on 
groundwater sources due to limited surface water availability, particularly 
during dry seasons. 
• 
The Eastern Mount Lofty Ranges contain notable aquifers that are tapped 
for both agricultural and domestic uses. 
• 
The McLaren Vale region historically relied upon groundwater resources 
for irrigation however expansion of the irrigated area has driven a need 
for an alternate supply to supplement the use of groundwater. 
• 
Groundwater resources on Kangaroo Island are very limited and generally 
saline.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 14  
Water 
resource 
Key features and characteristics 
(Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board 2021, Kangaroo Island Landscape Board 
2021) 
Groundwater conditions are generally stable in the region although there is some 
gradual decline in groundwater levels in McLaren Vale and localised salinity 
increases (DEW, 2022c).  
A managed aquifer recovery scheme operates in the Angas Bremer with around 
0.8 GL of surface water injected in 2020-21 (DEW, 2022b). 
Surface water 
Surface water and groundwater resources are used extensively through the 
region for stock and domestic use and irrigation of pastures, grapes and 
horticulture. Most of the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu region is in the Prescribed 
Water Resources Area. Surface water is captured through diversions from 
watercourses and off-stream storage. 
Several notable rivers traverse the AHFKI region.  
• 
The Onkaparinga River in the Adelaide Hills is one of the largest and most 
significant, flowing through to the coast and supporting diverse 
ecosystems along its course.  
• 
The Murray River, although more associated with regions further east, 
influences the Lower Lakes and Coorong wetlands on the Fleurieu 
Peninsula, providing critical water inflows that maintain ecological health.  
• 
On Kangaroo Island, the Cygnet River is the largest river, supporting local 
ecosystems and agriculture. 
Prescribed 
Water 
Resources 
Areas and 
Wells Areas 
The taking of surface water and groundwater in the region is controlled through 
several water allocation plans that apply to Western Mount Lofty Ranges (WMLR) 
and Eastern Mount Lofty Ranges Water Areas (EMLR) and Prescribed Wells Areas 
(PWAs) (Department for Environment and Water, 2020a). 
PWAs are designated zones where groundwater extraction is regulated to ensure 
sustainable use. PWAs in the region include Angas-Bremer, McLaren Vale (part), 
Central Adelaide (part) and Dry Creek.  
Around 104 gigalitres (GL) of licenced surface water was used in 2020-21 in the 
WMLR (DEW, 2022a). Around 22 GL of licenced surface water and 9 GL of 
groundwater was used in 2020-21 in the EMLR (DEW, 2022b). Around 4 GL of 
groundwater extracted from the McLaren Vale area in 2020-21(DEW, 2022c).  
Water resources on Kangaroo Island are not prescribed (although the NRM Plan 
provides some limits on use) but holds surface water resources used for stock

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 15  
Water 
resource 
Key features and characteristics 
and domestic (Middle River reservoir operated by SA Water provides around 0.5 
GL/year) and limited groundwater supplies. 
Stock and domestic use is not licenced. 
Wetlands 
Wetlands in the region play critical roles in biodiversity conservation and water 
purification. These wetlands support diverse ecosystems, offering habitats for 
migratory birds and other wildlife. 
• 
The Fleurieu Peninsula is home to nationally and internationally 
significant wetlands such as Fleurieu Swamps and parts of the Ramsar 
listed Coorong and Lower Lakes system. 
• 
KI has 15 wetlands of national significance including the Flinders Chase 
River Systems, American River Wetland System, and Murray Lagoon. 
Water 
infrastructure  
Much of the region is serviced by mains water.  
Expansion of the irrigated area in the McLaren Value has driven a need for an 
alternate supply to supplement the use of groundwater. Around 7 GL of recycled 
water is now delivered to the McLaren Vale region each year for irrigation of high 
value wine grapes. 
There has also been investment in new pipelines to deliver River Murray water to 
irrigated regions such as The Creeks Pipeline Company delivering water to the 
Langhorne Creek and Currency Creek areas.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 16  
Figure 3 Prescribed water resources areas and prescribed wells areas intersecting the region 
 
 
 
Climate  
2.5.1 Rainfall  
The AHFKI region experiences a Mediterranean climate characterised by warm to hot, dry summers and 
more mild wet winters. The Adelaide Hills, due to its elevation, tend to be cooler and wetter compared to the 
coastal areas, with more significant rainfall supporting vegetation and agriculture. The Fleurieu Peninsula 
enjoys a moderate climate, with coastal areas benefiting from maritime influences that moderate 
temperatures and provide consistent rainfall. Kangaroo Island’s climate is similarly moderated by the 
surrounding ocean, leading to mild temperatures year-round and traditionally reliable winter rainfall.  
Rainfall reduces moving east due to the influence of the Mount Lofty Ranges, with annual rainfall in 
Langhorne Creek less than half of that at Parawa.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 17  
Figure 4 shows that majority of the AHFKI region receives on average 400-1000mm of rainfall per year 
(Bureau of Meteorology 2021). 
Figure 4 Average annual rainfall 1991 – 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology 2021)  
 
The AHFKI region is all within the same rainfall zone, experiencing winter-dominant rainfall. The whole 
region experiences dry summers with little rainfall, especially in western Kangaroo Island (refer Figure 5 and 
Figure 6, BOM 2021).

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 18  
Figure 5 Percentage of annual average rainfall occurring in summer 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology 
2021) 
 
Figure 6 Percentage of annual average rainfall occurring in winter 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology 
2021)

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 19 
Figure 7 shows average monthly rainfall at four locations in the region from 1964 to 2023. Rainfall is 
significantly lower at Langhorne Creek, especially during the winter months. 
Figure 7 Average monthly rainfall 1964 to 2023 
Rainfall has been decreasing in recent decades. Data from myclimateview.com.au shown in Table 7 shows 
rainfall has reduced from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-2023. 
Table 7 Rainfall change 1964 to 2023 (myclimateview.com.au) 
Location 
Average 
annual rainfall 
1964 – 1993 
(mm) 
Average 
annual rainfall 
1994 – 2023 
(mm) 
Change (mm) 
Change (%) 
Charleston 
794 
743 
51 
-6.4%
Mount Torrens 
739 
683 
56 
-7.6%
Mount Compass 
876 
810 
66 
-7.5%
Strathalbyn 
499 
463 
36 
-7.2%
Parawa 
838 
787 
51 
-6.1%
Parndana 
672 
634 
38 
-5.7%
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Langhorne Creek
Parndana
Parawa
Charleston

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 20  
2.5.2 Temperature  
The AHFKI region experiences moderate temperatures, with most of the region experiencing average annual 
maximum temperatures of 15 to 24°C and average summer maximum temperatures of 18 to 27°C (see 
Figure 8 and Figure 9). 
Figure 8 Average annual maximum temperature 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology, 2021) 
 
Figure 9 Average summer maximum temperature 1991 to 2020 (Bureau of Meteorology, 2021)

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 21  
Temperature has been increasing in recent decades. Data from myclimateview.com.au shown in Table 8 
shows the increase in average annual maximum temperature from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-2023. 
Table 8 Temperature change 1964 – 2023 (myclimateview.com.au) 
Location 
Average annual 
maximum 
temperature 
1964 – 1993 (oC) 
Average annual 
maximum 
temperature 1994 
– 2023 (oC) 
Change (oC) 
Change (%) 
Charleston 
19.2 
19.9 
+0.7 
+3.6 
Mount Torrens 
19.3 
20.0 
+0.7 
+3.6 
Mount Compass 
19.3 
19.8 
+0.5 
+2.6 
Strathalbyn 
21.1 
21.7 
+0.6 
+2.8 
Parawa 
18.4 
18.9 
+0.5 
+2.7 
Parndana 
18.7 
19.3 
+0.6 
+3.2 
2.5.3 Evapotranspiration  
Evapotranspiration is a collective term for the transfer of water, as water vapour, to the atmosphere from 
both vegetated and un-vegetated land surfaces. It is affected by climate, availability of water, vegetation 
type and abundance, and soil type.  
Point potential evapotranspiration in the region is between 1.4 and 1.8 meters (refer Figure 10) (BOM 2005). 
Figure 10 Average point potential evapotranspiration (annual) (Bureau of Meteorology, 2005)

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 22  
2.5.4 Impact of rainfall on agricultural yield 
The impact of reduced rainfall on agricultural and horticultural yield has been noted in the region for some 
time. 
In 2016 the need for more sustainable irrigation for McLaren Vale grape production led to the construction 
of a large water storage dam. At the time the Chair of the McLaren Vale Irrigators Council Jock Harvey 
noted: 
“Demand for winter irrigation and additional water during the growing season are now commonplace 
– substantially increasing demand for economically and environmentally sustainable irrigation water 
beyond projected over the last decade” (McLaren Vale Wine 2016). 
Using data reported in PIRSA crop and pasture reports, analysis of growing season rainfall and yield for key 
crops on Kangaroo Island and the Central Hills and Fleurieu since 2000 has been undertaken. Figure 11, 
Figure 12, Figure 13 and Figure 14 show that while yields follow rainfall trends in most years, for example 
lower growing season rainfall in 2006 saw lower yields, there have been some years when high yields 
occurred when rainfall was lower (2022) and other years when high rainfall did not see higher yields (2013 
and 2016) (PIRSA 2024a).  
It is important to note that some high rainfall areas of the Fleurieu Peninsula tend to benefit from drier years 
as a result of less water logging of poorly draining soils which in turn improves crop and pasture growth. 
Figure 11 Kangaroo Island wheat yield vs rainfall 2000 - 2023 
 
 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
0.00
100.00
200.00
300.00
400.00
500.00
600.00
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
Yield (t/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Wheat Yield
Growing Season Rainfall

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 23  
Figure 12 Kangaroo Island canola yield vs rainfall 2000 - 2023 
 
Figure 13 Central Hills and Fleurieu canola yield vs rainfall 2000 - 2023 
 
Figure 14 Central Hills and Fleurieu barley yield vs rainfall 2000 - 2023 
 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0.00
100.00
200.00
300.00
400.00
500.00
600.00
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Yield (t/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Canola Yield
Growing Season Rainfall
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Yield (t/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Canola Yield
Growing Season Rainfall
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Yield (t/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Barley Yield
Growing Season Rainfall

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 24  
 
Assets and infrastructure  
The AHFKI region benefits from infrastructure that supports individuals, communities and industries. 
Infrastructure provision for essential services (power, water and telecommunications) is generally good. 
However, opportunities to improve telecommunications and water security on Kangaroo Island have been 
identified. These are being progressed through SA Power Network’s construction of an undersea fibre optic 
cable from Cape Jervis to Kangaroo Island, and SA Water’s construction of a desalination plant at 
Penneshaw. 
Critical infrastructure assets of the AHFKI region are described in Table 9.  
Table 9 Key infrastructure in the AHFKI region 
Infrastructure  
Description  
Road transport 
State maintained roads that provide key freight routes include: 
AH: South Eastern Freeway, Onkaparinga Valley Road, Strathalbyn Road 
FP: Victor Harbour Road, Main South Road 
KI: Playford Highway, West End Highway, and South Coast Road 
Rail transport 
Rail transport passes through the region however there is no internal freight 
transport via rail in the region as there are no freight stops. 
AH: Adelaide to Melbourne railway line 
FP: Passenger heritage railway between Mount Barker and Victor Harbour 
(Steam Ranger Heritage Railway) 
Ferry 
Kangaroo Island residents and businesses are reliant on the ferry between Cape 
Jervis and Penneshaw to transport goods between the Island and mainland 
including agricultural exports. Two new ferries with more frequent services and 
upgrades to the ferry terminal check-in and loading infrastructure at both Cape 
Jervis and Penneshaw are currently under construction.  
Air transport 
Adelaide Airport (outside the region) is the only international airport in South 
Australia. Kingscote Airport on Kangaroo Island is the only commercial domestic 
airport in the region and is operated by Kangaroo Island Council.  
Sealed airstrips are located across the region: 
AH: Woodside 
FP: Goolwa, Hindmarsh Island, Strathalbyn 
KI: Vivonne Bay, American River

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 25  
Infrastructure  
Description  
Energy 
generation 
Large scale renewable electricity generation in the region occurs at the Starfish 
Hill Wind Farm near Cape Jervis on Fleurieu Peninsula. Small scale (household) 
solar generation is common. 
Kangaroo Island is currently powered by a 15km undersea electricity cable from 
the mainland and a back-up 6MW diesel generator at the main town of 
Kingscote. About one-quarter of the 3,000 homes on Kangaroo Island already 
have rooftop solar, and there are two larger installations of 14kW at the council 
chambers and 50kW at the airport (Parkinson 2016). 
Mains water 
Mains water on the Fleurieu Peninsula is sourced from the rainfall fed Myponga 
Reservoir. Across the Adelaide Hills most mains water comes from the River 
Murray via the Balhannah treatment plant.  
On Kangaroo Island, Middle River Reservoir and a small desalination plant at 
Penneshaw supply mains water to most of the Island.  A new desalination plant 
is currently under construction near Penneshaw.  
Significant parts of the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula are not connected 
to mains water or sewerage, and instead rely on rainwater and on-site effluent 
disposal.  
Tele-
communications 
Telecommunications in the region are generally reliable, especially in more 
populated areas. However there are pockets with limited access on the 
southern Fleurieu Peninsula and on Kangaroo Island. 
Telecommunications on Kangaroo Island will improve following SA Power 
Network’s construction of an undersea fibre optic cable from Cape Jervis to 
Kangaroo Island due for completion in 2024. 
Community 
infrastructure  
The region is well-serviced by community infrastructure including hospitals and 
healthcare and education facilities. However, there is a significant shortage of 
early childhood education and childcare across the region.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 26  
 
Governance 
There are a range of organisations with responsibilities that include aspects that do or could contribute to 
drought resilience in the region. A selection of these organisations are described in Table 10. 
Table 10 Roles and responsibilities of regional organisations 
Organisation 
Roles and responsibilities 
RDA AHFKI  
(RDA AHFKI 
2024b) 
General role – 
• 
Ensuring good regional productivity and liveability by providing 
appropriate infrastructure (public transport, housing, freight) 
• 
Enhancing regional innovation and resilience by addressing key issues 
and disruptions (climate change, demographic change, digitisation, 
demand for skilled workforce) 
• 
Strengthening the region’s three most competitive industries (tourism, 
manufacturing, agriculture), increasing exports and growing employment 
• 
Ensuring our region and government will be well connected and informed 
to make the most of economic development opportunities by providing 
regional economic advice and promoting/delivering government programs 
Drought related –  
• 
Improving agriculture practices by promoting AgTech awareness 
programs 
• 
Identifying and promoting funding options for the region’s communities 
and business to act on climate change 
• 
Continuing support for Resilient Hills & Coasts 
Landscape Boards 
(Hills and Fleurieu; 
Kangaroo Island)  
(Hills and Fleurieu 
Landscape Board 
2024; Kangaroo 
Island Landscape 
Board 2024) 
General –  
• 
Facilitating the sustainable management of natural resources and 
biodiversity conservation in each region  
• 
Connecting people to knowledge, expertise, and funding 
• 
Providing education and support to landholders on best practices 
• 
Promoting the formation of long-term and meaningful partnerships to 
better manage the region’s landscapes 
Drought –  
• 
Providing grants and funding for environmental and agricultural projects. 
• 
Supporting sustainable, low-emissions agriculture  
• 
Preparing properties for fire and extreme weather events 
Southern and Hills 
LGA 
(Southern & Hills 
Local Government 
Association (SH 
LGA) n.d.; SH LGA 
2023) 
 
General –  
• 
Undertaking a regional coordinating, representational, advocating and 
marketing role on behalf of its member councils 
• 
Facilitating information sharing and collaboration among councils 
Drought –  
• 
Advocating for climate change related relief and recovery

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 27  
Organisation 
Roles and responsibilities 
• 
Supporting the development and implementation of regional drought 
response plans 
• 
Fostering collaboration among stakeholders 
SA Drought Hub 
(SA Drought Hub 
2024) 
 
General – 
• 
Serving as a central resource for drought resilience and preparedness -
related information and support services 
• 
Coordinating applied and practical research and innovation efforts to 
improve drought resilience 
Drought – 
• 
Supporting a wide range of projects with the objective of enhancing 
drought resilience across all farming sectors, along with the industries 
and communities they support 
• 
Facilitating access to drought-related research, tools and technologies 
• 
Disseminating up-to-date information and resources  
PIRSA 
(PIRSA 2023; 
PIRSA 2024b) 
 
General –  
• 
Maintaining the prosperity and support the development and 
sustainability of the State's primary industries and regions  
• 
Promoting research and innovation to enhance industry productivity and 
sustainability 
Drought – 
• 
Collaborating across government and industry to help the State adapt, 
prepare, and respond to climate change – including drought 
• 
Providing technical and financial assistance to farmers and agribusinesses 
• 
Promoting carbon farming/sequestration  
• 
Providing information on how to manage drought 
• 
Coordinating the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program and Farm 
Business Resilience Program funded through the Australian Government’s 
Future Drought Fund. 
Resilient Hills and 
Coasts Climate 
Partnership 
(Resilient Hills & 
Coasts n.d., 
Resilient Hills & 
Coasts 2022) 
General –  
• 
Developing and implementing regional climate adaptation and resilience 
strategies 
• 
Facilitating collaboration among councils and stakeholders on climate 
resilience projects (through Regional Climate Partnerships network) 
• 
Promoting series of expert webinars on sustainable homes 
• 
Undertaking bushfire and biodiversity projects 
Drought – 
• 
Building on and spreading regional best practice in enabling agriculture 
that is regenerative, water smart, resilient to a variable climate, and 
supports carbon farming as part of a zero emissions 
pathway.Leveraging our leadership and networks to encourage

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 28  
Organisation 
Roles and responsibilities 
residential and infrastructure development that avoids natural hazards, is 
built to maximise resilience, and is energy efficient and water sensitive. 
Councils 
General –  
• 
Providing local governance and deliver essential services to communities 
• 
Managing local infrastructure, planning, and development projects 
• 
Supporting community well-being through health, recreation, and cultural 
programs 
Drought – 
• 
Supporting the integration of drought resilience into local planning and 
policy frameworks 
Australian 
Government 
Department of 
Agriculture, 
Fisheries and 
Forestry 
General –  
• 
Maintaining and creating agricultural export opportunities, to provide 
gains for Australian agriculture, fishing and forestry.  
• 
Managing biosecurity risks to Australia to protect our multi-billion-dollar 
industries and our way of life.  
• 
Engaging with international counterparts to reinforce Australia’s role in 
shaping how the global agriculture and fibre sector addresses food 
security, productivity, trade, sustainability and the impacts of climate 
change. 
Drought – 
• 
Coordinating the Future Drought Fund and range of other drought related 
programs before, during and after drought to support the primary 
production industry. 
Industry bodies 
and farming 
systems groups 
General –  
• 
Partnering with government and industry to develop policies and 
programs that promote the social, economic, and environmental 
sustainability of primary production. 
• 
Presents a united voice on behalf of their membership in advocacy and 
representative activities. 
Drought – 
• 
Supporting industry to implement best practise drought resilience action.

The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Region | 29  
 
Defining features of the AHFKI Region  
Through the collation of information in the previous sections, a number of defining features of the AHFKI 
region have been identified: 
• A growing population – growing faster than the rest of the State and projected to continue to grow until 
2041. 
• Low rates of unemployment. 
• Higher rates of volunteering, particularly on Kangaroo Island. 
• A diverse economy at a regional scale but less diversity on Kangaroo Island with nearly 25% of 
employment and 33% of economic output in the agricultural sector.  
• Agriculture ranked sixth in industry of employment and second in economic output generation for the 
region as a whole. 
• 44% of land in the region used for livestock farming. 
• Very high proportions of State apple, pear and cherry production, established and reliant on cool climates 
and reliable rainfall. 
• Internationally renowned grape growing and wine production. 
• Significant cropping production including wheat, canola, beans, barley and oats. 
• Annual rainfall declining and average maximum temperatures rising from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-
2023. 
• Although crop yields are generally better when growing season rainfall is high, there have been some 
seasons when other factors contributed to higher yields despite lower rainfall and vice versa. 
• Mainland communities are generally well serviced by electricity, water, telecommunications and transport 
infrastructure however Kangaroo Island communities are less well serviced. 
• Kangaroo Island industries are highly reliant on road and ferry transport which can be disrupted by 
extreme weather and mechanical issues. 
• Strong tourism offerings with close proximity to Adelaide.

Drought | 30  
 Drought  
 
A definition of drought 
Because people use and view water in so many different ways, there is no universally agreed definition of 
drought. It is measured in different ways and at different timescales, for example (Kirono et al, 2020):  
• Meteorological drought – below-normal rainfall. 
• Agricultural or soil moisture drought - below-normal water storage in the saturated soil zone. 
• Hydrological drought - below-normal water availability in streams, lakes and/or groundwater. 
• Socioeconomic drought – when water needs cannot be met.  
This lack of a clear definition can present a barrier to effective drought planning (Hughes et al. 2022). 
Governments often select meteorological indicators (such as rainfall and temperature) to serve as drought 
policy triggers due to their objectivity and transparency. However, this fails to capture the socio-economic 
outcomes of drought, which in the past has lead to some non-drought affected areas receiving assistance 
and vice versa. 
The Bureau of Meteorology defines drought as a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use (Bureau of Meteorology, 2024). 
Drought is not simply low rainfall. Rather, drought is a comparatively dry period compared to normal 
conditions. It also considers the ability of those affected to cope with drier than usual conditions. It may be 
for a short period or a long period of time. 
For the purpose of the AHFKI Regional Drought Resilience Plan, drought is defined as:  
A period of abnormally dry conditions that impacts negatively on a region’s water availability, the 
environment and agricultural production in a region and, consequently, impacts negatively on the 
economy and environment of the region and the health and wellbeing of its residents. 
 
Causes of drought  
Drought in the AHFKI region is caused by a number of natural atmospheric conditions including the Positive 
Indian Ocean Dipole and El Niño-Southern Oscillation. Anthropogenic climate change is also projected to 
impact on drought conditions. The following descriptions have been adapted from the Bureau of 
Meteorology website. 
3.2.1 Positive Indian Ocean Dipole 
The Indian Ocean Dipole is one of the strongest climate drivers for the AHFKI region. The Indian Ocean 
Dipole refers to sustained changes in the difference between sea surface temperatures of the tropical 
western and eastern Indian Ocean (Bureau of Meteorology 2021). The Indian Ocean Dipole has three 
phases: neutral, positive, and negative. 
During the positive Indian Ocean Dipole phase, westerly winds weaken along the equator allowing warm 
water to shift towards Africa. Changes in the winds also allow cool water to rise up from the deep ocean in 
the east. This sets up a temperature difference across the tropical Indian Ocean with cooler than normal 
water in the east and warmer than normal water in the west. Generally, this means there is less moisture

Drought | 31  
than normal in the atmosphere to the northwest of Australia. This changes the path of weather systems 
coming from Australia's west, often resulting in less rainfall and higher than normal temperatures over parts 
of Australia during winter and spring. 
A positive Indian Ocean Dipole typically means: 
• 
Less rainfall across the region (see Figure 15) 
• 
Higher than normal temperatures during winter and spring in the region. 
Figure 15 Winter-spring mean rainfall deciles during positive Indian Ocean Dipole years (Bureau of 
Meteorology, 2021) 
 
3.2.2 El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO)  
El Niño and La Niña also influence drought conditions in the AHFKI region (Bureau of Meteorology 2021a). 
They are a part of a natural cycle known as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and are associated with 
many months of warming (El Niño) or cooling (La Niña) in the central and eastern tropical Pacific. The ENSO 
cycle loosely operates over timescales from one to eight years. 
El Niño typically results in: 
• Reduced rainfall across the entire the AHFKI region (refer Figure 16) 
• Warmer temperatures 
• Shift in temperature extremes

Drought | 32  
• Increased frost risk 
• Reduced tropical cyclone numbers 
• Later monsoon onset 
• Increased fire danger in southeast Australia. 
An El Niño occurs when sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean become 
substantially warmer than average, which causes a shift in atmospheric circulation. Typically, the equatorial 
trade winds blow from east to west across the Pacific Ocean. El Niño events are associated with a 
weakening, or even reversal, of the prevailing trade winds. 
The shift in rainfall away from the western Pacific, associated with El Niño, means that Australian rainfall 
is usually reduced through winter–spring, particularly across the eastern and northern parts of the continent. 
Although most major Australian droughts have been associated with El Niño, analysis of past El Niño events 
shows that widespread drought does not occur with every event, and the strength of an El Niño is not 
directly proportional to the rainfall impacts. 
Figure 16 Winter-spring mean rainfall deciles during El Niño years (Bureau of Meteorology, 2021a)

Drought | 33  
 
Past droughts 
Before European colonisation, the region would have experienced numerous drought periods. Since 
meteorological records began, the region has experienced a number of significant declared droughts 
including (Bureau of Meteorology 2020): 
• The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902 
• The 1914 to 1915 drought  
• The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945 
• The 1965 to 1968 drought (particularly affecting the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula)  
• The 1982 to 1983 drought 
• The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009 
• The 2017 to 2019 drought (the Tinderbox drought)  
The 2017 to 2019 drought, whilst one of the shortest on record, was extremely severe in eastern South 
Australia including the AHFKI region. The region experienced rainfall deciles that were very much below 
average and high temperatures. The drought caused significant stress on water resources, agriculture, and 
natural ecosystems in the area. The hot conditions further combined with the dry landscape and strong 
winds produced dangerous fire weather conditions during December 2019 into early January 2020, including 
the severe 2020 Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island bushfires. 
 
Green Drought 
From February 2024 to May 2024 as this Plan was being prepared, rainfall across the region was well below 
average. Average rainfalls through June were enough for green cover to establish, however below average 
rainfall in July lead to conditions referred to as a green drought. 
A green drought can occur when there is enough rainfall to grow grass, but there is not enough deep-soil 
moisture for crop and pasture growth (Bureau of Meteorology 2019). 
New green growth with high water content does not provide adequate nutrition for stock, especially young 
and breeding animals. Although the land may look green, supplementary feeding to meet nutrition needs 
may be required for some time until pastures mature.

Drought | 34  
3.3.1 Past impacts of droughts 
Through the stakeholder engagement undertaken for this project, the impacts of drought on the region 
described in Table 11 were identified.  
Table 11 Drought impacts 
Theme 
Impact 
Social impacts 
Drought erodes self-confidence, increases anxiety and increases mental stress, 
leading to physical health issues, increased family and relationship breakdowns, 
and higher suicide rates 
Relationships get strained as people focus on immediate situations and cannot 
think about the future 
Withdrawal from community settings which leads to reduced social interaction 
and division within the community 
Children are affected by the loss of family income, increased stress and reduced 
family time 
Reduced feelings of positivity and optimism (e.g. caused by having to get rid of 
stock or wastages or financial stress), leaving people feeling out of control 
Declines in visual amenities and lifestyle, leading to a reduction in services and 
infrastructure 
Decrease in holidays and time off, with people working seven days a week, 
leading to increased workload and burnout 
Agricultural 
impacts 
Reduced agricultural production 
Farms incur greater debt, impacting their financial stability and long-term 
viability, and reducing cash flow, making it difficult to manage regular expenses 
and invest in future operations 
Farmers often engage in 'fire sales' to get rid of stock and then have to buy back 
at a premium or have lost herd genetic diversity 
Increased fruit and crop damage from extreme heat 
Decrease in water availability for stock consumption, irrigation of pastures and 
milking shed hygiene and potential increase in salinity 
Increased spending on buying feed, trucking water, and other essential 
resources 
Livestock health deteriorates due to inadequate feed and water 
Consolidation of smaller farms, reducing the number of individual farm 
operations 
Reduction of ability to grow feed 
Immediate demands of drought conditions make it difficult for farmers to plan for 
the long term

Drought | 35  
Theme 
Impact 
Environment 
Increase in grazing pressure  
Different timing of pests during drought 
Increase in bushfire risk due to dry conditions and lack of water resource access 
Adverse impacts on native plant and animal health/condition  
Reduced water flows, with impacts on water dependent species including native 
fish 
Increase in erosion risk, decrease in topsoil, decline in soil health 
Decrease in water quality and availability of surface water 
Increase in wildlife and human interaction, increase in biosecurity risk 
Economy 
Lower farm incomes lead to decreased spending in local shops and businesses 
Increased economic strain due to insufficient government funding and assistance  
Larger companies can afford to pay higher wages, making it difficult for smaller 
businesses to compete 
Decrease in local economy (in towns and also individual farms/agribusiness) – an 
increase in debt and decrease in equity 
Businesses that provide services and supplies to farms, such as machinery 
suppliers and resellers, experience reduced demand and financial stress 
Labour demands – increase in workloads but decrease in motivation and 
productivity 
Increase in need for off farm income jobs 
Job losses, with people leaving the area to seek employment elsewhere 
Serious strain on Kangaroo Island’s logistics, affecting the transport of goods and 
resources 
Decrease in tourists, impacting the local tourism industry 
Increase in prices for essential goods and services 
Fall in market prices for agricultural products 
Infrastructure 
Deterioration of infrastructure due to compounded effects of drought 
Damage to farm infrastructure and equipment from poor roads worsened by 
drought conditions 
Decrease in on-farm capital and repairs 
Governance 
Highlights the need for local decision-making to be managed locally to effectively 
address the unique challenges posed by drought

Drought | 36  
 
Future climate and drought projections 
Climate projections describe what the future climate could be like, sourced from multiple climate models, 
and based on numerous assumptions about the factors that influence climate and the trajectory of change in 
greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. 
The CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology have used up to 40 global climate models to develop projections for 
different parts of Australia. Each model uses different assumptions and algorithms to project how climate 
variables such as temperature, rainfall and evapotranspiration will respond in different emissions scenarios 
over different time frames. The projections presented in online tools and viewers each use a different 
combination of global climate models and so show slightly different results. Three of the projections tools 
most commonly used in South Australia are described in the following sections: 
1. My Climate View (national focus) 
2. Climate Change in Australia (national focus) 
3. DEW South Australian Climate Projections Viewer (SA focus). 
Analysis of multiple global climate model simulations of rainfall and soil moisture for the historical (1900–
2005) and future (2006–2100) climates undertaken by Kirono et al (2020) indicated that under climate 
change, Australia will spend more time under drought conditions, with longer drought duration and more 
intense drought, particularly across southern and eastern Australia. Kirono et al (2020) defined drought as 
when the Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI) and Standardised Soil Moisture Index (SSM) were negative 
for a period of 3 months or more, and reached a value of -1.0 to define drought and -2.0 to define extreme 
drought. Drought intensity is defined by the cumulative SPI or SSMI from all events. The more negative the 
value, the more intense the event.  
Figure 17 shows the percentage of models showing a projected increase in percentage of time spent in 
drought and extreme drought, and the intensity of drought and extreme drought in the 21st century (2006–
2100) under RCP8.5, relative to the 20th century (1900–2005).  
Model results in southern Australia showed lower levels of uncertainty than the rest of Australia with high 
model agreement on the increase in time spent in drought.

Drought | 37  
Figure 17 Increase in percentage of time spent in drought and intensity of drought (from Kirono et al., 
2020). 
 
3.4.1 My Climate View (myclimateview .com.au) 
My Climate View is a collaboration between Australia's national science agency CSIRO and the Bureau of 
Meteorology and has been designed together with Australian farmers as part of the Climate Services for 
Agriculture program with funding from the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund. Climate trends for 
specific commodities at a local scale are presented to support decision making. 
My Climate View presents projected future rainfall, temperature, and relative humidity data from Climate 
Change in Australia (see following section), using its Application-Ready dataset. It also presents seasonal 
forecast data from the Bureau of Meteorology.  
My Climate View allows users to select a location and if desired, a commodity (for example sheep or wheat).  
Projections include key commodity climate factors, for example for sheep it will include winter rainfall for 
pasture growth and cold exposure at lambing. For wheat it will include growing season rainfall, frost at 
flowering and heat damage at flowering and grain fill. A default growing season is defined for each location 
but can be altered in the tool. 
Data is presented for each location and commodity at 2050 for a medium emissions scenario (RCP 4.5) as a 
default, with users able to explore 2030, 2050 and 2070 at a medium or high (RCP 8.5) emissions scenario.  
Rainfall and temperature projections for four locations in the 2050s using RCP 8.5 are shown in Table 12.

Drought | 38  
Table 12 Selected climate projections for four AHFKI region locations  
Climate variable  
Langhorne 
Creek 
Parndana 
Parawa 
Charleston 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
Total annual rainfall  373 mm 
335 mm 
634 mm 
591 mm 
787 mm 
731 mm 
743 mm 
737 mm 
Summer rainfall  
64 mm 
52 mm 
68 mm 
54 mm 
91 mm 
75 mm 
86 mm 
75 mm 
Autumn rainfall 
90 mm 
82 mm 
140 mm 
139 mm 
174 mm 
161 mm 
151 mm 
149 mm 
Winter rainfall 
130 mm 
120 mm 
294 mm 
275 mm 
343 mm 
331 mm 
329 mm 
337 mm 
Spring rainfall 
98 mm 
86 mm 
130 mm 
122 mm 
178 mm 
162 mm 
177 mm 
172 mm 
Average maximum 
temperature 
22.2oC 
23.6oC 
19.3oC 
20.4oC 
18.9oC 
20.1oC 
19.9oC 
21.3oC 
Annual hot days 
(over 35oC) 
17 days 
24 days 
5 days 
6 days 
5 days 
8 days 
11 days 
18 days 
 
3.4.2 Climate Change in Australia (climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au) 
Climate Change in Australia was developed by the CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology and provides a 
number of data products and tools that present projections at different scales for four timescales (2030, 
2050, 2070 and 2090) and three emissions scenarios (RCPs 2.5, 4.5 and 8.5).   
The Regional Climate Change Explorer provides a summary of projections across large “cluster” areas. Most 
of the AHFKI region is within the Southern and South-Western Flatlands East sub-cluster as shown in Figure 
18.  
Figure 18 Southern and South-Western Flatlands East sub-cluster

Drought | 39  
Key climate projection messages for the cluster are described below: 
• 
Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons (very high confidence). 
• 
More hot days and warm spells are projected with very high confidence. Fewer frosts are projected 
with high confidence. 
• 
A continuation of the trend of decreasing winter rainfall is projected with high confidence. Spring 
rainfall decreases are also projected with high confidence. Changes in other seasons unclear, 
although downscaling results suggest a continuation of the observed autumn declines. 
• 
Increased intensity of extreme rainfall events is projected, with high confidence. 
• 
Mean sea level will continue to rise, and height of extreme sea-level events will also increase (very 
high confidence). 
• 
A harsher fire-weather climate in the future (high confidence). 
• 
On annual and decadal basis, natural variability in the climate system can act to either mask or 
enhance any long-term human induced trend, particularly in the next 20 years and for rainfall. 
The eastern part of the region (a portion of the eastern Adelaide Hills and eastern Fleurieu Peninsula) is part 
of the Murray Basin sub-cluster.  
Figure 19 Murray-Basin sub-cluster (BOM & CSIRO 2019) 
 
Key climate projection messages for the Murray-Basin sub-cluster are described below: 
• Time spent in drought is projected, with medium confidence, to increase over the course of the century. 
• By late in the century, less rainfall is projected during the cool season, with high confidence. There 
is medium confidence that rainfall will remain unchanged in the warm season. 
• Increased intensity of extreme rainfall events is projected, with high confidence. 
• More hot days and warm spells are projected with very high confidence. 
3.4.3 DEW South Australian Climate Projections and Viewer 
(https:/ / www.environment.sa.gov.au/ climate-viewer/ ) 
The Guide to climate projections for risk assessment and planning in South Australia  (DEW 2022) provides a 
summary of the changes in climate and sea levels likely to occur in South Australia, together with guidance

Drought | 40  
on the use of climate projections for risk assessment and planning. Projections are presented for landscape 
management regions, including the Hills and Fleurieu (HF) and Kangaroo Island (KI) Landscape Regions. 
The guide identifies that time spent in drought (over a 20-year period) is projected to nearly double in the 
HF and KI Landscape Regions. This means that up to 65% of time could be in drought by 2030. Also, by 
2030 the frequency of extreme drought will more than double.  
By 2050, time spend in drought is projected to more than double within the HF and KI Landscape Regions. 
This means that up to 70% of time could be in drought by 2050.  
By 2030 annual mean daily maximum temperatures are projected to increase by 1.0 °C in the KI and HF 
Landscape Regions. 
The South Australian Climate Projections Viewer is a new online tool for climate projection maps and data. 
The interactive maps display projected changes to temperature and rainfall across South Australia for a 
range of future time periods. The climate data can be displayed in 10km and 50km grids or for individual SA 
landscape regions for a range of future time periods, climate variables and parameters.  
 
Impacts of drought on water availability 
Drought can lead to a range of changes to the availability of water over shorter timeframes and can be 
better characterised by factors such as (Fowler et al. 2023): 
• 
Increasingly less run-off for a given rainfall. 
• 
Changes in rainfall seasonality. 
• 
Increased time spent in spells of little or no rainfall. 
• 
Decreases in frequency of high-rainfall events. 
• 
Increases in evaporative demand. 
The effect of a drier climate on water resources is measurable. For example, inflows to the River Murray in 
the last 20 years averaged 4820 GL/year compared to 9407 GL/year over the last 100 years (Walker et al. 
2021). It is estimated that that a 10% change in average annual rainfall will be amplified as a 20–35% 
change in the catchment runoff (as well as in streamflow, and inflow into storages) for parts of southeastern 
Australia (Walker et al. 2021).  
The impact of climate extremes has been investigated for some parts of the AHFKI area. For example, the 
Department of Environment and Water (DEW) (2019) classified climate related risks across the Eastern 
Mount Lofty Ranges (EMLR) and found a medium level of risk to economic uses of groundwater in the Marne 
Saunders area and a medium level of risk to human needs and economic use of surface water in the 
southern part of the EMLR as a result of climate extremes. 
DEW has undertaken annual assessments of water resources across the State and have noted relationships 
between lower rainfall and lower run-off. The assessments of the Western Mount Lofty Ranges (WMLR) for 
the 2018-19 year indicated widespread lower than average rainfall (Figure 20) and below average and ‘very 
below average’ streamflow (Figure 21). This would indicate dry conditions do not need to persist for long 
periods to impact surface water resources.

Drought | 41  
Given that surface water resources in the region are prescribed it is possible that in extended dry conditions 
access to water entitlements is reduced. This occurred for River Murray licences during the Millenium 
Drought that were reduced to a few percent of the annual allocation (Cock 2023). 
Figure 20 Distribution of rainfall for the period 1986-2015 (left) and 2018-19 (right). This shows lower 
rainfall over the majority of the WMLR (DEW, 2020b). 
 
 
Figure 21 Streamflow decile descriptions for eight gauging stations in the WMLR, which shows where 
average (white), below average (pink) and very below average (orange) flows were measured (DEW, 
2020b).

Drought | 42  
A reduction in cool-season rainfall is likely to reduce recharge to groundwater systems. Higher temperatures 
and lower rainfall will lead to higher potential evapotranspiration, which may affect groundwater demand 
and evaporative discharge. This, together with reduced recharge, will place greater pressure on groundwater 
systems possibly causing groundwater levels to fall and groundwater salinity to rise. Water resource 
assessments by DEW generally indicate an acceptable condition of groundwater resources across the region.  
3.5.1 Implications for agriculture, horticulture and viticulture 
The impact of drought on agriculture, horticulture and viticulture is varied and depends on many factors 
including (but not limited to): 
• 
Current climate regime (e.g. drier climates are usually more susceptible). 
• 
Type of water source and availability of alternatives (e.g. groundwater resources can be more 
resilient than surface water resources in extended dry periods). 
• 
Type of crop/stock, including whether there is irrigation or dryland agriculture. 
• 
Soil type and ability to retain moisture.  
• 
The condition of the farming enterprise leading into drought, including the availability of reserves 
and financial position.  
In irrigated areas drought can generally mean higher evaporative demand from crops. Dry spring and 
autumn conditions mean irrigation seasons can be longer. This can present issues where annual allocations 
are limited and temporary trade of water is needed to meet demand. 
Where water sources become severely limited such as during the Millenium Drought, irrigation may not be 
possible and strategies to save more valuable perennial crops may be put in place. Irrigators in the 
Langhorne Creek area had to invest in strategies to access and store water supplies. This included dredging 
channels to water that had receded in Lake Alexandrina, storing water via managed aquifer recovery 
schemes and building new pipelines to the River Murray. 
Regions that have access to better quality groundwater such as McLaren Vale appeared to be more resilient 
to drought. Access to a diversity of water resources, for example groundwater, surface water and mains 
water, also generally have higher levels of resilience.  
It has been reported that irrigation with higher salinity water has occurred in times of severe water shortage 
(e.g. Langhorne Creek) resulting in a build-up of salt in the root zone. It takes several years of subsequent 
irrigation to return soil salinity to healthy levels. 
Extended or seasonal dry conditions in dryland agricultural areas can deplete soil moisture storage leading to 
lack of production of crops, and reduction in feed for stock and livestock which causes loss of condition 
where feed cannot be imported and destocking is not undertaken. Drought also reduces the availability of 
sources of water for stock watering. 
Soil health can deteriorate during drought making production following a drought more difficult. Lack of 
cover on dry soils increases erosion potential, causes compaction (creating problems for root penetration) 
and potentially leads to increased water repellence. It can reduce soil carbon stocks, with consequences for 
landowners engaged in soil carbon sequestration projects.  
An increasing frequency and intensity of drought will further exacerbate these impacts.

Other drivers of change | 43  
 Other drivers of change 
A number of other economic, social and environmental trends may influence the resilience of the AHFKI 
region to drought. These are occurring at different scales and have different implications for the region. 
 
Global drivers of change 
Table 13 describes global drivers of change (CSIRO 2022, PwC 2022, Taylor et al. 2017) and how they are 
or have potential to influence the AHFKI region. 
Table 13 Global drivers of change  
Global trend 
Description  
Climate change 
and 
decarbonisation 
Rising greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere are causing temperatures to rise, 
annual rainfall to reduce, and extreme weather events to become more frequent and 
more severe. Responding to climate change requires a shift in the global economy to 
reduce carbon emissions and action to adapt to a new and changing climate. In the 
region, agriculture and transport are key sources of emissions that are likely to see 
transformation change over the next thirty years. 
Technological 
disruption 
A digital world is filled with opportunities for online work and study, telehealth, online 
shopping, and digital currency. With technology and automation come consequences 
for jobs and security. A lack of access to technology due to a lack of infrastructure 
can lead to disadvantages compared to those with access.   
In the AHFKI region, access to digital technology is reliable for most residents, 
providing increased opportunity to work from home and access health and education 
services. It also supports commerce and industry. A greater reliance on technology 
for work, business and study means that outages and service issues can have a 
significant impact on operations.  
Urbanisation 
and population 
growth 
The global population is rapidly expanding, a trend that is projected to be mirrored in 
the AHFKI region. This growth, particularly in the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu 
Peninsula areas, will result in an increased demand for residential and commercial 
spaces. 
Trade 
disruptions  
Sudden and unexpected widespread trade disruptions brought through global 
pandemics, conflict, geopolitical tensions, or similar events can have significant 
impacts on supply chains, demand, and commodity prices. The COVID-19 pandemic 
had a significant impact on the tourism and agricultural industry globally, with 
impacts also felt across the whole region.  
Consumer focus Globally there is a strong consumer and citizen push for decision makers to consider 
trust, transparency, fairness, and environmental and social governance. Demand for 
sustainable produce is growing. Across the region, an increasing number of farmers

Other drivers of change | 44  
are trialling and converting to sustainable production techniques, such as use of 
biological rather than chemical fertilisers and on Kangaroo Island their genetically 
modified (GM)-free status allows them to access Japan's high-priced market for GM-
free grain (Hough, 2020). 
Increased 
demand for 
meat  
As many developing countries become wealthier and individuals receive more 
income, demand for meat is increasing. In the AHFKI region, pastoralists have an 
opportunity the contribute to meeting this demand.  
Disease  
Disease outbreaks and other biosecurity risks can threaten the agricultural industry.  
 
National and state drivers of change  
Table 14 describes national and state drivers of change (CSIRO 2022, Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021) 
and how they are or have potential to influence the AHFKI region. 
Table 14 National and state drivers of change  
National and/or 
state trend 
Description  
Environmental 
targets and 
limits  
Australia has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. This may have 
significant impacts on high emissions industries including mining and agriculture. It 
also presents opportunities to build renewable energy and low pollution economies 
and limit the scale of climate change.  
The AHFKI agricultural and manufacturing industries that are key sources of 
emissions will require transformational change to contribute to emissions reduction 
targets. 
Increased cost 
of living  
Increasing costs of living is placing pressure on Australians to fund their everyday 
needs. There is high variability in the income security of the AHFKI community and 
this driver will be felt differently in different communities.  
Health 
challenges  
The post-pandemic world has exacerbated existing health challenges posed by an 
ageing population and growing burden of chronic disease. One in five Australians 
report high or very high levels of psychological distress. Responding to our health 
risks and improving health outcomes is becoming more and more important. The 
research and engagement for this project highlighted the significant adverse impacts 
on the mental health of the people and communities experiencing drought and the 
need for increased services.

Drought resilience | 45  
 Drought resilience 
 
A definition of resilience 
The term ‘resilience’ is commonly used in a number of subject areas from health and wellbeing to natural 
resources and the economy. A range of Regional Drought Resilience Plans and literature were analysed to 
compare their definitions of ‘drought resilience’. These are presented in Table 15. From this analysis, the 
following definition of drought resilience was selected from the Future Drought Fund (Drought Resilience 
Funding Plan 2020 to 2024) Determination 2020: 
Drought resilience means the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to 
changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and changed 
seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, environmental and social wellbeing. 
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In many cases, the intent is to use disruption as an opportunity 
to move in a new direction, not just recover back to a previous state. Resilience is about proactively 
changing in order not to be changed involuntarily. 
Building resilience will help the AHFKI region to endure droughts with fewer negative impacts and recover 
from them sooner. 
Table 15 Definitions of resilience from various drought plans 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
Regional Drought Resilience Plans (Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry 2024) 
South West 
Queensland  
‘Resilience’ is harder to define. The World Bank has defined resilience as the 
ability “… to anticipate, absorb, accommodate or recover from the effects of a 
hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner”. 
Australia’s CSIRO perhaps more specifically states: “drought resilience will 
result in a regional Australia that can endure deeper, longer droughts, and 
recover from them sooner. This will allow our food and agribusinesses to boost 
national farm income, increase food security, and protect the regional jobs that 
rely on agriculture. It will increase the resilience of rural and regional 
communities that depend on agriculture and improve environmental outcomes 
Murraylands & 
Riverlands  
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In many cases, we want to use 
disruption as an opportunity to move in a new direction, not just recover back 
to exactly where we were.  
Northern & 
Yorke 
Resilience has multiple definitions; common traits of resilience include the 
ability of a system, organisation or individual to withstand adversity and 
bounce back. For the purpose of the NYRDRP, the definition of resilience has 
been taken from the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 and is 
described as: “the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to 
changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and

Drought resilience | 46  
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, environmental and 
social wellbeing”. (Australian Government, 2019).  
Also includes a quote from a participant: Resilience is the ability to withstand 
bad times or disasters – not to just get back up, but figure out how to move 
forward, progress and grow in capacity to prevent it from happening again. 
Must be able to adapt to prevent. - Anita Kuss, Unihub Spencer Gulf 
ACT 
While resilience can be defined as “The capacity of a system to absorb 
disturbance and reorganise so as to retain essentially the same function, 
structure and feedbacks”, rather than framing resilience as “bouncing back”, it 
could be more accurately described as adapting or transforming as needed in 
response to change. 
Gippsland 
Victoria  
Walker (2020) defines resilience as the capacity of a system to absorb a 
disturbance and reorganise so as to keep functioning in the same kind of way. 
Rather than just ‘bouncing back,’ resilience is all about changing and adapting 
to circumstances, rather than having them change you. 
For the purpose of this document, resilience is used to describe the ability to 
respond positively to the known impacts of drought and maintain business 
functions. It is about being able to adapt, thrive and take advantage of 
opportunities when encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ 
of the current situation, or being stoic, resilience includes the ability to adapt 
and be decisive during uncertainty and change. 
Wimmera 
Victoria  
For the purpose of this document, resilience is defined as the ability of a 
system to effectively respond to disruptions, like drought, while maintaining 
function. It is about being able to consistently and collectively develop, hone 
and create the tools to adapt, thrive and take advantage of opportunities when 
encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ of the current 
situation resilience includes the ability to adapt and potentially transform the 
way things are done during periods of uncertainty and change. 
Mid West WA  
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system 
to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks 
so as to continue to deliver values. 
Southern 
Wheatbelt WA 
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system 
to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks 
so as to continue to deliver values. 
Maru et al. 2017 
The capacity of a linked social-ecological system to absorb disturbance and 
reorganize so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, and

Drought resilience | 47  
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
feedbacks – to have the same identity. Resilience thinking embraces the ideas 
of adaptation of the current system, and also transformation to a different kind 
of system when the existing one is in an irreversibly undesirable state, or on a 
trajectory towards such a state. 
Walker 2020 
The simplest definition of resilience is the ability to cope with shocks and to 
keep functioning in much the same kind of way. It is a measure of how much 
an ecosystem, a business, a society can change before it crosses a tipping 
point into some other kind of state that it then tends to stay in. 
Possibly the most common misinterpretation of resilience is “bouncing back.” 
Resilience is in fact the ability to adapt and change, to reorganize, while coping 
with disturbance. It is all about changing in order not to be changed. A 
resilient system responds to a disturbance by changing the relative amounts of 
its different parts and how they interact, thereby changing the way it 
functions. It stays the same kind of system by learning from a disturbance, to 
be able to better cope with a similar disturbance in the future. It does not 
bounce back to look and behave exactly like it did before. Resilient systems are 
learning systems. 
Resilience is largely about learning how to change in order not to be changed. 
Trying to protect a system by keeping it in a constant state reduces its 
resilience. 
Carpenter et al. 2012 
Resilience, in the context of environmental management and sustainability, is 
the capacity of a social-ecological system to absorb disturbance, reorganize, 
and thereby retain essential functions, structures and feedbacks. 
South Australian Fire 
and Emergency Services 
Commission, 2019 
The ability to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what happens. 
Macbeth, 2024 
“Resilience is the capacity to really build your future on your own terms and to 
get on the front foot… The whole notion of resilience depends on adaptive 
capacity - the ability to adapt to new conditions as the world changes. We’ve 
come to realise that drought is a reality of life in Australia - so it shouldn’t be a 
shock.” – Professor John Cole, former Executive Director of the University of 
Southern Queensland’s Institute for Resilient Regions. 
Resilience is not just about how a community responds to a shock or a 
challenge such as drought. It also involves a community that’s stronger for the 
everyday - that is socially connected and inclusive, and that is capable of 
working together in good times to prepare for tougher times. This involves 
developing a shared awareness of what future challenges might be, and

Drought resilience | 48  
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
planning and adapting accordingly so that infrastructure and services can 
withstand future shocks. 
Arbon, 2024 
How people, communities, and businesses cope in the face of change and 
uncertainty and build capacity to survive better through (often unexpected and 
cascading) consequences of disruptions that threaten our complex and 
interconnected social systems. 
The AHFKI Regional Drought Resilience Plan is focused on drought resilience. However, enhancing drought 
resilience will help the region respond to and recover from other stresses or pressures such as bushfires, 
flooding rains, pandemics, and economic market changes. 
 
The importance of drought resilience  
Past droughts have had big impacts on the AHFKI region. They have resulted in major consequences for 
jobs and income, mental health and wellbeing, agricultural productivity, and the health of the environment. 
With climate projections predicting more frequent and more intense drought, building resilience is crucial. 
Resilience is about taking action to try to avoid or minimise these negative impacts before they happen 
rather than waiting until they do occur to act, or just focusing on recovery. Building resilience can help to 
create economic, social, and environmental development opportunities. 
 
Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, and 
regions 
It is important to consider resilience at a variety of scales from the individual to the community and the 
whole region. Resilience looks different for every community depending on its unique experience, attributes, 
risks and characteristics. However, there are a number of common attributes of a drought resilient region 
that have been identified by stakeholders, community (see Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary 
Report) and the literature (Council of Australian Governments 2011; South Australian Fire and Emergency 
Services Commission 2019; Walker 2020). 
5.3.1 Individuals  
Characteristics of resilient individuals are described in Table 16.  
Table 16 Characteristics of resilient individuals  
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Social 
characteristics 
• Having strong social connections, networks and relationships with friends, family, and 
the wider community. 
• Learning from past droughts and having knowledge of drought management. 
• Openness to share struggles with others, being willing to ask for help and access 
mental health support, seeking opportunities for breaks and respite.

Drought resilience | 49  
Theme 
Key characteristics  
• Awareness of available resources and knowledge for primary producers and 
communities. 
Financial 
characteristics 
• Diverse sources of household income. 
• Access to and awareness of financial support available. 
• Sustainable long-term business planning and risk management. 
Environmental 
characteristics 
• Adapting, innovating, and adopting new practices and technology. 
Agricultural 
characteristics 
All economic and environmental characteristics as well as: 
• Embracing innovation and implementation of new techniques, tools and technology. 
• Proactive preparation for drought. 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Access to good education, healthcare and digital connectivity. 
• Strategic investment in reliable water infrastructure that maximises water capture 
and minimises water loss. 
5.3.2 Communities  
Characteristics of resilient communities are described in Table 17.  
Table 17 Characteristics of resilient communities 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Social 
characteristics 
• Strong, connected, caring communities that help each other in times of need. 
• Proximity to regional centres with health, education and support services. 
• Sharing knowledge and celebrating sustainable, resilient practices. 
• Supporting community leaders as conduits for information. 
• Promoting and supporting volunteering opportunities that provide a sense of purpose. 
Economic 
characteristics 
• Diversification of local economies.  
• Access to community grants and training for individuals to pursue off-farm income. 
• Investment in projects that give good return to the community. 
• Local employment opportunities that support people to stay in the community. 
Agricultural 
characteristics 
• Uptake of new and adapting technology and practises. 
• Industry diversification. 
• Best practise soil and water efficiency practices. 
• Flexible water supply options. 
• Understanding seasonality for holistic primary production planning. 
Environmental 
characteristics  
• Low populations of pest/overabundant animals through proactive management 
before drought.

Drought resilience | 50  
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Assets and 
infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Reliable access to water, power, energy, digital connectivity and food. 
• Community spaces that enable people to come together. 
• Access to efficient community services and affordable commodities. 
• Good education and career pathways in agriculture. 
• Efficient transportation and special needs services during crises. 
Governance 
characteristics 
• Place-based, collaborative, long-term approaches and support from external agencies 
in ways that meet the unique needs of each community. 
• Implementing community-led initiatives with engagement at all levels. 
5.3.3 Regions  
Characteristics of resilient regions are described in Table 18. 
Table 18 Characteristics of resilient regions 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Infrastructure 
characteristics 
• Reliable and effective critical infrastructure (e.g., water, transport, power, 
telecommunication) 
• Strategic investment in infrastructure across the region. 
• Access to reliable transport/freight and movement (e.g., inputs, stock, fodder, 
people). 
• Effective local and regional weather forecasting. 
Economic 
characteristics 
• Strong agricultural commodity market conditions. 
• Access to financial institutions, interest rate support, grants, emergency funds, and 
financial education. 
• Workers that are attracted to and retained in the region. 
• Promoting local products and supporting businesses. 
Governance 
characteristics 
• Good communication and provision of information about drought updates, 
information and available grants and programs. 
• Strategic and proactive preparation for drought - investing in good times to increase 
resilience during bad times. 
• Policies that reflect regional needs (e.g. water usage, land usage, etc.). 
• Effective protocols for triggering funding and response strategies. 
• Meaningful government dialogue with the community to understand needs and 
challenges. 
• Comprehensive government understanding of drought impacts across stakeholders. 
• Scientific and observational lenses in policy development. 
• Agencies and government bodies that adopt values that support community-driven 
solutions. 
Environmental 
characteristics 
• Policies and practices for sustainable land and water use.

Approaches to drought resilience planning | 51  
 Approaches to drought resilience planning 
 
Learnings from other planning regions 
Many other regions across Australia have already prepared draft or final Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
through the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program. A desktop review of these plans and online 
meetings with a number of plan leaders has helped to: 
• Understand what has worked well or not worked well in the process of preparing Regional Drought 
Resilience Plans in other regions around Australia, including in engagement, research, reporting and 
review phases.  
• Identify the types of strategies and actions proposed for other regions and the collated evidence that 
suggests they will be successful in building drought resilience. 
The key findings of this review and engagement are summarised in Table 19.  
Table 19 Key learnings from other planning regions 
Planning 
element 
Key findings 
Structure of 
plan 
• Short, simple, easy to read plans with lots of graphics are more effective than long, 
context-heavy plans.  
• Ensure the plan is written for the target audience (ie the people who make decisions 
about what to do about drought, from community based organisations and local 
business owners through to local, state and federal agencies). 
• Drought resilience plans should be high level to enable flexibility in implementation. 
The ‘how to actually do it’ is critical but this sits separately to the plan itself. 
• Including some tools such as My Climate View can be useful for those who want 
something more tangible from the plan.  
• Providing a list of potential partners is more effective and achievable than identifying 
particular responsibilities for each goal/action. 
• Preparing a ‘plan on a page’ summary of the plan is a useful approach for those who 
do not want to read the entire plan. 
Strategies 
and actions 
• Strategies and actions should be grouped by themes. 
• The plan should take a social focus – social/people/community actions are often the 
most effective in building drought resilience.  
• The plan should be viewed through a primarily agricultural lens, noting that impacts 
on agriculture then flow through the wider system.  
• Supporting/funding community clubs/organisations to deliver their own community 
programs is a very successful approach and helps to ensure the community can 
continue to implement the plan themselves, and that actions are led by and designed

Approaches to drought resilience planning | 52  
Planning 
element 
Key findings 
for the community. This needs to be managed appropriately to avoid volunteer 
burnout.  
• Actions should be considered across the range of change types (eg maintaining, 
modifying, and transforming) with some in each category. 
Engagement • Leverage existing relationships and networks to increase engagement, including for 
First Nations engagement. 
• Tailor engagement messaging to ensure you reach all parts of the community.  
• Online engagement can work well.  
Approach 
• A risk assessment framework approach is an effective approach.   
• Using the Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) 
Framework (Crossman, 2018) is an effective approach.  
 
 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy 
(DRAMP) Framework 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman, 2018) 
published by the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) takes an integrated, multi-
pronged approach to reduce risks and impacts of drought. The Framework includes six goals, aligned with 
three pillars of drought risk reduction illustrated in Figure 22.

Approaches to drought resilience planning | 53  
Figure 22 The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman, 
2018) 
 
The six goals of the DRAMP Framework are: 
1. 
Reduce exposure to drought: reduce the potential for loss of people, livelihoods, ecosystem services 
and resources, infrastructure, as well as economic, social or cultural assets in places that could be 
adversely affected by drought. 
2. 
Reduce vulnerability to drought: reduce tendency to be adversely affected by drought. 
3. 
Increase resilience to drought risk: strengthen the ability of communities, ecosystems and economies 
to anticipate, absorb, accommodate or recover from the effects of drought quickly and efficiently by 
ensuring the preservation, restoration or improvement of natural capital. 
4. 
Transformation: alter fundamental attributes of social, economic and ecological systems, including 
value systems; regulatory, legislative, or bureaucratic regimes; financial institutions; and technological 
or biological systems. 
5. 
Prepare, respond, and recover from drought: the backbone of management and planning approaches 
to reduce drought risk, including development of comprehensive drought monitoring and early 
warning systems.  
6. 
Transfer and share drought risks: distribute risks among wider section of society to include those who 
benefit directly and indirectly from robust drought risk management.

Approaches to drought resilience planning | 54  
 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy was prepared to provide a foundation upon which state and 
local government, non-government organisations, businesses, and communities can work together to make 
a safer, more resilient South Australia. The Strategy includes eight guiding principles described in Figure 23 
for building disaster resilience that are applicable to drought resilience planning. 
Figure 23 Guiding principles for building disaster resilience (Government of South Australia, 2019) 
 
 
Types of change  
Building the resilience of the AHFKI region to drought will require various change in practices and processes. 
There are many ways and scales in which change can be approached. Three types of change often referred 
to in resilience planning are described below (Roggema et al, 2012): 
• Incremental change – associated with slow processes and small adjustments, which modify the landscape 
only slightly. They are often associated with ongoing improvements in current practice. For the AHFKI 
region, providing more frequent ferries between Kangaroo Island and the mainland would be an example 
of this change type.  
• Transitional change – associated with moving from one way of doing things to another in a deliberate 
way, for example transitioning from tradition to regenerative agricultural practices. 
• Transformational change – associated with a fundamental shift in the system. They are usually multi-
actor, multi-scale processes, where the change is highly non-linear. Examples may be initially 
controversial or cause wide-spread apprehension, for example if there was no further extraction of 
groundwater for irrigation (NOTE – this is not proposed, it is provided as an example of something that 
would be transformational).

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 55  
 Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience 
 
Opportunities from other regions 
A review of drought resilience plans from other regions with similar climate and agriculture has identified a 
number of opportunities that could be trialled or applied in the AHFKI region. 
Table 20 Opportunities from other regions to strengthen drought resilience  
Region  
Plan theme 
Opportunity 
ACT 
(ACT 
Government 
2023) 
Environment 
- 
Land Management – develop resilient land management practices 
- 
Vegetation Management – promoting native vegetation 
- 
Enterprise Selection – point to drought-tolerant species and enterprises 
which could be appropriate for future ACT climates 
- 
Water Management – soil and water conservation methods and new 
systems 
- 
Stock Management – interlinked with land management 
- 
Infrastructure – dams, rainwater storage tanks, etc. 
Social 
- 
Improve/support wellbeing 
- 
Knowledge sharing and information provision 
Governance 
- 
Recognise the important role rural land plays in providing food and fibre 
- 
Support biodiversity and provide a buffer zone for managing bushfire 
risk 
- 
Provide clear agriculture policy that articulates these themes and 
acknowledges the importance of rural land. 
Wimmera 
Southern 
Mallee 
(Agriculture 
Victoria 
2023b) 
 
Communities 
and People 
- 
Continue investment in community leadership programs  
- 
Ensure local sport and cultural events in the region remain organised 
during drought periods and ensure the infrastructure remains serviced  
- 
Promote events and activities to share drought experiences  
- 
Maintain access to recreational water and park areas during times of 
drought when their impact on community mental and physical health, 
environment and recreation is most critical  
- 
Build and strengthen programs to support mental health and create 
awareness of support options for the whole community  
- 
Ensure continuing training and education on the use of digital tools, to 
reduce the digital divide  
- 
Increase awareness and build respect for cultural and spiritual values of 
Country and protect areas of significance from drought impact  
- 
Build awareness of the actions that can be taken to increase resilience 
to drought

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 56  
Region  
Plan theme 
Opportunity 
- 
Continue to include drought resilience, preparation and response 
options in regional education and training, particularly as it applies in a 
local context 
Farming 
Enterprises 
- 
Advocate for support of financial advice and counselling services to 
enable farm and other businesses to make timely business decisions  
- 
Assist farm businesses with whole of farm planning, including drought 
preparedness, treatment of drought as a business risk, system and 
income diversification, and alternative income streams, especially in 
periods of non-drought  
- 
Encourage and support community members to access and utilise 
financial advice and counselling services  
- 
Encourage and support on farm drought preparedness activities related 
to land, crop and livestock management that are specific to the 
Wimmera Southern Mallee farming systems, climate and environment  
- 
Strengthen and expand locally specific and relevant agricultural 
research, development and extension  
- 
Support youth and careers in agriculture through workshops, career 
days, meet and greets and on-farm traineeships  
- 
Encourage entrepreneurship in farming businesses, both in family farms 
and enterprises through ‘skilling up’ 
Industry and 
Business 
- 
Advocate for support for financial advice and counselling services to 
enable industry and small businesses to make timely business decisions  
- 
Support for commercial services to provide a drought lens to 
discussions with all businesses, including larger firms  
- 
Promote and retain local business leadership/management located in 
the region for better informed decision making and early detection of 
drought impact  
- 
Support networking of industry, businesses, and the financial sector to 
focus on drought preparedness  
- 
Work closely with the financial sector to support customers with high 
drought impact risks 
Governments 
and Agencies 
- 
Maintain and regularly review plans for drought response and recovery  
- 
Promote inter-agency planning for preparation and response to drought 
periods  
- 
Focus government and agency preparations on being pro-active  
- 
Maintain formal and informal networks of key stakeholders on drought 
preparedness and resilience building  
- 
Ensure that any funding provided is targeting the needs of local 
communities

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 57  
Region  
Plan theme 
Opportunity 
Infrastructure - 
Investigate further support for investments to increase efficiencies in 
water distribution and management  
- 
Strengthen communications infrastructure to support digital access  
- 
Explore opportunities to expand localised, reliable, renewable energy 
generation and storage  
- 
Further expand mobility options and public transportation to support 
opportunities for social interaction for isolated or vulnerable groups of 
people  
- 
Maintain the road networks to enable economic activity despite lower 
rate income during droughts  
- 
Ensure community halls and houses are safe and accessible for 
everyone in the community 
Landscape 
- 
Support an interconnected network of drought refuges for flora and 
fauna to maintain an  ecologically healthy community during drought  
- 
Encourage the establishment of stock containment areas and promote 
planned grazing management to reduce soil erosion  
- 
Promote the maintenance of ground cover to support healthy soils that 
are more resilient  during droughts  
- 
Support Landcare and Caring for Country practices based on traditional 
land management approaches 
Gippsland 
(Agriculture 
Victoria 
2023a) 
Resilient, 
Connected 
and 
Empowered 
Communities 
- 
Foster and support our community leaders 
- 
Improve community health and wellbeing by raising awareness of, and 
access to, community health services 
- 
Foster coordination and collaboration between not-for-profit 
organisations 
Sustainable 
Management 
and Use of 
Natural 
Resources 
- 
Accelerate the adoption of innovative resilient and adaptive farming 
systems 
- 
Diversify water storage and supply options on farm and in communities 
- 
Improve management of natural resources on public and private land 
Resilient 
Local 
Businesses 
and Regional 
Economies 
- 
Improve decision making enhanced by holistic business planning and 
business skill development 
- 
Encourage businesses to build resilience in good years and build greater 
adaptability to seasonal conditions 
- 
Improve business continuity through succession plans and transition 
pathways 
- 
Promote diversification of local businesses and economies 
Innovation, 
Research, 
- 
Farm systems innovation through information and technology targeted 
to the needs of Gippsland.

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 58  
Region  
Plan theme 
Opportunity 
Knowledge 
Sharing and 
Skills 
Development 
- 
Industry innovation through collaborative research and knowledge 
sharing. 
- 
Building regional capability through skill development pathways, 
recruitment and local employment opportunities. 
Key Enablers 
Essential to 
Effective 
Collaboration 
and 
Collective 
Action 
- 
Clarify drought accountabilities, shared responsibilities, regional 
governance and coordination (including service offering from various 
organisations) 
- 
Consult with community groups and other existing regional and local 
networks to inform drought resilience programs. 
- 
Improve digital connectivity to support community connection 
 
 
Opportunities in stakeholder plans and projects 
Through a review of stakeholder plans and projects, and engagement with stakeholders through the key 
informant interviews, a number of opportunities that could be further progressed or accelerated through the 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan have been identified.  
Table 21 Opportunities from stakeholder plans and projects to strengthen drought resilience 
Plan 
Plan theme 
/ project 
Opportunity 
AHFKI RDA 
– Strategic 
Regional 
Plan 2022-
2025   
(RDA AHFKI 
2022b)  
Agriculture 
- 
Promotion of carbon capture in agricultural systems  
- 
5G providing reliable connectivity for mobile tools and machines – smart 
farming 
Community 
- 
Development of value-adding agriculture and industry utilising the 
regions wastewater to maximise potential of this resource  
- 
Continuous development of effective and efficient freight routes suited 
to evolving transport needs  
- 
Mapping the region’s mobile blackspots against population and industry 
- 
Encouragement of upskilling of workers and supporting businesses to 
increase digital literacy 
- 
Investigation and encouragement of collaboration with local suppliers 
who can support uptake of new technology 
- 
Supported access to business information and resources 
- 
Increased awareness of government and industry programs 
- 
Connection with government, markets, customers, researchers and 
other stakeholder

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 59  
Plan 
Plan theme 
/ project 
Opportunity 
Hills and 
Fleurieu 
Landscape 
Plan 2021-
2026 
(Hills and 
Fleurieu 
Landscape 
Board 2021) 
Agriculture/ 
Land 
management 
- 
Embracing regenerative agriculture: Supporting landholders to integrate 
regenerative agriculture principles by developing networks, sharing 
learnings and applying them locally. 
- 
Develop a Hills and Fleurieu Pest Management Strategy to prioritise 
management and compliance efforts. 
- 
Developing a circular economy - Supporting and maintaining circular 
economy opportunities in food, wine and agriculture industries to 
maximise economic, social and environmental benefits within the Hills 
and Fleurieu region.  
- 
Carbon Farming Roadmap: Providing pathways for uptake of emissions 
reduction and carbon sequestration opportunities in soils, vegetation, 
forestry and livestock management.  
- 
Supporting landholders to integrate regenerative agriculture principles 
by developing networks, sharing learnings and applying them locally. 
- 
Collaborating and information sharing to clarify responsibilities and 
improve control of priority weed species on roadsides. 
Viticulture 
- 
Enhancing biodiversity in vineyards by implementing Biodiversity Action 
Plans on individual properties 
- 
McLaren Vale Water Security Planning - Planning for how native and 
alternative water sources can support industries in the face of projected 
climate change impacts. 
Climate 
change 
- 
Explore and support carbon reduction activities, including uptake of 
carbon farming. 
- 
Ensure water resource planning is climate-ready 
- 
Support primary producers to understand regional climate impacts and 
adaptation options. 
- 
Support the community to prepare landscapes for, and recover from, 
fire and extreme weather events.  
- 
Build systems and consumer demand that support local provenance 
foods and regenerative, climate-ready land management practices.  
- 
Encourage primary producers and consumers to adopt circular economy 
practices 
First Nations 
- 
Strengthen collaboration with First Nations to embed their knowledge 
and approaches in looking after Yatra/Ruwe Country. 
- 
Protect and raise awareness of First Nations cultural and heritage 
assets. 
- 
Support the interests of Aboriginal people in accessing and caring for 
Country.

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 60  
Plan 
Plan theme 
/ project 
Opportunity 
- 
Involve Aboriginal businesses and organisations in landscape 
restoration. 
Kangaroo 
Island 
Landscape 
Plan 2021-
2026 
(Kangaroo 
Island 
Landscape 
Board 2021)  
Economy - 
Sustainable 
primary 
production 
and the 
island’s 
economy 
- 
Improving the health of the soil, water and biodiversity that supports 
our economy 
- 
Strengthening the viability of primary production through sustainable 
practices 
- 
Working in partnership with industry to ensure the island’s economy 
continues to prosper 
Pests 
- 
Controlling and, where possible, eradicating weeds, pests and diseases 
Resilient 
Hills & 
Coasts – 
Regional 
Action Plan 
2020-2025 
(Resilient 
Hills & Coast 
2022) 
Agriculture – 
Adelaide 
Hills and 
Fleurieu  
- 
Continue to improve seasonal forecasting relating to rainfall and 
temperature which will provide growers with the ability to make better 
decisions on farms, such as when to trade stock or determining how to 
manage projected water demand over a coming irrigation season. 
- 
Undertake research to determine suitable crops, varieties, and 
management techniques 
- 
Research into and manage potential changes in future water quality 
- 
Assess a broad variety of products to determine suitability for 
production under a changing climate.  
- 
Provide information to primary producers regarding adaptive land 
management techniques. 
- 
Develop a policy that requires cost-benefit analysis for agricultural 
water infrastructure to consider future climate and water quality 
implications.  
- 
Diversification of agricultural activities 
Agriculture – 
Kangaroo 
Island 
- 
Adapting agriculture to climate change will require diversifying 
agricultural production systems; improved seasonal forecasting; 
incorporating carbon sequestration into food based agriculture primarily 
through increasing soil carbon; and building the resilience of supporting 
ecosystems. 
- 
Adaptation options for emergency management that will assist in 
protecting vulnerable members of the community and aid with 
biodiversity conservation involve whole-of-island vegetation 
management planning to reduce fire risk, community messaging around 
risk; and insurance developed in partnership with the Insurance Council 
of Australia; and improved early warning systems leading into fire 
events 
Livestock 
SA: 
Beef 
- 
Consistent supply of highly credentialed premium product to high-value 
markets

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 61  
Plan 
Plan theme 
/ project 
Opportunity 
The South 
Australian 
Beef 
Industry 
Blueprint – 
2018 to 
2028 
(Livestock 
SA 2018) 
 
 
The South 
Australian 
Sheep 
Industry 
Blueprint 
2030 
(Livestock 
SA 2020) 
- 
Product differentiation based on product quality and integrity attributes 
- 
Equipping producers with the knowledge and skills to cost effectively 
increase productivity and return on farm assets managed 
- 
Capitalise on new data recording and technology platforms both on-
farm and through the value chain for enhanced decision making and 
management 
- 
Unlocking the increased production potential in key regions 
- 
Expansion of finishing opportunities for stock bred in the pastoral zone 
Sheep  
- 
Supporting productivity with sustainable practices 
- 
Promoting a responsive and resilient supply chain 
- 
Fostering a growing, skilled workforce 
- 
Optimising market outcomes 
SA Grain 
Industry 
Blueprint 
(Grain 
Producers 
SA 2020) 
Cropping 
- 
Grain production sector to have increased business resilience and 
sustainability – through training and providing tools/support to farmers 
- 
Sustain industry capacity by supporting the health and wellbeing of 
regional communities – provide access to range of programs in 
response to drought or other hardships 
- 
Secure the science base to support growth in SA’s grain industry by 
driving innovation in agriculture - focus investment in traits to combat 
the greatest environmental risks to grain production, such as heat, 
drought, frost and salinity tolerance.  
- 
Increase the production base of SA’s grain industry through sustainable 
intensification of agriculture - invest in research which targets plant 
breeding, agronomic management and better use of weather forecasts 
to develop solutions to frost, heat stress and drought. 
SA 
Dairyfarmers 
Association 
(SADA) 
(SADA 
2024) 
Dairy  
- 
Our Farm Our Plan’ Project (funded by future drought fund) is to 
provide subsidised training for a minimum of 30 farmers to develop 
their strategic management skills and support them to develop or to 
update an existing farm business plan.

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 62  
 
Opportunities identified through regional engagement 
Through the regional engagement, stakeholders identified strategies and opportunities that will be further 
explored and considered as the AHFKI Regional Drought Resilience Plan is prepared. These are presented in 
the following themes: 
• Agriculture, horticulture and viticulture  
• Community health and wellbeing 
• Financial and economic management 
• Environmental management 
• Governance and advocacy 
• Infrastructure. 
Opportunities are ordered by whether they are to be implemented before, during or after drought.  
7.3.1 Agriculture, horticulture and viticulture  
Table 22 Opportunities to strengthen regional drought resilience through agriculture, horticulture and 
viticulture  
Phase Opportunities for action 
Before 
Develop and implement bushfire preparedness plans 
Encourage farmers to plan ahead and take action to prepare for the season ahead (e.g. consider 
diversification options to spread risk) 
Establish a central fodder hub for producers to stockpile resources and consider storage of 
fodder rebate 
Plan for drought by enhancing on-farm efficiencies and management practices, such as reducing 
fodder wastage, managing fodder reserves, improving irrigation efficiency, breeding for genetic 
resilience, selecting drought-resistant rootstocks, and improving water catchments and storage 
Develop and implement individual farm/business drought plans, including specific trigger points 
for action based on rainfall and other indicators 
Provide education on innovative farming and drought practices through local discussion groups 
with expert speakers (e.g., ways to manage farming calendar by seeding according to variability 
rather than set calendar) 
Create property management plans to guide land use and resource allocation during drought 
Increase financial management skills among farmers, focusing on debt reduction and better tax 
management 
Encourage vineyards and fruit growers to analyse and prioritise their most profitable production 
areas 
Develop a comprehensive drought learning book that compiles best practices and lessons 
learned

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 63  
Phase Opportunities for action 
Promote forward planning for grain warehousing and conservative risk management 
Work with the Kangaroo Island Pasture Group (KIPG) to improve feed availability on Kangaroo 
Island 
Implement benchmarking for production and finance to identify best practices 
Encourage the planting of low water-use and more drought resilient gardens, pastures, and 
crops (e.g. rye grass) 
Encourage and support clay spreading which will help hold soil together, retain moisture, help 
with germination etc. 
Improve water holding capacity and biological health of soils through the use of soil ameliorants, 
soil amendments and soil management practices, agronomic practices and strategic crop 
selection 
Build relationships with fodder suppliers within and outside the region 
Invest in soil moisture probes and provide training for farmers to use them effectively across all 
drought phases 
Improve on-farm data measurement and monitoring to make informed decisions 
Ensure efficient water security and storage and delivery infrastructure, minimise water usage 
Adopt biodynamic farming methods and other innovative farm management systems 
During 
Develop and implement a stock management strategy and confinement feeding practices in 
accordance with established farm drought plan 
Continuously evaluate performance for improvement (e.g. identify good performing crops) 
Collaborate with Kangaroo Island Pure Grain (KIPG) to increase grain availability 
Managing total grazing pressure by increasing shooting permits 
Have good accessibility of feed/fodder and money to afford 
Make prompt, prioritised decisions, deferring non-critical tasks 
Work proactively to address immediate stock-related issues with feed and water 
Identify effective strategies during the drought and share this knowledge with others 
Tailor fertilisation strategies based on soil testing to optimise resource use 
Utilise alternative resources and bring in additional fodder to support livestock 
After 
Provide tailored advice specific to individual properties rather than generic solutions 
Manage and restock farming systems according to appropriate stocking rates 
Utilise technology to connect neighbouring properties with experts, providing timely and specific 
support 
Review land use to identify opportunities for diversification, such as converting farms to housing 
or engaging in different primary production activities, like solar farming or other agribusinesses

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 64  
Phase Opportunities for action 
Learn from and implement effective water infrastructure strategies used during drought 
Improve soil health to enhance resilience against future droughts 
 
7.3.2 Community health and wellbeing 
Table 223 Opportunities to strengthen regional drought resilience through community health and 
wellbeing 
Phase Opportunities  
Before 
Establish strong social structures and networks to foster community collaboration through 
accessible and free social activities (e.g., sports, church groups, clubs) 
Facilitate knowledge sharing on adapting to changing conditions (e.g. connecting older and 
younger farmers) 
Build relationships with key stakeholders such as carriers, bank agents, and neighbours 
Offer mentoring, business advice, and tailored support to farmers 
Support mental health and wellbeing initiatives in the region 
Empower community leaders to take proactive roles 
Encourage farmers to develop individual drought and farm plans 
Bring together experience, knowledge, and innovation to strengthen community resilience 
During 
Foster community collaboration and maintain social connections through activities and regular 
interactions (e.g. pub/clubs) 
Provide education and training opportunities, including mentoring and peer-to-peer advice for 
effective decision-making and business planning 
Emphasise the importance of self-care, including health, exercise, sleep, and hobbies 
Support those who support others (e.g. volunteers) to prevent burnout 
Encourage sharing of successful strategies and tools from businesses and individuals who have 
managed drought well 
Encourage seeking help and advocacy when needed 
Organise workshops tailored to specific areas, discussing past experiences, confinement 
pastures, mental health, benchmarking, budgeting, etc. 
Launch a campaign to support local community (e.g. ‘buy from the bush’ and do ‘normal 
business’) 
Promote the provision of counselling services to support mental health during drought 
After 
Foster community collaboration to review drought experiences and identify improvements

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 65  
Phase Opportunities  
Understand and address the financial positions and support needs of individuals affected by 
drought 
Document and celebrate successful strategies and resilience to learn from experience and plan 
for the future 
Support personal recovery and well-being through counselling services and encouraging help-
seeking behaviours 
Maintain a forward-looking perspective to stay positive and proactive in drought recovery efforts 
Encourage individuals to take breaks and holidays to recover from the stress of drought 
Promote better feed sources and nutritional value to support livestock recovery 
Implement stock management practices to allow pastures to recover effectively 
Ensure effective collaboration between community and government agencies 
Ensure transparent communication about the impacts of drought and the measures needed to 
recover 
7.3.3 Financial and economic management 
Table 24 Opportunities to strengthen regional drought resilience though financial and economic 
management 
Phase Opportunities  
Before 
Promote solid business planning, including budgeting, setting aside funds, and risk management, 
particularly concerning water allocation 
Optimise profitability during good years to build financial buffer/reserves 
Fund projects that attempt to reverse the likelihood of drought (e.g. reduce carbon emissions, 
soil carbon) 
Provide access to local bank managers and financial solutions tailored to regional needs 
Promote education and capacity building for agronomists to improve sector-wide expertise 
During 
Maintain close oversight of finances and liaise with bankers to navigate drought-related 
challenges 
Secure funding to support drought resilience measures such as contained feeding and advisory 
services 
Support to find additional workers when needed 
Encourage continued spending within the region by locals and visitors 
After 
Simplify access to Farm Household Allowance 
Simplify and expedite recovery grant processes to provide quick and flexible financial support 
Conduct individual financial reviews

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 66  
7.3.4 Environmental management  
Table 25 Opportunities to strengthen regional drought resilience through environmental management  
Phase Opportunities 
Before 
Implement a regional approach to pest management for both plants and animals, (e.g. focusing 
on those that extract moisture from crops) 
Ensure access to local weather data and improve forecasting capabilities 
Clearly define what constitutes a 'drought' to ensure consistent understanding and responses 
Establish shelterbelts and native corridors to support biodiversity and environmental resilience 
Shelterbelts and native corridors and patches 
Encourage practices that reduce emissions 
Encourage species diversity in pastures to enhance drought tolerance 
During 
Provide information and education on pasture management and drought resilience 
Promote understanding and acceptance of the uncontrollable factors causing drought, focusing 
on adaptable measures 
Implement pest plant management strategies 
After 
Continue efforts to reduce emissions to mitigate climate impacts 
 
7.3.5 Infrastructure 
Table 26 Opportunities to strengthen regional drought resilience though infrastructure 
Phase Opportunities 
Before 
Promote the adoption, education and use of technologies that support better farm management 
Provide financial support for infrastructure improvements, such as environmental covers and 
netting 
Ensure resource flexibility to respond to various events, not just drought 
Upgrade and improve farm infrastructure, including dams, silos, confinement lots, water 
monitoring systems, grain and fodder storage, water pumps, and fencing (e.g. vermin proof 
fencing) 
Ensure reliable sea freight services, including strategies to increase capacity and freight subsidies 
for Sealink during critical periods 
Rebuild roads that were previously affected by drought and implement better/active road 
maintenance 
Improve communication and coordination between transport operators 
Develop a long-term Kangaroo Island Water Security Infrastructure Plan (2025 -2050) for 
planned expansion of the desalination water network across the Island in the future

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 67  
Phase Opportunities 
Address capacity issues at abattoirs to prevent kill constraints 
Regional water infrastructure planning for improved water security 
During 
Provide freight subsidies for offloading stock, transporting food, fertilisers, grain, hay, etc. and 
enable heavy vehicle access to reduce freight costs 
Increase the capacity for Sealink services to Kangaroo Island, especially during adverse 
conditions 
Broaden access to quality fodder resources and ensure accessible information about fodder 
availability 
After 
Rebuild and repair infrastructure and assets damaged by drought 
 
7.3.6 Governance and advocacy 
Table 27 Opportunities to strengthen regional drought resilience through governance and advocacy  
Phase Opportunities  
Before 
Establish a coordinating structure to inform decision-making during droughts, similar to 
Agriculture Exceptional Circumstances 
Form a task force with representatives from various agricultural groups (e.g. ASART, Yan, Ag 
Ado group, VH Ag Whg group + others) 
Create pathways for new and young farmers to enter and remain in the industry 
Improve the dissemination of water information to farmers 
Advocate for longer funding and policy timeframes with more consistency 
Implement policy changes before droughts, such as increasing water harvesting capabilities, to 
prepare for future droughts 
Secure long-term funding for drought and land management staff who can lead and facilitate 
workshops 
Ensure drought plans include supported planning with built-in accountability 
During 
Ensure flexibility in water infrastructure policies (both on-farm and across region) and consider 
water infrastructure rebate 
Provide support to modify farming strategies and fill knowledge gaps through research 
Increase biosecurity measures (e.g. commodity vendor declaration) 
Provide transport subsidies 
Maintain open communication with the community about drought impacts and response actions 
Develop a plan for how the maximum number of businesses can access the help – irrelevant of 
the available funds of the business at the time

Opportunities to strengthen drought resilience | 68  
Phase Opportunities  
Ensure local decision-making remains community-centric 
Activate a structured response to coordinate drought relief efforts 
Identify and implement ways to alleviate financial stress, such as adjusting rates and bank 
repayments 
After 
Regularly review and update the Drought Plan 
Change policies to enhance resilience, better prepare for future droughts, and remove policy and 
legislative barriers to diversification and adaptation 
Develop and review case studies on lessons learned, including what worked well, for different 
drought intensities and durations 
Review organisational structure and processes to assess what was learned and what can be 
improved 
Rebuild and repair infrastructure and assets damaged by drought 
Provide funding to rebuild essential resources such as water supplies and livestock. 
Advocate for more local presence of government departments 
Implement new systems for accessing farming leases and hobby farmer lands at reasonable 
costs

References | 69  
 References  
ACT Government 2023, Draft ACT Regional Drought Resilience Plan, ACT Government, Canberra, 
<https://hdp-au-prod-app-act-yoursay-files.s3.ap-southeast-
2.amazonaws.com/8017/0666/8172/Draft_ACT_Regional_Drought_Resilience_Plan.pdf>. 
Adelaide Hills Wine Region 2024, Viticulture, Adelaide Hills Wine Region, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.adelaidehillswine.com.au/wine/viticulture/>. 
Agriculture Victoria 2023a, Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan, Agriculture Victoria, Melbourne, 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/Gippsland%20Drought%20Resilience%20Pla
n.pdf>. 
Agriculture Victoria 2023b, Wimmera Southern Mallee Drought Resilience Plan, Agriculture Victoria, 
Melbourne, 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/Wimmera%20Southern%20Mallee%20Droug
ht%20Resilience%20Plan.pdf>. 
Arbon, P 2024, ‘Torrens Resilience’, presentation notes from Rural Resilience: Enhancing Wellbeing 
Strengthening Communities, Flinders University and SA Drought Hub, on 14 June 2024.  
Aussie Apples n.d., About, Aussie Apples, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.aussieapples.com.au/about/#region-sa>. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2021, Search Census data, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 11 
July 2024, <https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area>. 
Australian Pears 2019, About Australian Pears, Australian Pears, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://australianpears.com.au/about-australian-pears/>. 
Authentic Kangaroo Island 2024, Agriculture, Authentic Kangaroo Island, viewed 28 August 2024, 
<https://authentickangarooisland.com.au/member_type/agriculture/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2005, Average annual and monthly evapotranspiration maps, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 18 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/evapotranspiration/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2019, Explainer: what is drought? 
<https://media.bom.gov.au/social/blog/2179/explainer-what-is-drought/> 
Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2021, Average annual, seasonal and monthly rainfall maps, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2021a, What is El Niño and how does it impact Australia?, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-
australia.shtml>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2023, Average monthly and annual temperature maps, Commonwealth of Australia, 
viewed 17 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Understanding drought, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>.

References | 70  
Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate Guides, Commonwealth of Australia, 
viewed 1 February 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/>.  
Carpenter, S. R., K. J. Arrow, S. Barrett, R. Biggs, W. A. Brock, A.-S. Crépin, G. Engström, C. Folke, T. P. 
Hughes, N. Kautsky, C.-Z. Li , G. McCarney, K. Meng , K.-G. Mäler, S. Polasky, M. Scheffer, J. Shogren, T. 
Sterner, J. R. Vincent, B. Walker, A. Xepapadeas, and A. De Zeeuw. 2012. General resilience to cope with 
extreme events. Sustainability 4(12):3248-3259. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/4/12/3248https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/4/12/3248https://www.mdpi.com/2071-
1050/4/12/3248https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/4/12/3248  
Cock, G 2023, The River Murray Millenium Drought 2002 to 2010. 
coNEXA 2023, Homepage, coNEXA Willunga Basin Water, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://wbwc.com.au/>. 
Crossman, 2018, Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework, UNCCD, 
Bonn, viewed 15 January 2024,  <https://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/2019-
04/DRAMP_Policy_Framework.pdf>. 
CSIRO 2022, Seven megatrends that will shape the next 20 years, CSIRO, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-20-years>. 
Dairysafe 2023, 2022-2023 Annual Report, Dairy Authority of South Australia, South Australia,  
<https://dairy-safe.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Dairy-Authority-of-SA-2022-2023-Annual-Report.pdf>. 
Data SA 2020, Conservation Reserve Boundaries, Data SA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://data.sa.gov.au/data/dataset/land-use-generalised>. 
Data SA 2023, Land Use Generalised, Data SA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://data.sa.gov.au/data/dataset/land-use-generalised>. 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024, Regional Drought Resilience Planning, Australian 
Government, viewed 14 January, <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/drought/future-drought-fund/regional-drought-resilience-planning>. 
Department for Environment and Water 2022, Guide to Climate Projections for Risk Assessment and 
Planning in South Australia, Government of South Australia through the Department for Environment, 
Adelaide, 
<https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20for%
20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf>. 
DEW 2019, Eastern Mount Lofty Ranges Water Resource Plan Area Risk Assessment DEW Technical report 
2018-10, Government of South Australia, Department for Environment and Water, Adelaide. 
DEW 2020a, Kangaroo Island 2018-19 water resources assessment, DEW Technical report 2020/34, 
Government of South Australia, Department for Environment and Water, Adelaide. 
DEW 2020b, Western Mount Lofty Ranges Prescribed Water Resources Area 2018-19 water resources 
assessment, DEW Technical report 2020/27, Government of South Australia, Department for Environment 
and Water, Adelaide. 
DEW 2022a, Western Mount Lofty Ranges Prescribed Water Resources Area 2020–21 water resources 
assessment, DEW Technical Note 2022/14, Government of South Australia, Department for Environment and 
Water, Adelaide.

References | 71  
DEW 2022b, Eastern Mount Lofty Ranges Prescribed Water Resources Area, 2020–21 water resources 
assessment, DEW Technical Note 2022/12, Government of South Australia, Department for Environment and 
Water, Adelaide. 
DEW 2022c, McLaren Vale Prescribed Wells Area groundwater resource assessment, DEW Technical Note 
2022/08, Government of South Australia, Adelaide. 
Fowler, K, Peel, M, Saft, M, Peterson, T, Western, A, Band, L, Petheram, Dharmadi, S, Tan, KS,  Zhang, Lu, 
Lane, P, , Anthony Kiem, Lucy Marshall, Anne Griebel, Belinda E. Medlyn, Dongryeol Ryu, Giancarlo Bonotto, 
Conrad Wasko, Anna Ukkola, Clare Stephens, Andrew Frost, Hansini Gardiya Weligamage, Patricia Saco, 
Hongxing Zheng, Francis Chiew, Edoardo Daly, Glen Walker, R. Willem Vervoort, Justin Hughes, Luca 
Trotter, Brad Neal, Ian Cartwright, and Rory Nathan 2023, Explaining changes in rainfall–runoff relationships 
during and after Australia’s Millennium Drought: a community perspective. 
Grain Producers SA 2020, SA Grain Industry Blueprint, Government of South Australia through PIRSA, 
Adelaide, <http://t182.membes-ams.com/public/182/files/SA-Grain-Ind-Blueprint_online.pdf>. 
Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board 2021, Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Plan 2021-2026, Landscape SA, 
viewed 18 June 2024, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/hf/hf_landscape_plan_2021-
26.pdf>. 
Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board 2024, Our Services, Landscape SA, viewed 11 July 2024,  
<https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/hf/about-us/who-are-we/our-services>. 
Hough, C 2020 GM-free applications from 11 councils rejected by South Australian Government, ABC Rural, 
viewed 12 July 2024,  https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2020-11-02/sa-councils-application-to-remain-gm-
free-rejected/12839636  
Hughes N, Soh WY, Boult C & Lawson K 2022, Defining drought from the perspective of Australian farmers, 
Climate Risk Management, vol #35, viewed 14 June 2024, 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096322000274https://www.sciencedirect.com/scienc
e/article/pii/S2212096322000274 
Kangaroo Island Landscape Board 2021, Kangaroo Island Landscape Plan 2021–2026, Landscape SA, viewed 
18 June 2024, 
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ki/kangaroo_island_landscape_plan_2021-2026.pdf>. 
Kangaroo Island Landscape Board 2024, Our Services, Landscape SA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ki/about-us/ki-landscape-board>. 
Kirono, DG, Round, V, Heady, C, Chiew, FH and Osbrough, S 2020, Drought projections for Australia: 
Updated results and analysis of model simulations, Weather and Climate Extremes, 30, p.100280.   
Langhorne Creek Wine Region n.d., One of a Kind, Langhorne Creek, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://langhornecreek.com/our-region/>. 
Livestock SA 2018, The South Australian Beef Industry Blueprint – 2018 to 2028, Adelaide, 
https://livestocksa.org.au/assets/lsa/documents/SASIB-Beef-Blueprint_ONLINE_LR_single-pgs.pdf  
Livestock SA 2020, The South Australian Sheep Industry Blueprint 2030, Adelaide, 
https://livestocksa.org.au/assets/lsa/documents/SASIB-Booklet_Insides_FA_online_single-pgs.pdf  
Macbeth, SM 2024, Building the future on your own terms in Resilient Communities in Dry Times Research 
Report, May 2024, no. 22, pp. 2-4, <https://assets-global.website-
files.com/63331877e8a75200a4d7078e/662f6d13aae0b90d943ca938_KondininDrought_May02_24_WEB.pdf
>.

References | 72  
Maru Y, O’Connell D, Grigg N, Abel N, Cowie A, Stone-Jovicich S, Butler J, Wise R, Walker B, Million AB, 
Fleming A, Meharg S, Meyers J 2017, Making ‘resilience’, ‘adaptation’ and ‘transformation’ real for the design 
of sustainable development projects: piloting the Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation 
Assessment (RAPTA) framework in Ethiopia, CSIRO, Australia. 
McLaren Vale Wine 2016, McLaren Vale's Water Security Strengthened By $2.5m Federal Government 
Commitment, McLaren Vale Wine, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://mclarenvalewine.au/news/media-
releases/mclaren-vales-water-security-strengthened-by-2-5m-federal-government-commitment>. 
McLaren Vale Wine 2024, Key Varieties, McLaren Vale Wine, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://mclarenvalewine.au/wine/key-varieties>. 
NatureMaps 2024, Flora and Fauna Tools, NatureMaps, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<http://spatialwebapps.environment.sa.gov.au/naturemaps/?locale=en-us&viewer=naturemaps>. 
Parkinson, G 2016, Can Kangaroo Island be powered by 100% renewable energy?, Renew Economy, viewed 
11 July 2024, <https://reneweconomy.com.au/can-kangaroo-island-powered-100-renewable-energy-
47162/>. 
PIRSA 2023, Climate change adaptation, PIRSA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/climate_change_adaptation>. 
PIRSA 2024a, Crop and pasture reports, PIRSA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/grains/crop_and_pasture_reports?shorturl_crop-report>. 
PIRSA 2024b, Managing drought, PIRSA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://pir.sa.gov.au/emergencies_and_recovery/drought/managing_drought>. 
Profile.id 2021, Community Profile, .idcommunity, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://profile.id.com.au/>. 
PwC 2022, Megatrends - Five global shifts reshaping the world we live in, Price Waterhouse Coopers, viewed 
11 July 2024, 
<https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.htmlhttps://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.html
>. 
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 2022a, Regional Economic 
Health Update April 2022, South Australia, <https://rdahc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/RDA-AHFKI-
Regional-Economic-Health-Update.pdf>. 
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 2022b, Strategic Regional Plan 
2022-2025, South Australia, <https://rdahc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Strategic-Regional-Plan-
2022-2025.pdf>. 
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island 2024a, Our Region, RDA AHFKI 
viewed 17 June 2024, <https://rdahc.com.au/our-region/>. 
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island, 2024b, What We Do, RDA 
AHFKI, viewed 4 July 2024, <https://rdahc.com.au/what-we-do/>. 
REMPLAN Community 2021, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.remplan.com.au/community/>. 
REMPLAN Economy 2023, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.remplan.com.au/economy/>.

References | 73  
Resilient Hills & Coast 2022, Regional Action Plan 2020-2025, Resilient Hills & Coast, South Australia, 
<https://www.resilienthillscoasts.com/s/RH-and-C_Action-Plan_2020-2025_2022-Update_Endorsed-8-April-
2022.pdf>. 
Resilient Hills & Coast n.d., Partners, Resilient Hills & Coast, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.resilienthillscoasts.com/partners>. 
Roggema R, Vermeend T, Dobbelsteen AVd. Incremental Change, Transition or Transformation? Optimising 
Change Pathways for Climate Adaptation in Spatial Planning. Sustainability. 2012; 4(10):2525-2549. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525htt
ps://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525  
SA Drought Hub 2024, About, SA Drought Hub, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://sadroughthub.com.au/about/>. 
SA Drought Hub n.d., Livestock Biosecurity Extension Program, SA Drought Plan, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://sadroughthub.com.au/project/innovation-activities/livestock-biosecurity-extension-program/>. 
Southern & Hills Local Government Association (SH LGA) n.d., About Us, SH LGA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.lga.sa.gov.au/southern-and-hills-lga/about-us>. 
SH LGA 2023, Annual Report 2022/23, SH LGA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.lga.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0037/1475686/S-and-HLGA-2022-2023-Annual-
Report.pdf>. 
South Australian Dairyfarmers’ Association 2024, Future Drought Fund - Our Farm Our Plan Project Funding, 
South Australian Dairyfarmers’ Association, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://sada.asn.au/industry-
development/projects/future-drought-fund-our-farm-our-plan-project-funding>. 
South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission, 2019, South Australia’s Disaster Resilience 
Strategy 2019-2024, <https://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINET%20V
ERSION%20%281%29.pdf> 
South Australian Wine Industry Association 2024a, Currency Creek, South Australian Wine Industry 
Association, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://www.winesa.asn.au/SA-regions/sa-wine-regions/currency-
creek/>. 
South Australian Wine Industry Association 2024b, Southern Fleurieu, South Australian Wine Industry 
Association, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://www.winesa.asn.au/SA-regions/sa-wine-regions/southern-
fleurieu/>. 
Taylor, B, Walton, A, Loechel, B, Measham, T & Fleming, D 2017, Strategic foresight for regional Australia: 
Megatrends, scenarios and implications, CSIRO and the Australian Government Department of 
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities, Canberra, Australia. 
<https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:EP175665>. 
Walker B. 2020. Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecology and Society, vol 25, no 2, 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_not>. 
Walker, GR, Crosbie, RS, Chiew, FHS, Peeters, L and Evans, R 2021, Groundwater Impacts and Management 
under a Drying Climate in Southern Australia, Water 13, 3588. <https://doi.org/10.3390/w13243588>.

Appendix A Regional Engagement Summary Report | 74  
Appendix A Regional Engagement Summary Report

Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu & Kangaroo Island  
24ADL-0489 
December 2024 
 
Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and 
Kangaroo Island Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan -  
Engagement Summary 
Report

Engagement Summary Report 
December 2024 
 
Lead consultant 
URPS 
27 Halifax Street 
Enter via Symonds Pl 
Adelaide  SA  5000 
(08) 8333 7999 
urps.com.au  
In association with 
Richardson Consulting 
Prepared for 
Regional Development Australia Adelaide Hills, 
Fleurieu & Kangaroo Island 
Consultant Project Manager 
Anna Pannell, Associate Director 
apannell@urps.com.au 
URPS Ref 
24ADL-0489 
 
Document history and status 
Revision 
Date 
Author 
Reviewed 
Details 
V1 
12/07/24 
R. Liew, A Pannell 
A. Pannell 
Draft report for Steering Committee review 
V2 
10/12/2024 
R. Liew, A Pannell 
E. Mansfield, A. 
Pannell 
Updated report following Steering Committee 
and CSIRO review

Contents | i  
 
Contents 
Contents ............................................................................................................... i 
Acknowledgement of Country................................................................................ 1 
 
Introduction ............................................................................................... 2 
 
How we engaged ....................................................................................................... 2 
 
Who we engaged with ................................................................................................ 3 
1.2.1 
Workshops ...................................................................................................................... 3 
1.2.2 
Key informant interviews .................................................................................................. 4 
 
Summary of workshops ............................................................................... 5 
 
What contributes to resilience? ................................................................................... 6 
 
How has/does drought impact the region? ................................................................. 11 
 
What can be done to build resilience before, during and after drought? ....................... 15 
 
Key informant interviews ........................................................................... 24

Acknowledgement of Country 1 
Acknowledgement of Country  
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Drought Resilience Steering Committee acknowledge 
Aboriginal people as the First Peoples and Nations of the lands and waters we live and work upon. 
We pay our respects to Elders past, present and emerging. We acknowledge and respect the deep 
spiritual connection and the relationship that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have to 
country and commit to working with the First Nations People of the region as we deliver the Drought 
Resilience Plan.

Introduction 2 
 
Introduction 
The Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island (AHFKI) region Drought Steering Committee has 
initiated the preparation of a Drought Resilience Plan as part of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program. 
The Plan will identify strategies and actions to enhance the Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo 
Island region’s ability to respond to and recover from drought, that will also help prepare for and 
respond to other stresses or pressures. 
The Plan will document how the region’s agricultural and associated industries might be impacted by 
drought, describe a desired future or vision that acknowledges more frequent or severe drought and 
greater rainfall variability and identify strategies and actions to build resilience to ensure regional 
values are maintained and economic and social development opportunities are optimised. 
Stakeholder and community engagement is an integral part of the Plan’s preparation.  
Engaging with stakeholders and community members has: 
• Enabled people and organisations to contribute their own knowledge, expertise and experience to 
the plan. 
• Built capacity of people to think about how drought might change what they do and how they 
could plan and act proactively to build resilience to drought. 
• Provided the foundation for an ongoing and enduring process that empowers people to activate 
the Plan developed by this project and drive the implementation of actions. 
The first phase of engagement aimed to understand: 
• How has the AHFKI region impacted by drought? 
• What makes people, communities and regions resilient to drought? 
• In what ways is the AHFKI region already resilient? 
• How can the resilience of the AHFKI region to drought be maintained and enhanced? 
 
How we engaged  
Four face-to-face workshops were undertaken with stakeholders and communities across the region 
in late June 2024. Stakeholders were identified by the Steering Committee and invitations sent by the 
AHFKI project manager.  
Table 1 Workshop participation  
Location 
Date 
Number of participants  
Charleston 
24 June 2024 
10 
Parndana 
25 June 2024 
24 
Strathalbyn 
27 June 2024 
9 
Mount Compass 
28 June 2024 
12

Introduction 3 
 
Who we engaged with  
1.2.1 Workshops  
Participants at the workshops included primary producers, local, state and federal government, land 
and/or catchment management authorities, extension and training providers, researchers and 
academics, agribusiness specialists, not-for profit organisations, other private businesses, grower 
groups, wellbeing providers, funding bodies and retirees.  
Participants represented every age bracket between 25-34 years old and 75-84 years old, with most 
participants aged in the middle.  
 
Participants lived across every part of the AHFKI region, with the most represented postcodes being 
5223 (American River, Baudin Beach, Brownlow Ki, Emu Bay, Island Beach, Nepean Bay, Penneshaw) 
and 5220 (Kingscote) on Kangaroo Island. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Age
Occupation
Occupation of workshop participants
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65-74
75-84
Number of participants
Age bracket
Age of workshop participants

Introduction 4 
 
A summary of the discussions and key points from the workshops is provided in Section 2. 
1.2.2 Key informant interviews  
In addition, key stakeholders that were unable to attend the workshops were invited to participate 
through a “key informant” interview. 12 interviews were undertaken with representatives from the 
following organisations:  
• ifarmwell (University of SA)  
• SA Water  
• Hills and Fleurieu Local Food Futures project  
• South Australian Dairyfarmers Association (SADA)  
• Rural Bank / Bendigo Bank  
• Kangaroo Island Leaders  
• Food and Beverage Australia Limited (FABAL)  
• Kangaroo Island Landscapes Board  
• Goyder Institute for Water Research Coorong, Lower Lakes and Murray Mouth Research Centre 
(CCLLM)  
• Mundoo Island Station  
• Susie Green Consulting  
• Adelaide Hills Wine Region  
A summary of key points raised in each interview is provided in Section 3. 
77 individuals participated in the engagement.  
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Number of participants
Postcode
Residential postcode of workshop participants

Summary of workshops 5 
 
Summary of workshops 
At each workshop, participants were presented with information about the drought resilience planning 
process and then facilitated discussions and activities were used to understand participants’ ideas 
about the following:  
• What makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought? 
• How has/does drought impact the region? 
• What can be done to build resilience before, during and after drought? 
The following sections collate the responses.  In each table, the points raised have been collated by 
theme and the workshop/s where the idea or point was raised is identified.

Summary of workshops 6 
 
What contributes to resilience?  
Workshop participants were asked what makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought? 
Table 2 Characteristics of individual resilience 
Characteristics What makes individuals resilient to drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount 
Compass
Social 
Having strong social connections, networks and relationships with friends, family, and the wider community, 
having multiple touch points such as sport clubs, the Country Women's Association, Fleurieu Beef group, 
Fleurieu Food group, or participating in shed talks, workshops, or other peer to peer groups 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Sharing struggles with others, being open and willing to ask for help, having adequate access to mental 
health support, and the opportunity to take breaks or go on holiday/respite 
X 
X 
X 
X 
The ability to learn and reflect from past experiences of droughts, and possessing adequate knowledge and 
education about what to do before, during, and after a drought event 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Awareness of available resources and knowledge for primary producers and local communities 
X 
 
X 
 
Environment 
Being open-minded and understanding the need to adapt to changing climate conditions is crucial for 
resilience 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Agriculture 
Embracing innovation and implementing new techniques, approaches, and technology in agricultural 
practices 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Utilising methods like containment feedlots for livestock feed during drought conditions. 
 
X 
 
 
Economic 
Having diverse sources of household and off-farm income 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Good long-term business and financial planning, focusing on long-term sustainability rather than short-term 
profit, avoiding stagnant debt, and adopting good risk management plans 
X

Summary of workshops 7 
Characteristics What makes individuals resilient to drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount 
Compass
Assets and 
infrastructure 
Strategic investment in infrastructure on farm, such as reliable water infrastructure and effective water 
management practices, is crucial for resilience. 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
Table 3 Characteristics of community resilience 
Characteristics What makes communities resilient to drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount 
Compass  
Social 
Strong relationships and connections within the community and between community groups and 
organisations 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Sharing information, experience, and knowledge within the community and celebrating success stories of 
sustainable practices, and early adopters being proactive in learning from others 
X 
X 
X 
 
Showcasing and supporting community leaders who act as a conduit to other members in the community 
 
X 
X 
 
Supporting volunteers and promoting opportunities for people to positively contribute within the region which 
provide a sense of purpose 
 
 
X 
 
Environment 
Providing support for protection against pests (e.g. birds, bats, deer, kangaroos, etc.) especially during dry 
times (e.g. installing environmental covers in farms) 
X 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Implementing flexible water supply options and temporary changes in water licensing during dry times 
X 
X 
 
X

Summary of workshops 8 
Characteristics What makes communities resilient to drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount 
Compass  
Promoting industry diversification 
 
 
X 
 
Implementing soil water efficiency practices, increasing soil carbon 
 
 
X 
X 
Understanding of seasonality – important for primary production (autumn, spring, water runoff) – holistic 
approach bringing it all together 
 
 
 
X 
Economic 
Providing access to education and training to take up off-farm opportunities 
X 
 
 
 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
Access to efficient and accessible community services (e.g. childcare, social groups, education, health, GPS, 
psych services, mental health support) and affordable commodities (food, housing, etc.) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Access to good education, supporting career pathways into the agricultural sector, improving community 
knowledge by bringing in knowledge experts to the region  
 
 
X 
X 
Ensuring efficient transportation capacity and special need services during crises 
 
X 
 
 
Governance 
Ensure initiatives are community-led and that engagement occurs across all levels 
X

Summary of workshops 9 
Table 4 Characteristics of regional resilience 
Characteristics What makes regions resilient to drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount 
Compass  
Infrastructure 
Enhance the availability and management of infrastructure (e.g. dams, tanks, bores, pipeline, transport, roads, 
power, water, technology, telecommunication) and provide adequate infrastructure support (e.g. state 
government, Sealink) 
 
X 
X 
X 
Implementing efficient water storage/infrastructure, and flexible water policies (e.g. reserve on excess water) 
 
X 
X 
X 
Providing an accessible platform for information and updates 
X 
 
 
 
Strategic investment in infrastructure across the region 
 
X 
 
 
Ensuring reliable transport/freight and movement to and from mainland (e.g. inputs, stock, fodder, people) 
 
X 
 
 
Efficient local and regional weather forecasting 
 
 
X 
X 
Economy 
Providing access to financial institutions, interest rate support, grants/incentives, emergency funds, pre-
drought financial buffers, and financial education 
 
X 
X 
X 
Attracting and retaining workers in the region 
 
X 
 
 
Promoting local products and supporting local businesses 
 
 
X 
 
Protecting economic use of land 
 
 
X 
 
Governance 
Developing and implementing policies that reflect the unique characteristics and needs of each region (e.g. 
Water Affecting Activities policy, sustainable limits review, live export of animals) 
 
X 
X 
X 
Establishing clear protocols for drought declarations that trigger funding, strategies, and policy 
implementations (e.g., farm drought plans with triggers for different actions) 
 
X 
X 
X 
Ensuring that government agencies engage in meaningful dialogue with locals in the region to understand 
their needs and challenges 
X 
 
X

Summary of workshops 10 
Characteristics What makes regions resilient to drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount 
Compass  
Ensure the government has a good understanding of drought, promoting a comprehensive understanding of 
what drought means for various stakeholders across the region 
 
 
X 
X 
Utilising a strong scientific lens and/or observational lens 
X 
 
 
 
Implementing a bipartisan approach where government investment is made in collaboration with regional 
communities to run resilience programs and initiatives 
X 
 
 
 
Ensuring that organisations, agencies, and government bodies possess the behaviours and values necessary to 
learn from communities and develop informed policies and strategies that allow community-driven solutions 
X 
 
 
 
Implementing policies and practices that promote better management of the biophysical environment, such as 
sustainable land and water use practice 
 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 11 
 
How has/does drought impact the region? 
Workshop participants were asked how drought has previously impacted the region, and what might happen in the future. 
Table 5 Drought impacts on the AHFKI region 
Characteristic How has/does drought impact the region? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass 
Social 
Drought erodes confidence, increases anxiety and mental stress, leading to physical health issues, increased 
divorce, and higher suicide rates 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Relationships get strained as people focus on immediate situations and cannot think about the future 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Withdrawal from community settings which leads to reduced social interaction and division within the 
community 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Children are affected by the loss of family income and increased stress, leading to reduced family time 
X 
X 
X 
 
Reduced feelings of positivity and optimism (e.g. caused by having to get rid of stock or wastages or 
financial stress), leaving people feeling out of control 
X 
 
X 
 
Declines in community visual amenities and lifestyle, leading to a reduction in services and infrastructure 
 
X 
 
X 
Decrease in holidays and time off, with people working 7 days a week, leading to increased workload and 
burnout 
 
X 
 
X 
Everyone is impacted by drought  
X 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
Farms incur greater debt, impacting their financial stability, long-term viability, and reducing cash flow, 
making it difficult to manage regular expenses and invest in future operations 
X 
X 
 
X 
Farmers often engage in 'fire sales' to get rid of stock and then have to buy back at a premium or have lost 
herd genetic diversity 
X 
 
 
 
Increased fruit/crop damage from extreme heat 
X

Summary of workshops 12 
Characteristic How has/does drought impact the region? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass 
Depletion of water supplies (for stock consumption, irrigation of pastures, milking shed hygiene)  
X 
 
X 
 
Increased need for grants for crop protection 
X 
 
 
 
Increased spending on buying feed, trucking water, and other essential resources 
X 
X 
X 
 
Decreased water availability which leads to poorer water quality and increased salinity 
 
X 
X 
 
Livestock health deteriorates due to inadequate feed and water 
 
X 
 
X 
Consolidation of smaller farms, reducing the number of individual farm operations. 
 
 
X 
 
Reduction of ability to grow feed 
X 
X 
 
X 
Reduced income and profitability will impact ability to adapt/respond 
 
 
 
X 
Immediate demands of drought conditions make it difficult for farmers to plan for the long term 
 
X 
 
X 
Environment 
Highlights the importance to recognise the impacts of compound events such as drought, bushfire, hail, 
pandemic, etc. 
X 
 
 
 
Different timing of pests during drought and increased grazing pressure 
X 
X 
 
 
Increase in bushfire risk due to lack of water resource access 
X 
X 
 
 
Adverse impacts on wildlife health 
 
X 
 
 
Native fish reduced water flows 
 
X 
 
 
Increased erosion risk, decrease in topsoil, decline in soil health 
 
X 
X 
 
Decrease in water quality and availability of water 
 
X 
X 
 
Increase in wildlife and human interaction, increase in biosecurity risk 
  
X 
X

Summary of workshops 13 
Characteristic How has/does drought impact the region? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass 
Impact on native vegetation 
 
X 
 
 
Economy 
Decrease in farm income 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Increased economic strain due to insufficient government funding and assistance (Charleston: no funding 
because area is not considered a drought area but could increase government spending) 
X 
X 
X 
 
Larger companies can afford to pay higher wages, making it difficult for smaller businesses to compete 
X 
 
 
 
Decrease in local economy (in towns and also individual farms/agribusiness) – an increase in debt and 
decrease in equity 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Lower farm incomes lead to decreased spending in local shops and businesses 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Businesses that provide services and supplies to farms, such as machinery suppliers and resellers, 
experience reduced demand and financial stress 
X 
 
 
 
Labour demands – increase workloads but decrease in motivation and productivity 
 
X 
 
 
Increase in off farm income jobs 
 
X 
 
 
Job losses, with people leaving the area to seek employment elsewhere 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Serious strain on Kangaroo Island’s logistics, affecting the transport of goods and resources 
 
X 
 
 
Decrease in tourists, impacting the local tourism industry. Strathalbyn: Improved messaging by tourism 
bodies is needed to encourage visitors to support the region during drought periods. 
 
 
X 
X 
Increase in prices for essential goods and services 
 
 
X 
 
Fall in market prices for agricultural products 
 
 
 
X 
Infrastructure 
Deterioration of infrastructure due to compounded effects of drought 
 
X

Summary of workshops 14 
Characteristic How has/does drought impact the region? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass 
Damage to farm infrastructure and equipment from poor roads worsened by drought conditions 
 
X 
 
 
Decrease in on-farm capital and repairs 
 
X 
 
 
Governance 
Highlights the need for local decision-making to be managed locally to effectively address the unique 
challenges posed by drought 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 15 
 
What can be done to build resilience before, during and after drought? 
Workshop participants were asked what can be done to build resilience before, during and after drought.  
Table 6 Opportunities to strengthen resilience before drought  
Characteristic What can be done before drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Social/ 
Community 
Establish strong social structures and networks to foster community collaboration through accessible and free 
social activities (e.g., sports, church groups, clubs) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Facilitate knowledge sharing on adapting to changing conditions (e.g. connecting older and younger farmers) 
 
X 
X 
X 
Build relationships with key stakeholders such as carriers, bank agents, and neighbours 
 
X 
 
 
Offer mentoring, business advice, and tailored support to farmers 
 
 
X 
 
Support mental health and wellbeing initiatives in the region 
 
 
 
X 
Empower community leaders to take proactive roles 
 
 
 
X 
Encourage farmers to develop individual drought and farm plans 
 
 
 
X 
Bring together experience, knowledge, and innovation to strengthen community resilience 
 
 
 
X 
Agriculture 
Develop and implement bushfire preparedness plans 
X 
X 
 
 
Encourage farmers to plan ahead and take action to prepare for the season ahead (e.g. consider 
diversification options to spread risk) 
 
X 
X 
 
Establish a central fodder hub for producers to stockpile resources and consider storage of fodder rebate 
 
X 
X 
 
Plan for drought by enhancing on-farm efficiencies and management practices, such as reducing fodder 
wastage, managing fodder reserves, improving irrigation efficiency, breeding for genetic resilience, selecting 
drought-resistant rootstocks, and improving water catchments and storage 
 
X 
 
X

Summary of workshops 16 
Characteristic What can be done before drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Develop and implement individual farm/business drought plans, including specific trigger points for action 
based on rainfall and other indicators 
 
 
X 
X 
Provide education on innovative farming and drought practices through local discussion groups with expert 
speakers (e.g., ways to manage farming calendar by seeding according to variability rather than set calendar) 
 
 
X 
X 
Create property management plans to guide land use and resource allocation during drought 
X 
 
 
 
Increase financial management skills among farmers, focusing on debt reduction and better tax management 
X 
 
 
 
Encourage vineyards and fruit growers to analyse and prioritise their most profitable production areas 
X 
 
 
 
Develop a comprehensive drought learning book that compiles best practices and lessons learned 
 
X 
 
 
Promote forward planning for grain warehousing and conservative risk management 
 
X 
 
 
Work with local farmers and other groups to improve feed availability on Kangaroo Island 
 
X 
 
 
Implement benchmarking for production and finance to identify best practices 
 
X 
 
 
Encourage the planting of low water-use and more drought resilient gardens, pastures, and crops (e.g. rye 
grass) 
 
X 
 
 
Encourage and support clay spreading which will help hold soil together, retain moisture, help with 
germination etc. 
 
X 
 
 
Promote understanding of the role of biochar in drought resilience and training landowners to make biochar 
as part of their land management plans to reduce fire risk and improve soil water holding capacity 
 
 
X 
 
Build relationships with fodder suppliers within and outside the region 
 
 
 
X 
Invest in soil moisture probes and provide training for farmers to use them effectively across all drought 
phases 
 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 17 
Characteristic What can be done before drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Improve on-farm data measurement and monitoring to make informed decisions 
 
 
 
X 
Environment 
Implement a regional approach to pest management for both plants and animals, (e.g. focusing on those 
that extract moisture from crops) 
X 
 
X 
 
Ensure access to local weather data and improve forecasting capabilities 
 
X 
 
X 
Clearly define what constitutes a 'drought' to ensure consistent understanding and responses 
X 
 
 
 
Establish shelterbelts and native corridors to support biodiversity and environmental resilience 
 
X 
 
 
Encourage practices that reduce emissions 
 
 
X 
 
Assets and 
infrastructure 
Promote the adoption and use of technologies that support better farm management 
X 
X 
 
 
Provide financial support for infrastructure improvements, such as environmental covers and netting 
X 
 
 
 
Ensure resource flexibility to respond to various events, not just drought 
X 
 
 
 
Upgrade and improve farm infrastructure, including dams, silos, confinement lots, water monitoring systems, 
grain storage, water pumps, and fencing (e.g. vermin proof fencing). 
 
X 
 
 
Ensure reliable sea freight services, including strategies to increase capacity and subsidies for Sealink during 
critical periods 
 
X 
 
 
Rebuild roads that were previously affected by drought and implement better/active road maintenance 
 
X 
 
 
Improve communication and coordination between transport operators 
 
X 
 
 
Address capacity issues at abattoirs to prevent kill constraints 
 
 
 
X 
Economic 
Promote solid business planning, including budgeting, setting aside funds, and risk management, particularly 
concerning water allocation 
X 
X

Summary of workshops 18 
Characteristic What can be done before drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Optimise profitability during good years to build financial buffer/reserves 
 
X 
 
 
Fund projects that attempt to reverse the likelihood of drought (e.g. reduce carbon emissions, soil carbon) 
 
X 
 
 
Provide access to local bank managers and financial solutions tailored to regional needs 
 
 
X 
 
Promote education and capacity building for agronomists to improve sector-wide expertise 
 
 
X 
 
Governance 
Establish a coordinating structure to inform decision-making during droughts, similar to Agriculture 
Exceptional Circumstances. 
 
 
 
X 
Form a task force with representatives from various agricultural groups (e.g. ASART, Yan, Ag Ado group, VH 
Ag Whg group + others) 
 
 
 
X 
Create pathways for new farmers to enter the industry 
 
 
 
X 
Improve the dissemination of water information to farmers 
 
 
 
X 
Advocate for longer funding and policy timeframes with more consistency 
X 
 
 
 
Implement policy changes before droughts, such as increasing water harvesting capabilities, to prepare for 
future droughts 
 
X 
 
 
Secure long-term funding for drought and land management staff who can lead and facilitate workshops 
 
X 
 
 
Ensure drought plans include supported planning with built-in accountability 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 19 
Table 7 Opportunities to strengthen resilience during drought 
Characteristic What can be done during drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Social/ 
Community 
Foster community collaboration and maintain social connections through activities and regular interactions 
(e.g. pub/clubs) 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Provide education and training opportunities, including mentoring and peer-to-peer advice for effective 
decision-making and business planning 
 
X 
X 
X 
Emphasise the importance of self-care, including health, exercise, sleep, and hobbies 
 
X 
X 
 
Support those who support others (e.g. volunteers) to prevent burnout 
X 
 
 
 
Encourage sharing of successful strategies and tools from businesses and individuals who have managed 
drought well 
X 
 
 
 
Encourage seeking help and advocacy when needed 
 
X 
 
 
Organise workshops tailored to specific areas, discussing past experiences, confinement pastures, mental 
health, benchmarking, budgeting, etc. 
 
X 
 
 
Launch a campaign to support local community (e.g. ‘buy from the bush’ and do ‘normal business’) 
 
 
X 
 
Promote the provision of counselling services to support mental health during drought 
 
 
X 
 
Agriculture 
Ensure efficient water security and storage and delivery infrastructure, minimise water usage 
 
X 
X 
 
Develop and implement a stock management strategy and confinement feeding practices 
 
X 
 
X 
Continuously evaluate performance for improvement (e.g. identify good performing crops) 
X 
 
 
 
Collaborate with Kangaroo Island Pure Grain (KIPG) to increase grain availability 
 
X 
 
 
Managing total grazing pressure by increasing shooting permits 
 
X

Summary of workshops 20 
Characteristic What can be done during drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Have good accessibility of feed/fodder and money to afford 
 
X 
 
 
Make prompt, prioritised decisions, deferring non-critical tasks 
 
X 
 
 
Work proactively to address immediate stock-related issues with feed and water 
 
X 
 
 
Identify effective strategies during the drought and share this knowledge with others 
 
X 
 
 
Tailor fertilisation strategies based on soil testing to optimise resource use. 
 
 
X 
 
Adopt biodynamic farming methods and other innovative farm management systems 
 
 
 
X 
Utilise alternative resources and bring in additional fodder to support livestock 
 
 
 
X 
Environment 
Provide information and education on pasture management and drought resilience 
 
X 
 
 
Promote understanding and acceptance of the uncontrollable factors causing drought, focusing on adaptable 
measures 
 
 
X 
 
Implement pest plant management strategies 
 
 
X 
 
Assets and 
Infrastructure  
Provide freight subsidies for offloading stock, transporting food, fertilisers, grain, hay, etc. and enable heavy 
vehicle access to reduce freight costs 
 
X 
 
X 
Increase the capacity for Sealink services to Kangaroo Island, especially during adverse conditions 
 
X 
 
 
Broaden access to quality fodder resources and ensure accessible information about fodder availability 
 
 
 
X 
Economic 
Maintain close oversight of finances and liaise with bankers to navigate drought-related challenges 
 
X 
 
 
Secure funding to support drought resilience measures such as contained feeding and advisory services 
 
 
X 
 
Support for finding additional workers 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 21 
Characteristic What can be done during drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Encourage continued spending within the region by locals and visitors 
 
 
X 
 
Governance 
Ensure flexibility in water infrastructure policies (both on-farm and across region) and consider water 
infrastructure rebate 
 
X 
X 
X 
Provide support to modify farming strategies and fill knowledge gaps through research 
X 
 
 
 
Increase biosecurity measures (e.g. commodity vendor declaration) 
 
X 
 
 
Provide transport subsidies 
 
X 
 
 
Maintain open communication with the community about drought impacts and response actions 
 
X 
 
 
Develop a plan for how the maximum number of businesses can access the help – irrelevant of the available 
funds of the business at the time 
 
X 
 
 
Ensure local decision-making remains community-centric 
 
 
X 
 
Activate a structured response to coordinate drought relief efforts 
 
 
 
X 
Identify and implement ways to alleviate financial stress, such as adjusting rates and bank repayments 
 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 22 
Table 8 Opportunities to support drought recovery  
Characteristic What can be done after drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Social/ 
Community 
Foster community collaboration to review drought experiences and identify improvements 
 
X 
X 
X 
Understand and address the financial positions and support needs of individuals affected by drought 
 
X 
 
X 
Document and celebrate successful strategies and resilience to learn from experience and plan for the future 
 
X 
 
X 
Support personal recovery and well-being through counselling services and encouraging help-seeking 
behaviours 
X 
 
 
 
Maintain a forward-looking perspective to stay positive and proactive in drought recovery efforts 
 
X 
 
 
Encourage individuals to take breaks and holidays to recover from the stress of drought 
 
X 
 
 
Promote better feed sources and nutritional value to support livestock recovery 
 
X 
 
 
Implement stock management practices to allow pastures to recover effectively 
 
X 
 
 
Ensure effective collaboration between community and government agencies 
 
 
X 
 
Ensure transparent communication about the impacts of drought and the measures needed to recover 
 
 
X 
 
Governance 
Regularly review and update the Drought Plan 
 
X 
X 
X 
Change policies to enhance resilience, better prepare for future droughts, and remove policy and legislative 
barriers to diversification and adaptation 
 
X 
X 
 
Develop and review case studies on lessons learned, including what worked well, for different drought 
intensities and durations 
 
X 
 
X 
Review organisational structure and processes to assess what was learned and what can be improved 
 
 
X 
X 
Provide funding to rebuild essential resources such as water supplies and livestock. 
 
 
X

Summary of workshops 23 
Characteristic What can be done after drought? 
Charleston  
Parndana 
Strathalbyn 
Mount Compass  
Advocate for presence of government departments in regional areas 
 
 
X 
 
Implement new systems for accessing farming leases and hobby farmer lands at reasonable costs 
 
 
 
X 
Economic 
Simplify access to Farm Household Allowance 
X 
 
 
 
Simplify and expedite recovery grant processes to provide quick and flexible financial support 
X 
 
 
 
Conduct individual financial reviews 
 
X 
 
 
Agriculture 
Provide tailored advice specific to individual properties rather than generic solutions 
X 
 
X 
 
Manage and restock farming systems according to appropriate stocking rates 
 
X 
 
X 
Utilise technology to connect neighbouring properties with experts, providing timely and specific support. 
X 
 
 
 
Review land use to identify opportunities for diversification, such as converting farms to housing or engaging 
in different primary production activities, like solar farming or other agribusinesses 
 
 
X 
 
Learn from and implement effective water infrastructure strategies used during drought 
 
 
 
X 
Improve soil health to enhance resilience against future droughts 
 
 
 
X 
Environment 
Continue efforts to reduce emissions to mitigate climate impacts 
 
 
X 
 
Assets and 
Infrastructure 
Rebuild and repair infrastructure and assets damaged by drought 
 
X

Key informant interviews 24 
 
 
Key informant interviews 
Interviews were undertaken with the following regional stakeholders: 
• ifarmwell (University of SA) – Natasha Caufield 
• SA Water – Simon Sheriff 
• Hills and Fleurieu Local Food Futures project – Liz Sanders, Local Food Activator 
• South Australian Dairyfarmers Association (SADA) – Andrew Curtis, CEO 
• Rural Bank / Bendigo Bank – Nick Brook, Agribusiness Relationship Manager 
• Kangaroo Island Leaders  
• Food and Beverage Australia Limited (FABAL) – Ashley Keegan, CEO 
• Kangaroo Island Landscapes Board – Jo Sullivan, Sustainable Landscapes Manager 
• Goyder Institute for Water Research Coorong, Lower Lakes and Murray Mouth Research Centre (CCLLM) 
– Nick Whiterod, Science Program Manager 
• Mundoo Island Station – Sally Grundy  
• Susie Green Consulting – Susie Green 
• Adelaide Hills Wine Region – Sarah Carlson 
Key points from each interview are summarised below with more information provided in Appendix A. 
 
ifarmwell, University of SA, Natasha Caulfield 
• Drought has significant impacts on farmer health and wellbeing, with increased stress leading to 
relationship and family breakdowns and in some cases suicide. 
• Decision making during drought is poorer as clouded by high stress and fatigue combined with an 
increased workload as farms may have let staff go. 
• Drought can lead to some farmers leaving the land. Less primary production can deplete regional 
communities. 
• Farmers may need to recognise that they may not be able to control what is going on as a result of 
drought but that there is support for them. 
• Maintaining social networks and connections during drought is really important. 
• It is important to communicate what is available to provide support for health and wellbeing of farmers. 
This requires multiple avenues to promote what available, and continually remind them. 
• Ifarmwell modules can be used before, during and after to learn /trigger thinking about what can do to 
feel better, how manage in drought.

Key informant interviews 25 
 
• Fat Farmers groups (rural health initiative) focussed on exercise and social interaction could be 
established in Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu (currently on Kangaroo Island) 
 
Hills and Fleurieu Local Food Futures project, Liz Sanders, Local Food Activator 
• Drought significantly reduces farmers' wellbeing, contributing to high suicide rates and increased stress 
over managing livestock and uncertain rainfall patterns. 
• Drought leads to severe economic impacts on local communities, resulting in reduced spending, business 
closures, and a decline in local investments in infrastructure and labour. 
• Farmers face reduced access to essential supplies such as fertiliser and feed due to global shipping and 
distribution challenges. This further stresses the financial stability of agricultural operations within the 
region. 
• There is a perception that the region is consistently lush and productive and is not susceptible to 
drought. It is crucial to address this misconception and highlight the impacts of drought within the 
region. 
• Building strong relationships, fostering trust within the community, and learning from First Nations 
practices (e.g., cool burns) are crucial for managing land sustainably and enhancing resilience against 
drought. 
• Encouraging diversity in agricultural activities and avoiding monocultures on individual farms and across 
the region can strengthen resilience. 
• Effective governance is critical for implementing resilience strategies. This involves rigorous processes, 
clear Terms of Reference, and the inclusion of the right people, including First Nations perspectives and 
farmers with lived drought experience. 
 
SA Water, Simon Sheriff 
• Townships and service centres across the region depend on climate-sensitive water supplies, such as 
reservoirs. SA Water and the Department for Environment and Water have implemented measures such 
as construction a desalination plant that connects to Middle River water supply system in Kangaroo Island 
and preparing a water security statement for Fleurieu. 
• Fires in catchment areas severely affect water quality, leading to increased reliance on alternative water 
sources like groundwater and additional strain on the mains system. 
• Livestock relocation near pipelines adds further pressure, while low water levels cause algal growth and 
water quality challenges, worsened by intensified stock contamination near unfenced watercourses. 
• It is important to how to share the impacts of drought and reduced water availability across social, 
economic, and environmental sectors. 
• Opportunities in Kangaroo Island: Implement water efficiency measures and fit-for-purpose water use, 
such as avoiding mains water for activities like boom spraying and livestock, exploring on-farm 
opportunities for matching water use with its purpose.

Key informant interviews 26 
 
• Opportunities in Adelaide Hills/Fleurieu: Utilise wastewater from Mount Barker, implement low flow dam 
programs, improve efficiency, adopt integrated water management approaches, prevent urban 
encroachment on preservation districts, reduce land use intensification to protect water quality and 
quantity, and maintain soil moisture in vineyards over winter. 
• General opportunities: Enhance data and monitoring systems to understand water use and impacts 
better. Revive PIRSA's program matching land use with land capability to adapt to client changes. 
Administer environmental flows and import River Murray water during dry periods. 
 
South Australian Dairyfarmers Association (SADA), Andrew Curtis, CEO 
• Drought leads to cost increases, forcing dairy farms to downsize and reduce employment. Smaller dairy 
operations often do not recover post-drought.  
• Dairy cows need to be milked twice daily. During drought, reduced pasture feed lowers milk production, 
or expensive feed needs to be brought in, impacting farm viability. 
• Each drought cycle results in a loss of dairy farms, as the inability to agist cows leads many to be sold for 
meat, effectively ending their dairy production.  
• The dairy industry relies heavily on irrigation; drought-induced water shortages severely impact farm 
operations. 
• Communities like Myponga and Mt Compass that are less reliant on agriculture, still face economic 
downturns during droughts as farmers cut back on local spending. 
• Enhancing resilience through infrastructure (e.g., housed animals, varied diet, technology) and support 
for intensification, while addressing challenges such as proximity to communities and mobile connectivity 
gaps is important. 
• The dairy sector generates significant data through advanced technology (e.g., cow collars, sensors). 
However, there are gaps in training, maintenance, and support for these technologies, leading to 
potential inefficiencies. Efforts should focus on providing good tech resilience plans, including repair, 
replacement, and redundancy measures. 
• Numerous agricultural and regional plans exist from various bodies, requiring coordinated efforts to 
prevent overlap, conflict, and resource wastage. The RDA could play a central role in aligning these 
initiatives. 
 
Rural Bank / Bendigo Bank, Nick Brook, Agribusiness Relationship Manager 
• During droughts, unprepared livestock farmers often resort to buying poor-quality, overpriced feed out of 
desperation, leading to negative impacts on stock health. 
• Well-prepared farmers can achieve 85% lambing targets, while poorly prepared ones drop to around 
45%, leading to a five-year decline in farm viability. 
• Banks are obligated lend responsibly during drought; well-prepared operators can justify the risks, while 
poorly prepared one’s struggle to secure loans, worsening their financial issues.

Key informant interviews 27 
 
• Drought significantly increases stress among farmers, local businesses, and advisors, putting pressure on 
mental wellbeing and leading to feelings of abandonment. 
• Prepared farmers reduce spending early in anticipation of drought, negatively affecting local businesses 
well before the drought's peak. 
• Debt levels rise during drought as farmers who paid it down in good times tend to draw it back out again, 
either to invest or fund sustaining operations. 
• Effective drought resilience relies on comprehensive preparation, including detailed plans and cashflows, 
made during non-stress periods. Trusted advisors and regular strategic meetings are also crucial. 
• While diversification can be beneficial, it should not distract from the main operation. Investments in 
machinery during good times can enhance productivity and provide valuable assets that can be sold if 
necessary. 
 
Kangaroo Island Leaders Meeting 
• There is interest in building additional desalination plants and capturing overland water to address water 
security concerns. There are constraints to building dams in existing dry areas due to salinity, water table 
issues, and current water allocation policies. 
• Impact of drought on mental health needs to be addressed, with calls for rural financial counsellors and 
ongoing community support. 
• Ensuring that the community receives financial and legal advice (e.g., through workshops) before 
drought is important. 
• Effective community engagement involves the government reaching out to the community, not the other 
way around, and immersing in daily community life and events like footy to foster good collaboration. 
• This plan presents an opportunity to go beyond political cycles by embedding robust business planning 
skills, including cash flow management, risk mitigation, and succession planning, within the community's 
resilience framework. 
• The issues of freight were highlighted, with calls for a designated freight port/service for agriculture 
purposes (e.g., transporting hay and livestock). It is also important to provide subsidies or cost discounts 
for water transport during drought. 
• During the Millennium drought, there was significant delay in decision-making and implementation, often 
attributed to bureaucratic processes and delays from Canberra. Similar challenges were observed during 
recent bushfires, where promises were slow to materialise into action. 
• Famers should consider agricultural diversification (e.g., crops, livestock, or different business such as 
agri-tourism and grape and bee farming) to mitigate economic impacts of drought. 
• The plan must prioritise Kangaroo Island's unique needs, ensuring it is not overshadowed by the Adelaide 
Hills and Fleurieu Peninsula regions. It's crucial for the Kangaroo Island community to identify with and 
take ownership of the plan.

Key informant interviews 28 
 
Food and Beverage Australia Limited (FABAL), Ashley Keegan, CEO 
• Drought impacts are varied across the region; areas with diverse water sources (e.g., McLaren Vale) 
were more resilient than areas that are heavily dependent on surface water (Langhorne Creek).   
• Many were unprepared for the Millennium Drought, as people assumed that ‘it would rain next season’. 
Education on the importance of being prepared is needed (e.g., having plans and backup plans). 
• Drought events are not always prolonged; it can also occur in shorter periods, such as within a single 
growing season.  
• Communities faced heightened stress if they had limited coping options during drought periods. 
• A positive impact of drought was the effective collaboration between government and industry, which 
accelerated engineering solutions to protect production. This cooperation also reduced regulatory barriers 
and strengthened community bonds. For instance, FABAL secured Ngarrindjeri support for a 3.8 km 
dredging project to access lake water. 
• Diversifying water sources is crucial for building drought resilience. FABAL's approach during the 
Millennium Drought involved significant investments in diverse water access and storage infrastructure 
including dredging for lake water access, aquifer recovery schemes, a desalination plant, surface storage 
capacity, and the Marathon pipeline to secure River Murray water. 
• Good community and stakeholder engagement is crucial for enhancing farm and farmer resilience against 
drought. Despite the challenges of acquiring access across 32 km of private land for the Marathon 
pipeline, the project succeeded due to strong community support.  
• Effective government support in minimising regulatory barriers for infrastructure projects is crucial to 
building regional resilience. 
• Resilience of a primary producer ultimately comes down to effective capital utilisation and ability to raise 
capital and use it a cost-effective way that delivers a return (like the Creeks Pipeline Company and 
Marathon pipelines). 
 
Kangaroo Island Landscapes Board - Jo Sullivan, Sustainable Landscapes Manager 
• Kangaroo Island experiences highly variable rainfall (400 to 900mm), with lower rainfall areas more 
susceptible to dry periods. 
• Agriculture predominantly focuses on grazing (meat and wool) with limited irrigation, relying heavily on 
off-stream surface water storage due to limited groundwater availability. 
• Previous droughts have resulted in pasture shortages and feed depletion for sheep, leading to potential 
over-grazing and increased soil erosion risks. 
• Economic activity declines during drought, and there are challenges in securing adequate water for 
critical human needs, intensified by low storage capacity in the Middle River dam. 
• Strategies to strengthen drought resilience include promoting the use of perennial pastures with deep 
roots to improve soil moisture retention capabilities.

Key informant interviews 29 
 
• There should be further exploration of the use of biochar, potentially sourced from local blue gum 
plantations, to enhance soil moisture management on Kangaroo Island. 
• The reliance on Sealink ferry for feed imports highlights vulnerabilities in transport logistics during 
drought periods. 
• The Kangaroo Island Landscape Board has completed valuable drought-related projects in the area, 
including climate change impact assessments, water supply security mapping, and property management 
planning. 
 
Goyder Institute for Water Research Coorong, Lower Lakes and Murray Mouth Research Centre 
(CCLLM), Nick Whiterod, Science Program Manager 
• The CCLLM are undertaking research to better understand the environmental, social, cultural, and 
agricultural importance of water and recognise how water availability impacts community well-being and 
adaptation planning. 
• Increasing environmental flows to maintain lake levels and salinity is a key part of drought resilience in 
the lower lakes. 
• The prediction of more frequent droughts suggests a cumulative impact that may drive long-term 
adjustments to farming systems. 
 
Mundoo Island Station - Sally Grundy 
• Drought in the lower lakes isn’t just about lack of water. During the Millennium drought, stock water in 
the lower lakes became very salty due to leaking barrages, leading to cattle deaths. Mundoo Station had 
to self-fund a pipeline for stock water to protect their breeding herd. 
• Mental health issues are significant for landholders especially during dry periods, with increased anxiety 
due to inadequate support from SA Water and other authorities. 
• Better government support and a trigger-based management approach linked to lake water levels and 
salinity would have helped. 
• Resilience in the lower lakes is tied to maintaining environmental flows, as local rainfall was adequate, 
but flows were too low during the Millennium drought. 
• There were unacceptable delays with emergency declarations to allow the extension of channels. 
 
Susie Green 
• 
Apple, pear, and cherry trees are irrigated using a mix of groundwater and surface water. 
• 
Most dams were constructed between 30 and 80 years ago with variable maintenance. Currently, 
there are limited potential for new dams or bores

Key informant interviews 30 
 
• 
Producers with less water availability have seen reduced fruit size, affecting yield and marketability. 
There is a need to better manage and diversify water sources; there has been an increase in the 
usage of recycled water (e.g. Bird in Hand and Mount Barker treatment plants) 
• 
Extreme heat and fires have had a more significant impact on horticultural crops than drought 
• 
New variety breeding is mostly done overseas, with Australian growers sourcing new stock 
internationally. Trialling new varieties is highly controlled and licenced 
• 
Within the region, there has been a shift away from potato farming. When orchards are removed, 
they are replaced with wine grapes. 
• 
Strawberries are a high-value crop in the region, nearly matching the value of apples and pears at 
around $85 million. 
• 
Fresh fruit is not significantly affected by smoke taint; research discovered that there is some impact 
on cider production post-Cudlee Creek fire. Spring frosts can affect cherries and apples. 
• 
Agri-tourism presents an income diversification option for smaller producers. 
 
Adelaide Hills Wine Region, Sarah Carlson 
• 
During 2021-2023, PIRSA and the Hills and Fleurieu Landscape Board supported landholders 
impacted by the Cudlee Creek bushfire to recover by establishing a recovery program and local 
economic recovery fund. The recovery program also offered funding support for training initiatives 
aimed at rebuilding and improving skills in the affected communities.  
• 
By identifying and organising training, the Adelaide Hills Wine Region strengthened its reputation as 
a regional association and created opportunities to build connections among businesses and with the 
association, all contributing to resilience. 
• 
PIRSA also had a similar program on Kangaroo Island, but this was only limited to fire impacted 
properties. 
• 
The Adelaide Hills Wine Region uses a regional weather station network for crop watch reports, with 
soil moisture data accessible on their website.  
• 
There is an opportunity to expand the soil moisture monitoring network to support vineyard 
irrigation decisions, helping avoid over and under-watering. 
• 
The South Australian Vine Improvement Association (SAVIA) has an Adelaide Hills group that 
supports the supply of drought-resilient vine cuttings. 
• 
Early planning and investment are needed to transition vineyards to drought-resilient varieties or 
invest in other efforts for vine improvement. 
• 
There is also an opportunity to fund and support better vineyard management that improves soil 
health, water management and vine health through vine pruning.