BARWON 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge and respect Victorian Traditional 
Owners as the original custodians of Victoria’s land 
and waters, their unique ability to care for Country 
and deep spiritual connection to it. The recognised 
Traditional Owners in the Barwon Region include 
the Wadawurrung and Eastern Maar Peoples.
We honour Elders past and present, whose 
knowledge and wisdom have ensured the 
continuation of culture and traditional practices. 
We are committed to genuinely partner, and 
meaningfully engage, with Victoria’s Traditional 
Owners and Aboriginal communities to support 
the protection of Country, the maintenance of 
spiritual and cultural practices and their broader 
aspirations in the 21st century and beyond.

Preface
Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period 
that results in significant impacts to communities, 
businesses and the environment.
The Barwon Drought Resilience Plan is one of 
nine regional plans developed in Victoria, as part 
of the Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
Program, under the Future Drought Fund. Barwon 
communities are committed to taking steps now 
to prepare for and build resilience to dry seasonal 
conditions and drought. 
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought related initiatives to help 
Australian communities prepare for the impacts  
of drought. These are implemented through  
a suite of programs under four focus areas:
•	Better climate information
•	Better practices
•	Better planning
•	Better prepared communities
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) 
Program is part of the ‘better planning’ focus area 
and supports the development of regional drought 
resilience plans throughout Australia from 2021  
to 2025.
This Drought Resilience Plan for the Barwon 
region (the Plan) has been developed through 
consultation with a wide range of local individuals, 
groups and organisations. The Plan includes 
a collectively agreed framework for building 
economic, environmental and social resilience to 
guide regional effort and investment.
The Plan builds on historic and recent experiences 
of drought and integrates existing drought-related  
programs and strategies. Some of the key programs 
and documents that informed the Plan are:
•	South-West node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	Barwon South West Regional Climate  
Adaptation Strategy 2020–2025
•	Central and Gippsland Region Sustainable  
Water Strategy
•	Corangamite Regional Catchment Strategy
•	Victorian Government’s ‘Strong, Innovative, 
Sustainable: A New Strategy for Agriculture  
in Victoria’
•	Future Drought Fund’s Farm Business  
Resilience Program
•	Future Drought Funds’ Helping Regional 
Communities Prepare for Drought Initiative – 
Community Impact Program
Some aspects of the Plan have been developed 
using a consistent methodology across Victoria 
including: 
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts. 
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify key 
insights and suggested priority areas for action 
to build drought resilience.
As part of the planning process a Drought 
Resilience Reference Group was established for 
the region. This group included key stakeholders 
with specialist knowledge of agriculture, health, 
finance, water, community and environment. 
The Barwon Reference Group included the 
organisations:
•	City of Greater Geelong Council
•	Surf Coast Shire Council
•	Colac Otway Shire Council
•	Corangamite Catchment Management Authority
•	Southern Farming Systems
•	South West Node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	WestVic Dairy
•	Barwon Water
•	Southern Rural Water
•	Rural Financial Counselling Service
•	Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action
•	Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
•	Department of Health and Human Services
•	National Emergency Management Agency
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Photo: Surf Coast Shire

Contents
Preface	 	
	
1
Introduction	
4
Purpose and Goals	
6
Plan design and development	
7
Vision and Our Guiding Principles	
8
Vision	
	
	
9
Guiding Principles	
9
The Barwon Region	
10
Region and Community	
10
Geography	 	
10
Population	 	
12
Industry/employment	
12
Climate trends	
13
Drought in the Barwon region	
14
Recent experience of drought	
16
Future drought scenarios	
19
Resilience	 	
20
Definitions of Resilience	
20
Community Resilience	
20
Barwon Drought Framework	
22
Barwon Themes	
22
Theme 1:	 Resilient communities	
24
Theme 2:	Sustainable management of natural resources	
26
Theme 3:	Resilient local businesses and regional economies	
28
Theme 4:	Innovation and skills development	
30
Theme 5:	Key enablers	
32
Barwon Resilience Case Studies	
34
Next Steps	 	
38
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning	
40
Appendices		
44
Appendix 1:	 Stakeholders consulted	
44
Appendix 2:	 Barwon References 	
46
3

INTRODUCTION
4

Drought is a recurring feature in the Australian 
landscape, and has been for thousands of years. 
However, the impacts of climate change are 
increasing the frequency and severity of drought. 
The Australian and Victorian Governments have 
partnered to support regional areas in building 
resilience to future droughts, with a focus  
on adaptative and transformational change.  
The Australian Government’s Drought Response, 
Resilience and Preparedness Program vision is to 
have farm businesses and rural communities that 
are prepared for, and capable of managing drought 
in pursuit of a prosperous and sustainable future. 
Government, industry and community have 
contributed to the development of this place-based 
drought resilience plan for the Barwon region.  
A wide range of stakeholders have participated 
in either group discussions or one-on-one 
interviews (Appendix 1). Future engagement will 
ensure Traditional Owners self-determine their 
involvement in the Plan.
Photo: Tracey McRae
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

Purpose and Goals
Development of the Plan has encouraged a 
collaborative and coordinated approach to building 
drought resilience in the Barwon region. The Plan 
includes a collectively agreed framework for building 
economic, environmental and social resilience.
The long-term objectives of the Plan are to:
•	Build the social capital of Barwon communities 
through increased connectivity, improved 
wellbeing and a greater sense of security.
•	Empower Barwon communities and businesses 
to implement activities to build their economic 
resilience to drought.
•	Support Barwon land managers to adopt 
approaches which will improve the natural 
resource base for long term productivity and 
landscape health.
•	Support Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
communities to continue to self-determine and 
care for Country in the lead up to, and during, 
times of drought.
For this Plan, drought resilience is defined as 
the ability to maintain function while effectively 
responding to the impacts of drought. It is about 
being able to adapt, thrive and take advantage of 
new opportunities rather than trying to maintain the 
status quo. This includes the ability to be flexible yet 
decisive during periods of uncertainty and change.
Resilience is critically important in rural and 
regional communities because it assists individuals 
and groups to develop the mindset, social network 
and business skills to navigate difficult periods and 
extreme events.
Droughts also pose a key threat for Traditional 
Owners, impacting the health of Country, and 
affecting their rights and responsibilities in caring 
for Country.
For Traditional Owners and Aboriginal Victorians, 
caring for Country extends beyond physical 
landscapes and involves the natural waters, 
animals and resources and how they influence  
and impact each other. Healing Country in the 
wake of drought events is essential to ensuring 
positive health and wellbeing outcomes for 
Aboriginal Victorians.
A partnership approach will be needed with 
Traditional Owners, in line with the Government’s 
policy and legal commitments, including the 
Victorian Aboriginal Affairs Framework and the 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action’s Pupangarli Marnmarnepu ‘Owning Our 
Future’ – Aboriginal Self-Determination Reform 
Strategy 2020–2025.
Photo: Surf Coast Shire
6

Plan design and development
Action learning is central to the way this Plan has 
been developed, by listening to diverse perspectives 
about how drought has been managed in the past 
and determining which strategies will likely work 
best in the future. The Plan was developed over nine 
months, drawing on conversations with stakeholders 
through workshops and meetings, community 
feedback through the Victorian Government’s public 
consultation platform Engage Victoria and reviewing 
existing strategic plans for common themes.
During community conversations, local 
stakeholders told us that drought is experienced 
differently across the region and that the pathway 
to resilience will vary depending on individual 
circumstances. They also commented on the 
connection between drought, fire and floods, and 
suggested that a more integrated approach to risk 
mitigation is required.
The community believe that increased awareness 
and preparedness is essential to building 
improved social, environmental, and economic 
resilience. They agreed that all businesses have 
a responsibility to prepare for variable seasons 
and drought and that the best way to mitigate the 
impacts are by understanding the risks and being 
well prepared.
In this plan, five themes were identified as critical 
to building drought resilience:
•	Resilient communities
•	Sustainable management of natural resources
•	Resilient local businesses and regional economies
•	Innovation and skills development
•	Key enablers
Under each theme, stakeholders identified 
outcomes and actions to focus effort and guide 
investment for building drought resilience. The 
proposed actions capture the lived experience, 
local knowledge and solutions identified by 
the Barwon community through nine months of 
conversations. Some of the actions can be addressed 
directly by the community, while others require 
broader cooperation from governments, agencies, 
community organisations or the private sector.
The themes, outcomes and actions that have been 
developed provide a robust framework for building 
regional resilience based on current knowledge  
of the most effective ways to prepare for drought.
Ultimately, this document is a snapshot of the 
priorities of the community at a point in time. 
Barwon’s drought resilience story does not begin 
or end with this Plan. Rather, these priorities  
will evolve as our understanding of drought, 
variable seasons, risk and resilience improve.  
An implementation plan detailing costed activities 
and their timelines will be developed once the  
Plan is approved.
The Barwon Drought Resilience Plan Reference 
Group (the Reference Group) oversaw the 
consultation process, and developed the thematic 
framework based on feedback received from local 
stakeholders. This thematic framework includes 
themes, outcomes and proposed actions for 
building resilience. The Reference Group noted 
that the framework:
•	Provides a ‘collectively agreed framework’  
to focus effort and guide future investment.
•	Builds on and complements existing drought 
related strategies and plans (Appendix 2).
•	Captures knowledge of recent drought 
experience in a form that can be used to improve 
preparedness and response.
•	Provides an avenue for ongoing conversations 
with community.
•	Provides the basis to develop an implementation 
plan with specific actions.
The Reference Group would like to acknowledge 
and thank the many organisations and individuals 
who contributed their time and expertise to shape 
this Plan.
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

VISION AND OUR 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
Photo: Tracey McRae
8

A vision was developed to articulate what the 
Reference Group hopes to achieve through the 
implementation of the Plan. This was done in a 
collaborative manner and the guiding principles 
were considered in the development of the vision.
Vision: Barwon region’s thriving and resilient communities are proactively 
planning for and prepared to respond to drought; community networks are 
ready to provide support and effective governance structures are in place.
“Encourage collaboration, not competition”.
—Nina O’Brien, Foundation for Rural Regional Renewal
Guiding Principles
The following principles are known to have  
positive benefits in building resilience:
Self-reliance and risk mitigation:  
drought is not an exceptional circumstance, 
but a risk to be managed along with other 
business risks.
Encourage preparedness: investment 
should focus on supporting community 
connectedness and wellbeing and  
increasing preparedness in good years.
Collaboration, inclusiveness and co-design: 
putting local people, including Traditional 
Owners (as determined by them), at the 
forefront of decision making by ensuring 
programs are co-designed with local 
stakeholders to ensure community priorities 
are addressed.
Improved decision making: providing the 
best possible information and tools to 
support evidence-based decision-making  
for communities, business and government.
Integration: fostering collaboration between 
organisations to deliver timely, place-based 
and integrated services. 
Leadership and community networks: 
support local leaders and design and deliver 
programs in partnership with trusted, 
established networks and Traditional 
Owners/First Peoples.
Traditional Owner self-determination: 
work with Traditional Owners to provide 
opportunities for them to be involved in,  
and have their self-determined goals  
reflected in, drought preparedness and 
resilience activities.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

Region and Community
The recognised Traditional Owners of the Barwon 
region include the Wadawurrung and Eastern Maar 
Peoples. They have inhabited the area for millennia 
and maintain a strong connection to land and water 
through cultural practices and spiritual beliefs.
The region includes the local government areas of  
the City of Greater Geelong, Surf Coast Shire, Colac 
Otway Shire and the Borough of Queenscliff, and 
is home to Victoria’s largest regional city, Geelong. 
Other significant towns in the region include Lara, 
Ocean Grove, Torquay and Colac. The Barwon 
region hosts historic townships, vibrant growing 
communities, passionate residents, progressive 
businesses, and wide-ranging recreational choices.
Geography
The region primarily falls within the catchments 
of the Barwon River and the Otway Coast basin, 
encompassing the south-western Victorian 
coastline from the heads of Port Phillip Bay at 
Queenscliff to Cape Otway. The urban fringe of 
Melbourne is to the north, and the agricultural 
community of Colac is in the south-west of the 
region. There is a distinctive blend of coastal, 
mountain, forest, agricultural and urban 
landscapes, with the Great Ocean Road, You Yangs 
and the Otway Ranges attracting visitors, while the 
central and western districts are highly productive 
agricultural areas.
THE BARWON 
REGION
Figure 1. Satellite image 
of the Barwon region 
showing coastline and 
forested areas
Google Earth (2024)
GREAT OTWAY 
NATIONAL PARK
LORNE
COLAC
BARWON HEADS
10

21.8%
POPULATION 
(2020)
POPULATION GROWTH 
(2011–20)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
324,300
$17.6
billion
 
 
 
 
 
Geelong
Torquay
Colac
Lorne
Apollo Bay
GOLDEN PLAINS
SHIRE
CITY OF
GREATER
GEELONG
SURF COAST
SHIRE
COLAC OTWAY
SHIRE
BOROUGH OF
QUEENSCLIFF
Source: Barwon Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2022)
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Population
The Barwon region is projected to grow from 
325,000 to 505,000 people by 2030, an increase 
of 21% from 2021 (Barwon Regional Economic 
Development Strategy, 2022). Strong population 
growth of 13.3% over the past decade has 
predominantly been around Geelong, reflecting 
the livability, close proximity to city markets, 
and numerous educational and employment 
opportunities of the area. Colac Otway Shire  
has seen subdued population growth and  
internal migration out of the region, especially  
in younger cohorts.
Industry/employment
Located in close proximity to Victoria’s capital 
city of Melbourne, the region has both social 
and economic advantages which attracts 
businesses, workers and tourists. Once renowned 
for manufacturing, the region’s most significant 
sectors now reflect a more diverse economy, 
comprising construction, health care and social 
assistance, manufacturing, public administration 
and safety, and education and training.
The region’s fertile soil and relatively abundant 
rainfall support a robust agriculture sector 
including dairy, livestock (sheep, cattle and pigs), 
horticulture, and poultry. Food production, with 
farmgate experiences, wineries and food trails, 
primarily located in the Surf Coast, Bellarine 
Peninsula and Otway Ranges, are also a major 
contributor to the economy (Barwon Regional 
Economic Development Strategy, 2022). Direct 
agricultural employment across the region is 
low (2%), however, for the Colac Otway Local 
Government Authority (LGA) this increases to 
11.4% (Frontier Economics, 2022).
Deakin University has two Geelong campuses 
with a strong focus on manufacturing, materials, 
data analytics, agriculture and health. CSIRO’s 
Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness 
facility in Geelong has a high-containment facility 
designed to protect Australia’s multi-billion-dollar 
livestock and aquaculture industries from the 
threat of infectious disease.
$13.8 billion
GVA  
(2020)
Top sectors by GVA ($ billion):
1.	
Construction
$1.9
2.	 Health care and social assistance
$1.8
3.	 Manufacturing
$1.5
4.	 Public administration and safety
$1.2
5.	 Education and training
$1.2
Figure 2. Top sectors by  
Gross Value Added ($ billion)
Barwon Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2022)
It is recognised that many communities, including 
Traditional Owner communities, do not operate 
strictly within regional boundaries, nor do the 
organisations and businesses that support them. 
Despite being developed for the Barwon region, 
the actions identified in the Plan often have  
inter-regional impacts. It is important to cooperate 
and share information on resilience with neighboring 
municipalities and regions, and across other  
states and territories.
Similarly, it is acknowledged that for many 
Traditional Owners, connection to Country is 
more holistic and not bound by the region and 
constructs of the Plan, and that impacts are  
likely to be broader than the Barwon region  
and the actions identified in the Plan.
12

Climate trends
Rainfall in the Barwon region occurs 
predominantly in winter and spring and is generally 
the result of rain-bearing weather systems from 
the west. Most areas receive between 600–700mm 
of rain per year. The highest rainfall occurs in the 
Colac Otway Shire, at just below 900mm annually, 
while Geelong records just above 450mm per year. 
Since the 1950s, average rainfall has declined 
across the Barwon region, especially in autumn.
Climate projections for the region based on climate 
change scenario modelling (Frontier Economics, 
2022) indicate continued variability and change in 
future with:
•	average temperatures to increase by 1.4–1.9°C
•	spring rainfall to decrease by 6–11%
•	an increase in fire danger days of 49%
•	a decrease in frost risk.
Figure 3. Agriculture industries 
in the Barwon region
Frontier Economics (2022)
Nurseries, cut flowers  
or cultivated turf (Total)
Vegetables (Total)
Livestock slaughtered and 
other disposals (Total)
Broadacre crops (Total)
Hay (Total)
Livestock products
4%
9%
9%
3%
29%
46%
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Drought has always been and will continue to be  
a feature of the Barwon climate. Droughts can 
easily be characterised in hindsight, however 
in reality they are slow moving, complex and 
dynamic. The impacts of drought can be highly 
variable across the region depending on rainfall, 
soil type and topography.
An assessment by Frontier Economics (2022) of 
the socio-economic and environmental impacts 
of past and future droughts can be found in the 
supplementary report – Drought in the Barwon 
Region. The report looks at not only the effect 
drought has on agriculture, but also the flow on 
effects to regional communities.
The Wadawurrung Traditional Owners Plan 
‘Paleert Tjaara Dja’ (Let’s make Country good 
together 2020–2030. Wadawurrung Country Plan) 
DROUGHT 
IN THE 
BARWON 
REGION
14

identifies drought as one of the key threats that 
can negatively impact on the health of things 
that they value. In Paleert Tjaara Dja, drought is 
considered to have a high impact on Wadawurrung 
sites, places and culture.
The Eastern Maar Country Plan ‘Meerreengeeye 
Ngakeepoorryeeyt’ does not specifically mention 
drought. However, goal 4 of Meerreengeeye 
Ngakeepoorryeeyt, ‘Our Country is healthy, and 
our natural resources are managed and used 
sustainably’ is strongly aligned to one of the 
key themes of this Plan which is ‘sustainable 
management of natural resources.’
The effects of climate change, including drought, 
significantly impact on Aboriginal communities 
across Victoria. Drought harms Country and 
people, through impacts on waterways, plants, 
animals, ecosystems and seasons, making it hard 
to practice culture and heal Country. Cultural 
heritage sites are also damaged by fire, drying 
soils and erosion, caused by drought.
The impact of drought on farms can be very 
different across the region. Some farms will 
prosper if they are well prepared, act early and 
take advantage of high prices associated with 
reduced supply. However, in general there is an 
economic downturn associated with drought 
including reduced cash flow through the local 
economy. The Colac area tends to be more 
impacted by drought due to its inland location  
and large agricultural industry. Areas closer  
to Geelong and the coast tend to have larger,  
more diverse economies and a milder climate.
Photo: Elizabeth Ryan
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

Drought has many pervasive impacts on 
communities. As surface water and subsoil 
moisture continued to decline during the 
Millennium Drought the cash, fodder and water 
reserves of many farms became extremely low 
or fully depleted. Compounding the issue of 
reduced cash flow were the high supplementary 
feed or agistment costs, as well as the additional 
work of carting water for stock. Agricultural 
businesses look for ways to reduce their spending 
on household needs such as groceries, healthcare 
and education. The reduced spending of farmers 
flows to other regional businesses and impacts the 
regional supply chain.
Recent experience of drought
Drought has affected the Barwon region to varying 
degrees in recent decades with each drought being 
unique in its severity, duration and distribution.  
The Millennium Drought spanned more than a 
decade from 1997 to 2009, and more recently the 
region experienced a drought from 2013 to 2015.
During the Millennium Drought, the Barwon region 
experienced conditions that significantly lowered 
agricultural production and had flow on effects 
for the community. The following section provides 
an insight into the community’s experience when 
the conditions were most severe. Lessons learned 
from this period have greatly influenced the 
development of this Plan.
Figure 8 highlights the severity of the Millennium 
Drought from 1997 to 2009, with average 
temperatures consistently warmer than the 
median, and the lowest rainfall on record 
experienced for much of the region.
The Bureau of Meteorology reported that the 
Millennium Drought was essentially a cool-season 
drought in southern mainland Australia, with low 
rainfall in Winter and Spring, and above average 
warm-season rainfall (November to March) received 
in many areas (Bureau of Meteorology, 2022).
The lack of rainfall during this time resulted in 
rapidly declining water storages. In many towns 
water restrictions became so severe that only  
25% of sporting fields and public sporting 
facilities were being irrigated. As a consequence, 
some sporting fields could not be used as the 
playing surface was unsafe. A unique feature of 
the Millennium Drought was the long intervals 
without any significant rain.
Highest on record
Very much above average
Above average
Average
Below average
Very much below average
Lowest on record
Figure 4. Victorian average rainfall decile range 
during the Millennium Drought 1997 to 2009
Bureau of Meteorology
16

During the Millennium Drought, families, businesses, communities, infrastructure, the regional economy 
and local ecosystems were all impacted in different ways. Rainfall in 2009 continued to be below 
average, especially in the east. During this period local media were reporting:
•	Negative impacts in the local rivers, lakes 
and dams, with 10 of the region’s 28 lakes 
experiencing increases in lake salinity due  
to increased evaporation.
•	Culturally significant sites for Traditional 
Owners, predominantly located on flood plains 
were increasingly becoming vulnerable to  
drying soils and erosion.
•	Two of the region’s biggest eel habitats, Lake 
Colac and Lake Bolac, were empty, causing 
the Victorian Commercial Eel Fisherman’s 
Association to declare that the dry conditions 
had vastly reduced the state’s eel haul.
•	Community leaders were calling for improved 
access to mental health support.
•	Invasive pests such as rabbits, mice and 
kangaroos were causing widespread damage  
on public and private land.
•	Many towns encountering Stage 4 urban water 
restrictions, prohibiting the watering of outdoor 
spaces, experienced substantial impacts on the 
community’s wellbeing and livability.
•	Coastal tourism continued to provide much 
needed income diversity, however, for those 
towns enduring Stage 4 water restrictions, the 
dry conditions affected the tourist’s amenity 
when visiting local towns and tourist destinations.
•	While it did not receive significant media 
coverage, the Department is aware that drought 
also had a significant impact on Traditional 
Owners to care for Country.
Higher temperatures during these dry years led 
to increased evaporation rates which caused 
severe drying of the landscape. The conditions, 
which peaked during the Black Saturday (2009) 
heatwave and bushfires, culminated in the loss of 
173 lives in Victoria (Bureau of Meteorology, 2022).
Our emergency services recognise the cyclical 
connection between drought, fire and floods, 
and the hazards these cause to properties and 
landscapes. Dry periods can increase the risk of 
bushfire, as well as increasing the risk to public 
and private assets and community wellbeing.
The social, economic and environmental 
vulnerabilities that exist in communities are 
amplified as the conditions of drought unfold. 
Table 1 summarises the interconnected impacts of 
drought as described by community stakeholders.
Photo: Tracey McRae
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

Table 1. The interconnected impacts 
of drought in the Barwon region
Social
•	Reduced health and wellbeing
•	Workforce changes
•	Increased transition to 
retirements
•	Water restrictions in urban areas 
causing societal impacts. Lack of 
water available to keep sporting 
grounds in a safe state
•	Increase in domestic violence
•	Uncertainty leading to fatigue, 
anxiety and mental health issues
•	Individuals withdraw and 
stop community participation 
impacting family life
•	Less attractive rural landscapes. 
Water recreation is reduced 
•	Tensions around sharing of 
water that is left between urban, 
agriculture and environment,  
all of which are under stress
•	Higher risk of fires
•	Traditional Owners unable  
to practice culture and care  
for Country
•	Damage to cultural heritage sites
Economic
•	Job losses. Loss of individual  
and family income
•	Increased financial hardship  
for the families, businesses,  
and local communities
•	Reduction in income for the 
region, decline in supply chain 
businesses
•	High levels of restrictions on 
extractions from rivers and 
streams, and in some areas on 
aquifer extractions
•	Reduced pastures for livestock 
•	Reduced on farm water storages
•	Increased supplementary feed  
and agistment costs 
•	Supply chain impacts on  
major food producers e.g.,  
Bulla/Australian Lamb Company
•	Economic impact in smaller towns 
with less disposable income. 
Smaller, more remote communities 
are more exposed to financial risks
•	Reduced investment in farm 
development
•	Decline in tourism
Environment
• Soil damage, loss of species  
(both plants and animals)
• Environmental: habitat loss and 
species population decline
• Reduced river and stream flows 
leading to water shortages. e.g., 
The Barwon River ceased to flow
• Negative impacts on fish, stock 
and wildlife
• Increased strain on aquifers. Colac, 
Barwon Downs, Anglesea bore 
fields took a long time to recover
• Reduced water quality and 
increased algae blooms
• Lake Colac dried up which had 
an environmental impact and 
increased risks of salinity
• Overuse of bore water impacting 
aquifers
• Pressure on land management 
decisions
• The integrity of many dam walls 
deteriorated significantly, so when 
they suddenly filled after the 
drought, the chance of collapse 
and failure was greatly increased
• Increased weeds
• Increased threat from invasive 
pests and wildlife which caused 
further damage to agricultural 
landscapes and slowed recovery 
• Linear reserves e.g., roadsides 
that host endangered 
communities faced pressure from 
stock grazing and invasive pests
• Wetlands and ground water  
dried out
• Loss of topsoil to erosion
• Time and costs for restorative 
work to soils and pastures
• Carbon loss
• Stressed trees and loss of habitat 
leading to carbon loss, loss of 
biodiversity soil damage
• Increased fire risk
• Traditional Owners’ ability to care 
for Country using traditional and 
culturally appropriate tools is 
reduced.
• Culturally significant places, 
species and ecosystems impacted
• Cultural water flows reduced
18

Future drought scenarios
Future drought modelling by Frontier Economics (2022) includes the below scenarios:
•	Gross Domestic Product (GDP) falling by  
12.7%, a reduction of more than 1400 jobs,  
and a reduction of 4% in consumer spending;
•	River flows and lakes levels to decline  
with negative impacts on biodiversity;
•	Social and economic impacts on  
the community;
•	Fluctuating tourist numbers when water 
restrictions are implemented or following 
bushfire;
•	Parks and sporting precincts face water 
restrictions;
•	Services such as healthcare and Rural Financial 
Counselling see increasing wait times.
“Better preparation, more detailed modelling  
and scenario planning will assist in preparation”.
—Peter Morgan, Barwon Water
Photo: Elizabeth Ryan
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

RESILIENCE
Definitions of Resilience
Walker (2020) defines resilience as the capacity of 
a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise 
to keep functioning in the same kind of way. 
Rather than just bouncing back, resilience is about 
changing and adapting to new circumstances.
For this Plan, resilience is described as the ability 
to effectively respond to the impacts of drought 
and maintain function. It is about being able to 
adapt, thrive and take advantage of opportunities 
when encountering change. Rather than 
maintaining a persistent or stoic response to the 
situation, resilience includes the ability to make 
tactical decisions in times of uncertainty.
Resilience assists individuals and groups to build 
the mindset, social network and business skills 
required to navigate the challenges encountered  
in difficult seasons.
Community Resilience
In our discussions with regional stakeholders,  
we heard that resilient communities demonstrate 
some, or all, of the following characteristics:
•	Local leadership and initiative
•	Adaptive governance that embraces change
•	Connection through formal and informal networks
•	Diversity of experience and needs, including 
of different parts of the community, including 
Traditional Owners.
Photo: Elizabeth Ryan
20

Photo: Oz Aerial
The Victorian Community Resilience Framework 
for Emergency Management (2020) provides a 
coherent perspective on community resilience. 
Although drought is not a legislated emergency, 
it is closely aligned to the guiding principles of 
this document, which offers a useful foundation 
on which to build a more resilient region. It is 
composed of the following seven characteristics 
that lead to greater resilience:
1.		Safe and well
2.	Connected, inclusive and empowered
3.	Culturally rich and vibrant
4.	Sustainable built and natural environment
5.	Dynamic and diverse local economy
6.	Reflective and aware
7.		Democratic and engaged
Building resilience includes a focus on well-
functioning communities with the explicit objective 
of strengthening the liveability, viability, and 
wellbeing of both the people and the region.
Although there is no one-size-fits-all solution, 
alignment with this community resilience 
framework will support organisations to:
•	Better understand and participate in building 
safer and more resilient communities 
•	Improve collaboration within and between 
organisations
•	Use connected networks to support wellbeing, 
liveability and sustainability
•	Utilise planning systems to mitigate risk
•	Align adaptive governance, policies and 
programs to strengthen community resilience
•	Partner with Traditional Owners to  
support culturally appropriate practices  
in emergency events.
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

The Themes, Outcomes and Actions 
(the Framework) detailed below 
capture the lived experience and 
local knowledge of the Barwon 
community. The Framework was 
developed through nine months 
of conversation and engagement 
with community members and 
organisations. It considers 
relevant regional plans and policy 
documents and aligns with these.
The Framework consists of five themes, each with 
an outcome, and a list of actions to move the region 
towards achieving its vision. Some actions can 
be addressed directly by the Barwon community, 
while others will require broader cooperation from 
governments, agencies, and industry.
Many actions identified in the Plan are 
incremental, building on existing approaches 
such as improving water use efficiency and 
better business planning across the region. 
However, incremental changes alone are not 
sufficient to adapt to a changing climate and at 
some point, transformational change is required. 
Transformation requires a significant change to 
how things are currently done. For example, land 
use change where a higher water use industry, like 
dairy, is replaced by a lower water use industry, 
like beef cattle. Transformational changes can be 
disruptive, and the businesses and communities 
involved may often require support to navigate 
these changes.
The actions identified encourage preparedness 
for drought, including the need for adaptive 
and transformational change. Actions include 
implementing sustainable water practices, 
adopting different farming methods, fostering 
community engagement, and encouraging 
innovation.
BARWON DROUGHT 
FRAMEWORK
Barwon Themes
Theme 1:	 Resilient communities  
Theme 2:	Sustainable management of  
natural resources 
Theme 3:	Resilient local businesses and  
regional economies 
Theme 4:	Innovation and skills development 
Theme 5:	Key enablers
22

“Increase self-determination of local community and 
industry groups through co-developed partnerships”.
—Rebecca Lester, Centre for Regional and Rural Futures
Photo: Tracey McRae
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

RESILIENT 
COMMUNITIES
Theme 1
Outcome:  
Barwon communities have strong, self-sustaining networks that are 
responsive and welcoming. Physical and mental health services are easy 
to access and there are ample educational and leadership opportunities.
Theme 1 is about building and maintaining  
resilient communities with a focus on 
connectedness, accessible health services, 
collaborative leadership, educational opportunities, 
skill development and networking. The actions 
reflect a community commitment to enhance 
wellbeing in preparedness for drought and other 
related challenges.
24

Actions
1.1
Develop and promote opportunities to maintain social connectedness and to create  
new connections across communities.
1.2
Support improved access to health and wellbeing programs; ensuring services are 
accessible, convenient, and relevant. (See case study 1)
1.3
Foster a culture of collaborative leadership across agencies, industry, emerging leaders, 
and community groups.
1.4
Establish or strengthen programs such as youth networks, vocational training in high 
schools and scholarships to make careers in agriculture more accessible and attractive.
1.5
Promote training to maintain the currency of a skilled agricultural workforce to better  
deal with the challenges of drought and other climate related risks.
1.6
Facilitate the networking of community, industry, government, and the financial sector  
to focus on drought preparedness.
1.7
Support opportunities for Traditional Owners to build drought resilience and  
preparedness efforts, in line with their self-determined values, goals and aspirations  
for Country and Community. 
“Preparedness is about planning and anticipating the implications if we do 
or don’t act in certain ways. If we don’t manage our dry feed, we will pay for 
it in winter in lower pasture production. The same applies when managing 
through drought — plan and prepare when times are good, not when we are 
in the middle and are trying to survive”.
—Scott Chirnside, Chairman of Southern Farming Systems
Photo: Southern Farming Systems
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

SUSTAINABLE 
MANAGEMENT 
OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES
Theme 2
Outcome:  
Land managers are aware of the impacts of drought and have measures 
in place to reduce the impacts, hasten recovery, and protect biodiversity 
and other natural assets. Current and potential water resources are well 
understood and managed in line with regional water strategies.
Theme 2 is about proactive management of the 
regions natural resources to reduce the impacts 
of drought, balance competing water demands, 
foster sustainable and resilient farming practices, 
protect biodiversity, and collaborate and partner 
with Traditional Owners, to share learnings.
26

Actions
2.1
Support and empower farmers to accelerate the adoption of innovative and resilient 
farming practices that best suit their needs and circumstances.
2.2
Diversify water storage and supply options on farm and in communities. (See case study 2)
2.3
Promote the availability and maintain the functioning of the regional emergency water 
points (locations, operation, ownership, maintenance) to ensure the region can maintain 
sufficient access during times of drought. 
2.4
Highlight the benefits of farm water management planning and implementation.
2.5
Promote the maintenance of ground cover to support healthy soils that are more  
resilient during droughts.
2.6
Promote dialogue around managing the competing water needs of cities, regional 
communities, Traditional Owners, agriculture, and the environment.
2.7
Improve sustainable land and water management practices through collaboration  
and partnership with Traditional Owners and First Peoples, in line with Government’s  
legal and policy obligations.
2.8
Promote the importance of protecting biodiversity and other natural assets and  
support the work that Landcare and other groups do in this area.
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

RESILIENT LOCAL 
BUSINESSES 
AND REGIONAL 
ECONOMIES
Theme 3
Outcome:  
Regional economies are supported by flexible and diverse businesses 
that have considered how they will respond to drought. All businesses 
within the Barwon region can access quality business planning and 
financial advice that is affordable.
Theme 3 is about maintaining resilient businesses 
and a strong regional economy. This can be 
achieved through business planning, providing 
access to financial advice, building financial 
buffers, and encouraging business diversification. 
28

Actions
3.1
Encourage small business owners to regularly undertake business planning with an 
accredited provider, including planning for business risks like drought. (See case study 3)
3.2
Promote, encourage and support Barwon businesses to utilise financial advice and 
advocate for improved access to these services.
3.3
Provide opportunities for small business owners to network with and choose the right  
‘team’ of advisors to generate financial success and resilience.
3.4
Highlight the benefits of building financial buffers during good years that can be used 
during difficult times, like drought.
3.5
Promote diversification as a way to build resilience for local businesses and economies.
Photo: Surf Coast Shire
“Put in place preventative measures before the crisis occurs”.
—Karen Brady, Rural Financial Counselling Service Victoria West
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

INNOVATION 
AND SKILLS 
DEVELOPMENT
Theme 4
Outcome:  
Community, industry and government work collaboratively to 
identify key drought related issues and develop innovative solutions. 
Information products relating to drought resilience are widely shared 
and can be easily accessed.
Theme 4 is about encouraging innovation and 
skills development through the sharing of research 
outcomes, building a shared knowledge base and 
taking on improved processes and technologies. 
This theme emphasizes collaboration, co-design, 
and economic assessment to drive effective 
drought resilience solutions. The theme also 
prioritizes access to information products  
for drought resilience, ensuring that valuable 
knowledge reaches a wide audience and 
contributes to the overall preparedness of  
the region.
30

Actions
4.1
Strengthen and expand locally specific and relevant agricultural research, innovation  
and extension. (See case study 4)
4.2
Document and share drought related research, innovation and extension knowledge  
and activities.
4.3
Identify and promote opportunities that best contribute to drought resilience arising  
from new and emerging technologies and high value products.
4.4
Increase the relevance and uptake of farm innovation practices by co-designing research 
and extension programs with local farming communities.
4.5
Commission an assessment of the economic benefits of investing in resilience building 
activities in preparation for drought.
4.6
Identify, in partnership with Traditional Owners, opportunities to use traditional knowledge, 
and culturally appropriate tools to heal and care for Country
“Promote research to facilitate drought resilience in agriculture”.
—Rebecca Lester, Centre for Regional and Rural Futures
Photo: Surf Coast Shire
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

KEY ENABLERS
Theme 5
Outcome:  
Community, industry and government are clear on their responsibilities 
relating to drought preparedness and response. A standing Resilience 
Advisory Group maintains a functioning network of stakeholders and 
helps coordinate preparedness activities.
Theme 5 identifies the key enablers that are 
critical for effective drought preparedness and 
response. Clear coordination arrangements, 
defined responsibilities, a Resilience Advisory 
Group, inter-agency planning, and the integration 
of drought preparedness will support stakeholders 
to work together and actively contribute to the 
region’s collaborative drought resilience efforts.
32

Actions
5.1
Develop clear regional drought coordination arrangements with appropriate industry, 
community, not-for-profit and agency leaders.
5.2
Define and articulate the responsibilities of all stakeholders in drought preparedness,  
then maintain and regularly review these for drought response and recovery.
5.3
Establish a permanent Resilience Advisory Group to coordinate the delivery of the  
Barwon Drought Resilience Plan.
5.4
Promote inter-agency planning and build drought preparedness into relevant strategies  
and plans. (See case study 5)
5.5
Encourage each agency and organisation to consider drought preparedness and 
incorporate mitigation actions into relevant strategies and plans.
5.6
Develop working partnerships with relevant Traditional Owners on matters relating  
to drought preparedness and responses in the Barwon area. 
Photo: Tracey McRae
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

Barwon Resilience Case Studies
The following case studies  
provide examples of lived 
experience in the Barwon 
community each highlighting 
different aspects of building 
drought resilience including 
community leadership, health 
and wellbeing, sustainable land 
management, self-responsibility, 
inclusivity, and connectivity.
Theme 1: Resilient Communities 
Steering Straight: Improving mental health  
in farming communities
Theme 2: Sustainable management  
of natural resources  
The benefits of shared environmental water delivery
Theme 3: Resilient local businesses  
and regional economies  
The importance of having a business plan
Theme 4: Innovation and skills development 
Better understand your soils
Theme 5: Key enablers 
Preparing local government for climate change  
in emergency management
THEME 1: RESILIENT COMMUNITIES 
Improving mental health in 
farming communities
Those in rural farming communities are at a higher 
risk of suicide than average Australians. Farmers 
are known to be generous in providing help to 
others, but they are often reluctant to ask for help  
themselves. Access to mental health support in  
rural areas is limited, and where support is available, 
providers may have poor understanding of the 
realities of life and work in the farming environment.
Recognising these risk factors, the National  
Centre for Farmer Health worked in collaboration 
with Great South Coast community members  
to develop a dedicated resource for farmers  
and farming communities. 
Steering Straight empowers farmers to reflect 
on and prioritise their health and wellbeing by 
identifying personalised, practical steps to take 
when navigating difficult situations. It helps to:
•	Identify personal signs of stress
•	Identify and plan helpful activities 
•	Break down goals into manageable steps
•	Know who to call for support
Written by Dr Alison Kennedy from the National  
Centre for Farmer Health. Steering Straight and the 
Managing Stress on the Farm publication were  
developed as part of the Great South Coast Suicide 
Prevention Place-Based Trial, and are now being  
used across Australia and internationally.  
www.farmerhealth.org.au/managing-stress-book
34

THEME 2: SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT  
OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
Managing water to sustain  
our waterways
The Moorabool River passes near the towns of 
Ballan, Morrisons, Batesford and Fyansford and is 
fed by the Moorabool, Bostock and Lal Reservoirs. 
It is one of the most ‘flow-stressed’ rivers in 
Victoria and is very dependent on water released 
from Lal Reservoir to maintain flows over dry 
periods.  These flows maintain the life of the river 
and the health of the surrounding environment. 
However, current water entitlements limit such 
releases to 7,500 megalitres over 3 years –  
only a small proportion of what the river and 
environment requires for basic ecological function. 
Corangamite Catchment Management Authority 
have worked in partnership with community 
members to clarify an environmental watering 
objective to guide the use of water to sustain the 
health of the river and its ecological system. 
This proactive approach to environmental water 
releases is improving the Moorabool River’s  
flow-dependent ecological values and services 
through the provision of environmental water, 
while also providing for social and cultural values 
for future generations.
Written by Jayden Woolley from the Corangamite  
Catchment Management Authority.
Photo: Batesford Fyansford 
Stonehaven Landcare Group
Image: Victorian 
Environmental 
Water Holder
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

THEME 4: INNOVATION AND SKILLS 
DEVELOPMENT
Better understand your soils 
Grain and oilseed growers Stewart and Pip 
Hamilton know first-hand the benefits of data-led 
decisions when investing in soil health. 
The Hamiltons manage vastly different soils across 
their 2830 hectare operation – from shallow sandy 
loam river flats to heavy volcanic clay soils at 
Inverleigh, to black self-mulching soils with red 
rises and sandy dunes at Wycheproof. To get the 
best out of these different soils and invest in soil 
health, paddock testing of soils has provided 
the Hamiltons the data needed to make targeted 
investment on farm.
Inadequate organic matter in soils degrades soil 
structure and ability of the soil to retain moisture. 
This challenges water retention in dry times, and 
water penetration during wet times. Stewart and 
Pip recognised this was a significant risk to their 
business and since the 1990s they have worked  
to improve drainage and improve soil aeration.
By employing grid mapping across their land, 
Stewart and Pip are now armed with accurate  
soil information to manage risks and get better 
return on investment, for example with targeted 
fertilised application.  Stewart and Pip are 
confident with data from subsequent soil tests 
supporting their approach. 
As active members of Southern Farming Systems 
the Hamiltons are no strangers to on-farm trials 
and testing new techniques to suit their needs. 
They believe that this approach has given them  
the soil data they need for improved decision 
making, increased yields, and healthier soils for 
greater resilience in the long term.
Written by Society of Precision Agriculture Australia
THEME 3: RESILIENT LOCAL BUSINESSES 
AND REGIONAL ECONOMIES 
The importance of business 
planning
Less than 1,000 farms between Geelong and 
the South Australian border produce more than 
20% of Australia’s milk. Dairy Australia’s WestVic 
Dairy team support these businesses and their 
6,000 employees to manage their businesses in a 
changing economic and environmental climate. 
The Our Farm, Our Plan program helps farmers 
to develop a well-designed business plan, getting 
everyone in the business on the same page, 
clarifying where the farm business needs to go, 
and understanding how to get there. 
Through a series of structured workshops, farmers 
identify their goals and explore opportunities to 
optimise their farm production and profitability. 
The program uses measurements and metrics to 
inform decision making and track progress. This 
information also empowers farmers to understand 
opportunities for their businesses to embed best 
practice approaches, test new ideas, and manage 
risk and volatility.
By encouraging participants to connect with 
discussion groups throughout the program, 
Our Farm, Our Plan helps farmers to build 
more resilient farming businesses, and a more 
connected industry and agricultural community.
Written by the WestVic Dairy 
www.dairyaustralia.com.au/westvic-dairy/farm-business/
our-farm-our-plan
36

THEME 4: INNOVATION AND SKILLS 
DEVELOPMENT
Creating innovative solutions  
for local problems
Southern Farming systems (SFS) coordinates 
the South West Node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub - part of 
the Future Drought Fund. 
Working with universities, regional development, 
catchment management organisations and 
private sector partners, this role builds on the SFS 
commitment to support farming businesses by 
identifying and promoting opportunities that best 
contribute to drought resilience arising from new 
and emerging technologies.
A recent collaboration with National Landcare has 
enabled two innovative tools to improve on-farm 
decision making:
MyFarm Dashboard centralises real-time 
information on climate, soil moisture, prices and 
pasture into a dashboard to inform common 
decisions to address soil constraints and optimise 
soil health.
Decision Wizard helps farmers to structure the 
decisions they make on-farm to yield better 
choices and a more resilient farm business.
These world-leading solutions for local problems, 
are enabling innovation in farming systems 
and supporting farmers to implement adaptive 
practices on-farm.
Written by Cam Nicholson  
www.myfarmdashboard.sfs.org.au  
www.decisionwizard.sfs.org.au
THEME 5: KEY ENABLERS
Preparing councils for  
a changing climate
Having recently experienced a number of extreme 
weather events, the realities of a changing climate 
are hitting home for the Barwon region. Knowing 
the anticipated increase in frequency and intensity 
of extreme weather events will result in significant 
financial and social costs for their communities, the 
region’s Councils wanted to better understand the 
potential impacts of climate change on their region.
City of Greater Geelong, Borough of Queenscliff, 
Colac Otway Shire Council and Surf Coast 
Shire Council worked together through the 
Barwon Regional Partnership to develop a 
detailed understanding of likely impacts, and the 
consequences for all aspects of council operations.
The partnership approach better utilises regional 
resources and best practice tools to prepare for 
the changing climate. Working together builds 
Councils’ capacity to prepare for and respond to 
potential emergency events. The collaborative 
approach has also identified the need for changes 
to business-as-usual Council operations.
The work provides Councils and other government 
agencies with information to prioritise the funding 
and investment required to mitigate the potential 
impacts of climate change for their organisations 
and their communities.
Written by State of Victoria (first appeared in the  
Barwon South West Regional Climate Adaption Strategy 
2020–2025, p55.)
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

This Plan has been drafted with input from 
community members and organisations who have 
an important part to play in realising the Plan’s 
vision. It provides a Framework for focusing effort 
and guiding investment decisions to enhance 
drought resilience in the Barwon region.
The Framework is only the first step in identifying 
the priorities of the community and we know that 
continued collective action is necessary for the 
Plan to succeed.
This Plan is a document to be used by the 
community, in collaboration and partnership with 
First Peoples, industry, the not-for-profit sector, 
and all levels of government to: 
•	coordinate investment
•	align to other plans or strategies to support 
funding proposals
•	collaborate for shared outcomes
•	inform future drought resilience priorities
•	develop drought resilience programs
•	monitor resilience to future droughts.
Some of the actions identified can be addressed 
directly by the community, while others will 
require broader cooperation from governments, 
not-for-profit organisations, and industry. Many 
of the actions identified in the Plan will require 
investment if they are to be undertaken.
NEXT 
STEPS
38

Immediate next steps include securing resources 
to support delivery of actions within the Plan, 
identification of a lead organisation to coordinate 
the Plan’s delivery, and establishment of a 
governance group to support and collaborate  
on the Plan’s implementation.
The Plan Coordinator will ensure engagement  
with community, industry, business, not-for-profit, 
and government stakeholders. They will continue 
to identify roles and responsibilities to deliver the 
Plan and achieve the desired outcomes.
Partnerships with Traditional Owners/First Peoples 
of the Barwon region will ensure their unique 
rights and responsibilities, and self-determined 
goals and aspirations for Country, are reflected 
during implementation of Plan actions.
It is acknowledged that the Plan will need to 
be agile and adapt in response to changes in 
the natural environment, operational and policy 
environments, evaluation and learning as well as 
the changing needs of the community.
The Barwon Reference Group acknowledges 
the experience, knowledge and generosity of 
organisations and individuals who contributed to the 
development of this Plan. Increased awareness and 
preparedness are essential to building resilience, 
and everyone has a responsibility to prepare for 
variable climatic conditions. An integrated approach 
to managing risk is critical to mitigating the impacts 
of drought.
This approach will support Barwon communities to 
be better prepared for, and capable of managing, 
drought in the pursuit of a prosperous and 
sustainable future.
“Don’t use a one solution 
suits all approach”.
—Karen Brady, Rural Financial  
Counselling Service Victoria West
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

The collaborative effort and shared expertise used 
to prepare the Plan is an important first step in 
building drought resilience in the Barwon region. 
Work was been done by the region to articulate 
the actions needed to achieve desired regional 
outcomes. The next step is for the actions and 
activities identified in the Plan to be implemented, 
evaluated and adapted as needed to achieve the 
longer-term outcomes for drought resilience.
Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) is a 
key element of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning program. Program objectives, outcomes 
and measures of success are clearly articulated  
at all levels of program delivery (national, state  
and regional) and are over a range of short, 
medium and long timeframes.
MONITORING, 
EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING
Figure 5. Pathway of program delivery 
through discovery, engagement, development, 
implementation and evaluation
1
Understand 
the context
Past, current 
and future 
understanding 
of drought 
in the region
2
Gather 
momentum
Bring together 
the experiences 
and perspectives 
to develop a 
regional Plan
3
Articulate the 
desired steps 
for change
Work together 
to determine 
desired outcomes 
and actions
4
Take the steps 
and actions
Implement the 
actions and activities 
to acheive change 
and build resilience
5
Determine 
next steps
Evaluate regional 
outcomes and 
identify learnings 
and gaps for 
future progress
We are here
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
40

Measuring success
The outcomes identified in this Plan are community 
and region wide, and dependent on the fourth  
step of implementation identified in the pathway 
of program delivery (Figure 5). Given the long-term 
outcomes of the Plan, the MEL framework below 
outlines how progress toward success will be 
measured.
Management and reporting
The successful lead organisation chosen to 
coordinate delivery of the Plan will work with 
Agriculture Victoria to provide up-to-date data and 
information to support program implementation 
and planning. Monitoring and reporting will enable: 
key learnings to be identified, effective reporting, 
and adaptive program management.
A range of assessment tools may be used to 
indicate progress including, but not limited to, 
surveys, case studies, stakeholder interviews and 
engagement data analysis. Data and information 
will be collected at various intervals across 
implementation planning, and during and after 
activities are implemented.
Assumptions underpinning 
success of the Plan
Measuring success and reporting on progress 
toward regionally specific outcomes is dependent 
on several key assumptions.
 
Key assumptions affecting short-term  
outcomes (1–2 years)
•	Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning.
•	Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other for regional planning.
•	Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs.
•	Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them.
•	There are sufficient learnings to continuously 
improve program implementation.
 
Key assumptions affecting medium term 
outcomes (2–4 years)
•	Supporting regional stakeholders through 
program implementation will result in change  
in practice in the Barwon region.
•	There are sufficient opportunities and funding 
for the region to implement elements of the Plan.
•	Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience.
•	The Barwon Plan Coordinator and regional 
stakeholders continue to review and implement 
the Plan.
MEL Framework
Key regional themes and outcomes are matched 
with relevant Future Drought Fund strategic 
priorities, regional progress measures (2–4 years) 
and indicators.
The MEL Framework is aligned to existing MEL 
plans at the Program and Fund level to ensure 
consistency and to ensure the data collection tools 
provide information across a range of learning and 
reporting requirements.
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Resilient communities
Barwon communities have strong, self-sustaining networks that are responsive and welcoming. 
Physical and mental health services are easy to access and there are ample educational and 
leadership opportunities.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities are coming together to 
prepare for and respond to drought.
Communities are learning and building 
capability, capacity, expertise, and sharing 
innovative ways to build social resilience.
Improved community awareness of and 
access to health and wellbeing services.
Groups and networks continue to 
function and work well together.
Leaders in the region are more 
confident to implement strategic 
actions.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver on 
actions across the region.
Sustainable management of natural resources
Land managers are aware of the impacts of drought and have measures in place to reduce the  
impacts, hasten recovery, and protect biodiversity and other natural assets. Current and potential 
water resources are well understood and managed in line with regional water strategies.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Primary producers and businesses are 
better able to prepare for drought.
Knowledge and understanding of 
resilience of natural resources across  
the region is increasing.
Capability to manage natural resource to 
build resilience is improving across region.
Farmers are learning about  
and implementing new business 
strategies and practices.
Farmers and agricultural 
industries have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Stakeholders have increased 
understanding of natural 
resource management to build 
drought resilience.
Resilient local businesses and regional economies
Regional economies are supported by flexible and diverse businesses that have considered  
how they will respond to drought. All businesses within the Barwon region can access quality  
business planning and financial advice that is affordable.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable communities
Impacts of drought on the economies  
of region are known and prepared for.
Businesses are identifying, managing  
and planning for the business risks 
associated with drought.
Increased community 
understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic 
characteristics. 
Innovative pathways and 
opportunities for business 
diversity are identified.
Table 2. MEL Framework for the Barwon
1. Future Drought Fund (FDF)
42

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Innovation and skills development
Community, industry and government work collaboratively to identify key drought related  
issues and develop innovative solutions. Information products relating to drought resilience  
are widely shared and can be easily accessed.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience for an 
innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector
Innovative pathways and opportunities to 
improve drought resilience in the region 
are being identified. 
New technologies and practices are known 
and being adopted to support primary 
producers and communities to adapt.
Plan actions and opportunities are 
incorporated into other strategic planning 
across the region.
Best practice approaches 
are being used to identify 
opportunities to build drought 
resilience in the region.
Stakeholders are learning about, 
implementing and adopting new 
practices.
Key enablers
Community, industry and government are clear on their responsibilities relating  
to drought preparedness and response. A standing Resilience Advisory Group maintains  
a functioning network of stakeholders and helps coordinate preparedness activities.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Communities are communicating regional 
drought resilience needs and priorities to 
inform investment.
Improved collaboration and coordination 
between governments, industry, 
communities and other networks.
Regions are monitoring their resilience  
to drought in accordance with the Plan.
Traditional Owners are engaged 
in regional drought preparedness 
activities, and those activities reflect 
Traditional Owners’ priorities.
Increased community 
understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought 
resilience, considering the 
region’s unique economic, 
environmental and social 
characteristics.
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
Traditional Owners are 
increasingly involved in drought 
programs and activities.
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

APPENDICES
Appendix 1 
Stakeholders consulted
Development of the Barwon Drought Resilience 
Plan (the Plan) was based on in-depth 
conversations with the organisations and 
individuals listed below.
The Barwon Drought Resilience Plan Reference 
Group was established to provide expert input to 
the Plan and ensure that the outcomes and actions 
identified represent a coherent and balanced view 
of stakeholder feedback. We acknowledge and 
appreciate all of the knowledge, insight and support 
that we have received in the creation of this Plan.
The Barwon region includes the following  
Local Government Areas:
•	Borough of Queenscliff
•	City of Greater Geelong
•	Colac Otway Shire
•	Surf Coast Shire
Barwon Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Reference Group Members
Agriculture Victoria (Chair)
City of Greater Geelong
Surf Coast Shire
Colac Otway Shire
Barwon Water
Corangamite Catchment Management Authority
Department of Environment, Land, Water  
and Planning
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing 
Department of Health
National Emergency Management Agency
Southern Farming Systems
Southern Rural Water
South West Node of the Victorian Drought Hub
Rural Financial Counselling Service
West Vic Dairy
Agricultural Industry and Farm Business 
Services
Agriculture industry representatives 
Agriculture consultants
Finance
WestVic Dairy
Community and Not-for-Profit Organisations
Australian Red Cross  
(State-wide and regional programs) 
Lions Need for Feed (Victoria)
Tourism Greater Geelong and Bellarine
Community Health Organisations 
National Centre for Farmer Health
Community Leaders
G21 Geelong Region Alliance, Chair
G21 Geelong Region Alliance, CEO
The Gordon TAFE, Head of Centre  
(Science and Technology) The Gordon TAFE
Education and Capability Building 
Deakin University
Federation University  
(Future Regions Research Centre)
The Gordon TAFE
Farmer Groups and Local Business Leaders
Municipal agriculture sector advisory groups
Victorian Farmers Federation
United Dairy Farmers Victoria
Southern Farming Systems
Rural Financial Counselling Service
Small Business Mentoring Service
44

Government Agencies and Statutory Authorities
Barwon Southwest Climate Alliance
Barwon Regional Emergency Management Team
Centre for Regional and Rural Futures
Climate Change Adaptation, Community  
& Partnership Programs
Country Fire Authority 
Cross Border Commissioner
Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action
Department of Environment Water and Planning
Department of Family, Fairness & Housing 
Emergency Management Victoria
Emergency Recovery Victoria (formerly Bushfire 
Recovery Victoria)
Fire and Forest Operations
National Recovery and Resilience Agency
Rural Assistance Commissioner
Small Business Victoria 
Victoria Police
Agriculture Victoria 
Major farmer, industry, and community events
Victoria Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub’s 
Drought Think Tank, Bendigo (23 March 2023)
Victoria Drought Adoption and Innovation Hub’s 
Innovation Showcase, Geelong (21 June 2023)
Natural Resource Management Organisations
Corangamite Catchment Management Authority
Barwon Water
Landcare networks
Parks Victoria 
Southern Rural Water
Other Future Drought Fund Programs
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption  
and Innovation Hub 
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption  
and Innovation Hub – South West Node  
(Southern Farming Systems)
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub – South West Node (Food & Fibre)
Leadership development program (Australian 
Rural Leadership Foundation)
Farm Business Resilience program  
(Agriculture Victoria)
Regional Drought Resilience Planning program – 
Pilot regions – Goulburn, Gippsland, and Wimmera 
Southern Mallee (Agriculture Victoria)
Agriculture Dependent Resilient Communities 
Community of Practice
Regional Development Organisations
G21 – Geelong Region Alliance
The Agricollective
Small Business Organisations
Small Business Victoria
Traditional Owners
Wadawurrung Traditional Owners Aboriginal 
Corporation
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

Appendix 2  
Barwon References 
This Appendix outlines some of the existing 
strategies, reports and programs that have been 
reviewed for their relevance in building drought 
resilience in the region. It is intended to be used  
as a resource document.
Agriculture
Dairy Australia Strategic Plan 2020–2025 (2020). 
Dairy Australia
WestVic Dairy Strategic Plan 2020–23 (2020). 
Dairy Australia
Dairy Australia Climate Change Strategy 2020–25 
(2020). Dairy Australia
Drought Preparedness module – More beef from 
pastures. Meat and Livestock Australia,  
www.mbfp.mla.com.au (last updated 2019)
Farm decision making. The interaction of 
personality, farm business and risk to make 
more informed decisions (2020). Grains Research 
Development Corporation 
People in Agriculture, www.peopleinag.com.au 
(last updated 2022)
Community Health
From inside the farm gate: rural women’s stories of 
surviving and thriving. National Centre for Farmer 
Health, www.farmerhealth.org.au/inside-farm-gate 
(last updated 2021)
Summary of the Royal Commission into Victoria’s 
mental health system. National Centre for  
Farmer Health, www.farmerhealth.org.au  
(last updated 2022)
Economic Development
Australian Bureau of Statistics. www.abs.gov.au 
(last updated 2023)
Barwon South West Regional Circular Economy 
Plan (2022). Victorian Government, www.vic.gov.au/
barwon-south-west-regional-circular-economy-plan 
(last updated 2022)
Barwon Regional Economic Development Strategy 
(2022). Regional Development Victoria.  
Victorian Government
Economic Development Strategy 2021–2031  
– Growing a prosperous future (2021).  
Surf Coast Shire 
G21 Agribusiness Economic Profile (2018).  
City of Greater Geelong 
Barwon Regional Digital Plan (2022).  
Regional Partnerships Barwon, Regional 
Development Victoria. Victorian Government
Emergency Management
Barwon Regional Emergency Management Plan 
(2020). Barwon South West Regional Emergency 
Management Planning Committee (REMPC)  
Community Resilience Framework for  
Emergency Management (2017).  
Emergency Management Victoria
Surf Coast Climate Emergency Corporate 
Response Plan 2021–2031 (2021). Surf Coast Shire
Federal and State Government Policy  
and Programs
Agriculture and Climate Change. Department  
of Energy, Environment and Climate Action,  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/climate-and-weather/
policy-programs-action (last updated 2021)
Drought, disaster and rural support. Department  
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,  
www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-
food-drought/drought (last updated 2023)
Drought Policy. Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry, www.agriculture.gov.au/
agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/
drought-policy (last updated 2023)
46

Future Drought Fund Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program Framework Extension (2022). 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 
Australian Government
Loddon Mallee Regional Climate Adaptation 
Strategy (2022). Department of Environment Land 
Water and Planning, Victorian Government
National Climate Resilience and Adaptation 
Strategy 2021–2025 (2021). Department of 
Agriculture, Water and Environment, Australian 
Government
National Drought Response, Resilience & 
Preparedness Plan (2019). Department of 
Agriculture, Australian Government 
Natural Environment Climate Change Adaptation 
Action Plan Victorian Government (2022). 
Department of Environment Land Water and 
Planning, Victorian Government
Primary Production Climate Change Adaptation 
Plan 2022–2026 (2022). Department of 
Environment Land Water and Planning,  
Victorian Government
Strong, Innovative, Sustainable – A New Strategy for 
Agriculture in Victoria (2020). Victorian Government
Victoria’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan  
2017–2020 (2016). Department of Environment 
Land Water and Planning, Victorian Government
Victorian drought preparedness and response 
framework. Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action, www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/
farm-management/managing-for-and-during-
drought/drought-preparedness-and-response-
framework (last updated 2021)
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub, www.vicdroughthub.org.au  
(last updated 2023)
Victoria in Future 2019 (2019). Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 
Victorian Government
Victorian Government Response to the Inquiry into 
Tackling Climate Change in Victorian Communities 
(2021). Department of Environment, Land, Water 
and Planning, Victorian Government
Knowledge, Research and Innovation
Farm drought resilience research program.  
CSIRO, www.csiro.au/Drought-Resilience  
(last accessed 2023)
Future Drought Fund Projects. Southern Farming 
Systems, www.sfs.org.au (Last updated 2023)
Future Regions Research Centre (2023) Federation 
University, www.federation.edu.au/research  
(last updated 2023)
Natural Resource Management
Barwon South West Regional Climate Adaptation 
Strategy 2020–2025 (2021). Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning, 
Victorian Government.
Corangamite Regional Catchment Strategy (2023). 
Corangamite Catchment Management Authority, 
www.corangamite.rcs.vic.gov.au (last updated 2023)
Climate Change Response Plan 2021–2030 (2021). 
The City of Greater Geelong
Domestic and stock water. Southern Rural Water, 
www.srw.com.au/water-and-storage/water-
management/domestic-and-stock-water  
(last updated 2020)
Environmental Management Strategy 2020–2030 
(2020). The City of Greater Geelong
Rural Hinterland Futures Strategy(2019).  
Surf Coast Shire
Supporting local action on climate change. 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action, www.climatechange.vic.gov.au/supporting-
local-action-on-climate-change (last updated 2022)
Surf Coast Shire: Towards Environmental 
Leadership. Surf Coast Shire,  
www.environmentsurfcoast.com.au  
(last updated 2020)
BARWON DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

Regional Resilience
Central West Regional Resilience Strategy. 
Championing resilience and prosperity across 
Central West Queensland (2020). Queensland 
Government 
Combining social capital and technology for drought 
resilience in agriculture. (2013) Author – Ranjan R. 
Journal – Natural Resource Modelling. Vol 27/1
Community resilience framework for emergency 
management (2017). Emergency management 
Victoria
Drought and the future of rural communities: 
Opportunities and challenges for climate change 
adaption in regional Victoria, Australia. (2012). 
Authors – Kiem A and Austin E. Journal – Global 
Environmental Change. Vol 23/5
Making ‘resilience’, ‘adaptation’ and 
‘transformation’ real for the design of sustainable 
development projects: piloting the Resilience, 
Adaptation Pathways and Transformation 
Assessment (RAPTA) framework in Ethiopia (2017) 
CSIRO, Australia. 
Managing extreme water shortage in Victoria 
– lessons from the Millennium Drought (2016). 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, Victorian Government
Nature Conservation Strategy (2021).  
Parks Victoria, Victorian Government
Resilience, adaptation pathways and transformation 
approach. A guide for designing, implementing and 
assessing interventions for sustainable futures 
(version 2) (2019). CSIRO, Australia
Resilience: what it is and is not (2020) Author – 
Walker B. Journal Ecology and Society. Vol 25/2
Social impacts of drought: A report to NSW 
Agriculture (2004). Centre for Rural Research, 
Charles Sturt University
Strengthening Australia’s Resilience to Climate 
Change (2022). CSIRO, www.csiro.au/en/research/
environmental-impacts/climate-change/Climate-
adaptation-research (last accessed 2022)
Transformative Adaptation Research 
Alliance(2022. CSIRO, www.research.csiro.au/tara 
(last accessed 2022) 
Understanding the Drought Phenomenon: The Role 
of Definitions (1985). Authors – Wilhite D and Glantz 
M. Journal – Water International. Vol 10/3
Urban Water Strategy 2022: Water for our future 
(2022). Barwon Water
What is maladaptation and why does it matter? 
Cervest, www.cervest.earth/news/what-is-
maladaptation-and-why-does-it-matter  
(last updated 2022)
Traditional Owners 
Aboriginal Water Program Phase 1 (2016–2020). 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action, www.water.vic.gov.au/the-aboriginal-water-
program (last updated 2023)
Meerreengeeye Ngakeepoorryeeyt Country Plan 
(2015) Eastern Maar Traditional Owners
Paleert Tjaara Dja County Plan – Wadawurrung 
Healthy Country Plan 2020–2030 (2020). 
Wadawurrung Traditional Owners 
Water, Country and Community Program  
2020–2024. Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action, www.water.vic.gov.au/ 
the-aboriginal-water-program/water-country- 
and-community-program (last updated 2023)
Water is Life – Traditional Owner access to water 
roadmap (2022). Department of Environment,  
Land, Water and Planning, Victorian Government
48

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the Barwon Region
Information to support the Barwon Regional Drought Resilience Plan
This research was jointly funded by the Australian Government 
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
November 2022

Regional summary
The Barwon region is the most densely populated of the nine Regional 
Partnerships across Victoria and includes a large section of the 
Great Ocean Road. The area stretches from Geelong to the Otway 
forests and has a Gross Regional Product (GRP) of $17.6 billion. The 
Barwon region’s largest city is Geelong, and the region is also home to 
numerous coastal towns and the inland city of Colac. The region had a 
population of 334,450 in 2021.
Key industries for employment in the Barwon region in 2021 included 
health care and social assistance, retail trade, construction and 
education and training. Agriculture, forestry and fishing industries 
contributed 2.0 % employment to the region in 2021. The Barwon 
region has extensive coastal tourism given its proximity to Melbourne, 
with key tourism towns of Torquay, Anglesea and Lorne located at 
various points along the Great Ocean Road.
The Barwon region includes the traditional lands of the Wadawurrung 
and Eastern Maar peoples as well as other Traditional Owner groups in 
Victoria who are not formally recognised.
Water is sourced predominately from rainfall with access to recycled 
water, groundwater, rivers, creeks, lakes and on-farm dams providing 
additional sources. The region is also home to Lake Corangamite, 
the largest permanent salt-water lake in Australia, with a surveyed 
area of over 23,000 hectares. It is a RAMSAR site and is therefore 
internationally protected.
The region recently experienced drought and dry seasonal conditions 
during the Millennium drought, 2013 to 2015 and 2017 to 2019.
Campaspe
Goulburn
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gippsland
Colac 
Otway
Surf 
Coast
Queenscliﬀe
Geelong
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund.
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was a key factor to the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
This research was jointly funded by the Australian Government and 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are four ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may  
change in  
the future
The Barwon 
region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness  
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls  
on surface or subsurface  
water supply
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Barwon Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These 
on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets 
(e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of 
drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market 
impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions  
+ 
Changes in the Barwon region
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for  
ag farm services  
(but could increase  
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
 
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands  
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation  
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from  
green space
Drought in the Barwon Region
Frontier Economics
3

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. The last 25 years has seen 
Barwon experience extensive drought periods, starting with the 
Millennium drought from 1997 to 2009 and more recently the dry 
conditions experienced from 2013 to 2015 and to a lesser extent 
2017 to 2019.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Rainfall (mm)
Year
Anglesea
Annual
10th %ile
Median
Agricultural impacts and 
implications of drought  
+ Non-agricultural impacts  
and implications
The Colac Otway Local Government Area (LGA) is most likely to be heavily 
impacted by drought in the Barwon region due to its larger agricultural 
industry, where 1 in 8 jobs are directly associated with primary 
production. Areas closer to the coast attracted a range of tourists based 
on a number of drought resilient activities, which continued to provide 
income during past drought and dry periods. This coupled with larger 
diverse economies around Geelong and to a lesser extent Melbourne 
means drought impacts varied significantly across the region. 
While direct agricultural employment across the region is low, for the 
Colac Otway LGA it is 11.4%. Agricultural importance for the value-add 
of the region also varies significantly, with it accounting for as much 
as 25% in the Barwon West and Colac & Corio SA3 regions, while 
accounting for less than 2% in the Surf Coast and Geelong and its 
surrounds. Food manufacturing is the second largest manufacturing 
sub-sector, utilising primary production from the region as well as 
from South West Victoria. The major food processing centres are 
located in Colac and Geelong.
Agricultural production in the region is dominated by livestock farms 
– with extensive dairy, beef and cattle as well as intensive poultry and 
pigs – and the majority of sourced water is used for pastures or grain. 
Other agricultural production includes nurseries and cut flowers and 
broadacre cropping such as wheat, barley and canola.
During drought, livestock farms have been impacted by:
•	
Reduced pastures and feed for livestock
•	
Reduced on farm water storages and rainfall for pasture growth
•	
Increased reliance on hay which can be more costly
•	
Higher reliance on livestock prices to manage destocking if required
01
02
The historical rainfall and temperature charts for Anglesea and 
Aireys Inlet in Figure 3, provides evidence of the severity of these 
recent drought events. During periods of the Millennium drought 
and especially during recent dry periods the average maximum 
temperature has been consistently hotter than the median. 
The Millennium drought also resulted in below average rainfall, 
however apart from 2006 and 2008 when rainfall was below the 
10th percentile, the Barwon region experienced more consistent 
rainfall than other parts of Victoria. This was again the case in the 
recent 2017 to 2019 dry period which was much more significant 
in the east of Victoria.
15
15.5
16
16.5
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
20.5
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Year
Aireys Inlet
Annual
90th %ile
Median
01
02
03
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Recently experienced droughts and dry 
periods in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2013 to 2015
•	 2017 to 2019
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Barwon region
Drought in the Barwon Region
Frontier Economics
4

In the Barwon region drought and dry conditions generally involve 
a “failed” spring, where insufficient rainfall is received during the 
Spring growing season. For example, in 2016 livestock farms faced 
challenging conditions when the region experienced its second “failed” 
spring in a row and many farmers were low on stored fodder, with 
stock water also in shortage. Responding to these conditions can 
require high supplementary feed and/or agistment costs.
Regional milk production in Western Victoria, which includes the Great 
South Coast and Barwon regions, remained relatively steady at around 
2 to 2.1 billion litres during the Millennium drought. In contrast, 
Northern Victoria experienced a significant decline in milk production 
during the Millenium drought (see Figure 4). Western Victorian 
production levels were likely less impacted due to:
•	
Significant levels of dryland dairy production not linked to 
irrigation
•	
Varying dairy locations that are not reliant on a single connected 
water source
•	
Drought conditions not being as severe as in Northern Victoria
•	
Additional access to fodder (for example failed cereal crops)
Town water 
Towns in the Barwon region were faced with prolonged periods on Stage 
4 urban water restrictions during the Millennium drought, particularly 
during the period from 2006 to 2009. Stage 4 water restrictions prohibit 
the watering of any outdoor space, amongst other restrictions, which had 
profound impacts on the community’s liveability.
The Lorne system is an example of the diverse experiences in the 
region. During the Millennium drought demand was unrestricted, 
however, dry conditions in the summer of 2015-16 led to Stage 3 
restrictions and water carting.
Recreation and Tourism 
Coastal tourism in the region is significant and provided much needed 
income to the region during prior drought periods. However, drought 
conditions still affected tourist’s amenity benefit from visiting the 
towns and landscapes in the region, particularly those that were 
experiencing stage 4 water restrictions.
Environment 
There were negative impacts on riverbank and in-stream vegetation 
in the rivers, lakes and dams in the region during the Millennium 
drought. At least 10 of the 28 monitored lakes changed from 
groundwater throughflow or discharge lakes to recharge lakes 
that dried. There was also an observed increase in lake salinity 
due to increased evaporation, or a combination of increases in the 
evaporation and groundwater to lakes volume ratios.
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites, particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or are water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable to 
damage. Additionally, the movement of stock to areas where there were 
feed reserves meant stock was placed in areas of cultural significance. 
Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the community.
Community outcomes  
in past droughts
Barwon is one of the most diversified regions in Victoria 
with extensive manufacturing, construction and health care and social 
assistance sectors, although the manufacturing sector is in decline 
due to decreasing petroleum and coal product manufacturing. This 
diversity cushioned the region from some of the community impacts 
experienced in other more agriculturally reliant regions in Victoria. 
However, the more agriculturally reliant and isolated Colac Otway LGA 
was exposed. Farming communities , such as those in the Colac Otway 
LGA, are severely impacted during periods of drought, due to:
•	
Financial pressures from decreased on-farm income and 
increased costs
•	
On-farm challenges relating to lack of water and feed for stock, 
and poor yields on crops
•	
Pressures from invasive native and pest animals on farms
•	
Physical and mental health and wellbeing impacts on individuals 
and families
•	
Flow on financial pressures being experienced by supporting 
businesses in the community.
The impact on agricultural production during drought in the Barwon 
region also affects a range of agricultural farm service providers, support 
businesse and processing facilities in the region, in turn affecting 
spending and business activity across the broader community. 
Overall, the cumulation of impacts on production, regional economies, 
and liveability from drought led to significant impacts on the regional 
communities in the Barwon region. An increase demand for mental 
health services and Rural Financial Counselling Services was also evident.
03
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Milk production (Million Litres)
Year
Eastern Victoria
Northern Victoria
Western Victoria
Figure 4 Victorian annual dairy production
Drought in the Barwon Region
5
Frontier Economics

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Barwon region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Barwon region with future droughts 
expected to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate 
projections show that by 2050 the Barwon region on average will 
be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number of fire danger 
days. Similar to the past, the region and sub-regions will continue to 
face variable conditions within and across seasons — however in the 
future this variability will be around a lower average rainfall and higher 
average temperature than previously experienced. This means that, 
compared to current conditions, it is likely that parts of Barwon will 
face some seasons with rainfall significantly below and temperatures 
significantly above current averages.
The significant prevalence of dryland agriculture, which relies on timing 
and quantity of rainfall, does not offer resilience options that irrigated 
agriculture has access to (as they have continued access to water that can 
be drawn upon during dry periods).
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural impacts 
and implications
Agricultural production in dairy and dryland farming operations are 
likely to be most exposed to the increasing likelihood and severity of 
future droughts as they are dependent on rainfall to feed and water 
their livestock. The adaptiveness of these producers, with farmers 
already having many strategies to manage drought, and their ability 
to maintain sufficient reserves will be critical to their farm profitability. 
However, the growing number of hobby farms in the region may not 
have as many strategies in place and could be more exposed during a 
prolonged drought. The prevailing circumstances of a future drought 
— such as commodity prices, interest rates and fuel and fertiliser 
costs — will also play a role in resultant impacts.
While manufacturing is strong in the region (although declining), 
the large proportion of manufacturing related to agriculture will 
reduce the ability of the manufacturing sector to provided diversified 
income during times of drought. Therefore, the impacts of decreases 
in primary production are likely to be exacerbated as the impact 
of drought flows through to down-stream markets such as food 
processing and manufacturing. Declines in dairy production will have 
flow on effects to dairy processing facilities, which may need to be 
rationalised if dairy production levels are not able to recover. 
Changes in the Barwon region
There have been a number of changes in the Barwon region that 
will alter the impacts of drought in the future, including:
•	
Town water security planning and investment has increased 
in the region, including key investments made since the 
Millennium drought, such as the Melbourne to Geelong and 
Barwon to Colac pipelines.
•	
Population changes (including an increase in sea/tree-
changers due to Covid19) bringing additional water demand 
to the region.
•	
Increase in peri-urban development and number of  
lifestyle/hobby farmers which will change the water  
demands in the region.
•	
Continuing diversification of the region’s economy away from 
agricultural production.
It is noteworthy that limited opportunities for water trade and 
irrigation distribution mean the Barwon region is less exposed 
to broader ‘system level’ responses to drought and a changing 
climate (as compared, for example, to the Northern Victorian 
regions) — including interregional water trade and Basin Plan 
water recovery.
01
02
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures in spring expected 
to increase by up to 2.2°C. Number of days over 
35°C increasing from 6.4 days to 8-16 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable. 
Average rainfall in spring expected to 
decrease by 12-22%.
6-11%
49%
Number of very high fire 
danger days to increase by  
9 days per year
1.4 to  
1.9 °C 
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions  
+ 
Changes in the  
Barwon region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 5 Climate projections for the Barwon region
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Barwon Region

Future implications of drought are likely to continue to impact the 
wellbeing and mental health of the local communities. Farmers and 
community businesses are likely to continue to rely on financial 
counselling services and the broader community will continue to rely 
on mental health services. 
Access to mental health services need to be emphasised moving 
into the next drought. People trying to make tough decisions in 
drought are already in a vulnerable space and support needs to be 
readily available. The physical and mental health of the community 
may also be impacted as community green spaces, trees and 
waterways are impacted. 
Town water  
Connectivity from the Melbourne to Geelong and Barwon to Colac 
pipelines will decrease the likelihood of severe water restrictions in 
town (as compared to the Millennium drought).
Town water security planning has improved with lessons from 
drought. Likewise, Urban Water Strategies are now required to 
incorporate future impacts of climate change (including potential 
droughts). For example, Barwon Water has used the Department 
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning’s 2020 ‘Guidelines for 
Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water Availability in 
Victoria’ to undertake water demand system forecasts and identify 
a range of climate scenarios to assess potential impacts on water 
supply and customer demand. 
Barwon Water’s Urban Water Strategy 2022 looks to further increase 
water security in the region by expanding the reach of the Melbourne 
to Geelong Pipeline to service more areas in the region, increase the 
use of recycled water as well as returning water to the flow stressed 
Moorabool River.
Recreation and Tourism  
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water access 
under future drought. Initiatives that are not dependent on water 
availability could boost visitors to the region. The Barwon region is 
also better placed than many other regions in Victoria due to the 
majority of  tourism being related to the coast, which is less rainfall 
dependant. COVID-19 has provided a boost to regional travel and 
relocation, evidenced by an increase in population from 2016 to 2021.
Environment 
Inland lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during 
times of drought which will impact the native biodiversity living in 
and relying on these water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food 
and drinking water for wild animals living in the region. Additionally, 
the increased risk of wildfires will have significant environmental and 
economic impacts.
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or water dependent will increasingly be exposed to damage. 
Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the community.
03
Figure 6 Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modelling for a future drought
Community outcomes  
in future droughts
Economic modelling of potential future drought in Victoria, undertaken 
by Victoria University’s Centre of Policy Studies, found the Barwon 
region would be significantly affected with GDP falling by 12.7 % and a 
reduction more than 1400 jobs in the region (see Figure 6).  
The modelled three-year drought, while prolonged, is not equivalent 
to the most severe recorded in Victoria.
Flow through impacts  
from agriculture to the 
community
The increased likelihood and severity of 
drought in the future and the increased 
competition for water under these 
conditions will mean that the drought 
impacts on the community from 
agricultural consequences of drought are 
expected to be larger than have been 
historically observed.
Impacts on GDP
Economic modelling of potential future 
drought in Victoria found the Barwon to be 
significantly affected, with:
•	 GDP impact: 
– Direct agriculture impact -10.2%
– Regional impact -12.7%
•	 A fall in employment of more than 
1,400 jobs.
•	 This would flow through the region 
reducing consumption/spending by 4%.
Employment and  
value add impacts
The effects on employment will not be 
distributed equally across the regions, 
with the more agriculturally dependent 
regions likely to experience larger 
decreases in employment. 
The economic modelling finds that the 
large impact of drought on value-added 
output of agricultural primary production 
has significant impacts on the value-
added output of the livestock sector.
12.87%
GDP
1,400
jobs
Drought in the Barwon Region
Frontier Economics
7

Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought and 
dry conditions become more prevalent. Not only are mental health 
services important during times of drought, but improved mental 
health increase a person’s ability to adapt. This can improve drought 
resilience by allowing people to effectively plan for future drought 
conditions.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of 
community spirit and liveability within local communities. Water 
Corporations and Councils now have a strong understanding of the 
importance of greenspace for their communities. However, should 
town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will have a 
mental health toll on residents.
The diversity of the Barwon region will continue to mean that 
some areas will be impacted by future droughts more than others 
— especially the more agriculturally reliant Colac Otway LGA. The 
region will continue to be exposed to dry and drought conditions, 
and smaller communities that are highly dependent on agriculture 
and more geographically isolated will be most exposed. Declining 
populations in smaller towns, due in part to larger farm properties 
and remote farming, may mean they are more vulnerable to change.
Overall, the Barwon region has a more diverse economy than many 
other parts of Victoria, but there is still potential for significant 
community impacts from future drought.
Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness
The diverse Barwon region already has many drought resilience 
measures in place or in development. 
Agricultural research, innovation and extension will remain important 
to support the ongoing adaptation in agriculture and will aid 
preparedness to future drought. Farmers capacity to adequately 
prepare for drought differs significantly within the Barwon region. 
Farmers can be better prepared for future droughts by addressing 
gaps in on-farm business and decision-making skills. There is an 
ongoing need to close the gap in farmer’s skills and capabilities to be 
more adaptive and prepared for the next drought. 
A vulnerability to livestock industries during drought is the limited 
hay and grain production in the region, meaning that supplementary 
feeds costs will include a significant transport component. Access to 
feed and the price at which it is available is also a concern if drought is 
widespread and prevalent in other regions.
Drought will also have a different impact on those livestock producers 
that do not have access to Barwon Water’s reticulated rural supply 
water network, compared to those that do. This relates to the 
reliability of stock water supply as well as the water quality issues that 
can arise in stream and farm dams during drought.
The increase in the number of small block farms, either lifestyle farms 
or artisan producers, is also relevant to drought management. New 
farmers may have less experience with drought and be more exposed 
to risks. It may also be that some of these blocks are managed using 
regenerative farming approaches which may help retain soil moisture 
and manage drought.
Tourism will continue to provide much needed income to the region 
during times of drought. Key tourist locations along the Great Ocean 
Road are relatively rainfall independent. Other coastal towns should 
also benefit from this source of income.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to contain 
the drought impacts flowing from the agricultural sector. Towns 
throughout the Barwon region have varying degrees of diversification 
with larger, centrally located towns more likely to experience these 
benefits. Specifically:
•	
The city of Geelong will provide somewhat of a buffer to these 
drought impacts as it has a diverse economy. Geelong itself 
will be buffered to some degree from reductions in agricultural 
output as it has alternative industries (such as health, education 
and retail). Townships near Geelong can also benefit from 
some of this buffering in the face of less agricultural activity 
due to drought. This is especially the case for townships within 
an approximately 50km radius of the city, which offers the 
benefits of rural living while also allowing access to employment 
opportunities in the larger centre. Colac is also likely to offer 
some diversification benefits although the economy is much 
more heavily linked to agricultural production.
•	
Medium to smaller sized communities are likely vary significantly 
in their drought resilience. Those communities that are located 
close to the coast or the metropolitan regions of Geelong and 
Melbourne are likely to have additional opportunities during 
times of drought.
•	
Smaller, more agriculturally reliant communities that are not 
located near the coast, such as those found in the Colac Otways 
LGA will be more severely affected by drought, as there are 
limited alternatives that can replace the people and economic 
activity provided by agriculture. 
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These 
kinds of health services have long wait times in the region, even 
outside of drought. Following the onset of a drought there is a 
general lag in the provision of additional health services. This means 
that individuals unable to access these services are having to make 
drought management decisions under significant stress.
Drought in the Barwon Region
Frontier Economics
8

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our  
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions and Visit Victoria.
CGE Modelling credits: Centre of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from the BOM, ARM online and Dairy Australia.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
Disclaimer None of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd (including the directors and employees) make any representation or warranty as to the accuracy or 
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.