Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon 
Drought Resilience Plan

Acknowledgement of Country
Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils acknowledge the Wiradjuri Nation as the original custodians 
of the Local Government Area. We recognise their continued connection to Country, land, rivers, waters, and 
community, and pay respect to Elders past and present. The Councils extend our respect to all other First Nations 
People and to our neighbouring nations.
Contact
Bathurst Regional Council
158 Russell Street
PMB 17
Bathurst NSW 2795
Phone (02) 6333 6111
E. council@bathurst.nsw.gov.au
www.bathurst.nsw.gov.au
Lithgow City Council
180 Mort Street
PO Box 19
Lithgow NSW 2790
Phone (02) 6354 9999
E. council@lithgow.nsw.gov.au
www.council.lithgow.com
Oberon Council
137 - 139 Oberon Street
PO Box 84
Oberon, NSW 2787
Phone (02) 6329 8100
E. council@oberon.nsw.gov.au
www.oberon.nsw.gov.au
Contents
A Letter From the Mayors	
4
Key Abbreviations	
6
Glossary of Key Terms	
7
01 Introduction 
9
Local Government Areas	
10
Vision, Goals, and Outcomes 	
11
02 Drought Resilience at a Glance	
12
03 A Plan for Drought Resilience 	
16
Strategic Alignment 	
19
04 About this Regional Drought Resilience Plan	
20
Purpose of the Plan 	
21
The Process in Detail 	
22
Key Inputs 	
25
Our Partners 	
26
05 Regional Profile 
30
Resilience Challenges  	
46
Resilience Opportunities	
48
06 Our Drought Resilience Journey	
50
Action Strategic Alignment 	
52
Action Pathways	
56
Enabling Agritourism through the Provision of 
Clearer Processes and Local Guidance	
58
Improving Consistency of Approach to Drought 
Resilience by Adopting Water Conservation 
Policies within Council	
60
Improving the Resilience of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and Opportunities	
62
Improving Landholder’s Mental Health by 
Enhancing Awareness and Uptake of Drought 
Resilient Support Services and Events	
66
Promoting Water-Efficiency Practices within the 
Community via School Children as Young Agents 
for Change  	
70
Improving Adoption of Water Use Practices 
through Community Knowledge Sharing 	
74
Fostering an Ecosystem of Drought Resilient 
Support and Best-Practice across the Region	
78
07 Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
82
References	
90

Image of foggy rural scene  
A Letter From the Mayors
Bathurst Regional Council
Our region has been affected by severe drought in 
recent years and our city came very close to running 
out of water in 2020. It is something I never want our 
community to experience again and is the reason why 
work is continuing to enhance our water supply. 
Part of this work involves the Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan which involves Bathurst collaborating with Lithgow 
City Council and Oberon Council. The plan identifies our 
region’s priorities and provides a roadmap of actions to 
help prepare and act early to respond to future drought 
risks, reducing the impact on people, the environment, 
and the economy. The objective of the plan is to come up 
with practical solutions for addressing gaps in the way we 
prepare for and respond to drought.
It is important that we mitigate the impact of future 
droughts to ensure our city has a secure and reliable water 
supply. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program is 
jointly funded by the Australian Government and the NSW 
Government under the Future Drought Fund.
 
Jess Jennings
Mayor – Bathurst Regional Council
Lithgow City Council 
Lithgow City Council is pleased to have been involved 
in the development of a Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan, in partnership with Oberon and Bathurst Regional 
Councils. The Council is also very appreciative of the 
support given to us by the Australian Government and 
the NSW Government under the Future Drought Fund.
During the last drought our waterways, landscapes, native 
flora and fauna and farming lands suffered dramatically. 
Council entered a period of restrictions limiting the 
availability of water to residents and primary producers. 
Council has since undertaken works to address water 
security as part of its strategic planning by preparing 
its Integrated Water Cycle Management Strategy 
and investigating the potential for a new Clarence to 
Wallerawang pipeline project.
I have been involved with farming all my life and know 
the significant strain that occurs when we experience 
drought. Unfortunately, drought is again developing 
across the region and becoming more challenging for our 
communities. The mental health of farming families and 
business owners, who directly or indirectly rely upon their 
businesses surviving through dry periods, is becoming 
increasingly difficult and may become especially more so 
with the forecast of a worsening drought ahead. Fodder 
and fuel are possibly now the most expensive ever seen, 
with both these commodities necessary to survive on 
the land. I hope when you read this message that we will 
already have had some very welcome rain. This will ease 
the ongoing stress of living on the land, and flow on to 
effected businesses and residents.
Life is short, so do not be too hard on yourself. Seek 
support if you need it. Talk to friends, mates, and family. 
The health of our society, economy, environment, and 
personal selves is everything, and this Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan has been designed to help maintain the 
health of each.
 
Maree Statham
Mayor – Lithgow City Council
Oberon Council
This project is the first step in managing drought across 
our whole community.
This project has been facilitated by the Council, but the 
ideas have been generated within the community and 
actions are owned and implemented by the community.
This project has the potential to improve outcomes 
through drought years for both farm and town-based 
businesses, supporting economic growth, social cohesion 
and community and personal wellbeing.
The actions will require collaboration across service 
providers in our LGA and region and clear identification of 
existing services and possible areas of need.
This is the beginning. The plan will need review and 
updating to retain relevance as climatic, social, and 
economic circumstances change.
Long term, the plan has the potential to create a more 
resilient community.
 
Clr Mark Kellam 
Mayor - Oberon Council
We would like to thank all partners, stakeholders, community members, and 
organisations who have generously contributed their time and knowledge in 
the development of this Regional Drought Resilience Plan.   
4
5
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Key Abbreviations
%
Percentage
°C
Degrees Celsius
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
BLO
Bathurst, Lithgow, Oberon
BoM
Bureau of Meteorology
BRC
Bathurst Regional Council
CDI
Combined Drought Indicator
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation
DPI
Department of Primary Industries
e.g., 
For example,
EDIS
Enhanced Drought Information 
System
FAQs
Frequently Asked Questions
FDF
Future Drought Fund
FFDI
Forest Fire Danger Index
GRP
Gross Regional Product
GVA
Gross Value Add
IAP2
International Association of Public 
Participation
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change
IPR
Integrated Planning and Reporting
IRSAD
Index of Relative Socio-economic 
Advantage and Disadvantage
JO
Joint Organisation
LCC
Lithgow City Council
LGA
Local Government Area
LLS 
Local Land Services
LOTE 
Languages Other Than English
MCA 
Multi-Criteria Assessment
MEL
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning
MIS 
Management Information System
NSW
New South Wales
OC
Oberon Council
PCG
Project Control Group
RAMHP 
Rural Adversity Mental Health 
Program
RAPTA
Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and 
Transformation Approach
RCP
Representative Concentration 
Pathway
RDR Plan 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
RDRP
Regional Drought Resilience Planning
REDS
Regional Economic Development 
Strategy
RFCS 
Rural Financial Counselling Service
RFQ
Request For Quote
SAP
Special Activation Precinct
SDG 
Sustainable Development Goal(s)
SOW 
Scope of Works
Glossary of Key Terms
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human 
systems in response to actual or expected shocks and 
stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or 
exploit beneficial opportunities.1 
Adaptive capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and 
respond to environmental and socioeconomic 
changes.2
Adaptive governance
Adaptive governance is defined by a focus on 
decentralised decision-making structures and 
procedurally rational policy, supported by intensive 
natural and social science. Decentralised decision-
making structures allow a large, complex problem 
like global climate change to be factored into many 
smaller problems, each more tractable for policy and 
scientific purposes.3
Blue-sky thinking 	
Brainstorming without limits or being grounded in 
reality, opening possibilities for creativity without 
practical constraints.
Co-design
The process of partnership to develop and formulate 
project delivery and agreed objectives and needs, 
using participatory methods. A process of working 
together utilising generative and explorative processes.
Drought
Drought in general means acute water shortage. 
Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when 
the amount of available water is insufficient to meet 
our normal use.4
Economic resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic 
impact of shocks and stressors without changing the 
economic status or outcomes.5 
Environmental resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope 
with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while 
maintaining natural processes and ecosystem services.6 
Feedback loop
Feedback loop is a process where the output of a 
system is fed back into the input, resulting in circular 
cause and effect that can either amplify or diminish 
the effects of droughts. It is used to visualise the 
interdependencies and interrelations of causes and 
effects across different systems.7
Green drought
Green droughts refer to instances when vegetation 
retains a green top, but growth is stunted and soil 
moisture stress has been impacted for over a month.8
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by 
which individuals, groups and agencies in a society 
share power and make decisions. It can be formally 
institutionalised, or informal.9 
Local knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge 
incorporate elements of lived experience within a 
landscape, bearing witness to the operation of systems. 
It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how 
people interact with surroundings and as part of 
communities and processes.
6
7
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Glossary of Key Terms continued
Resilience
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and 
reorganise so as to maintain the existing functions, 
structure, and feedbacks.10 Also see general 
resilience, specified resilience, economic resilience, 
environmental resilience, and social resilience.
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or 
ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values 
and objectives associated with such systems.11 
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or 
region). Examples include major storms, floods, bush 
fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism, and 
cyber-attacks.12
Social resilience
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse 
range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
existing social and community functions.13 
Standardised Precipitation Index
A simple measure of drought (and also of very wet 
conditions) and is based solely on the accumulated 
precipitation for a given time period (e.g. over the last 
30 or 60 days), compared with the long-term average 
precipitation for that period.
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that 
causes an adverse effect, e.g., drought.14 
Systems
The interaction of processes, networks, and 
inter-dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
Trends
Major global or regional influences that have driven 
change in the past and are expected to shape change 
into the future.15
Vulnerability
The propensity or predisposition to be adversely 
affected.16 
01
Introduction
Drought is omnipresent and affects a larger proportion of the world-wide population than any 
other natural disasters. Future droughts are notoriously difficult to predict, resulting from a lack of 
understanding of contributing physical factors, including those of climate change. Droughts can be 
differentiated from other natural hazards by their lack of warning as to duration, severity, and extent of 
a drought event. Droughts are a chronic stress with no distinct beginning or set tipping point, meaning 
the opportunity for implementing and adaptation is often missed. This makes actions historically 
reactive rather than proactive. 
Over the years, the frequency and intensity of 
drought events have significantly increased, affecting 
communities and economies in ways extending far 
beyond the immediate impact on major industries, 
such as agriculture. While drought may be historically 
hidden from wider society’s view, largely seen, and 
felt as an “on-farm” issue, its ripple effects span 
across various sectors—from water supply to energy 
production, public health, to local businesses. Given 
this broad scope, an inclusive, cross-sectoral approach 
is essential for enhancing resilience towards the 
increasing threat of drought.
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan) 
aims to shift the focus and paradigm to encapsulate 
a ‘whole-of-community’ and ‘whole-of-economy’ 
perspective. The objective is to encourage behavioural 
and cultural shifts to foster a collective awareness and 
understanding of shared responsibility surrounding 
drought resilience. By adopting this inclusive strategy, 
the RDR Plan positions itself as a comprehensive 
roadmap that outlines context and community-driven 
strategies, and actionable plans to equip regions with 
the tools they need to plan for, respond to and recover 
from drought impacts effectively. This document is 
tailored to the Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon (BLO) 
region, and serves as part of a suite of guidance 
documents that aim to provide stakeholders with 
the knowledge and tools to support the building of 
drought-resilient communities and economies. 
This RDR Plan serves as a living document, which will 
be reviewed and updated through active learning and 
adaptive governance as conditions change, and as 
our community’s understanding of their own drought 
vulnerability improves in tandem with the changing 
drought resilience needs of our community.
8
9
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Background image of fruit trees. 
Local Government Areas
T
h
e
 
m
a
p also provides 
informatio
n on the three 
LGAs 
covered in 
this pl
an. 
Ba
thurst
’s tradit
ional owners
 are t
he Wirad
juri gr
oup. Mai
n towns in
clude Bathu
rst, Perthville
, and Eglint
on. The area 
is 3,820 k
ilometre
s squared, w
ith a popu
lation of 43,
567 people. This 
is 21,857
 males and 
21,705 femal
es. 
Lithgow’
s tradition
al owners 
are also
 Wirad
juri. 
Main town
ships i
nclude
 Lithgo
w, Waller
awang, 
a
nd Port
land. Th
e LGA 
covers
 4,512 square kil
ometres, with 20,8
42 people. This is 10,529 males and 10,313 females. 
Oberon’s traditional owners include Wiradjuri, Dharug, and Gundungurra clans. The main township within this LGA is Oberon, with the LGA spanning 3,659 square kilometres. There is a population of 5,580 people, including 2,915 males and 2,662 females. 
Vision, Goals, and Outcomes 
Our Plan has set a vision: For Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils, drought resilience means thriving despite ongoing water adversity. The region recognises its reliance on water and prioritises water security. Our region is welcoming, valuing education, and deeply aware of drought challenges. Equipped with knowledge and tools, the region navigates dry times, remaining connected and prosperous across economic, environmental, and social fronts. Together, the region stands united, turning today’s adversity into tomorrow’s strength.
This vision informs our three strategic areas: economic, environmental, and social. Our economic strategic priorities are to ensure our communities have the skills and tools they need to remain resilient and financially stable in a changing world. Our environmental strategic priorities are to promote environmentally conscious behaviours in community, business and industry that protect our unique natural assets to ensure they remain resilient for future generations. Our social strategic priorities are to fortify our existing social capital and attract a diversity of people to our region to ensure we remain mental and socially resilient during times of hardship.
This informs our economic, environmental, and social resilience goals. 
Our economic resilience goals are to: 
1.	Enhance education on drought resilience and sustainable business practices.
2.	Promote awareness of and support for the application of available financial support and planning,
3.	Facilitate improved opportunities for education and upskilling to cater to the needs of the region.
4.	Provide financial support and services aligned with the specific needs of our community.
5.	Promote networking and collaboration among local industries and businesses. 
Our environmental resilience goals are to: 
1.	Protect and build climate resilience in our natural assets.
2.	Establish harmonious coexistence with the natural and agricultural environment, with limited aesthetic value lost.
3.	Promote sustainable and regenerative farming practices.
4.	Maintain water availability despite ongoing restrictions.
5.	Ensure efficient water management and resilient infrastructure in times of drought. 
Our social resilience goals are to: 
1.	Strengthen community connections to provide support during times of adversity. 
2.	Build the capacity of individuals, community groups, and services to take ownership of drought resilience.
3.	Provide accessible training and capacity building tailored towards drought resilience.
4.	Promote honesty regarding mental health and community wellbeing during times of adversity.
5.	Enhance local and timely mental health support services across our region.
6.	Encourage visitation and relocation to the region.
10
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

02
Drought Resilience at a Glance
In simple terms, drought means acute water shortage. According to the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), 
drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient to 
meet our normal use.17
However, no universal definition of drought exists, 
meaning it is difficult to understand drought 
characteristics across time and space (see Figure 
2.1 below for different types of droughts and their 
definition). Droughts can be exacerbated by low 
soil moisture, a low water table, and high rates of 
evaporation. They can be as short as a single season; 
however, ‘megadroughts’ can persist for decades 
(more than 30 years).18 Droughts are a feature of all 
climates and are defined based on the long-term 
average climate of a given region. Droughts will 
have different prevailing effects depending on the 
system being analysed including social, environmental, 
meteorological, and hydrological.
Figure 2.1: Types of droughts and their definition.19
Type of Drought
Description

Meteorological
A period of months or years with no precipitation or climatological water balance rain. It is 
often accompanied by above average temperatures and precedes and causes other types 
of droughts. The climate change projects for droughts in Australia are based on a measure 
of meteorological drought - the Standardised Precipitation Index. 
Meteorological drought is caused by persistent changes in weather patterns, often 
triggered by irregular sea surface temperatures. Localised conditions such as reduced 
evaporation and low humidity due to dry soils and high air temperatures often enhance 
atmospheric conditions.

Soil moisture 
(agricultural)
A period of reduced soil moisture resulting from below average rainfall, less frequent rain 
events, or above normal evaporation, impacting particularly on agricultural systems.

Hydrological
When river flows and water storages in aquifers, lakes, or reservoirs fall below long-term 
levels. Hydrological drought develops more slowly because it involves stored water that is 
depleted but not replenished. 

Socioeconomic
A measure of drought that considers the supply and demand of economic goods (e.g., 
water, lucerne hay) with elements of meteorological, hydrological, and agricultural drought. 
This is different from the three other drought types as it measures the implications of 
drought on the supply and demand of goods and the associated impacts to society.
Droughts have always been part of the region’s 
history. In fact, severe drought affects some parts of 
Australia on average, once every 18 years.20 This is 
expected to worsen according to the current climate 
change trajectory with drought expected to increase 
in frequency, intensity, and duration.21 For the BLO 
Region, climate projections indicate similar changes 
across the landscape. Climate projections for the 
Region are shown in Table 5.4.
Persistent drought is likely to cause a shift in the 
relationship between communities and the land 
they live on, forcing them to re-configure their living 
standards to accommodate the reality of lower water 
availability. The economic, social, and environmental 
impacts of drought can be far reaching and 
interconnected. Water-reliant industries like agriculture 
may see drastic shifts in productivity and even face 
the prospect of relocating or closing down entirely. 
Deterioration of natural landscapes and waterways 
can impact tourism and visitation. Drought can impact 
human and environmental health in many ways 
including poorer drinking water quality, an indicator 
of poor river health, in turn causing increased rates of 
illness in residents. Similarly, economic decline from 
drought impacted industries can cause financial stress 
and perverse mental health outcomes. 
For the BLO region, some experiences of drought have 
been documented over the past 50 years. Drought 
contributed to the severity of the 2019-20 bushfires 
which had a significant regional impact, with most 
severe effects in Oberon Local Government Area 
(LGA). 731km2 of land was burnt, which led to direct 
impacts to the visitor economy due to damage to 
the region’s national parks and state forests. Other 
industries were impacted including forestry, with 
damage to plantations and loss of 2020 vintage for 
boutique vineyards (with both wine and grapes tainted 
with smoke).22 The social impacts of drought, such as 
poor mental health and reduced social cohesion, have 
also been felt across regional New South Wales (NSW). 
With the region experiencing an ageing population, the 
impacts of drought are likely to result in more severe 
consequences such as health impacts and isolation. 
This is combined with an already stretched hospital 
system. 
In 2020, The Australian Government established 
the Future Drought Fund (FDF) to provide secure, 
continuous funding for drought resilience initiatives. 
Through the FDF, the Australian Government is 
working with state and territory governments to 
support regions in developing RDR Plans to prepare for 
and manage future drought risks.
This RDR Plan uses desktop research and community 
feedback gained through a series of engagement 
sessions, to set out seven actions to strengthen the 
region’s drought resilience. The actions within this RDR 
Plan are intended to support the community to prepare 
for and mange future drought risks, responding to 
the challenges and opportunities within the region, as 
highlighted by the community.
Image of silo murals 
12
13
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

The Process Overview
Figure 2.2 Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils RDR Plan Process at a glance
14
15
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

03
A Plan for Drought Resilience 
Of all the climate and weather-related conditions that affect Australia, drought is often the most 
challenging. NSW is prone to periods of persistent drought with downward trends in rainfall and 
streamflow documented. 
Drought is a defining feature of the climatic cycle of 
the Australian landscape. In large part this owes to 
our geography. Our continent spans the latitudes of 
the subtropical high-pressure belt. This is an area of 
sinking, dry, stable air, and usually clear skies. The 
far north and south of the country come under the 
influence of reasonably regular rain-bearing systems 
for at least part of the year. The east coast is normally 
well watered by moisture from weather driven by the 
Tasman and Coral seas. However, over most of the 
country rainfall is low and erratic. Even in the wetter 
areas, very dry years can disrupt normal activities and 
lead to water shortages.23
As such, droughts will come again, and they are 
anticipated to get worse in parts of the country 
as a result of a changing climate. Droughts are 
challenging times, not just at the farm gate but 
for entire communities and regions. The costs of 
drought are spread across economic, social, and 
environmental factors. The toll taken on regions and 
their communities has been enormous and the impacts 
often linger for decades.
The most effective response to rising uncertainty 
is to plan for greater drought resilience. This can 
be achieved by building sustainable and diverse 
regional economies, reducing the vulnerability of 
communities to changing economic conditions and 
accelerating recovery, as well as enhancing thriving 
natural environments. The Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning (RDRP) program is one of the five focus areas 
of the Commonwealth Government’s FDF. These plans 
focus on innovative ways to build regional drought 
resilience, taking steps to plan now to stem the impact 
of future drought on our region.
The NSW RDRP program is jointly funded through 
the Australian Government’s FDF and the NSW 
Government, supporting local governments to work 
together regionally to plan for drought resilience 
proactively and pragmatically.
Image of a rural scene including a tractor. 
Objectives
Consistent with the strategic priorities and objectives 
of the FDF Agreement, the objectives of the RDR Plan 
process are to:
	
+
grow self-reliance and performance of the 
agricultural sector.
	
+
improve the natural capital of agricultural 
landscapes for better environmental outcomes.
	
+
strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, 
regional, and remote communities.
Strong community and diverse regional economies are 
core objectives of the NSW Government, providing 
both short- and long-term opportunities to strengthen 
regional drought resilience. 
As such, the objectives of this RDR Plan will reflect 
the intent of the FDF Agreement, addressing the 
drought resilience needs of our own community. 
Ultimately, the objectives of the Plan are to address 
the challenges of the community in the face of drought 
and leverage the opportunities available to improve 
community resilience to drought. These challenges 
and opportunities (Figure 3.1 below) are informed by 
community voices obtained during our engagement 
program, and background research of the region. 
Figure 3.1: Key Challenges and Opportunities within the Region. 
Challenges
	
+
Water-reliant landscapes and industries 
	
+
Ageing population and culturally diverse 
populations 
	
+
Attracting and retaining employees 
within the region
	
+
Lack of contextual drought impact 
awareness and water efficient practices 
(for existing and new residents)
	
+
Compounding regional and national 
natural disasters and events impacting 
mental health
	
+
Inadequate communication methods 
tailored to the needs of the community 
	
+
Lack of localised, affordable, and 
available support services 
	
+
Declining volunteer populations
	
+
Water security and water quality, 
including surface water reliance 
Opportunities
	
+
Improving availability and accessibility 
of mental health support services in 
the region 
	
+
Capitalise on existing networks and 
provide mental health support, building 
community connection
	
+
Water resource redundancy and 
opportunities for improved diversified 
water supply
	
+
Attractive and diverse natural 
landscapes and recreational and tourism 
opportunities 
	
+
Existing and expanding transport 
connectivity 
	
+
Retain youth and skills within the region 
	
+
Leverage diverse industry and economic 
opportunities within the region
	
+
Council and community connections
16
17
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Expected Benefits
This RDR Plan focuses on providing specific actions 
to help primary producers and communities become 
more prepared for, and resilient to, the impacts of 
drought. The expected benefits of these actions are 
underpinned by the ability to absorb, adapt to, or 
transform, to deal with the stresses of drought (see 
Figure 3.2 below). 
The actions outlined in this Plan provide a blueprint 
for our region to continue to improve drought 
resilience for years to come. Further implementation 
funding will become available across Australia under 
the Commonwealth Government’s FDF, ensuring 
these actions can be brought to fruition. Planning for 
resilience allows for greater recovery following shocks 
and stressor events. This shortened recovery period is 
characterised as ‘resilience benefits’ (Figure 3.2). That 
is, efforts in becoming resilient before a shock/stressor 
event, result in benefit at a later stage. For example, 
reduced disaster damage, lower recovery costs, and 
improved mental health benefits.
Figure 3.2: Improving our prosperity through resilience (adapted from Fiksel, 201624)  
A di
agram explaining two 
pathways to resilienc
e. Actions can
 limit the imp
act or shorten
 recovery f
rom shocks 
or stresses. Actions adapting to or transforming socio-economic and settlement systems to avoid or resist an impact provide a pathway to resilience, building community performance with time. Without such actions, ongoing shock or chronic stress events lead to reduced community performance over time. 
Strategic Alignment 
The FDF seeks to enhance the public good by 
building drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural 
sector including the landscapes and surrounding 
communities on which they are built. The intent of 
its eight interrelated foundational programs is to 
have an innovative and persevering farming sector, a 
sustainable natural environment, and adaptable rural, 
regional, and remote communities, all with increased 
resilience to the impacts of drought and climate 
change. 
The FDF is intended to deliver against three 
inter-connected strategic priorities:
	
+
economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector
	
+
environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscapes
	
+
social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities.
The RDR Plans focus on the community as a system 
where economic, built, environmental, and social 
capacity to endure, respond, and evolve through 
drought are enhanced.
The 20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW was 
released in 2018. This strategy sets out the NSW 
Government’s priorities and plans to achieve long-term 
social and economic success for regional communities 
across the state. 
Other key strategies with strong linkages and 
relationships to matters of drought resilience include 
the Regional Economic Development Strategies 
(REDS) and NSW State and Regional Water Strategies. 
Key tools which support the delivery of the NSW 
Government’s vision for drought ready regions include:
	
+
The Australian Government’s Drought Resilience 
Adoption and Innovation Hubs (including Charles 
Sturt University) in southern NSW.
	
+
NSW Government Department of Primary 
Industries DroughtHub, an online drought 
assistance and information portal for NSW primary 
producers.
	
+
NSW Government AdaptNSW website, to inform 
and empower communities, businesses, households, 
and government to adapt to climate change.
Image showing that the Future Drought Fund is intended to deliver against three inter-connected strategic priorities, building functioning economies, healthy country, and connected communities. 
With a focus on drought readiness and economic 
diversity, the strategy provides a framework to help 
regional communities prepare for drought. The plan 
promotes strong and diversified regional economies, 
future-ready primary industries, and stronger 
communities. The strategy includes 14 specific actions 
across three key areas of commitment: 
	
+
Sustainable, secure, and healthy water resources 
through six actions for more efficient and 
coordinated water resources which support the 
NSW Water Strategy.
	
+
Stronger primary industries prepared for drought 
through five actions for accelerated innovation, 
information systems and diversification.
	
+
Stronger communities and diverse regional 
economies through three actions supporting 
community resilience which include this RDR Plan.
18
19
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

04
About this Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
This BLO RDR Plan is a collaboration between Bathurst Regional Council (BRC), Lithgow City Council 
(LCC), and Oberon Council (OC). 
The RDR Plan is designed to strengthen the capacities 
of residents, communities, institutions, businesses, 
and systems to better withstand the economic, 
environmental, and social challenges stemming from 
droughts. Building a resilient region will ensure the 
region is not only prepared for drought, but can 
continue to grow, thrive, and prosper throughout 
drought and beyond. By investing in resilience now, the 
region stands to benefit in good times as well as being 
adaptive in challenging periods.
Most crucially, the RDR Plan is community 
owned and driven, co-designed with community 
leaders, community members, local businesses, and 
organisations. This provides a foundation for the Plan 
targeted at minimising future impacts while leveraging 
opportunities to strengthen community resilience. 
Image of an autumn scene. 
Purpose of the Plan 
The BLO RDR Plan provides support to help our region better plan for and become more resilient to the impacts of 
drought over time. It has been developed in a collaborative, partnership approach, drawing on locally led inputs drawn 
from those who live and work in the region. It identifies community-led and council-facilitated actions to achieve the 
strategic objectives of both the FDF Agreement, as well as those of our individual and remarkable communities. 
The purpose and aims of this Plan are outlined below in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Purpose and Aims of the RDR Plan 
Create stronger 
connectedness and 
greater social capital within 
communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security
Increase the understanding of the 
region’s current and future drought 
resilience, considering the region’s 
unique economic, environmental,  
and social characteristics
Identify actions, pathways and 
opportunities to improve regional 
drought resilience, mitigate risks 
and adapt to change
Empower communities 
to implement 
transformative activities 
that improve their 
resilience to drought
Form stronger 
connections, 
relationships, and 
networks within regions
Help councils be in a stronger 
position to implement strategic 
actions and take advantage of 
opportunities as they arise
Support more primary producers 
to adopt whole-of-system 
approaches to natural resource 
management to improve the 
natural resource base, for long-term 
productivity and landscape health
Combine First Nations’ and 
local knowledge with resilience, 
and risk data and information to 
make informed decisions
Develop concrete, 
tangible actions to address and 
mitigate short- and long-term 
drought impacts
20
21
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

The Process in Detail 
Figure 4.2: The Drought Resilience Planning Process in Detail
The drought resilience planning process consisted of several steps
1.	Pre-Planning
2.	Round 1 Engagement
3.	Themes 
4.	Round 2 engagement 
5.	Outcomes 
6.	Round 3 engagement 
7.	Synthesis  
The pre-planning phase involved setting the project foundations. Steps included 
•	Establishing the Project Control Group which included representatives from Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils, and Department of Regional NSW)
•	Engaging with Subject Matter Experts
•	Developing a Resilience Assessment (looking at the local strategic context, environmental, social, and economic drought impacts, drought projections, challenges and opportunities) 
•	Developing a Stakeholder & Engagement Plan (which looks at key stakeholders and demographics, examining how to involve them)
•	And the development of the Have Your Say Survey (generating project interest and ground-truthing the desktop study). 
Round 1 engagement focuses on the challenges and opportunities across the Region. 
Engagement was conducted at Oberon, Burraga, Lithgow, Cullen Bullen, and Bathurst. We spoke to community members, stakeholders, and representatives from key organisations. Engagement included workshops, street talks, and phone interviews. This was conducted by facilitated group discussions on drought impacts, community strengths, existing services and ideas for action across key areas. These key areas were vulnerable groups, community and recreation, environment, local business and regional economy, utilities and infrastructure, cultural heritage and innovation.
From this engagement, key themes arose, showing us where to focus our efforts. These themes were agriculture, local economy, mental health, water security, education, and environmental, social, and economic efforts.
Round two engagements then focused on solutions for the future. This engagement was conducted at Bathurst, Burraga, Capertee, Lithgow, Oberon, and Rydal. Key stakeholders able to deliver or support actions were involved in workshops with fellow stakeholders clustered by theme. Facilitated discussions reviewing the ideas from round one, canvassing additional ideas, and idea evaluation occurred. To evaluate ideas considerations around effectiveness, feasibility, value for money, whether the idea addressed the root cause, capacity to deliver, and avoidance of duplication of efforts. 
This led to several outcomes showing us how to get there. Next we had to plan objectives, the action shortlist, supporting actions, and next steps. 
This informed round 3 engagement where actions were detailed. During this round of engagement action rationales, implementation steps, high-level cost estimates, action lead and stakeholders, action KPIs and evaluation, and supporting actions and next steps were considered. 
This informed the final phase, synthesis of the RDR Plan. This involved development of the vision, goals, and objectives, actions under economic, social, and environmental pillars, and monitoring, evaluation, and learning. 
22
23
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Describing the system 
Through desktop research and engagement with the 
community, the key features of the region have been 
identified and described. Using available information 
from the BoM, IDCommunity, Census and Australian 
Bureau of Statistics data, Council data, and pertinent 
local plans, a synthesised Resilience Assessment, 
considering the statistics of our economy, social, and 
environmental sectors was developed. This technical 
study fleshes out the existing baseline of drought 
resilience, from which understanding can be built upon, 
strengthening our community.  
Exploring scenarios
The Resilience Assessment was also designed to 
encapsulate what future drought means for the region. 
This study was undertaken to inform the subsequent 
community engagement activities, providing valuable 
information informing the stakeholder and community 
consultation program. This provided a baseline for 
resilience challenges and opportunities. Using high 
emission climate scenarios (particularly Representative 
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5), data was analysed 
to explore possible futures of our region. Existing 
and projected (for 2050 and 2090) conditions for 
temperature, rainfall, and bushfire danger allowed 
us to paint a picture of possible drought situations 
ahead of us. Regionally specific data was drawn upon 
to provide locally relevant impacts and understanding 
for BLO, seeking to see events through the eyes of our 
community. 
Analysing the system
Using these climate scenarios, the impact of drought 
to each system within the region was explored. This 
relied not only on numbers and datasets, but also on 
local stories and research to uncover historic impacts 
across social, cultural, economic, and environmental 
spheres. This took a broad view, considering how 
different stressors could interact and amplify each 
other and defined a number of feedback loops within 
the landscape of the region. This information was 
used to develop a preliminary understanding of 
the challenges facing the region, and opportunities 
available surrounding drought resilience.
Scoping and goal setting
Using community and stakeholder engagement, this 
step involved building upon the challenges and 
opportunities identified, in addition to understanding 
what a drought resilient region might look like. This 
involved three rounds of community and stakeholder 
engagement, in addition to a ‘Have Your Say Survey’. 
Using the ‘Have Your Say’ survey, insight on key visions 
for a drought resilient region helped to capture the 
region’s goals in three to four words. Integrating 
ideas from the community, business representatives, 
representatives from NSW Government, service 
providers, charitable organisations, and Council 
enabled the crafting of a vision and goals aligning with 
values and characteristics of the region. 
Community input was sought in the first round of 
engagement to refine the understanding of past 
drought impacts, capture all current actions, supports, 
services and the challenges from a community’s 
perspective. These were captured within the Resilience 
Assessment. 
Stakeholder mapping and engagement
The community are the primary driver to the 
development of this RDR Plan. To obtain a diverse 
range of stakeholders across the community to 
inform better preparation, response, and recovery 
in a collaborative manner, mapping exercises were 
undertaken. Using provided council databases and 
research, stakeholders were contacted and recruited 
across key industries including (but not limited to): 
Education (schools, early 
childhood educators, university 
representatives, Tafe).  
Water and agriculture (local 
farmers, water utilities, farm 
equipment manufacturers and 
suppliers, trades). 
Environment (Landcare, Local 
Land Services (LLS) etc).
Health (Rural Financial Counselling 
Services (RFCS), Lifeline, Services 
Australia).
Businesses (local small businesses, 
volunteers such as Country 
Women’s Association, National 
Disability Insurance Scheme/
employment providers).
In workshops, community voices were valued, 
making sure all voices were heard. The principles of 
inclusivity, accessibility, long-term horizon planning, 
and transparency were followed, building stakeholder 
influence and relationships to the RDR Plan, and 
ensuring community buy-in. Using the International 
Association of Public Participation (IAP2) Framework, 
workshops were collaborative in nature, with 
individuals empowered to lead and own actions 
fleshed out. This ensured everyone had a voice in 
shaping our plan. 
Imagining change
This plan went beyond the collection of data and 
required the community to imagine a better future. 
Round one of community engagement was used to 
encourage community ideation as a basis for action 
identification and ‘blue-sky’ thinking. This was done 
through their expression of opportunities and possible 
actions in the future. Key themes and ideas were 
continuously raised across the region, with themes 
naturally falling into several areas including business 
resilience, community connection and mental health, 
economic diversification, and environmental resilience.
Generating options
Based on the outcomes of first round community 
engagement, ideas were vast and broad, creating 
significant opportunities for potential change. Actions 
were evaluated and condensed into a long list, ranging 
from assisting in the development of a business ‘health 
check’ to hosting small events and activities promoting 
mental health. These were sorted into environment, 
economic, and social pillars to allow for prioritisation 
where long-lasting change was possible.
Sequencing pathways
To move forward, a clear path had to be set. 
To maintain trust and transparency across the 
development of the RDR Plan, actions and ideas 
generated from engagement were themed and 
presented back to collaborators and community 
members in the second round of engagement. 
Engagement was structured with stakeholders grouped 
according to their relevance to key action themes, 
including (but not limited to) social connectedness, 
economic diversification, and mental health. 
The intended outcome of this engagement was to 
prioritise the list of actions to create a short-list to be 
detailed within the plan, alongside the identification 
of action owners. This was done by stepping through 
implementation of each action with the community, 
lending a tangible and purposeful nature to the actions. 
Implementing pathways
Finally, goals and actions must be implemented to 
achieve benefits. Applying lessons learned, the final 
round of engagement involved workshops which 
were held with self-identified action owners and 
relevant stakeholders to flesh out and develop 
implementation steps for each action, following the 
Investment Logic Map approach. These workshops 
were designed to encourage conversations around 
practical implementation steps, and to encourage buy-
in. Prioritising how effective actions are in addressing 
the resilience challenges, identified in prior workshops, 
ensured each action was set up for success, creating a 
level of accountability. 
Monitoring and evaluation processes were developed 
in alignment with actions to ensure continuous 
innovation and learning is fostered through intentional 
capacity building and education, arming ourselves 
with knowledge and drought awareness for the future. 
Figure 6.1 further shows how actions were developed.
Key Inputs 
Numerous existing bodies of work spanning 
governance and leadership, primary production, 
economic, social, demographics, infrastructure, land 
use, climate change and other scientific studies and 
research including policies and strategic plans at 
international, national, state, and council level were 
used as key inputs for this RDR Plan. Priority actions of 
this Plan have been mapped against these key inputs 
to demonstrate the strategic alignment of each action. 
This is further elaborated in the Action Strategic 
Alignment section.
Image of a rural landscape sunset 
24
25
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Our Partners 
This RDR Plan was developed by BRC, LCC, and OC 
through an understanding of the unique challenges 
facing our region and gathering input from a wide 
range of key stakeholders from our community. A 
dedicated and thoughtful engagement approach was 
undertaken to connect with the community including 
interviews, phone calls, surveys, workshops, street 
talks, and one-on-one meetings. From the community 
engagement, it is understood that the existing 
community resilience rests upon strong primary 
industries, established agricultural supply chain sectors, 
local businesses, relevant local governments, as well 
as community organisations and service providers. 
However, it is also understood there is still much to be 
done in the eyes of the community, and as such, the 
intent of this RDR Plan is to be led and driven by our 
communities. 
More than 220 community members, business 
representatives, NSW Government representatives, 
service providers, charitable organisations, and the 
three Councils were engaged to ensure this RDR 
Plan was community-led and focused. Many of them 
shared their stories of hardship, community spirit, and 
perseverance in the face of drought and how, as a 
community, they can plan for a more resilient future. 
While the focal point of this engagement was targeted 
workshops and surveys, informal engagement 
was also conducted with a broad cross-section of 
the community, providing critical insight into local 
challenges, opportunities, and potential solutions for 
drought resilience. From the vibrant regional centre of 
Bathurst to the beautiful valley of Lithgow, to snow-
dusted hilltops of Oberon, stakeholders included 
graziers, health providers, support services, local 
business owners, community organisations and more, 
sharing about their drought journey, and the drought 
journey of the region. Figure 4.3 provides an overview 
of the community and stakeholder engagement 
undertaken, with the Engagement Outcome Summary 
Report providing a more detailed overview of the 
engagement outcomes.
Figure 4.3: Engagement outcomes
Workshops
15 workshops with 
> 132 participants
Organisations Engaged:
	
+
Jenolan Caves.
	
+
Rural Financial Counselling Services 
(RFCS).
	
+
Rural Adversity Mental Health 
Program (RAHMP).
	
+
Oberon Rotary Club. 
	
+
Burraga Ag Bureau.
	
+
Council Employees and Departments.
	
+
Councillors.
	
+
Destination Central West.
	
+
Department of Regional NSW .
	
+
Hartley Branch NSW Farmers.
	
+
Central Acclimatisation Society.
	
+
Bathurst Merino Association.
	
+
Lifeline Central West. 
	
+
The Enviro Factor.
	
+
NSW Health - Rural Response 
Recovery team.
	
+
Salvation Army.
	
+
Jemena Gas.
	
+
Retirees.
	
+
Self-Employed Persons.
	
+
Contractors.
	
+
NSW Farmers and Graziers.
	
+
Central Tablelands Regional Landcare.
	
+
Town and Country Rural Supplies.
	
+
Bathurst High Campus.
	
+
Local Land Services (LLS).
	
+
Western Sydney University 
(Lithgow campus).
Surveys 
(Have Your Say)
43 participants
Groups represented 
in survey:
	
+
First Nations.
	
+
Young Adults.
	
+
Elderly.
	
+
Agricultural industry 
(>40% of respondents).
	
+
Healthcare and social services.
	
+
Tourism.
	
+
Manufacturing.
	
+
Retail.
	
+
Hospitality.
	
+
Education.
Invitations
>300 sent
Workshop and Engagement 
Invitations sent:
	
+
Accommodation providers.
	
+
Tourism.
	
+
Indigenous.
	
+
Schools.
	
+
Small businesses.
	
+
Manufacturing and Industries.
	
+
Real Estate.
	
+
NSW Farmers.
	
+
Progress Associations.
	
+
Country Women’s 
Associations.
	
+
Community Organisations.
	
+
Education Providers (including 
Western Sydney University 
(Lithgow Campus)).
Street walk
55 participants
Businesses consulted:
	
+
Coopers Antiques.
	
+
Spark Electrical.
	
+
Barkers Butchery. 
	
+
Bowyer & Livermore. 
	
+
Oberon Bakehouse. 
	
+
Elders.
	
+
Oberon Veterinary Hospital. 
	
+
Oberon Saddlery.
	
+
Kringle Cottage. 
	
+
Lithgow Mobility Aids.
	
+
JG Locksafe and Security. 
	
+
Lithgow Technology Service. 
	
+
Dennis Seafood. 
	
+
Lithgow Pet Barn. 
	
+
KISS. 
	
+
Lithgow Laundry. 
	
+
SoL Healing Crystals. 
	
+
Lost Souls Second Hand Books. 
	
+
Dimmey’s Bargain Shop. 
	
+
Uniting Care Lithgow. 
	
+
Lithgow Fire Safety Supplies. 
	
+
Super Cheap Auto. 
	
+
Portland Post Office. 
	
+
Portland Police. 
	
+
Coronation Hotel, Portland. 
	
+
BP Portland.
	
+
IGA Portland Plus Liquor. 
	
+
Portland Newsagency.
	
+
Diggers Corner Café and 
Takeaway Portland.
	
+
Portland Country Women’s 
Association. 
	
+
Vinnies Portland. 
	
+
Vivability. 
	
+
Armada Bathurst Shopping 
Centre. 
	
+
Go Vita. 
	
+
Aussie Disposals. 
	
+
Raine and Horne Property. 
	
+
DARE Financial Solutions. 
	
+
Nutrien Ag Solutions.
Emails and phone 
conversations
>7 participants
Groups interviewed:
	
+
Central West Joint 
Organisation (JO).
	
+
Destination Central West.
	
+
Portland Village Voice 
(newspaper).
	
+
Blinky Bill Early Learning 
Centre Portland.
	
+
Mingaan Wiradjuri Local 
Aboriginal Land Council.
	
+
TafeNSW.
	
+
Charles Sturt University.
26
27
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

The four main principles that underpinned our 
engagement strategy for the RDR Plan are: 
	
+
Inclusivity: consult with a diverse range of 
stakeholders and community representatives to 
capture a range of local needs, interests, capacity, 
and co-design recommendations for opportunities 
and actions.
	
+
Accessibility: ensure equitable representation of 
susceptible communities, including those living with 
disabilities, women, youth, and the elderly.
	
+
Long-term horizon planning: facilitate community 
discussions that focus on sustainable actions which 
deliver long-term, enduring outcomes.
	
+
Transparency: use engagement techniques and 
reporting frameworks that foster openness and 
trust.
The objectives of our engagement from the 
outset were:
	
+
Foster co-designed, community-led planning, 
and collective ownership of the resulting plan 
to leverage existing strategic planning and avoid 
duplication of effort,
	
+
Recognise the diversity of people, businesses and 
landscapes involved in agricultural production, 
including Indigenous groups and landholders, and
	
+
Harness diverse region-specific knowledge and 
skills for a triple-bottom-line approach.25
Our engagement strategy for the RDR Plan was also 
informed by the internationally recognised approach 
developed by the IAP2 depicted in Figure 4.4 below. 
As far as reasonably practicable, the intention was 
to engage with community and stakeholders at the 
collaborate and empower end of the spectrum.
Figure 4.4: IAP2 Framework The international association for public participation framework for stakeholder engagement involves five levels, increasing in the level of public or stakeholder impact on decisions. 
Level 1 is inform. This involves providing information to improve understanding of issues and opportunities. 
Level 2 is consult. Seek feedback on alternatives or decisions. 
Level 3 is involve: directly engage the public to incorporate their issues and concerns, and to understand aspirations. 
Level 4 is collaborate. Partner with the public in the development of strategies and actions. 
The final level, level 5 is empower. This means final decision-making rests with the public. 
Source: International Association for Public Participation Image of Lithgow main street. 
29
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
28
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of a rocky outcrop. 
05
Regional Profile
Our region rests on the traditional lands of the Wiradjuri, Dharug, and Gundungurra people. 
The Wiradjuri are the largest language group in NSW, with a strong historic and contemporary 
presence in Bathurst and Lithgow.26,27 In Oberon, the Gundungurra and Wiradjuri people have 
deep-rooted ties to the land.28
Each of our LGAs have their own unique charm, 
contributing to the cultural diversity and economic 
vitality of the Central West, with transport links 
connecting them to broader NSW. Lithgow benefits 
from the Great Western Highway and the Main 
Western Railway line, making it a vital transportation 
hub for both road and rail. Bathurst has connectivity 
through the Great Western Highway and the regional 
airport, ensuring easy access to Sydney and beyond. 
Oberon relies primarily on road links, with the 
Oberon-Bathurst Road connecting it to Bathurst and 
neighbouring regions.  
Image of a road and houses. 
Figure 5.1: Our Region 
Bathurst LGA includes Bathurst, Georges Plains, Hill End, Peel, Rockley, Sofala, Sunny Corner, Trunkey Creek, Wattle Flat, Perthville, Eglinton, and Yetholme. The LGA spans an area of 3,820 square kilometres. 
Lithgow LGA includes Lithgow, Ben Bullen, Capertee, Glen Davis, Hampton, Cullen Bullen, Clarence, Hartley, Newnes, Old Bowenfels, Portland, Rydal, Sodwalls, Tarana, and Wallerawang. The LGA spans an area of 4,552 square kilometres. 
Oberon LGA includes Oberon, Black Springs, Shooters Hill, Edith, O’Connell, Hazelgrove, Mount David, Jenolan, and Burraga. The LGA spans an area of 3,659 kilometres squared. 
31
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
30
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Economic Profile
Understanding the economic profile of the region is critical in drought resilience planning, providing insights into 
the region’s economic dependencies. Similarly, it helps to identify the potential strengths and can allow for the 
appropriate allocation of resources to mitigate economic hardship during prolonged dry periods. An overview of the 
key industries by employment is displayed in Table 5.1 with a comparison against NSW in Table 5.2.
Bathurst: Image of orchard trees. 
Bathurst 
BRC’s Gross Regional Product (GRP) reached $2.62 billion in 2022, 
marking a 0.4% growth compared to the previous year. The Bathurst 
local economy is founded on a diverse range of industries, including 
health care, education, food manufacturing, and construction. Key 
exports include primarily food product manufacturing, and education, 
while robust local sales are attributed to the strength of the 
construction and property industry.29 Notably, the region’s agriculture 
and industry held a significant presence, with a value add (indicator of 
business productivity) of 5.2% compared to the state average of 2.4%, 
while road transport accounted for 3.8% of value added, compared 
to NSW’s 1.9%. Bathurst’s major industries of employment in 2021 
included health care and social assistance, education and training, and 
construction.
Lithgow: Image of lake and park scene. 
Lithgow  
Lithgow’s GRP stands at just under $1.3 billion, while nearly 
1,470 businesses contribute to the employment of over 8,623 
individuals.30 The mining industry has the Gross Value Add (GVA) 
equal to approximately 23% of the Lithgow regional economy.31 
Although the finance and insurance services industry is not a top 
employer, it has a high GVA due to higher wages associated with this 
industry.32 For the Lithgow LGA, the health care and social assistance, 
public administration and mining are the dominant industries 
by employment. This underscores the region’s wealth of mineral 
resources and resultant employment opportunities it offers. The coal 
produced in the ‘Lithgow’ seam is used today for electrical power 
production.33 It is also suitable to produce coke for fuel. 
Oberon: Image of hills and green pasture. 
Oberon 
Unlike, Bathurst and Lithgow, Oberon’s primary employment sector 
in 2021 was manufacturing, accounting for 16.7% of jobs. This was 
followed by agriculture, forestry, and fishing, and health care and 
social assistance. The local economy relies heavily on the timber 
production and processing industry, while the total gross value of 
agricultural production in Oberon is $33.1 million.34,35 The GRP of 
the region stands at $381 million, supported by 701 local businesses, 
including 49 tourism-related businesses operating within Oberon.36,37 
Table 5.1: Top Five Major Industries and Employment Statistics38,39,40 
Industry
% employed 
Bathurst
Health Care and Social Assistance
16.7%
Education and Training
12.5%
Construction
10.7%
Retail Trade
9.1%
Public Administration and Safety
8.8%
Lithgow
Health Care and Social Assistance
11.6%
Public Administration and Safety
10.6%
Mining
10.2%
Education and Training
7.9%
Retail Trade
7.7%
Oberon
Manufacturing 
16.7%
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing 
14.4%
Healthcare and Social Assistance 
9.6%
Construction
8.9%
Education and Training
7.0%
Table 5.2: Employment Statistics for NSW comparison41 
Industry
NSW %  
Healthcare and Social Assistance 
14.2%
Retail Trade
9.3%
Construction
8.9%
Education and Training
8.6%
Manufacturing
6.2%
Public Administration and Safety
6.1%
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing 
2.1%
Mining
1.1
32
33
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Environmental Profile
Bathurst: Image of the Pink-tailed Legless Lizard. 
Bathurst
Bathurst is home to various 
plants and animals of 
significance. However, 
many of our biodiverse 
counterparts are threatened, 
with populations in decline. 
The Bathurst LGA is home 
to a range of threatened 
species such as the Pink-
tailed Legless Lizard and 
four endangered ecological 
communities, providing 
important habitat features 
for migratory bird species.42,43  
The Macquarie River flowing 
through Bathurst, serves 
as a lifeblood for both the 
environment and local 
communities. Campbells River 
and Fish River also enhance 
our hydrology. 
Lithgow: Image of a kookaburra. 
Lithgow
Located on the western 
edge of the Blue Mountains 
and defined by rolling hills, 
rugged plateaus, and valleys, 
Lithgow ranges from lush 
green expanses to rocky 
escarpments where our 
biodiversity thrives. Lithgow 
is home to numerous 
native flora and fauna 
species, including wombats, 
kookaburras, and various 
bird species. Wet and dry 
eucalypt forests, heathlands, 
and woodlands, support 
the ecological diversity of 
the area, including many 
threatened species, such 
as the Hyacinth Orchid.44,45 
Prominent watercourses 
like the Cox’s River, Farmers 
Creek, Wolgan River, Lake 
Lyall, and Lake Wallace 
support a wide range of 
aquatic life. These waterways 
also play a pivotal role 
in Lithgow’s cultural and 
recreational activities, 
offering opportunities 
for fishing, kayaking, and 
picnicking. 
Oberon: Image of a spotted-tailed quoll
Oberon
Nestled within the Central 
Tablelands and surrounded 
by the World Heritage-listed 
Greater Blue Mountains 
Area, Oberon is home to 
numerous national parks 
and reserves including 
Jenolan Karst, Kanagara-
Boyd, and Abercrombie 
National Parks.46 Our natural 
environment supports a 
rich diversity of flora and 
fauna, including unique plant 
species like the Oberon 
Grevillea and a variety of 
wildlife. Threatened species 
identified in Oberon include 
the Spotted-tailed Quoll.47
Social Profile
An overview of the regional profile is depicted below in Figure 5.2. The region has a culturally and demographically 
diverse population, with a significant number of people born overseas or with languages other than English (LOTE). 
According to IDcommunity (based on Australia Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2021 Census data), the region has a 
generous community, with considerable volunteer contributions to the communities, however, volunteer populations 
have declined since 2016. 
Figure 5.2: Community Profile
Bathurst LGA
43,567
people
Aboriginal 
and/or Torres 
Strait Islander
7.9%
Median age
38
Indigenous 
median age
22
Forecast pop, 
growth to 2041
29.53%
People born 
overseas
15.5%
LOTE
12.4%
Lithgow LGA
20,842
people
7.8%
46
26
17.54%
17.9%
12.7%
Oberon LGA
5,580
people
4.7%
47
26
0.20%
33%
17.3%
NSW
8.1 million
people
3.4%
39
23
20.89%
34.6%
32.4%
34
35
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Socio-economic indicators in Bathurst, Lithgow, and 
Oberon reveal significant variations in the economic 
landscape of our region (see Table 5.3 below). 
According to IDcommunity, at least a third of the 
region’s population comprise low-income individuals 
(weekly income of less than $500). According to 
ABS 2021 Census data, Bathurst has an average 
unemployment rate of 4.4%, while Lithgow and 
Oberon’s unemployment rate is 5.5% and 3.5% 
respectively. This is reflected in the Index of Relative 
Socio-economic Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD), 
indicating that Lithgow is the most disadvantaged LGA 
within the region. 
According to the ABS, the Aboriginal unemployment 
rate in Bathurst sits at 9.7%. For Lithgow, the 
Aboriginal unemployment rate is 10.9% and for 
Oberon, this is at 14.5%, which is notably higher than 
the other LGAs. 
Table 5.3: Demographics and socio-economic indicators of Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon48,49
Bathurst LGA
Lithgow LGA
Oberon LGA
NSW
Population with 
a disability 
Low-income 
individuals
Unemployment 
rate (of those in 
the workforce)
Aboriginal 
unemployment 
rate 
Volunteer 
status 2021
Volunteer 
status 2016
IRSAD* 
2,807 
(6.4%)
1,582 
(7.6%)
308 
(5.5%)
5.8%
10,716 
(30.3%)
6,520 
(37.5%)
1,431 
(30.8%)
33.6%
4.4%
5.5%
3.5%
4.9%
14.9%
20.7%
14.5%
18.4%
13.9%
20.1%
13.0%
18.1%
9.7%
10.9%
14.5%
12.3%
4
2
3
N/A
* Index of Relative Socio-economic Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD) 1- most disadvantaged, 5 – most advantaged50
Our History of Drought Impacts 
Drought as a natural hazard is pervasive, recurring, 
and distressing. It is difficult to determine a start and 
end, or when the landscape has recovered. As for other 
disasters, they are difficult to predict or compare with 
differences in seasonality, extent, duration, severity, 
among other variables all contributing to the drought 
experience. 
Australia has highly variable rainfall records and in 
contrast also has highly variable periods of low rainfall. 
The BoM has four definitions of drought, which are 
meteorological, agricultural, hydrological, and socio-
economic (see Figure 5.3 below).
Figure 5.3: Types of droughts
Meteorological drought, or a period of months to years with low rainfall.
Agricultural drought: short-term dryness in the surface soil layers (root-zone) at a 
critical time in the growing season.
Hydrological drought: prolonged moisture deficits that affect surface or subsurface 
water supply, reducing streamflow, groundwater, dam and lake levels.
Socio-economic drought: other effect of elements of the above droughts on supply 
and demand of economic goods and human well-being.
2
1
3
4
Source: BoM
Drought Monitoring in NSW 
The Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS) 
is a publicly available drought monitoring tool that 
monitors seasonal conditions across NSW. EDIS 
was launched in March 2018 and is used across 
government and farming stakeholders to build drought 
risk awareness, emphasise drought preparedness and 
improve confidence in drought monitoring and early 
warning. A key feature of EDIS is the development 
of the NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI) 
Combined Drought Indicator (CDI).
The CDI integrates a range of data and model outputs 
in a framework that is useful for decision makers. It 
combines meteorological, hydrological, and agronomic 
definitions of drought (above) using indexes for 
rainfall, soil and water and plant growth. From these, 
a fourth index, drought direction, is developed. EDIS 
is undergoing redevelopment to provide farmers with 
world-leading weather and climate data to enable 
better business decisions. Image of a national park and escarpment. 
36
37
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Stages of Drought
Used together, the indexes of the EDIS indicate the 
stage of drought. The six stages progress from a non-
Drought category where all indicators suggest good 
conditions for production to recovery, through to a 
Drought Affected (weakening or intensifying) category, 
a Drought category, and into Intense Drought 
(see Figure 5.4 below). 
Complementing the stages is detailed information on: 
	
+
A technical and on-the-ground description of 
typical field conditions.
	
+
A suggested on-farm response.
	
+
A suggested advisory or policy response.
Figure 5.4: Stages of drought in NSW
Non Drought Phase: At least one indicator is above the 50th percentile.
Recovering Phase: All indicators are below the 50th percentile but above the 30th percentile.
Drought Affected (weakening) Phase: At least one indicator is below the 30th 
percentile and the rainfall trend is positive over the past 90 days.
Drought Phase: At least one indicator is below the 5th percentile.
Drought Affected (intensifying) Phase: At least one indicator is below the 30th 
percentile and the rainfall trend is negative over the past 90 days.
Intense Drought Phase: All three indicators (rainfall, soil water, plant growth) 
are below the 5th percentile.
2
1
3
5
4
6
Source: EDIS
The Regional Drought Context
The geological landscape of Australia makes it prone 
to experiencing extreme weather events including 
extended periods of meteorological and hydrological 
drought.51 Historically, Australia has experienced 
drought about once every 18 years with periods in 
between ranging from four to 38 years.52 Image of a scenic lookout. 
Drought events impacting each LGA have been provided in the timeline below.
Historic droughts 
Bathurst LGA
1982-83 drought
This drought had dramatic 
impacts to our city, with strict 
water restrictions put in place 
(and rigorously monitored). 
December 1997-mid-1998
A long hot summer period 
resulted in a substantial 
increase in water usage, 
with restrictions remaining 
in force until mid-1998. An 
upgrade to the Chifley Dam 
in 2001 doubled the town’s 
storage capacity and is 
credited with maintaining the 
area’s water security.
2007
High wheat prices prompted 
the Mars Pet Care factory in 
Bathurst to consider reducing 
their shifts from a four-shift 
to a three-shift operation.53
Lithgow LGA
LCC investigated the viability of 
recommissioning the Farmers 
Creek Number One Dam to 
increase storage by 17% and 
provide the Council with a 10-
day emergency water supply.54
May 2018
Lithgow City Councillors 
lobbying on behalf of 
farmers.
Oberon LGA
May 2005
Council changed its roadwork 
schedule due to drought 
conditions. The lack of rain 
meant there was insufficient 
water to work the road base 
into a smooth surface to allow 
sealing.55
May 2008
Oberon’s water supply fell 
below 17%, its lowest level 
since 1945.  
December 2009
Delta Electricity announced it 
would stop taking water from 
Oberon Dam when its capacity 
was projected to reach just 
8 per cent, in response to 
community concerns.56
 2011, Delta Electricity 
installed a reverse osmosis 
system, allowing reuse of 
water from the Cox’s River.57
2011
Changes to Oberon’s annual 
water allocation (750 
megalitres increased to over 
1,000 megalitres). 
February 2014
Central Tablelands Local Land 
Services commenced drought 
meetings in Oberon.
March 2014
Emergency Drought 
Assistance Packages. $20,000 
per producer for Transport 
Assistance Reimbursement, 
and up to $30,000 per 
producer for Emergency Water 
Infrastructure Grants, and the 
waiving of Local Land Services 
rates.58 
38
39
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

2017-2020 Drought Experiences  
Bathurst LGA
November 2018
Water restrictions for first time 
in more than 20 years (1997).  
Chifley Dam at 50% 
December 2018
Regional unemployment 
reached 5.3%. 
Late 2018
Corrective Services expanded 
their Drought Relief Program 
to the Bathurst correctional 
centre. The program offered 
the opportunity for inmates 
to help with maintenance 
projects, like fencing.59
July 2019
Macquarie Valley town, 
domestic and stock allocations 
reduced to 80% and high 
security to 70%.60 
Bathurst 1000 event, 
200,000+ visitors were 
expected to be conservative 
with water; ‘Water-Let’s make 
it last’ campaign.61
November 2019 
Irrigators restricted to 20% of 
their entitlement to conserve 
Chifley Dam water supply.62 
Vegetable growers (supplying 
major local employers like 
Simplot) effectively gave 
up 80% of their income. A 
$2,000 domestic water carting 
rebate was made available 
to eligible water users in the 
lower Macquarie Valley where 
regulated river flows had 
ceased.
2020
Day 0 was approached, with 
Chifley Dam recording its 
lowest level at 29% in March 
2020. 
Lithgow LGA
August 2019
Private company contracted 
to cart water for Centennial 
Coal’s Charbon and Airly 
mines near Lithgow to secure 
140 full time jobs.63
Oberon LGA
July 2018
30% less rainfall than their 
normal yearly average of 813 
millimetres. 
Graziers were destocking or 
handfeeding stock.
November 2019
Oberon Shire primary 
producers struggled to secure 
water for stock and crops, 
with normally fertile land 
rendered a ‘dustbowl’.
The drought contributed to 
the severity of the 2019-
20 bushfires which had a 
significant regional impact, 
with the most severe effects 
in Oberon LGA. 731km2 of 
land was burnt (Bathurst and 
Oberon region wide), with 
direct impacts to the visitor 
economy due to damage 
to national parks and state 
forests.64
Figure 5.5: Drought areas mapped by Department of Primary Industries 
Map produced by the Department of Primary Industries as a combined drought indicator for the 12 month period leading up to the 31st of December 2019. The map shows drought impacting western NSW and northern NSW along the eastern coast down to the Victorian border. The image zooms into the Oberon, Lithgow and Bathurst area. This shows Oberon was in intense drought during this time. Lithgow was also in intense drought, with a lower drought category ranked towards the west of the LGA. Bathurst was classed as a mix of drought and intense drought across the LGA. 
Combined Drought Indicator: 12 months to 31 December 2019
Source: DPI
40
41
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Future Drought Projections and Impacts
When considering drought hazards, it is key to account 
for the role climate change plays in exacerbating the 
effects of the event.65 Globally, temperatures have 
increased by 1.15°C since pre-industrial levels at 
a rate of 0.2°C per decade, resulting in hotter and 
drier climates.66 Regions experiencing increased 
temperatures and aridity intensifies drought 
conditions. Globally, drought days will increase 
by more than 20% by 2080 and the proportion of 
exposure to drought will increase by 9-17% by 2030 
and 50-90% by 2080.67 Winter and spring rainfall is 
projected to decrease by approximately 15% by 2030, 
and a further 20-30% by 2100, depending on the RCP 
scenario.68 
In Australia, climate change has shifted weather 
patterns southward, causing a 15% decrease in late 
autumn and early winter rainfall since the 1970s.69 
By the late 21st Century there could be a 50% 
reduction in autumn and winter precipitation.70 These 
changes have intensified recent droughts, notably 
the Millennium Drought in the late 20th and 21st 
Century, which have been severe compared to those 
experienced in the preceding 400 years.71 Weather 
projections using an RCP 8.5 pathway predict average 
Australian temperatures will increase. The BoM have 
also declared El Nino is underway and is expected to 
continue until at least the end of the summer 2023-
24.72 This means warmer, drier conditions will occur 
over spring and summer. This also increases fire danger 
in south-eastern Australia. As of October 2023, 46% of 
NSW is drought affected, in drought, or experiencing 
intense drought conditions.73 
Table 5.4 and Table 5.5 depict the climate change 
projections for BLO across 2050 and 2090 timelines, 
under RCP 8.5. This information has been sourced via 
the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO) Climate Change in Australia 
Threshold Calculator and CSIRO Central Slopes 
Cluster Report, depicting the mean projections for 
temperature and rainfall, and 50th percentile values 
for fire weather.
Table 5.4: 50th Percentile Climate Projections under RCP 8.5. 
Bathurst
Lithgow
Oberon*
Baseline
2050
2090
Baseline
2050
2090
Baseline
2050
2090
Temperature
Number of days per 
year over 35oC
6.10
17.04
32.83
0.53
2.64
7.44
0.73
2.69
7.15
Number of days per 
year over 40oC
0.07
1.26
4.46
0.00
0.03
0.32
0.00
0.03
0.38
Rainfall
Average days 
above the 99.9th 
percentile**
0.55
0.67
0.65
0.41
0.50
0.55
0.31
0.34
0.37
Average months per 
year below the 10th 
percentile***
1.17
1.50
1.68
0.93
1.44
1.58
0.90
1.23
1.30
* The threshold calculator only provides data for a select number of locations, including Bathurst and Lithgow. For Oberon, 
data has been sourced from Katoomba on the basis it is the closest in location and climate.
**The number of days where the total rainfall is greater than the historic 99.9th percentile were tallied in both the historic 
and projected future 30-year daily time-series.
***The number of months falling below the historic 10th percentile (sometimes referred to as “decile 1”) rainfall total was 
counted in both the historic and projected future 30-year monthly time-series.
Source: CSIRO Climate Change in Australia Threshold Calculator74 
Table 5.5: Cluster Climate Projections for Fire Danger under RCP8.5. 
1995 Baseline
2030*
2090
Fire Danger
Number of Severe Fire Danger 
Days (Forest Fire Danger 
Index (FFDI) >50)
2.2 days
+3.7 days
+7.2 days
Cumulative Forest Fire Danger 
Index (FFDI) (for one year) 
(ΣFFDI)75
3,857
4,446 
5,357
*2050 projections are not available within the Central Slopes Cluster Report. 2030 projections have been used as a substitute. 
Source: CSIRO Central Cluster Report76 
Image of road and park. 
42
43
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Drought Impacts77
During the last drought … Oberon Reservoir supply suffered 
dramatically, and total storage reduced to below 10%.
Table 5.6: Impacts of Drought
Economic
	
+
De-stock and reduced herd 
numbers.
	
+
Reduced crop and 
agricultural production.
	
+
Increased costs for animal 
care.
	
+
Increased costs for land 
maintenance and weed 
control.
	
+
Increased insurance claims 
for drought-related losses.
	
+
Higher insurance premiums.
	
+
Supply chain disruptions.
	
+
Increased consumer prices.
	
+
State and national increases 
to product and commodity 
prices.
	
+
Water prices increase.
	
+
Income loss. 
	
+
Increased unemployment.
	
+
Rural-urban migration.
	
+
Impact to family budgets.
	
+
Reduced water availability 
for business operations.
	
+
Water restrictions.
	
+
Reduced tourism.
Social
	
+
Increased risk of depression 
and suicide.
	
+
Increased isolation. 
	
+
Reduced community events 
and activities.
	
+
Exacerbated impacts for 
lower socio-economic 
population.
	
+
Challenges accessing 
support and services.
	
+
Increased pressure on 
healthcare workers and 
system.
	
+
Increased demand on 
volunteers.
	
+
Reduced school attendance 
for young people.
	
+
Health concerns (heat 
stroke, dust inhalation, etc.).
	
+
Trauma.
	
+
Forced migration.
Environmental
	
+
Vegetation drying and 
death of plants/trees. 
	
+
Loss of aesthetic appeal. 
	
+
Increased risk of bushfires.
	
+
Forest mortality and altered 
structure/composition.
	
+
Reduced food and water 
supplies. 
	
+
Reduced habitat availability. 
	
+
Population decline. 
	
+
Species loss and extinction. 
	
+
Altered species migration 
patterns.
	
+
Reduced freshwater quality 
(surface and subsurface).
	
+
Water turbidity and algal 
growth.
	
+
Increased soil and water 
salinity levels. 
	
+
Lower water levels in 
lakes, creeks, bores, and 
reservoirs.
	
+
Increased risk of soil 
erosion. 
	
+
Landscape and soil 
drying, degradation, and 
desertification.
	
+
Increased dust pollution, 
reduced air quality, and 
altered atmospheric 
chemistry.
	
+
Weed growth.
Figure 5.6: Amplifying Feedback Loops in Drought 
Figure 5.6 was derived from the Resilience Assessment 
desktop research, and feedback from the stakeholder 
and community engagement program. A systems 
mapping exercise was undertaken to visualise 
the amplifying impacts of droughts on the region. 
Accumulated knowledge shared by locals who know 
the region and the challenges they face was used to 
inform the creation of this diagram. Circular causes and 
effects of droughts were identified as a feedback loop 
under each sub-system (agriculture, tourism, social, 
cross-sectoral etc). For example, droughts cause lower 
crop yields, reducing farmers income and individual/
community adaptive capacity and ability to cope with 
other shocks and stresses. This exacerbates the effects 
of drought within our region. The sub-systems also 
influence each other in parallel resulting in domino 
effects of droughts across region. The feedback loops 
demonstrate the complexity and interconnectedness 
of causes and effects of droughts in the region across 
multiple sectors and systems, and help to inform 
the development of drought resilience 
interventions and action pathways.Feedback loops show that drought is cross sectoral. Drought causes reduced agricultural output, lowering discretionary spending in service centres, reducing employment in service centres, causing further economic decline (due to fewer people spending less money), which results in reduced economic diversity. 
Drought also has numerous impacts within the agricultural sector. It reduces (or results in no) crop yields, which means there is less grain to feed stock, which results in low or no income for farmers, causing a reduced ability to invest in drought-resilient practices, reducing cash holdings which act as drought buffers, which ultimately results in worsened drought effects. Social impacts of drought can arise as a result of reduced discretionary spending on recreational or social activities. This reduces social interactions and increases mental health impacts, lowering the individual and collective ability to handle other shocks and stresses. 
Tourism is impacted by drought as it results in less attractive landscapes and waterways. This reduces tourism, lowering the income of a community. This results in less investment in sustainable tourism infrastructure, resulting in worsened drought effects. Environmentally, drought causes reduced soil moisture and vegetation loss, increasing soil erosion and resulting in a loss of soil carbon. This results in a lower ability for soil to retain moisture or support plant growth, this increases surface temperatures for vegetative cover, worsening the impact of drought. 
44
45
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Resilience Challenges  
Maintaining healthy landscapes
Our ecosystems suffer from drought-related land 
and water degradation. Blue-green algae outbreaks 
have occurred in the region.78 Waterways must 
remain healthy so they can be utilised for recreational 
activities such as fishing, boating, and kayaking 
(something known to decline during drought 
times). Environmental degradation impacts tourism 
opportunities, having financial impacts on our region. 
Limited skill availability
A difficulty in attracting skilled labour, farm hands, 
and other assistance is known across the region. 
Succession planning was also a noted challenge, 
with an ageing population and fewer young people 
wishing to carry forward agricultural practices due to 
accumulating debt.82 
Culturally diverse populations
Residents born overseas or from non-English speaking 
backgrounds may struggle to access typically English-
communicated drought support services and relief. 
Indigenous People’s may also be averse to accessing 
support due to generational trauma and government 
distrust. During drought, the degradation of cultural 
artefacts and the effects from biodiversity loss had 
cultural flow on impacts across Wiradjuri, Dharug, and 
Gundungurra residents. 
Projected population ageing
The region has an ageing community. Older 
populations are more vulnerable to health problems 
from drought, like heat stress during extreme heat. 
They are also more susceptible to mental illness and 
isolation during climate related hazards.79 More elderly 
people within hospitals and healthcare systems could 
strain overstretched healthcare providers.80 
Declining volunteer population
Further, declines in volunteer numbers have been 
observed due to burnout and an ageing workforce.83 
This will create resource constraints during future 
droughts, challenging the region in their response to 
drought, and provision of support for locals ‘doing it 
tough’.84
Reliance on surface water supply
Despite water storage infrastructure like Chifley Dam, 
this doesn’t always mean there is sufficient water 
during long droughts. In 2019, Bathurst was predicted 
to face “Day 0”, where water supply would effectively 
run out.88 Increasing population, water disputes, and 
agricultural demand strain surface water supply. Water 
supply infrastructure needs repairs and better planning. 
Drought awareness
Many local residents and businesses think “drought 
does not impact us”. Many people moved out of 
Bathurst, Lithgow and Oberon LGAs following 
previous drought events, combined with an influx of 
new residents may mean local drought conditions are 
poorly understood (compounded by the current “green 
drought”).81 
Service availability
The provision of local, timely resources was limited 
during previous drought years. Local residents stressed 
that time and resources were provided to LGA centres 
and larger LGAs such as Bathurst, with little to no 
support available within smaller regions such as 
Oberon, or satellite, rural villages.85
Transparency and communication
A lack of communication and transparency of services 
available within the Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon 
region was perceived by our region’s residents. The 
Council’s efforts to provide clear and open disclosure 
of their actions and spending may benefit from further 
enhancement.
Industry reliance
Agriculture is a big part of our economy but is 
particularly sensitive to drought. Crop yields could be 
reduced causing an unanticipated loss of income.86 
Droughts create cash-flow difficulties. Income 
diversification can make farmers ineligible for support, 
creating “no-win” situations. The closure of coal mining 
and the transition to renewable energy could put an 
additional strain on the local economy with historic 
reliance’s on mining in times of financial stress.87
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted by the United Nations in 2015 as a universal framework and 
blueprint to achieve a resilient and sustainability future for all, have been widely adopted within the global community to 
guide the sustainable development process across all pillars environment, social, and economic. SDGs have been utilised 
throughout this RDR Plan to demonstrate the linkages between the region challenges, opportunities, actions, and the 
resilience and sustainable future pathways. Read more: https://sdgs.un.org/goals
46
47
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Resilience Opportunities
Leveraging natural landscapes
Our region’s rivers, mountains, parks, and wildlife 
areas provide opportunities for cultural connection, 
recreation, conservation, and tourism. Recognising 
the environmental and cultural benefits of our 
environment is key in water allocations. Community 
feedback highlights ecosystem health and First Nations 
involvement in water management are crucial. Key 
aims are to support environmental conditions and 
encourage agricultural productivity, conserve water 
resources, create open leisure spaces, and build upon 
tourism opportunities. Proximity to airports and 
transport hubs strengthens local nature-based and 
eco-tourism opportunities. 
Education, information, and communication
Dissemination of clear information is necessary in 
improving drought impact understanding. Utilising 
local connections and opportunities provided by 
local higher education institutions and vocational 
training makes use of existing infrastructure to provide 
upskilling and training opportunities. Mental health 
services, farm assistance skills, and cultural immersion 
training were particularly favoured by the community.
Transport connectivity
The region is a well-connected area, with transport 
networks linking us with rural and urban NSW. 
Bathurst Regional Airport and NSW Train network 
play a major role in building local nature-based, eco-
tourism, and agritourism opportunities, including nut 
farming, truffle farming, and horticulture. Leveraging 
the wealth of cool climate wineries, historical sites, 
nature reserves and national parks provide further 
tourism opportunities to boost other industries. Parkes 
Special Activation Precinct (Parkes SAP), combined 
with the Inland Rail (when completed) will provide rail 
access to Melbourne and Brisbane, may encourage 
supply distribution to larger cities, and could attract 
new business to the region. Improved transport 
connectivity facilitates a unique blend of tranquil 
regional lifestyle with connections to larger cities, 
building local economy, localised supply chains, and 
enhanced economic resilience.
Industry and economic diversity
Diversifying our economy creates opportunities 
for agriculture and agriculture-related industries to 
diversify their income and retain employment during 
drought times. Energy transition opportunities exist 
within Lithgow’s mining community. Direct and 
indirect support should be provided (such as business 
diversification training, cashflow management, and 
clear actions. Interventions providing objective views 
on existing farming affairs and required responses).
Relevant and context-informed support 
and services
Stakeholder-relevant and varied support is important, 
such as culturally sensitive mental health care. 
Greater communication and clear messaging on 
available services, their purpose, and application 
processes should be accessible to a broad audience. 
Establishment of local community champions to 
improve education and community cohesion would 
bridge Council and community. Financial subsidies 
and land management assistance would also ensure 
environmental resilience across the land.
Diversification of water supply
Diversified water supply can reduce community 
vulnerability during droughts. Purified recycled water 
is generally supported across our community. Asset 
mapping and water resource capacity planning across 
vegetation, agriculture production, and population 
were noted avenues for drought success. Funding 
plays a significant role here, particularly concerning 
water efficiency, availability, and supply.
Retaining youth
Difficulty retaining younger populations across our 
region has impacted our viability. Leveraging existing 
opportunities within the region should aid in retaining 
young people. Remote working arrangements, 
education, training, and jobs would further attract 
young people. The provision of regular wellbeing 
courses and face to face services targeting youth were 
also raised by community.
Mental health support
Accessible, timely, local support should be harnessed 
across the region. For farmers, this should be tailored 
to on-farm/site visits to reduce travel barriers. 
Improving the accessibility of existing mental health 
support services aims to improve positive outcomes 
and reduce isolation. Facilitating ‘mental health by 
stealth’ events like markets or barbeques are also 
recommended to reach people less inclined to access 
support. Existing social infrastructure provides 
opportunities for low-cost events to encourage social 
connection across our community.
48
49
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning  Refer to page 82.
06
Our Drought Resilience Journey
The Program Logic in Figure 6.1 describes our drought resilience journey starting from a shared vision 
and strategic objectives and goals to arriving at specific actions and the desired short-term and 
long-term outcomes. Reliance on external support and funding will be critical, especially during times 
of immense drought stress.
Figure 6.1: BLO RDR Plan Program Logic The RDR Plan’s vision for the region is “For Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon, drought resilience means thriving despite ongoing water adversity. Our region recognises its reliance on water and prioritises water security. Our region is welcoming, values education, and is deeply aware of drought challenges. Equipped with the right knowledge and tools the region will navigate dry times, by remaining connected and generating prosperity across economic, environmental, and social fronts. Together, the region stands united, turning today’s adversity into tomorrow’s strength.” 
This vision set three key strategic priorities for the Plan across three themes of economic, environmental, and social resilience. Under economic resilience we aim to prioritise and ensure our communities have the skills and tools they need to remain resilient and financially stable in a changing world. For environmental resilience this plan aims to prioritise the promotion of environmentally conscious behaviours in community, business and industry that protect our unique natural assets to ensure they remain resilient for future generations. Social resilience priorities are to fortify our existing social capital and attract a diversity of people to our region to ensure we remain mentally and socially resilient during times of hardship. 
This feeds into the plans goals. 
To build economic resilience, the Plan’s goals include: 
•	Enhance education on drought resilience and sustainable business practices.
•	Promote awareness of, and support for, the application of available financial support and planning.
•	Facilitate improved opportunities for education and upskilling to cater to the needs of the region.
•	Provide financial support and services aligned with the specific needs of our community.
•	Promote networking and collaboration among local industries and businesses.
Environmental resilience goals include: 
•	Protect and build climate resilience in our natural assets.
•	Establish harmonious coexistence with the natural and agricultural environment, with limited aesthetic value lost. 
•	Promote sustainable and regenerative farming practices.
•	Maintain water availability despite ongoing restrictions.
•	Ensure efficient water management and resilient infrastructure in times of drought.
Social resilience goals include: 
•	Strengthen community connections to provide support during times of adversity.
•	Build the capacity of individuals, community groups, and services to take ownership of drought resilience.
•	Provide accessible training and capacity building tailored towards drought resilience.
•	Promote honesty regarding mental health and community wellbeing during times of adversity.
•	Enhance local and timely mental health support services across our region.
•	Encourage visitation and relocation to the region.
Based on these goals, our Plan identifies seven actions. These actions are: 
1.	Enabling Agritourism through the Provision of Clearer Processes and Local Guidance.
2.	Improving Consistency of Approach to Drought Resilience by Adopting Water Conservation Policies within Council.
3.	Improving the Resilience of Landholders via Land Management Practices and Opportunities.
4.	Improving Landholder’s Mental Health by Enhancing Awareness and Uptake of Drought Resilient Support Services and Events.
5.	Promoting Water-Efficiency Practices within the Community via School Children as Young Agents for Change.
6.	Improving Adoption of Water Use Practices through Community Knowledge Sharing.
7.	Fostering an Ecosystem of Drought Resilient Support and Best-Practice across the Region.
These actions work to achieve short term outcomes (less than or equal to 4 years) under the three themes of economic, environmental and social resilience. 
Economic resilience short term outcomes include: 
•	Improving the diversity of farm incomes provides landholders with alternative revenue streams, enhancing their economic resilience through sustainability practices on-farm, and promote agritourism business development
•	Skill development initiatives associated with agritourism enhance community and landholder adaptability to changing economic landscapes and provide new avenues for employment.
•	Reduced disruptions of business operations and therefore reduced economic losses
•	Business owners actively pursue opportunities to adopt better financial planning, income diversification and utilisation of available grants, rebates, and financial support to increase financial security of their business pre-, during, and post-drought
•	Reduced water consumption leads to reduced cost for households and expenditure for Councils.
Environmental resilience short term outcomes include: 
•	Promotion of responsible water use and conservation to help preserve and protect local ecosystems during drought conditions, maintain water quality and reduce stress on water resources during drought.
•	Improved uptake of sustainable land management practices through awareness of available rebates, programs, and support
•	Instils a sense of environmental responsibility and stewardship through drought education for school children, which can lead to a lasting positive impact on local ecosystems
•	Improved natural flow of rivers and catchments and overall waterway health through biodiversity indicators such as population ecology of fish species
•	Potable water consumption has reduced as a result on implementing water saving measures.
Social resilience short term outcomes include: 
•	Agritourism contributes to the preservation of cultural identity.
•	Improved water management practices helps to ensure a more reliable water supply for communities, reducing the risk of water shortages during droughts and enhancing public health and wellbeing
•	Improved social connections across the community, with greater uptake and awareness of available support services offered across the region (both physical health, mental, and financial supports), Build a strong sense of community, encouraging mutual support and shared experiences.
•	Improved awareness and transparency of support available, leading to empowered communities and individuals during times of distress through exchange of ideas, contributing to ongoing learning and development.
•	Building individual resilience contributes to the resilience of families, school communities and the wider community.
Long term outcomes (longer than 4 years) include: 
•	There is a common understanding and a shared vision in the region to manage drought risks and build community drought resilience.
•	The region works collectively and in partnerships to build drought resilience across three main pillars.
•	Measures are implemented to limit impacts of drought and better respond to drought.
•	Stakeholders and communities actively share knowledge and take actions contributing towards drought resilience.
All of these actions and outcomes should be monitored, evaluated, and learned from (for further information refer to page 82).
50
51
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Enabling Agritourism through 
the Provision of Clearer 
Processes and Local Guidance
Improving Consistency of 
Approach to Drought Resilience 
by Adopting Water Conservation 
Policies within Council
Improving the Resilience 
of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and 
Opportunities
Improving Landholder’s Mental 
Health by Enhancing Awareness 
and Uptake of Drought Resilient 
Support Services and Events
Promoting Water-Efficiency 
Practices within the Community 
via School Children as Young 
Agents for Change
Improving Adoption of Water 
Use Practices through 
Community Knowledge Sharing
Fostering an Ecosystem of 
Drought Resilient Support and 
Best-Practice across the Region
Bathurst
Bathurst Biodiversity Management Plan 2012
Bathurst Climate Change and Water Security 
Plan 2011
Bathurst Climate Change Position Statement 
Bathurst Climate Change Response 
Framework 2020 
Bathurst Community Strategic Plan 2022
Bathurst Integrated Water Cycle Management 
Plan 
Bathurst Regional Council Emissions 
Reduction Plan 2022 
Bathurst Regional Council Updated Long Term 
Financial Plan 2023-2033
Bathurst Urban Waterways Assessment 
Update 2014
Bathurst Urban Waterways Management 
Plans 2010
Drought Management Plan Bathurst 2014 
‘Water – Let’s Make It Last’ – integrated 
communication, engagement, education, and 
compliance program in Bathurst Regional 
Council
Vision Bathurst 2040: Bathurst Regional Local 
Strategic Planning Statement 
Enabling Agritourism through 
the Provision of Clearer 
Processes and Local Guidance
Improving Consistency of 
Approach to Drought Resilience 
by Adopting Water Conservation 
Policies within Council
Improving the Resilience 
of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and 
Opportunities
Improving Landholder’s Mental 
Health by Enhancing Awareness 
and Uptake of Drought Resilient 
Support Services and Events
Promoting Water-Efficiency 
Practices within the Community 
via School Children as Young 
Agents for Change
Improving Adoption of Water 
Use Practices through 
Community Knowledge Sharing
Fostering an Ecosystem of 
Drought Resilient Support and 
Best-Practice across the Region
Lithgow
CENTROC Submission including Lithgow 
region Drought Proof Feasibility Study 
Lithgow 2040 Local Strategic Planning 
Statement 
Lithgow City Council Consequence 
Management Guidelines 
Lithgow City Council Delivery Program 2022-
2026 Operational Plan 2023-2024
Lithgow City Council Development Servicing 
Plans for Water Supply and Sewerage 2018
Lithgow City Council Economic Development 
Strategy 2015
Lithgow City Council Strategic Asset 
Management Plan 2022-2032
Lithgow City Council Strategic Plan 2007
Lithgow Community Strategic Plan 2030
Lithgow Destination Management Plan 
Lithgow Emergency Risk Management Study 
2014
Lithgow Emerging Economy Transition Plan 
2023
Lithgow Land Use Strategy 2010-2030
Lithgow Local Emergency Management Plan 
2021
Lithgow Long Term Financial Plan 2023-2032
Major Projects and Programs 2023 
Our Place Our Future – Lithgow City Council 
Long Term Financial Plan 2019-2029
Action Strategic Alignment 
52
53
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Enabling Agritourism through 
the Provision of Clearer 
Processes and Local Guidance
Improving Consistency of 
Approach to Drought Resilience 
by Adopting Water Conservation 
Policies within Council
Improving the Resilience 
of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and 
Opportunities
Improving Landholder’s Mental 
Health by Enhancing Awareness 
and Uptake of Drought Resilient 
Support Services and Events
Promoting Water-Efficiency 
Practices within the Community 
via School Children as Young 
Agents for Change
Improving Adoption of Water 
Use Practices through 
Community Knowledge Sharing
Fostering an Ecosystem of 
Drought Resilient Support and 
Best-Practice across the Region
Australia
Australian Government Drought Response, 
Resilience, and Preparedness Plan 2019
National Drought Agreement 2018
CSIRO Drought Resilience Mission – Progress 
Update 2022
Global
Sustainable Development Goal* 1 – 
No Poverty
Sustainable Development Goal* 2 – 
Zero Hunger
Sustainable Development Goal 3 – 
Good Health and Well-Being 
Sustainable Development Goal 4 – 
Quality Education  
Sustainable Development Goal* 5 – 
Gender Equality 
Sustainable Development Goal 6 – 
Clean Water and Sanitation 
Sustainable Development Goal* 7 – 
Clean and Affordable Energy
Sustainable Development Goal 8 – 
Decent Work and Economic Growth 
Sustainable Development Goal 9 – 
Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure 
Sustainable Development Goal 10 – 
Reduced Inequalities
Sustainable Development Goal 11 – 
Sustainable Cities and Communities 
Sustainable Development Goal 12 – 
Responsible Consumption and Production
Sustainable Development Goal 13 – 
Climate Action
Sustainable Development Goal* 14 – 
Life Below Water
Sustainable Development Goal 15 – 
Life on Land 
Sustainable Development Goal 16 – 
Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions
Sustainable Development Goal 17 – 
Partnerships for the Goals 
Enabling Agritourism through 
the Provision of Clearer 
Processes and Local Guidance
Improving Consistency of 
Approach to Drought Resilience 
by Adopting Water Conservation 
Policies within Council
Improving the Resilience 
of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and 
Opportunities
Improving Landholder’s Mental 
Health by Enhancing Awareness 
and Uptake of Drought Resilient 
Support Services and Events
Promoting Water-Efficiency 
Practices within the Community 
via School Children as Young 
Agents for Change
Improving Adoption of Water 
Use Practices through 
Community Knowledge Sharing
Fostering an Ecosystem of 
Drought Resilient Support and 
Best-Practice across the Region
Oberon
Oberon Community Strategic Plan 2019-2040
Oberon Council Local Strategic Planning 
Statement 2040
Oberon Delivery Program 2022-2026
Oberon Operational Plan and Long Term 
Financial Plan Report 2023-2024
Oberon Water and Sewer Asset Management 
Plan 2020 
Bathurst, Lithgow, Oberon
Abercrombie Regional Economic Development 
Strategy – 2023 Update
Bathurst and Oberon Regional Economic 
Development Strategy 2023 Update 
Bathurst and Oberon Regional Economic 
Development Strategy 2023 Update
Central NSW Regional of Council’s Drought 
Issues Paper 2018 
Environmental Sustainability Action Plan, 
Bathurst, Orange, and Dubbo
Lithgow Regional Economic Development 
Strategy 2023 Update
Macquarie-Castlereagh Regional Water 
Strategy 2020
What We Heard Report – Draft Greater 
Sydney Water Strategy 
NSW
20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW 
2018
Extreme Events Policy
NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
NSW Climate Change Policy Framework
NSW Drought Strategy: Managing and 
Preparing for Drought 2018
Local Land Services Managing and Preparing 
for Drought 2018
NSW Government Central West and Orana 
Plan 2041
NSW Water Strategy 2021 
*Actions have been developed to align with the three pillars of resilience, economic, environmental, and social. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by the United 
Nations align with these three pillars, acting as a blueprint for peace and prosperity across our planet and people both now and into the future. For homogeneity, challenges, 
opportunities, and actions have been linked to key SDGs to demonstrate the linkages throughout this RDR Plan. All 17 goals have been listed above, however, this RDR Plan 
only addresses a subset.
54
55
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of a scenic lookout at Mount Panorama. 
Action Pathways
Figure 6.2 demonstrates how the priority actions of 
this RDR Plan locate on the impact pathway spectrum. 
The impact pathway spectrum represents different 
activities that may help build resilience to drought in 
the region and range from supporting or underpinning 
activities, enhancing adaptive capacity, improving 
performance, and reducing exposure. The actions 
developed in this Plan are spread across this spectrum 
to provide a comprehensive approach to address 
drought vulnerabilities and reduce drought impacts. 
The actions were developed, evaluated and prioritised 
during stakeholder and community engagement 
program using the approaches discussed in The 
Process section. 
In subsequent sections, action plans for the seven 
actions developed, are documented and include 
information to support funding endeavours, and 
recommendations for implementation. This includes 
action rationale, high-level estimated costs and 
implementation timeframes, implementation steps, 
potential benefits and supporting actions. 
Note that the information provided within action 
plans, particularly timeframes and costs, are intended 
as preliminary estimates, to be further developed in 
subsequent phases following the completion of this RDR 
Plan. External support and funding will be critical for this 
work, especially during times of immense drought stress.
Figure 6.2: BLO Drought response to Drought Resilience (Impact Pathway Spectrum)  
This figure shows the potential points of intervention. To reduce our exposure to drought, we can use initiatives such as land management decision-making, insurance and risk transfer mechanisms, augmentation of water supply via water recycling or reuse, or business contingency planning. These can reduce the impacts of drought. 
We can improve the performance of the region, by reducing sensitivity and addressing vulnerability. Examples include regenerative agriculture, rainwater harvesting, water efficiency measures, and fodder and water storage.
We can reduce other threats which make the system vulnerable to drought impacts. Actions to enhance adaptive capacity include diversifying business or landholder incomes, or improving management of pests and weeds.
Another point of intervention is to invest in activities which enable improved decision making or policy interventions. These include improvements to data, research, policies, strategies, collaboration with stakeholders or community engagement.
The improving adoption of water use practices through community knowledge sharing action sits within the “minimise drought impacts” of the impact pathway spectrum. Promoting water-efficiency practices within the community via school children as young agents for change improves performance. Enabling agritourism through the provision of clearer processes and local guidance sits under the “reduce other threats” section. Improving the resilience of landholders via land management practices and opportunities spans from minimising drought impacts to reducing other threats.
Three actions sit within the underpinning activities section. These are:
•	Fostering an ecosystem of drought resilient support and best-practice across the region
•	Improving landholder’s mental health by enhancing awareness and uptake of drought resilient support services and events
•	Improving consistency of approach to drought resilience by adopting water conservation policies within Council 
Adapted from the National Environmental Science Program, Climate Systems, Interventions for Biodiversity Conservation
56
57
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Enabling Agritourism through the Provision of Clearer 
Processes and Local Guidance
Rationale
Drought can create extreme financial implications 
for landholders, causing distress and threatening 
the long-term sustainability of farming enterprises. 
Mitigating this risk involves the diversification of 
on-farm income, not only to improve the financial 
position of landholders in advance of drought, but also 
provide essential supplementary income as drought 
impacts become evident. Recognising this, the region 
is well placed to capitalise on local tourist attractions, 
such as Jenolan Caves, the Zig Zag railway, and 
Mayfield Gardens, along with its proximity to the Blue 
Mountains and Sydney. These attractions draw visitors, 
creating a market for agritourism ventures. 
In 2022 and 2023, the NSW State government 
proactively addressed the growing field of agritourism 
through substantial planning changes and the 
publication of a guide to agritourism planning 
approvals. Destination Central West is also developing 
materials to support the expansion of agritourism in 
the region. However, intricacies interfacing with local 
planning requirements are complex and can involve 
navigating specific timeframes, costs, and challenges. 
Engagement sessions with stakeholders have 
highlighted challenges encountered by landholders in 
establishing agritourism ventures. These challenges 
include understanding the activities permitted and 
approvals required, navigating local government 
points of contact, and other legislation or guideline 
considerations. A lack of awareness regarding the 
magnitude of requirements was identified as a key 
barrier in setting realistic expectations for landholders 
pursuing this initiative. 
In response, this action would complement the existing 
State and Regional resources through the development 
of tailored guidance in the approvals and permits 
necessary to build and maintain an agribusiness, for 
landholders within each LGA. Delivered by an external 
contractor with expertise in planning and agritourism, 
materials may include a flowchart and toolkit. These 
resources would contain regulatory and technical 
considerations such as fire protection, accessibility, 
wastewater systems, food handling and hosting events, 
with the ultimate objective to improve the accessibility 
of information for agritourism ventures to be fully 
compliant with relevant regulatory requirements.
An integral aspect of this initiative is building the 
capacity of Council staff. This envisages the creation 
of internal flowcharts for each Council, consideration 
of a fast-track approval process, and the identification 
of internal subject matter experts to champion 
agritourism within Councils. Subsequent steps are 
poised to further the integration of agritourism within 
the local tourism network, thereby enhancing success 
rates and positively contributing to the region’s 
tourism offerings.
This action aims to modify the existing regulatory 
system, providing a clearer framework for landholders 
seeking to access finance, approvals, and permits.
Implementation Timeframe
6 months.
Estimated Costs
Total Cost: $80,000 - $120,000.
Action Owner
Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils. 
Project outsourced to third-party contractor.  
Stakeholders
	
+
Internal Council staff.
	
+
Landholders and Farming representative bodies.
	
+
Destination Central West.
	
+
Regional tourism bodies.
Steps for Implementation: 
1.	 Establish a permanent agritourism steering 
committee within each Council by identifying 
subject matter experts willing to champion 
agritourism. 
2.	 Develop and issue request for quote (RFQ) for a 
contractor to deliver this action across the three 
LGAs. 
3.	 Recruit third-party contractor who would be 
responsible for Steps 4 – 11.
4.	 Map State, Regional, and Local legislation to 
determine activities permitted within each LGA, and 
any potential conflicts or areas of ambiguity. This 
step may draw and build upon existing resources 
available from state and regional departments. 
5.	 Review existing State and Regional Agritourism 
resources to identify gaps in knowledge and 
resources at the local Council level to support the 
adoption of permitted agritourism opportunities. 
6.	 To build upon the findings from Step 5, engage 
with landholders who have recently pursued 
agritourism ventures to identify challenges and 
support required for future ventures. Engagement 
should also be utilised to develop local case 
studies of agritourism adoption, communicating 
opportunities and benefits. 
7.	 To address gaps in knowledge and build internal 
capacity, facilitate engagement with internal 
Council staff to identify roles, responsibilities, 
relevant legislation, and required processes around 
agritourism.
8.	 Utilising the information gathered from previous 
Steps 4 to 7, develop bespoke collateral to guide 
and inform those wanting to adopt or engage 
in agritourism practice. This will be targeted to 
landholders and internal Council staff within each 
LGA. Collateral may include local case studies (see 
Step 6) and may also include frequently asked 
questions (FAQs) and flow-charts. 
9.	 Liaise with relevant external stakeholders, 
including but not limited to Destination Central 
West, and the Rural Fire Service, to ensure 
collateral developed in Step 8 will link landholders 
to all relevant approval agencies and entities 
capable of supporting an agritourism venture. 
10.	Establish an agritourism participant survey 
template to routinely identify lessons learnt from 
those who are both successful and discontinue 
their agritourism venture.
11.	Conduct capacity building events with landholders 
to share project collateral and provide access to 
one-on-one mentoring. 
12.	Destination Central West to utilise the survey 
developed in step 10, to check-in with participants 
at regular intervals, to develop lessons learned and 
inform future projects, and inform the optimisation 
of support. 
KPIs
	
+
Establish steering committee with each Council.
	
+
Flowcharts, FAQs, and support materials developed 
for internal and external use for each of the Council 
LGAs.
	
+
Number of engagement and capacity building 
activities held with Council staff, external 
stakeholders, and landholders.
	
+
Number of case studies developed. 
	
+
Survey developed.
Resilience Dividend
Economic 
	
+
Improving the diversity of farm incomes provides 
landholders with alternative revenue streams, 
enhancing their economic resilience. 
	
+
Increasing tourism offerings within the Region to 
increase tourism visitation and local spending.
	
+
Skill development initiatives associated with 
agritourism may enhance community and 
landholder adaptability to changing economic 
landscapes and provide new avenues for 
employment.
Environmental  
Supplementary income can help finance 
complementary sustainability practices on-farm to 
maintain the successful operation of the venture, 
building capacity for environmental stewardship. 
Social
Agritourism often involves showcasing local culture 
and heritage which can contribute to the preservation 
of cultural identity
Supporting Actions
Destination Central West to continue supporting the 
adoption of agritourism ventures across the region.
Next Steps
	
+
Pilot an agritourism coordinator to connect 
agritourism providers, small and large tourism 
businesses, and local and regional tourism bodies, 
share knowledge, build skills, and promote value-
adding activities such as agricultural products and 
experience development. 
	
+
Develop tourism collateral, such as sample 
itineraries and experience trails, to cross promote 
and link agritourism ventures into a holistic, 
region-scale tourism offering.
Spheres
Economic
Social
SDG Alignment
58
59
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Improving Consistency of Approach to Drought Resilience 
by Adopting Water Conservation Policies within Council
Rationale
The findings from the engagement process 
underscored the diverse maturity levels among the 
Councils concerning the integration of policies geared 
towards bolstering drought resilience, specifically 
focusing on water management (conservation) 
practices within public spaces and urban planning 
decisions. For example, some Councils mandate new 
developments to harness stormwater for reuse in 
public open spaces, while others stipulate minimum 
requirements for residential or industrial projects to 
capture onsite water. Additionally, certain Councils 
establish thresholds for the adoption of water-
sensitive urban design infrastructure.
It’s evident that implementing policies and practices 
for drought resilience is a crucial step in shedding 
light on the challenges associated with drought 
management and emphasising the community’s role 
in fortifying regional drought resilience. Although 
there’s a shared aspiration among the Councils to 
enhance and establish a best-practice approach, the 
requisite research to evaluate similar Councils’ policy 
frameworks, assess local feasibility, and garner internal 
support is a resource-intensive undertaking.
Acknowledging the constraints and extensive 
responsibilities within Councils, the proposed strategy 
involves engaging a consultant to meticulously 
examine and pinpoint gaps in existing water 
management and drought strategies within Bathurst, 
Lithgow, and Oberon Councils. Simultaneously, the 
consultant would scrutinise policies from comparable 
regional councils, particularly those within the 
Central NSW JO, to identify suitable approaches for 
implementation in the respective Council areas. The 
consultant would spearhead this action, overseeing the 
necessary engagement processes to gauge and secure 
buy-in, ultimately crafting recommendations for the 
subsequent phases of the initiative.
This action aims to modify the existing regional system 
by providing an uplift in Council water management 
practices. Proper implementation of water sensitive 
policies and practices will progressively transform the 
system (with time), working to build water efficiency 
practices across the community.
Implementation Timeframe
8 months.
Estimated Costs
$80,000 - $100,000.
Action Owner
Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon 
Councils. Project outsourced to third-party 
contractor.  
Stakeholders
	
+
Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City and Oberon 
Councils.
	
+
Central NSW Joint Organisation (JO).
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Determine scope inclusions and exclusions 
(or scope of works (SOW)) and budget 
based on extent of review determined to be 
suitable. 
2.	 Develop and issue RFQ for a contractor to 
deliver this action across the three LGAs. 
3.	 Recruit third-party contractor who would be 
responsible for steps 4 – 11.
4.	 Review, map, and establish a baseline for 
each Councils’ current approach to drought 
resilience within the sphere of water 
management (use and conservation). 
5.	 Review policies of Central NSW JO member 
Councils, and other relevant regional 
Councils to determine a benchmark for 
water management in terms of drought 
resilience in the region. 
6.	 Conduct gap analysis between the baselines 
established for Bathurst, Lithgow and 
Oberon, and the regional benchmark 
determined in Step 5. Highlight critical 
vulnerabilities based on gap analysis. 
7.	 Identify existing policies or practices from 
Central NSW JO member Councils to 
address gaps identified in Step 6 for each 
Council area. 
8.	 Determine applicability of policies to 
relevant Council areas. 
9.	 Conduct a multi-criteria assessment (MCA) 
to evaluate the policies and practices to 
bridge gaps identified for each Council area. 
MCA to be based on a comprehensive set of 
criteria, including social, environmental, and 
economic factors. 
10.	Engage with Council leadership and 
relevant staff to gauge appetite for 
adoption of identified policies and practices 
and determine agreed pathways for 
improvement upon existing approaches.
11.	Make recommendations for the next steps in 
the adoption of policies and practices. This 
will include priorities, estimated resources 
and costs, and timeframes.  
KPIs
	
+
Engagement targets a range of stakeholders to 
provide appropriate advice to the adoption of 
policies and practices.
	
+
Number of policies reviewed from comparable 
regional councils.
	
+
Number of internal stakeholders (within Bathurst, 
Lithgow, and Oberon Councils) who express 
support for the proposed policies.
	
+
Level of alignment of recommended improvements 
with established regional benchmark
	
+
Number of exemplar water management policies 
and practices carried through for adoption. 
Resilience Dividend
Economic 
Reduced disruptions of business operations and 
therefore reduced economic losses. 
Environmental 
Promotion of responsible water use and conservation 
to help preserve and protect local ecosystems during 
drought conditions, maintain water quality, and reduce 
stress on water resources during drought. 
Social 
Improved water management practices, which can help 
ensure a more reliable water supply for communities, 
reducing the risk of water shortages during droughts 
and enhancing public health and wellbeing.
Supporting Actions
As an outcome of the baseline established for each 
Council area, share water management (use and 
conservation) practices and policies adopted, between 
Bathurst and Oberon and Lithgow to provide region-
wide capacity building in drought resilience.
Next Steps
	
+
To align with the adoption of water conservation 
and usage practices, undertake a Water 
Augmentation Feasibility study. This may 
assess existing sewerage treatment plants and 
other opportunities for water recycling and/or 
stormwater harvesting.
	
+
This action will be supported by the undertaking 
of a carrying capacity study. Involving the mapping 
of water asset and resources against growing 
populations, this study will provide improved clarity 
around the capacity within the region. This will 
provide an understanding of the region’s ability to 
support the growing resource needs of industry, 
and community, based on existing and projected 
water resource availability. This step will help to 
inform better decision-making and investment 
across the region.
Spheres
Environmental
SDG Alignment
60
61
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Improving the Resilience of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and Opportunities
Rationale
This action comprises three core components, each 
intended to improve the resilience of the region’s 
landholders in the face of drought and other 
disasters. The three components of this action were 
raised through stakeholder consultation and focus 
on knowledge exchange and uptake, enhancing 
awareness, and implementing practical, physical 
strategies.
Part A: Provide landholders with on-the-ground 
exposure to drought-resilient farming approaches 
Stakeholders recognise the value of learning from 
practical, on-farm experiences. Peer to peer learning 
and farm tours have been identified as highly effective 
methods for enhancing awareness and encouraging 
the adoption of drought-resilient farm management 
techniques. Part A is intended to be a platform to 
share approaches for on-farm drought-resilience to 
landholders. 
Participants will embark on a guided bus tour that 
will take them to an assortment of farms selected for 
their successful implementation of drought-resilient 
practices. These farms will serve as real-life, practical 
examples of how to mitigate the impacts of drought. 
Examples may include drought containment paddocks, 
fodder storage, on-farm water storage, capitalising 
on natural capital. During the farm tours, participants 
will have the opportunity to witness and learn about 
various drought-resilient techniques and strategies in 
action. Farmers will provide insights, explanations, and 
demonstrations of their chosen approaches.
To support ongoing learning and upskilling, participants 
will receive take-home fact sheets, FAQs, and resource 
lists. These materials will serve as valuable references, 
allowing participants to apply what they have learned 
to their own farming practices.
Part B: Feral pig management 
Drought is an inherent aspect of the climatic cycle for 
farmers, and its impacts can be challenging to mitigate. 
However, many other factors, such as pest animals like 
feral pigs, significantly exacerbate the environmental 
and financial vulnerabilities of farming enterprises. The 
relentless predation by pigs, particularly during lambing 
season, can lead to distressingly low lambing success 
rates, sometimes plummeting below 10%. Pigs are also 
destructive on the landscape causing environmental 
degradation and can be carriers of exotic diseases that 
harm livestock and wildlife. Reducing feral pig numbers 
is paramount to bolstering a farmer’s overall success 
in building resilience and adaptability in the face of 
drought and other challenges.
Part B of this action aims to assess the current demand 
for pig traps and make provisions for additional traps 
to be secured if necessary. These would be freely 
accessible to farmers, comprising of prefabricated 
traps, or fencing materials to construct traps, along 
with the necessary instructions. In parallel, an 
evaluation will be conducted to understand the level 
of awareness of existing services, and efforts made to 
promote services if deemed necessary. 
This initiative is aimed to decrease the financial burden 
on landholders by reducing the need for costly outlays 
associated with feral pig management. This ideally 
will help to alleviate the extensive damage caused to 
farming enterprises and the environment. Further, 
providing landholders with the resources to take 
control over feral pig management, ensures ownership 
and decision-making authority remains in their hands.  
Part C: Carbon farming workshops 
Numerous landholders in the region are confronted 
with multifaceted challenges in making or maintaining 
the viability of their farming enterprise, even before 
drought conditions occur. These may manifest in 
various ways, such as landholders approaching 
retirement with no apparent succession plans in 
place. Or farmers grappling with the occurrence 
of widespread weed invasions on their properties. 
These complex challenges can be both mentally and 
financially draining. 
Carbon farming has emerged as a promising and 
sustainable solution for landholders facing challenges 
in maintaining viable farming enterprises. Carbon 
farming may provide a feasible exit strategy for 
landholders by generating revenue from their 
land, while allowing them to remain on their farm, 
connected with their community. 
This action will equip landholders with an 
understanding of carbon farming, enabling them 
to make informed decisions for their unique 
circumstances. This will be done through a series of 
workshops or forums, reinforced with take-home fact 
sheets. Information will be drawn from credible and 
independent sources and will outline the benefits and 
challenges associated with carbon farming. 
It is noted that there are grants and support services 
available that can significantly aid landholders in their 
journey towards carbon farming aligning with Part 
C of this action. These resources should be actively 
leveraged to ensure that landholders have access 
to the necessary support, guidance, and financial 
assistance, ultimately enhancing their capacity 
to embrace carbon farming as a sustainable and 
economically sound endeavour.
These initiatives aim to maintain and modify the 
existing rural landscape, managing feral species, 
thereby reducing further environmental degradation. 
Upskilling farmers will help modify behaviour, building 
drought-resilient farming practices into daily use.
Implementation Timeframe
Part A 
Drought Resilient Farming 4 to 5 months.
Part B 
Optimise pig-trapping resources 8 months 
(+ ongoing provision of service).
Part C
Carbon farming 6 months.
Estimated Costs
Part A Total Cost: $23,000.
	
+
Management, engagement, and coordination 
of action: $16,000.
	
+
Practical resources and materials (bus, 
information materials, etc.): $7,000.
Part B Total Cost: $13,000 - $50,000.
	
+
Engagement and evaluation of existing 
resources and awareness: $10,000.
	
+
Traps (if required):
	
−Prefabricated traps - $2,000 per trap.
	
−Fencing trap materials - $1,000 per trap.
	
+
Resources: $3,000.
Part C Total Cost: $19,000.
	
+
Research, engagement, and coordination of 
action: $14,000.
	
+
Workshop/forums and materials: $5,000.
Action Owner
Local Land Services (LLS) (Biosecurity and 
Agriculture Teams) or Landcare.
Stakeholders
	
+
Local Land Services.
	
+
Agricultural equipment and service suppliers.
	
+
NSW Parks and Wildlife Services.
	
+
NSW Forestry.
	
+
Central NSW JO.
	
+
Upper Macquarie County Council.
Spheres
Economic
Social
SDG Alignment
62
63
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Improving the Resilience of Landholders via Land 
Management Practices and Opportunities continued
Steps for Implementation
Part A: Drought Resilient Farming
1.	 Issue expression of interest (EOI) for farmers 
willing to participate with nominated practices 
(within stock/station agents, agronomists, radio, 
social media etc.).
2.	 Evaluate practices of farmers who expressed 
interest in participating to ensure there is a broad 
spread of examples available to contribute to wide-
spread learning. 
3.	 Organise a series of bus tours (depending on 
the number and location of farmers subject to 
geographical spread, timing, and logistics).
4.	 Advertise free farm tours through a multitude 
of avenues including stock/station agents, 
agronomists, radio, social media etc. 
5.	 Develop take home factsheets, FAQs, and list of 
available resources and grants. This will utilise the 
knowledge of the farmers showcasing their farms, 
in addition to desktop research. 
6.	 Conduct farm tours.
7.	 Issue surveys or evaluation forms to participants to 
gauge effectiveness and satisfaction of tours. 
8.	 Repeat (particularly if drought conditions change) 
to capture landholders when drought-management 
is most topical and showcasing solutions in 
the midst of drought to demonstrate their 
effectiveness.
Part B: Feral pig management 
1.	 Develop a survey for landholders within Bathurst, 
Lithgow, and Oberon LGAs to gauge awareness 
of pig trapping services (including informational 
workshops, videos, and traps) within LLS, and 
determine the need for them in the region.
2.	 If feedback indicates more awareness is needed, 
develop materials to communicate services to 
landholders across the region. Advertise services 
through a multitude of avenues including stock/
station agents, agronomists, radio, social media etc.
	
+
Materials should communicate how to access 
service, highlight service is available at no cost, 
points of contact, how to arrange, timelines, etc. 
	
+
Utilise existing materials developed by LLS 
including instructional videos, to improve 
understanding and uptake of service.
3.	 Based on the survey, evaluate current need versus 
current supply, to determine whether additional 
traps are needed. 
4.	 Should this indicate additional traps are needed, 
issue request to purchase additional traps, based 
on available budget. 
	
+
Obtain quotes to enable the purchase of the pig 
trap materials or commission fabrication of traps. 
	
+
Develop a 1-page user guide to accompany the 
traps.
	
+
Promote availability of traps via local media and 
landholder-facing businesses.
Part C: Carbon Farming
1.	 Conduct thorough research and assessment of 
the available support services, and materials that 
are applicable to the region surrounding carbon 
farming initiatives and research. 
2.	 Collaborate with local knowledge holders, such 
as the Upper Macquarie County Council, LLS, and 
Rural Financial Planners, to identify landholders 
who are facing challenges, such as financial 
struggles or weed infestations. 
3.	 Establish clear criteria for identifying those in need 
and create a systematic approach for outreach to 
landholders. 
4.	 Invite suitable landholders identified to participate.
5.	 Organise a series of both online and in-person 
forums to promote carbon farming as a viable 
solution. Ensure that the forums are accessible to 
a wide audience, utilising technology for virtual 
participation, and choosing convenient physical 
locations for in-person events. 
6.	 Identify and invite knowledgeable speakers 
and facilitators with expertise in carbon 
farming to present information in an engaging 
and understandable manner. Ensure that this 
information is tailored to the needs of the region.
7.	 Host a series of online and in-person forums to 
promote carbon farming as an option.
8.	 Develop a comprehensive fact sheet or take-
home resource that condenses key information 
presented during the forums. This resource should 
include details on the benefits and challenges of 
carbon farming, steps for implementation, and 
contact information for support services. Design 
the material in a user-friendly format that can 
serve as a quick reference guide for landholders.
KPIs
Drought Resilient Farming
	
+
Number of landholders expressed interest in 
participating.
	
+
Number of attendees on bus tours.
	
+
Proportion of positive feedback on tours. 
Pig Traps
	
+
Number of landholders utilising traps.
	
+
Number of landholders aware of services for pest 
control.
Carbon farming
	
+
Comprehensiveness of support and services 
identified for availability.
	
+
Number of landholders identified to participate in 
action.
	
+
Number of landholders attending workshops and 
forums.
Resilience Dividend
Economic
	
+
Successful practices contribute to reduced costs 
associated with drought mitigation (e.g., reduced 
volume of supplementary feed or water needed).
	
+
Drought-resilient practices and pest control can 
contribute to enhanced farm productivity, building 
resilience for drought-conditions, and reducing 
economic distress during this time.
	
+
Provision of pest control approaches can reduce 
ongoing land maintenance costs, reducing financial 
burden in times of drought.
	
+
Diversification of, or provision of supplementary 
on-farm income.
Environmental
	
+
Conservation of water and resource use through 
efficient practices.
	
+
Sustainable farming, land and pest management 
practices can help protect local ecosystems and 
wildlife, and reduce environmental damage.
	
+
Mitigation of risk of exotic diseases spreading to 
livestock and wildlife.
	
+
Contribution to carbon storage, climate mitigation, 
and protection of biodiversity.
Social 
	
+
Acquisition of new skills and techniques to 
effectively manage drought, enhancing confidence 
and preparedness. 
	
+
Contributes to social connection and sense of 
community, encouraging mutual support and 
shared experiences.
	
+
Networking through exchange of ideas, 
contributing to ongoing learning and development.
	
+
Empowering decision-making of landholders by 
providing appropriate tools and strategies can result 
in positive mental health outcomes.
Supporting Actions
Bathurst, Lithgow and Oberon Councils to promote 
landholder events on the Council event pages to 
increase visibility and awareness. 
Next Steps
	
+
Advocate for additional funding to manage weeds 
and reduce financial strain on farms. This may begin 
with better weed management of roadside weeds 
to reduce threats diminishing landholder resilience.
	
+
Secure funding for engagement of landholders to 
assess their ongoing needs for drought resilience 
and opportunities to provide further support across 
the region. This may include provision of financial 
and succession planning training.
64
65
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Improving Landholder’s Mental Health by Enhancing 
Awareness and Uptake of Drought Resilient Support 
Services and Events
Rationale
Awareness of support / mental health during periods 
of drought. 
Persistent droughts, combined with compounding 
stressor events, place significant stress on the 
community, particularly farmers.89, 90 Health is often 
neglected, with time and resources put into the 
farm.91 Feedback found people are unsure where to 
go for assistance or believe support is not available. 
However, there are a multitude of service providers 
in the government, not-for-profit and private sector 
addressing drought impacts, such as mental and 
financial strain, and preparedness (financial planning, 
land management, etc.).92
Part A: Magnet
Community spirit and the willingness to help one 
another shine through. However, landholders are 
often stoic and hesitant in seeking help, often framing 
conversations with service providers as “I’m just calling 
for a mate.” 93,94 These behaviours can be harnessed by 
providing a fridge magnet, titled “Help for your mate or 
neighbour” (or similar). Various formats (booklets, lists, 
online resources) were explored, with the community 
noting a magnet as likely being kept, being available 
later on when support was needed most. The simplicity 
of the magnet content also responds to those who 
have limited written or digital literacy. 
Each magnet aims to promote local service providers 
who understand local conditions and challenges local 
landholders face. A sentence description of services 
and contact details, with approximately 10-20 locally 
based service providers is envisioned, distributed 
to agricultural suppliers, community venues, post 
offices, and other landholder-facing entities. This 
leverages the Regional Support Network collaborative. 
Rural Adversity Mental Health Program (RAMHP), in 
conjunction with the Network, will design, print, and 
distribute magnets to participating businesses using 
in-kind resources.
Part B: Events Fund
To overcome reluctance in receiving assistance, the 
community identified the need for events facilitated 
by mental-health service providers. These events are 
carefully designed to explore topics that resonate 
with the interests and values of landholders, thereby 
enhancing their appeal and encouraging attendance. 
The choice of a neutral venue, ideally situated in small 
regional villages, offers a conducive environment 
for professionals from mental, financial, and land 
management support services to engage directly with 
landholders. To facilitate the success of these events 
modest funding is required to cover ancillary costs. 
This includes expenses such as catering, children’s 
activities, and equipment hire, transforming the event 
into an enjoyable and engaging day out. This initiative 
serves as an opportunity for individuals to temporarily 
step away from their farms, fostering socialisation and 
the establishment of connections. These connections 
contribute to the formation of informal support 
networks that prove invaluable during periods of 
drought. The proposed events are designed to occur 
strategically—both before, during, and after droughts—
ensuring a continuous and resilient support structure.
To enact this vision, a dedicated funding pool is 
envisioned. This pool would be accessible to fund 
events and activities led by drought-related service 
providers possessing the necessary capacity and 
capability. The primary goal of these community events 
is to promote inclusivity across a wide spectrum 
of stakeholders. The attendance of eligible service 
providers would be treated impartially, ensuring no 
preferential treatment for any specific offering. It 
is suggested that the participation and facilitation 
of events be offered at no cost by the participating 
service providers. This approach maximises the 
availability of resources for the essential elements 
that contribute to the success and impact of these 
community events.
This action aims to modify the existing mental 
health landscape by building a collaborative 
approach to support. Building daily awareness 
of support-services available to landholders will 
work to modify feelings of isolation, normalising 
mental health conversations every day of the 
year, during drought or otherwise.
Implementation Timeframe
	
+
Part A: 3 months (for magnet production).
	
+
Part B: 6 – 12 months of ongoing annual 
events.
Estimated Costs
$75,000.
	
+
RAMHP wages: $5,000 (in-kind contribution).
	
+
Magnet design, production, and distribution: 
$10,000.
	
+
Events fund: $60,000.  
Action Owner
RAMHP in conjunction with Bathurst 
Oberon Lithgow Regional Support Network 
Collaboration. 
Stakeholders 
Landholders including farmers, agricultural 
manufacturers, and other community members.
Steps for Implementation
Part A:
1.	 Establish a project committee within 
RAMHP and the regional support network. 
2.	 Establish priority list of specific services 
landholders may require and identify 
respective providers for engagement, 
ensuring a diverse range of services are 
represented. 
3.	 Collaborate with identified service providers 
to gather one-line explainers, and contact 
details. 
4.	 Design the fridge magnet content ensuring 
it is clear, concise, and caters to those with 
limited written or digital literacy. Consider 
incorporating QR codes and/or websites for 
other relevant support (e.g., DPI Drought 
Hub). 
5.	 Identify local businesses, organisations, and 
community venues where magnets could be 
displayed for collection by landholders. Ensure 
these entities understand the purpose and 
importance of the initiative.
6.	 Obtain quotes, print, and distribute magnets. 
7.	 Where necessary, periodically review content of 
magnets to ensure accuracy of service providers 
and contact details. 
Part B:
1.	 Develop a comprehensive plan outlining the types 
of events, topics, and activities that align with 
the interests and values of landholders. Select 
overarching topic of interest to landholders as the 
pilot event. 
2.	 Collectively create eligibility criteria to determine 
what activities and elements are eligible for the 
event support funding.
3.	 Engage with mental-health service providers 
to seek commitment to participation in events, 
tailored to the agreed topic.
4.	 Map out a calendar of events ensuring 
geographical coverage and a mix of events to 
cater towards different landholder cohorts (e.g., 
intergenerational farmers, hobby farmers, mixed 
enterprises, farmers approaching retirement etc). 
Consider strategic dates throughout the year.  
5.	 Coordinate with local businesses and community 
organisations to establish logistics such as catering 
and equipment hire. 
6.	 Advertise events across the region.
7.	 Conduct events, making sure magnets are available 
at each event.
8.	 Conduct a lessons-learned process with facilitators, 
attendees, and community leaders. Which events 
worked well, identify service gaps, or needs and 
feedback to relevant agencies/entities to further 
improve service provision.
Spheres
Social
SDG Alignment
66
67
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of a rural street. 
Improving Landholder’s Mental Health by Enhancing 
Awareness and Uptake of Drought Resilient Support 
Services and Events continued
KPIs
	
+
Number of magnets created and distributed. 
	
+
Number of participating entities in the distribution 
of the magnets including spatial spread. 
	
+
Increased awareness of and social reach of the 
magnet. 
	
+
Event success, as measured by number of people 
attending, social connections forged etc. 
	
+
Increased uptake of services (mental, financial, etc.). 
	
+
Number of events held and participant numbers. 
	
+
Community feedback on magnets and events. 
	
+
Number of media stories relating to the events.
Resilience Dividend
Economic 
Increased financial planning and viability of 
landholders. 
Environmental  
Improved uptake of sustainable land management 
practices through awareness of available rebates, 
programs, and support.
Social
Improved social connections across the community, 
with greater uptake and awareness of available support 
services offered across the region (both physical 
health, mental, and financial supports). 
Supporting Actions
	
+
Continued operation of the newly established 
Regional Support Network to provide a regular 
forum to coordinate support actions.
	
+
Ongoing business as usual initiatives such as mental 
health first aid training events as they arise.  
Next Steps
	
+
Advocate for this project (magnet and events) to 
be in perpetuity given ongoing preparedness and 
improving the resilience of landholders during good 
times so they are less impacted by future drought. 
This would also address the missing link between 
service provision and landholders being aware of 
and willing to utilise services. This is particularly 
pertinent given the ongoing diversity and change 
in service delivery and the ever-changing nature of 
service availability.  
	
+
Advocate for more resourcing of services delivered 
on farm.
69
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
68
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Promoting Water-Efficiency Practices within the 
Community via School Children as Young Agents 
for Change  
Option 1 – Green Day
Rationale
A near universal theme during engagement was for 
better awareness and education on the effects of 
drought and the actions individuals can take to reduce 
their water consumption. Children were identified as 
key to this process, with their strengths lying in their 
willingness to learn new things, and ability to act as 
conduits to influence the behaviour of their families. 
Rather than commence a new program from scratch, 
Watershed Landcare’s annual Green Day school event 
was identified to be replicated and run in our region. 
Green Day is an annual environmental expo, bringing 
together school-aged children, schools, educators, and 
the community to learn about a central topic (waste, 
water efficiency, etc.) through interactive and involved 
workshops and educational sessions. 
This supports our local students benefiting from a 
well-run program, utilising established and effective 
approaches. Using this existing program also allows 
local Landcare groups to gain experience in the 
operation of this event. In subsequent years, local 
Landcare groups will have the capabilities to host 
the event with minimal assistance from Watershed 
Landcare. 
This event would be the first of its kind for the 
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon region and as a result, 
the region does not have established relationships and 
sponsorships to support the event. As such, funding 
for this action would be required.
This action is intended to serve as an investment in 
building resilience at a school level, where informed 
and proactive individuals, families, and communities 
are better equipped to adapt to drought conditions, 
minimise its impact, and work towards a more 
sustainable and resilient future. 
This action aims to transform the region by educating 
an entire generation on the impacts of drought and 
efficacy of individual water conservation initiatives. 
By modifying existing programs already in operation 
outside the region, this action will work to build 
transformative change to young minds, thereby 
influencing their parents and those around them.
Implementation Timeframe
	
+
One year to establish the event within local 
schools. 
	
+
Event to be established as an annual event.
Estimated Costs
$20,000. 
	
+
$20/child for attendance. 
	
+
Watershed currently pays a staff member 
(part time) to run the event, and they get 600 
children. 
Action Owner
Lithgow-Oberon Landcare Association and 
Central Tablelands Landcare in partnership with 
Watershed Landcare.
Stakeholders
Local Primary Schools (State, Catholic and 
private) and broader community. 
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Issue expression of interest (EOI) across the 
region for the participation of local primary 
schools in the Green Day event. 
2.	 Identify a group of schools within each 
Council area to act as a pilot for the first 
year of Green Day. 
3.	 In collaboration with their Watershed 
colleagues, local Landcare groups are to 
assist in the development of a program of 
events for Green Day. Activities (such as 
workshops and interactive demonstrations) 
are to be centred around a drought- or 
water-efficiency theme across Bathurst, 
Lithgow, and Oberon Council area. 
4.	 Send out event invites to identified local 
schools, including times, topics, activities, 
and responsibilities.
5.	 Host the event.
6.	 Establish a monitoring and evaluation 
process to evaluate the success of the event 
and conduct a lessons learned process 
with the view of repeating the event in 
subsequent years. This should include 
identifying local businesses and agencies 
who could contribute funding for future 
events.
7.	 Issue fun and interactive quizzes to assess 
success of adoption of water efficiency 
practices. This could explore the possibility 
of providing ways to improve if score is low, 
e.g., water time for the sprinkler system. 
KPIs
	
+
Adoption of event within Bathurst, Lithgow, 
and Oberon Council areas.
	
+
Proportion of local primary schools that 
expressed interest in participating in the 
event.
	
+
Proportion of schools participating in the 
event.
	
+
Number of students who participated in the 
event.
	
+
Proportion of positive feedback from 
schools, teachers, students, and parents.
	
+
Adoption of water efficiency practices within 
homes.
Resilience Dividend
Economic 
Reduced water consumption in households (potentially 
leading to reduced water bills).
Environmental 
Instils a sense of environmental responsibility and 
stewardship, which can have a lasting positive impact 
on local ecosystems.
Social 
	
+
Builds a more informed and prepared generation, 
capable of understanding the challenges of drought 
and taking proactive steps to mitigate its impacts.
	
+
Knowledge shared within family units, encouraging 
water-saving behaviours, and fostering culture and 
ownership of drought resilience.
	
+
Strengthen community bonds by involving local 
schools, parents, and local organisations, fostering a 
sense of shared responsibility for drought resilience.
Supporting Actions
	
+
Schools to encourage attendance at events and 
support ongoing learning through curriculum. 
	
+
Watershed Landcare to share educational and 
event materials as example for the region. 
Next Steps
	
+
Establish the event annually. 
	
+
Maintain and continue to develop connections with 
local schools and organisations to participate in and 
contribute to the event.
	
+
Build on existing event to expand the benefits 
to classrooms and across the community. Similar 
to the Watershed Landcare’s Green Day, explore 
opportunities to establish professional development 
sessions for teachers, additional school visits, and 
community-based workshops. 
	
+
Investigate opportunities to expand event target 
audience to different age groups across the 
community. Event could be opened up to the wider 
community to invite cross-community learning and 
networking for new and existing residents. 
Spheres
Social
Environmental
SDG Alignment
70
71
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Promoting Water-Efficiency Practices within the 
Community via School Children as Young Agents 
for Change continued
Option 2 – National Tree Day
Rationale
A near universal theme during engagement was for 
better awareness and education on the effects of 
drought and the actions individuals can take to reduce 
their water consumption. Children were identified as 
key to this process, with their strengths lying in their 
willingness to learn new things, and ability to act as 
conduits to influence the behaviour of their families. 
Rather than commence a new program from scratch, 
the National Tree Day school event was identified to 
be adopted and run in our region. The National Tree 
Day is an annual event, bringing together school-
aged children, schools, and educators to learn about 
key topics through a rotation of interactive and 
involved workshops and educational sessions. This 
may involve tree planting, agricultural talks, Aboriginal 
Heritage talks, bird watching, and geology walks. In 
doing so, these activities can be linked to the goal of 
drought resilience across the region, reaching social, 
environmental, and economic pillars. 
In other council areas, this event is run with the 
support of a number of organisations, dividing 
responsibilities and involvement across an interactive 
team. This structure helps to establish a network 
between local organisations and builds support across 
the industry. This event would be the first of its kind 
for the Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon region, however, 
is a readily adopted event with councils across NSW 
and more broadly, Australia. 
This action is intended to serve as an investment in 
building resilience at a school level, where informed 
and proactive individuals, families, and communities 
are better equipped to adapt to drought conditions, 
minimise its impact, and work towards a more 
sustainable and resilient future. It is possible to 
initiate this event in one of the three local Councils as 
a pilot, before using learnings to expand to the other 
two LGAs. 
By investing in young minds, this action also aims 
to transform the system through education of the 
upcoming generation.
Implementation Timeframe
	
+
One year to establish the event within local 
schools. 
	
+
Event to be established as an annual event.
Estimated Costs
Total Cost: $20,000 – $30,000.
	
+
Should third-party contractor be utilised, 
costs may increase.
Action Owner
Bathurst Regional Council to coordinate with 
support from Lithgow City and Oberon Councils 
in organisation and delivery.
This coordination role could be delivered by a 
consultant, should it be beyond the capabilities of 
Councils.
Stakeholders
	
+
Lithgow-Oberon Landcare Association and 
Central Tablelands Landcare.
	
+
Local Land Services.
	
+
Local environmental organisations or groups.
	
+
Local rotary groups.
	
+
Local Primary Schools (State, Catholic and 
private) and broader community.  
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Establish LGA location for pilot test, or 
central location to run first event. 
2.	 Issue expression of interest (EOI) across 
the region for participation of local primary 
schools in the National Tree Day event. This 
event is typically run across approximately 
two (2) hours, including lunch. 
3.	 Identify a group of schools within each 
Council area to act as a pilot for the first 
year of National Tree Day. 
4.	 Bathurst Regional Council coordinator or 
identified contractor to organise details of 
event in collaboration with other Councils. 
This may include:
	
+
Identifying a date for event. Advised event 
may align with end of school year alongside 
exams, workloads, and curriculums. 
	
+
Send out invites to schools to identify 
number of participants. 
	
+
Organise run sheet of activities to be run 
across the day, centred around key topic 
of drought resilience. These activities need 
not be extensive and may be kept to 10- or 
15-minute slots. This could include putting 
on a BBQ lunch for the children. 
	
+
Contact relevant organisations to participate 
in activities. 
5.	 Host the event.
6.	 Establish a monitoring and evaluation 
process to evaluate the success of the 
event and conduct a lesson learned process 
with the view of repeating the event in 
subsequent years. This should include 
identifying local businesses and agencies 
who could contribute funding for future 
events.
7.	 Issue fun and interactive quizzes to assess 
success of adoption of water efficiency 
practices. This could explore the possibility 
of providing ways to improve if score is low, 
e.g., water time for the sprinkler system.
KPIs
	
+
Adoption of event within Bathurst, Lithgow, and 
Oberon Council areas.
	
+
Proportion of local primary schools that expressed 
interest in participating in the event.
	
+
Proportion of schools participating in the event.
	
+
Number of students who participated in the event.
	
+
Proportion of positive feedback from schools, 
teachers, students, and parents.
	
+
Adoption of water efficiency practices within 
homes.
Resilience Dividend
Economic 
Reduced water consumption in households (potentially 
leading to reduced water bills).
Environmental 
Instils a sense of environmental responsibility and 
stewardship, which can have a lasting positive impact 
on local ecosystems.
Social 
	
+
Builds a more informed and prepared generation, 
capable of understanding the challenges of drought 
and taking proactive steps to mitigate its impacts.
	
+
Knowledge shared within family units, encouraging 
water-saving behaviours, and fostering culture and 
ownership of drought resilience.
	
+
Strengthen community bonds by involving local 
schools, parents, and local organisations, fostering a 
sense of shared responsibility for drought resilience.
	
+
Facilitates network building across LGAs and 
between industries. 
Supporting Actions
Schools to encourage attendance at events and 
support ongoing learning through curriculum. 
Next Steps
	
+
Establish the event annually.
	
+
Maintain and continue to develop connections with 
local schools and organisations to participate in and 
contribute to the event.
	
+
Maintain and continue to develop connections with 
local organisations and groups to participate in and 
contribute to the annual event.
72
73
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Improving Adoption of Water Use Practices through 
Community Knowledge Sharing 
Rationale
Driving down potable water consumption by town 
residents and small businesses is critical to ensuring 
the availability of fresh water for dry/drought 
periods and future generations. It is important that 
the community is provided with practical and cost-
effective water saving measures that they can enact 
both during times of water scarcity and in daily life. 
This need was strongly reflected by the community 
in all manner of awareness-building actions raised 
in relation to capturing and/or conserving water. 
Most critically, the community had a strong desire to 
encourage knowledge-sharing to learn what water 
conservation measures their neighbours, friends and 
colleagues were implementing and how. Preferred 
water-saving solutions that were identified by 
community members ranged from rainwater tanks, 
grey water re-use systems, drought tolerant garden 
beds and landscaping solutions and wicking beds, 
to slightly larger scale solutions which could be 
implemented by small businesses or schools. 
Providing the opportunity for community members to 
directly connect and learn from local ‘water savings 
champions’ through small-scale bus tours, would 
not only strengthen social networks but provide 
participants with tangible knowledge that they can 
replicate at home, at work, or at school. This would 
expose community members to a range of practical 
water savings solutions, allowing residents to utilise 
solutions most suited to their own personal needs. 
To ensure this information can be disseminated to the 
broader community, particularly those who cannot 
attend in person, each ‘water savings champion’ would 
also film a 2–3-minute educational video and develop 
a digital one-page fact sheet on their respective water 
savings solution (s). This would act as a lasting resource 
that community members can access at any time from 
a dedicated online portal. Resources would include the 
implementation steps taken, any Council requirements 
and approvals needed, FAQs, and any other useful 
resources and websites to assist community members 
with implementation. 
The intent of this action is to connect community 
members for the purposes of education and 
awareness-building, arming the community with the 
tools and knowledge to implement practical water 
savings solutions in their own backyard. This action 
aims to not only strengthen the social networks 
across Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon but also play 
a role in tackling the issue of overconsumption of 
potable water by town residents, small businesses, and 
schools. Longer term, this action would also involve 
identification of grant funding to assist community 
members with the implementation of more costly 
initiatives such as large-scale rainwater tanks and 
water efficient fixtures/appliances, including front-load 
washing machines.
Through capacity building initiatives, this action aims 
to modify the existing system, building awareness of 
and connecting community members with existing 
tools and knowledge to improve water conservation 
across the region.
Implementation Timeframe
12 months.
Estimated Costs
Total Cost: $66,600.
	
+
Management, engagement, and coordination 
of action:  coordinator remuneration: 
$30,000 - $46,000.
	
+
Equipment and skills for resource 
development: $600 and in-kind support to 
be provided by Western Sydney University 
students.
	
+
Tour costs: $15,000.
	
+
Advertising: $5,000. 
Action Owner 
Western Sydney University (Maldhan Ngurr 
Ngurra Lithgow Transformation Hub). 
Stakeholders
	
+
Community participants.
	
+
Dedicated water savings champions 
(residents, small businesses, or school 
representatives).
	
+
Local tourism or bus companies.
	
+
Water infrastructure and water savings 
solutions materials suppliers e.g., WaterMart 
Bathurst, Lithgow Landscape and Produce 
Supplies, Australian Native Landscapes, 
Oberon.  
	
+
Bathurst Regional Council, Lithgow City 
Council, and Oberon Council.
Steps for Implementation 
1.	 Nominate or recruit a dedicated resource(s) 
from within Western Sydney University, to 
coordinate the implementation of steps 2–15.
2.	 Develop an informal role description that 
includes the following:
	
+
Overall intended aim of the action.
	
+
Timeframe for implementation. 
	
+
Steps and tasks required to implement the 
action (as detailed in steps 3 – 15). 
	
+
Estimated costs. 
	
+
Process for raising any concerns regarding 
implementation as nominated by Western 
Sydney University.
3.	 Undertake engagement in the form of 
phone calls, emails, or social media call outs 
to local residents, small businesses, and/
or schools to identify up to 10 community 
‘water savings champions’ to showcase their 
respective water savings solutions.
4.	 Undertake further engagement to understand 
capabilities of ‘water savings champions’ to 
develop a 2-3-minute educational video and 
coordinate supporting resources as needed e.g., 
hiring, and disseminating of camera equipment, or 
recruiting freelance cinematographer to assist.
5.	 Develop a fact sheet template to provide to ‘water 
savings champions’ and assist with input of the 
necessary information on their respective water 
savings solution(s).
6.	 Collect and organise educational videos and fact 
sheets so they are ready to upload to the relevant 
online portal as nominated by Western Sydney 
University. 
7.	 If a suitable online portal isn’t already available, 
Western Sydney University are to engage a 
content creator or marketing resource (ideally 
a Western Sydney University student) to help 
develop a suitable page/location on the Western 
Sydney University website to store educational 
resources. Further, this resource would be available 
to assist with video editing and graphic design of 
fact sheets. 
8.	 Upload educational materials to the nominated 
Western Sydney University online portal.
9.	 Communicate the availability of educational 
videos and fact sheets to community members 
of Bathurst, Lithgow and Oberon through social 
media, any relevant Western Sydney University 
newsletters, and emails and main Western Sydney 
University webpage. Communication of resources 
could be extended further by providing active links 
on Council webpages. 
10.		Engage with local tourism or bus companies in 
each respective LGA to determine feasibility of 
small-scale bus tour for residents to view water 
savings solutions in person. 
11.	Re-engage with each of the ‘water savings 
champions’ through emails or phone calls to 
confirm their involvement for in-person viewing of 
their water savings solutions.
12.	Advertise bus tours through social media or 
Western Sydney University website to anticipate 
the number of attendees.
13.	Develop a timeframe and itinerary for bus tours 
to provide attendees and organise any other 
resources needed to facilitate e.g., catering, water.
Spheres
Social
Environmental
SDG Alignment
74
75
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of a wall decorated with bright bird houses 
Improving Adoption of Water Use Practices through 
Community Knowledge Sharing continued
14.	Undertake bus tours which would be overseen by 
dedicated coordinator.
15.	Repeat yearly (particularly if drought conditions 
change) to show how the solutions perform under 
different drought conditions, and to showcase 
solutions when people are most receptive to 
changing their behaviour. 
KPIs
	
+
Number of educational videos and fact sheets 
completed and made available.  
	
+
Number of water savings solutions showcased. 
	
+
Number of tours hosted.
	
+
Proportion of participants intending to implement 
some/all of water saving activities.
	
+
Proportion of participants who learned something 
about water saving solutions/drought.
	
+
Hits/downloads on the website/portal.
	
+
Levels of social media engagement including 
number of posts shared or likes received.  
	
+
Dollars spent at local businesses on supplies to 
implement water savings solutions.  
Resilience Dividend
Economic
	
+
Increased cash flow into local businesses and 
suppliers of materials needed to implement water 
savings solutions.
	
+
Delayed Capital Expenditure by Councils to install 
rainfall independent water supply infrastructure 
such as recycled water plants and desalination 
plants, including treatment, piping, and pumping.
Environmental
	
+
Reduced consumption of fresh potable water 
reducing stress on rivers and catchments as primary 
water supply.
	
+
Supporting natural flow of rivers and catchments 
and overall waterway health through biodiversity 
indicators such as population ecology of fish 
species.
Social
	
+
Improved social networks between community 
members reducing levels of isolation and rates of 
depression and anxiety.
	
+
Improved drought awareness and understanding 
amongst community members fostering greater 
environmental responsibility.
	
+
Delivery of informal education and skills 
development providing residents with a sense of 
purpose and improved ability to cope with stress 
related to water scarcity (particularly elderly 
residents).
 Supporting Actions 
	
+
Western Sydney University students – provide 
opportunities for students to achieve credits 
towards relevant degrees to incentivise 
participation in the action program.
	
+
Water infrastructure and water savings solutions 
materials suppliers – are made aware of the action 
implementation and thus can anticipate additional 
business and customers and pool relevant 
information and resources to support uptake of 
water savings solutions.
	
+
Council – support awareness raising around action 
implementation and share links to educational 
resources to ensure they are wide reaching.
Next steps 
	
+
Identify grant funds are rebate schemes to support 
the uptake of more expensive water savings 
solutions e.g., large scale rainwater tanks and front 
load washing machines.
	
+
After initial 12 months of implementation, consider 
providing the option of bus tours to primary school 
groups in the following 12 months to extend the 
reach of awareness raising to school aged children. 
77
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
76
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Fostering an Ecosystem of Drought Resilient Support 
and Best-Practice across the Region
Rationale
Despite the availability of support services aiming to 
improve the financial, social, or environmental drought 
resilience of landholders, residents, and businesses, 
there is a lack of awareness among the intended 
recipients. The diversity, multitude, and dispersed 
location of service providers can make it challenging 
for recipients to access information about support, 
contributing to this lack of awareness. 
In parallel, service providers may be unaware of 
programs, rebates, or offerings provided by local 
Councils, government agencies, not-for-profits, and 
community groups. This hampers the provision of 
valuable information to their clientele. Adding to the 
complexity, service providers encounter difficulties in 
selecting the most effective communication channels 
to reach different demographics. They often lack the 
resources or expertise to generate sufficient interest 
and ensure that awareness of a particular issue or 
available support translates into active participation 
and adoption. 
Recognising the need for a more effective approach, 
storytelling was identified as a strategy to connect 
with the intended audience, local people, by telling 
their stories and showcasing how community members 
were addressing drought impacts or enhancing 
preparedness, water usage, or land management. 
Fostering interest for a particular solution is an 
incremental process that begins with general 
awareness of an idea. Subsequent stories can build 
upon this awareness before the audience is introduced 
to the details of accessing available assistance.
Sustaining this over time, requires a dedicated resource 
equipped with the ability to craft captivating stories. 
These stories should be released across multiple 
communication modes to ensure a broad reach. This 
approach aims to bridge the awareness gap, facilitating 
a more engaged community that actively participates 
in, and adopts available support services to enhance 
resilience in the face of drought. 
This action is designed to modify the existing drought 
resilience space, providing greater coordination of local 
initiatives and services available across the region. By 
improving connection and community engagement, 
this action will build upon existing work to provide 
sustained and coordinated drought resilience support 
to Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon. 
Part A: Drought Resilience Media Officer Role
This resource, the drought resilience media 
officer role, would be flexible and guided 
by insights from various stakeholders, such 
as mental health providers, Council water-
efficiency programs, and financial assistance 
services. It is envisaged that content would 
be informed by travelling to local events, 
the showcasing of support services, and 
interviews of individuals or businesses who have 
implemented drought resilient solutions. The 
content would be multi-modal, such as written 
case studies, newspaper articles, radio stories, 
YouTube videos, or social media clips, targeting 
subject matter relating to drought preparedness, 
resilience, or support. Involved stakeholders 
would be free to use generated content in 
subsequent activities, thereby providing a long-
term repository of resources. 
The role would ideally be filled by a person 
with a creative skillset including journalism, 
social media creation, networking, stakeholder 
engagement, and website management. Ideally 
the person would have firsthand experience 
of living within a regional farming community, 
providing them with direct understanding of the 
challenges and consequences associated with 
drought. 
Part B: Drought Resilience Support Services 
Coordinator
Sharing information can enhance the 
effectiveness and reach of existing services, 
maximising the utilisation of existing support, 
and avoiding duplication of effort. A services 
coordinator role would act to create a hub for 
the identification of drought-related services 
available across sectors including financial 
planning, land management, mental health, and 
water efficiency. This role would be responsible 
for highlighting connections between, and 
promoting cross awareness of available support 
programs, rebates, and information sessions 
facilitated by different organisations. Details 
to access these services will also be made 
available and highlighted to respective target 
audiences. This would be achieved through 
regular newsletters, events calendars, and other 
networking activities carried out across the 
three LGAs.  
Implementation Timeframe
12 months.
Estimated Costs
	
+
Part A Total Cost: $90,000 - $110,000.
	
+
Part B Total Cost: $60,000 - $80,000.
Action Owner
Bathurst Regional, Lithgow City, and Oberon Councils. 
Stakeholders 
	
+
Drought-related service providers.
	
+
Recipients of drought-related services and 
support, including town residents, businesses, and 
landholders. 
Steps for Implementation
Part A:
1.	 Develop and issue an RFQ for a contractor to 
assume the role of the media officer.
2.	 Recruit third-party contractor who would be 
responsible for steps 3 – 7.
3.	 Develop and implement media strategies by 
identifying target audiences, choosing appropriate 
media platforms, and creating compelling content.
4.	 Build and maintain relationships with media 
outlets, journalists, key stakeholders, and 
influencers within target audience communities. 
This includes pitching story ideas, responding to 
media inquiries, arranging interviews, and covering 
relevant topics or events which align with regional 
drought resilience.
5.	 Create and distribute engaging and informative 
content for various media channels, such as press 
releases, articles, videos, blog posts and social 
media updates, ensuring timely distribution to 
relevant media outlets and channels. 
6.	 In the event of a drought, assist in the creation of 
communication plans, services information, and 
promotion of available assistance services.
7.	 Monitor media coverage and analyse its impact and 
reach, making recommendations to stakeholders 
for improvement regarding engagement. 
Economic
Social
Environmental
SDG Alignment
78
79
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of a pink mural titled “Pink Up Bathurst” filled with hearts 
Fostering an Ecosystem of Drought Resilient Support 
and Best-Practice across the Region continued
Part B:
1.	 Develop a role description and KPIs for the 
position. 
2.	 Develop and issue an RFQ for a contractor 
to assume the role of the support services 
coordinator.
3.	 Recruit third-party contractor who would be 
responsible for steps 4 – 8.
4.	 Develop a centralised resource directory of 
drought-related support services available from 
government agencies, not-for-profit service 
providers, and community organisations for easy 
access. This may draw on Council-provided contact 
databases for the identification of additional 
services, where appropriate.
5.	 Identify synergies between service providers and 
link relevant providers to facilitate networking and 
optimisation of service provision. 
6.	 Publicly issue resource directory, with 
documentation of services, providers, links to 
providers and other key information. 
7.	 Working collaboratively with the Drought 
Resilience Media Officer Role, develop processes 
and tools to build awareness of available support 
amongst stakeholders. 
8.	 Link community leaders, organisations and 
residents with specialist support, guidance, and 
resources to further drought resilience outcomes. 
This step may be done in collaboration with the 
Drought Resilience Media Officer Role to build an 
effective network. 
9.	 Continue to create opportunities for cross-
awareness and collaboration amongst different 
organisations offering support. 
KPIs
Part A
	
+
Content developed.
	
+
Number of drought-resilience related stories 
developed and released.
	
+
Reach and engagement with created content.
Part B:
	
+
Creation of a support services database.
	
+
Number of services cross-promoted amongst 
stakeholders.
	
+
Number of service sharing activities undertaken.
Resilience Dividend:
Economic 
	
+
Increased adoption of financial planning, income 
diversification and utilisation of available grants, 
rebates, and financial support. 
	
+
Efficiencies created in the provision of support 
services to the community. 
Environmental 
Improved uptake of water efficiency measures resulting 
in an increase in potable water availability. 
Social 
	
+
Improved health and wellbeing of individuals and 
community groups.
	
+
Networking between community groups and 
organisations through the optimisation of service 
provisions. 
	
+
Improved awareness and transparency of support 
available, leading to more empowered communities 
and individuals during times of distress. 
Next Steps:
	
+
Update services directory hub regularly to reflect 
latest information on support services. 
	
+
Investigate opportunity to undertake targeted 
outreach for prioritised targets audiences for 
specific services and tailor communication materials 
accordingly. 
	
+
Assess effectiveness of each role with a view to 
securing funding to provide the role(s) on a long 
term or permanent basis.  
81
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
80
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

07
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) is core to the implementation of the RDR Plan, maximising 
effective program delivery, transparency, adaptive management, and long-term sustainability (see 
Program Logic in Section 6).
To optimise the effectiveness and outcome of 
MEL processes, MEL activities are embedded 
into the governance model and every stage of the 
RDR Plan program cycle, from the initial design 
to the implementation, and close out phases. The 
intention is that MEL processes will be regularly 
reviewed and updated by the regional Consortia of 
local governments and implementation partners to 
reflect changes. This allows for active learning and 
adaptive governance to best monitor and evaluate 
the performance of the RDR Plan pathways and 
actions, following the RAPTA guide (see Figure 7.1). 
It is important to note that this RDR Plan serves as a 
living document and through the MEL process, can be 
reviewed and updated as conditions change and as our 
communities improve in understanding their drought 
vulnerability, thus the changing needs of community 
resilience toward drought.
Delivery of MEL process for this RDR Plan can also 
be informed by and aligned with Bathurst Regional 
Council, Lithgow City Council, and Oberon Council’s 
Integrated Planning and Reporting (IPR) Framework 
such as Bathurst’s Delivery Program 2021-2025, 
Lithgow’s Draft 2023/24 Operational Plan and 
Community Framework and Strategy 2022, and Local 
Strategic Planning Statement 2040 to ensure efficiency 
and optimisation of time and efforts. 
Figure 7.1: Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach (RAPTA) 
Source: CSIRO95This figure explains the process underpinning this RDR Plan. There are three interlinking sections, with active learning and adaptive governance feeding into every aspect of the resilience, adaptation pathways and transformation approach. 
This approach includes consideration of people, including dialogue, values, and vision. This is informed by scoping and goalsetting, stakeholder mapping and engagement, and imagining change. This leads to effective engagement and legitimacy. This feeds into a systems analysis, which describes the system, explores scenarios, and analyses the system. Output leads to a systems understanding. This feeds into options and pathways to action. This involves generation of options, sequencing pathways, and implementing pathways. This produces a tested adaptation pathway for action. These step feeds back into the first loop, people. 
The RDR Plan’s MEL framework are underpinned by following core components: 
What Outcomes the Plan Intends to Achieve 
The Program Logic (in Figure 6.1 ) describes the goals 
and strategic objectives, and what the Plan hopes to 
achieve over the short, medium, and long term. 
MEL Scope and Approaches
MEL scope and approaches help to ensure the region’s 
ongoing commitment to strengthening drought 
preparedness and resilience. These are adopted from the 
FDF Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework 
2020 (as shown in Figure 7.2 below).
Figure 7.2: Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Scope 
This figure shows that monitoring, evaluation, and learning is informed by four things: 
1.	Rationale 
2.	Outputs 
3.	Effectiveness 
4.	Impacts 
When examining the rationale, it is helpful to ask questions like: 
•	To what extent are the programs aligned with the strategic objectives of the Funding Plan, and targeted at important needs? 
•	What can be done to improve the appropriateness of the investments? 
When examining outputs, helpful questions to ask include: 
•	To what extent are the program outputs being administered and delivered efficiently, and to the expected quality? 
•	What can be done to improve efficiency of the investments? 
During monitoring, evaluation, and learning phases, when examining the effectiveness of the plan, helpful guiding questions include: 
•	To what extent are programs achieving their intended outcomes (and any unintended outcomes)? 
•	What could be done to improve the outcomes of the investments? 
When examining the impact, helpful questions to consider include: 
•	What signs are there towards long-term drought resilience? And 
•	What priorities and opportunities do the programs reveal for drought resilience, future Funding Plans and programs? 
Source: Future Drought Fund. 2020.96
82
83
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of a rocky cliff edge 
MEL Roles and Responsibilities 
The Project Control Group (PCG) developed during 
RDR Plan development phases will continue to operate 
as a reference governance structure overseeing the 
RDR Plan implementation and ongoing development. 
The PCG consists of: 
	
+
	Department of Regional NSW – Strategy & Policy 
	
+
Bathurst Regional Council  
	
+
Lithgow City Council 
	
+
Oberon Council 
	
+
Any other individual selected by the PCG. 
Through the PCG and Council Consortia, continued 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning responsibilities 
will be shared. During the implementation phase, 
Councils will discuss and select appropriate 
governance arrangements for each action depending 
on the nature and coverage of the required work and 
management effort. 
Tracking Progress of the Plan
Below are key elements of how to track progress of 
the RDR Plan. These questions should be raised and 
considered by Action Owners and Council, through 
regular, scheduled review periods. 
Key evaluation questions
	
+
To what extent has the RDR Plan been 
implemented and impacted on the regional 
stakeholders and communities to strengthening 
drought preparedness and resilience? (Including 
intended and unintended, positive, and negative 
outcomes).
	
+
How is economic, environmental, and social 
drought resilience changing (or not) in the region, in 
which locations? (in a specific LGA or whole region, 
how and why?)
	
+
To what extent do the outcomes achieved by the 
Plan align with improvements in overall drought 
resilience in the region and across Australia?
	
+
What future priorities and opportunities are 
revealed by overall trends in drought resilience 
(including economic condition changes, community 
needs, etc.) and/or by the outcomes of the Plan?
	
+
What priorities and lessons can be drawn 
to improve the appropriateness, efficiency, 
sustainability, or effectiveness of future RDR Plan 
implementation so that they make the best possible 
contribution to the Plan’s goals and strategic 
objectives.
Indicators for regular monitoring 
Table 7.1 provides specific RDR Plan indicators for 
regular monitoring and evaluation of the Plan based on 
the relevant FDF MEL framework indicators and the 
actions developed in this RDR Plan. Each action has a 
set of specific KPIs, which can also be used for regular 
monitoring and evaluation.
Table 7.1: Indicators for regular monitoring of the RDR Plan 
FDF High-level indicators 
Specific RDR Plan Indicators 
Evaluation Approach 
Intermediate outcomes of the Plan (1-4 years)
Agricultural businesses are 
self-reliant, productive, 
and profitable (economic 
resilience).
	
+ Improving the diversity of farm incomes provides 
landholders with alternative revenue streams, 
enhancing their economic resilience. 
	
+ Increasing tourism offerings within the Region to 
increase tourism visitation and local spending.
	
+ Skill development initiatives associated with 
agritourism enhance community and landholder 
adaptability to changing economic landscapes 
and provide new avenues for employment. 
	
+ Supplementary income can help finance 
complementary sustainability practices on-farm 
to maintain the successful operation of the 
venture, building capacity for environmental 
stewardship. 
	
+ Reduced disruptions of business operations and 
therefore reduced economic losses.
	
+ Business owners actively pursue opportunities 
to adopt better financial planning, income 
diversification and utilisation of available grants, 
rebates, and financial support to increase 
financial security of their business pre-, during, 
and post-drought. 
	
+ Reduced water consumption in households 
(potentially leading to reduced water bills).
	
+ Delayed Capital Expenditure by Councils 
to install rainfall independent water supply 
infrastructure such as recycled water plants and 
desalination plants, including treatment, piping, 
and pumping.
	
+ Monitor ongoing business 
cash flow, with learning from 
previous droughts implemented 
into management plans. 
	
+ Economic metrics reported 
quarterly or annually.
	
+ Annual reporting on 
agritourism activities.
	
+ Annual reporting on 
employment rate.
	
+ Bi-annual business surveys.
	
+ Council’s annual budget 
tracking report.
	
+ Evaluation of previous lessons 
learned. 
	
+ Stakeholder/landholder/
business owner interviews and 
surveys.
Agricultural landscapes are 
functional and sustainable, 
with healthy natural capital 
(environmental resilience)
	
+ Promotion of responsible water use and 
conservation to help preserve and protect local 
ecosystems during drought conditions, maintain 
water quality, and reduce stress on water 
resources during drought.
	
+ Improved uptake of sustainable land 
management practices through awareness of 
available rebates, programs, and support.
	
+ Instils a sense of environmental responsibility 
and stewardship through drought education 
for school children, which can lead to a lasting 
positive impact on local ecosystems.
	
+ Improved natural flow of rivers and catchments 
and overall waterway health through biodiversity 
indicators such as population ecology of fish 
species.
	
+ Portable water consumption has reduced as a 
result on implementing water saving measures.
	
+ Monitor ongoing water usage, 
annual reporting, and tracking.
	
+ Rebate and Program tracking 
reports.
	
+ Stakeholder interviews and 
surveys.
84
85
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

FDF High-level indicators 
Specific RDR Plan Indicators 
Evaluation Approach 
Intermediate outcomes of the Plan (1-4 years)
Agricultural businesses are 
self-reliant, productive, 
and profitable (economic 
resilience).
	
+ Improving the diversity of farm incomes provides 
landholders with alternative revenue streams, 
enhancing their economic resilience. 
	
+ Increasing tourism offerings within the Region to 
increase tourism visitation and local spending.
	
+ Skill development initiatives associated with 
agritourism enhance community and landholder 
adaptability to changing economic landscapes 
and provide new avenues for employment. 
	
+ Supplementary income can help finance 
complementary sustainability practices on-farm 
to maintain the successful operation of the 
venture, building capacity for environmental 
stewardship. 
	
+ Reduced disruptions of business operations and 
therefore reduced economic losses.
	
+ Business owners actively pursue opportunities 
to adopt better financial planning, income 
diversification and utilisation of available grants, 
rebates, and financial support to increase 
financial security of their business pre-, during, 
and post-drought. 
	
+ Reduced water consumption in households 
(potentially leading to reduced water bills).
	
+ Delayed Capital Expenditure by Councils 
to install rainfall independent water supply 
infrastructure such as recycled water plants and 
desalination plants, including treatment, piping, 
and pumping.
	
+ Monitor ongoing business 
cash flow, with learning from 
previous droughts implemented 
into management plans. 
	
+ Economic metrics reported 
quarterly or annually.
	
+ Annual reporting on 
agritourism activities.
	
+ Annual reporting on 
employment rate.
	
+ Bi-annual business surveys.
	
+ Council’s annual budget 
tracking report.
	
+ Evaluation of previous lessons 
learned. 
	
+ Stakeholder/landholder/
business owner interviews and 
surveys.
Agricultural landscapes are 
functional and sustainable, 
with healthy natural capital 
(environmental resilience)
	
+ Promotion of responsible water use and 
conservation to help preserve and protect local 
ecosystems during drought conditions, maintain 
water quality, and reduce stress on water 
resources during drought.
	
+ Improved uptake of sustainable land 
management practices through awareness of 
available rebates, programs, and support.
	
+ Instils a sense of environmental responsibility 
and stewardship through drought education 
for school children, which can lead to a lasting 
positive impact on local ecosystems.
	
+ Improved natural flow of rivers and catchments 
and overall waterway health through biodiversity 
indicators such as population ecology of fish 
species.
	
+ Portable water consumption has reduced as a 
result on implementing water saving measures.
	
+ Monitor ongoing water usage, 
annual reporting, and tracking.
	
+ Rebate & Program tracking 
reports.
	
+ Stakeholder interviews and 
surveys.
FDF High-level indicators 
Specific RDR Plan Indicators 
Evaluation Approach 
Agricultural communities are 
resourceful, adaptable, and 
thriving (social resilience)
	
+ Agritourism has contributed to the preservation 
of cultural identity.
	
+ Improved water management practices, which 
can help ensure a more reliable water supply 
for communities, reducing the risk of water 
shortages during droughts and enhancing public 
health and wellbeing.
	
+ Improved social connections across the 
community, with greater uptake and awareness 
of available support services offered across 
the region (both physical health, mental, and 
financial supports). Build a strong sense of 
community, encouraging mutual support and 
shared experiences.
	
+ Improved awareness and transparency of 
support available, leading to more empowered 
communities and individuals during times of 
distress. 
	
+ Networking through exchange of ideas, 
contributing to ongoing learning and 
development.
	
+ Empowering decision-making of landholders 
by provide appropriate tools and strategies can 
result in positive mental health outcomes.
	
+ Building individual resilience has improved the 
resilience of families, school communities and 
the wider community.
	
+ Annual reporting and review 
of RDR plan implementation, 
barriers, and opportunities, 
making changes to the RDR 
Plan as necessary to meet the 
regional needs of communities.
	
+ Support service feedback 
reports.
	
+ Stakeholder and community 
interviews and surveys.
	
+ Key questions to ask include: 
	
+ How confident are the 
community’s necessary skills 
and resources to face drought 
and make necessary changes? 
	
+ How invested are they in 
implementing the RDR Plan? 
	
+ What actions or decisions have 
been directly initiated as a 
result of the RDR Plan? 
Long-term outcomes (4+ years)
 
 
Stronger connectedness and 
greater social capital within 
communities, contributing to 
wellbeing and security. 
Communities implement 
transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to 
drought. 
More primary producers 
preserve natural capital while 
also improving productivity 
and profitability.
	
+ There is a common understanding and shared 
vision in the region to manage drought risks and 
build community drought resilience.
	
+ The region works collectively and in partnerships 
to build drought resilience across three main 
pillars.
	
+ Measures are implemented to limit impacts of 
drought and better respond to drought.
	
+ Stakeholders and communities actively share 
knowledge and take actions contributing 
towards drought resilience. 
	
+ An on-going regional oversight 
committee comprising of 
the Plan’s owners and key 
stakeholder representatives/
implementation partners is 
critical.
	
+ This committee would have 
the role of initiating actions 
in line with the RDR Plan, 
reviewing progress against the 
Plan objectives and reflecting 
changes to the Plan as needed 
to maintain its relevance and 
usefulness.
	
+ Monitoring and evaluation 
activities should be taken 
at the regional level by this 
committee, which include:
	
+ Monitoring and reporting of 
regional level indicators that 
are captured as part of Local 
Government surveillance, 
surveys, and annual reporting.
	
+ Records of case studies 
demonstrate changes as a 
result of actions taken from the 
implementation of the Plan.
86
87
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

Image of silo murals 
Tools to support regular data collection on the indicators
Key data sources for the Plan regular monitoring approach are outlined in Table 7.2 below: 
Table 7.2: Tools to support regular data collection for MEL
Data Source/Tool
Description
Frequency of 
collection
Data availability
Implementation partners 
and stakeholders end 
of program evaluation 
completed online and 
capture in Management 
Information System 
(MIS).
At the end of each program/action, 
request feedback from stakeholders and 
implementation partners.
End of program 
or project.
Continuous and 
ongoing.
MIS.
Stores and enables analysis of basic 
information on participate stakeholders and 
community group members.
Ongoing.
Real-time.
Media monitoring and 
media analytics.
Monitoring: To capture stories that are 
profiled in the media about regional drought 
resilience and relevant actions. 
Analytics: To capture insights about social 
media sites including engagement, reach, 
content performance, reactions, audience 
demographics.
Monthly.
Available in local 
media for social 
and online media.
Community surveys.
Online or hard copy surveys sent to 
stakeholders and communities to gather 
feedback on the RDR Plan effectiveness.
Annually.
Annually, one 
month after 
survey closes.
Monitoring visits.
Targeted monitoring visits to interview 
relevant stakeholders and communities to 
gather feedback in written report to support 
data assurance.
Bi-annually.
One month after 
monitoring visit.
Case studies of changes.
Recording case studies of changes made and 
benefits evident as a result of actions taken 
from the implementation of the Plan.
Annual.
Annually.
Activities evaluating the proposed actions in this RDR Plan provide a deeper understanding of successes and what can 
be improved. This works to ensure a full and informed action plan for implementation of each action is established.
The design and delivery of all MEL activities are informed by following principles: 
Utilisation-
focussed
1
Cost-
effectiveness
2
Fit-for-
purpose
3
Transparent 
and 
accountable
4
Realistic
5
Flexible
6
The Key Risks to the Implementation of the RDR Plan and MEL Process
The Following assumptions were identified, based on the FDF MEL framework for the RDR plan, to be effectively 
implemented: 
Key assumptions affecting the plan 
short term outcomes  
The consortia of local governments have 
dedicated resource, capability, and the 
right governance mechanism to coordinate 
strategic planning activities. 
Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to actively participate in the plan. 
Regional stakeholders are willing to 
cooperate with each other on regional 
resilience planning. 
Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience 
needs.  
The program can be aligned with other 
relevant strategic planning.
Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively 
seek to implement them.
Stakeholders and communities are willing to 
share learnings with other regions.
There are sufficient learnings to inform 
future program design and implementation.
Key assumptions affecting the plan 
long term outcomes (>4 years)
Supporting consortia of local governments/
stakeholders representing a region will result 
in changes in practice through those regions. 
There are sufficient opportunities for regions 
to implement elements of plans. 
Plans contain implementable activities to 
build regional drought resilience across 
Australia. 
Regions continue to review, update, and 
implement their plans. 
These assumptions will need to be reviewed and updated during the implementation phase to reflect changes and 
new interventions can be designed.
88
89
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

References
1	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
2	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
3	
Brunner, R. & Lynch, A. 2017. Adaptive Governance. Climate Science. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.601
4	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2023. Understanding Drought. Australian Government. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>.
5	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
6	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
7	
The Climate Reality Project. N.d. Climate 101: Feedback Loops & Tipping Points. Accessed 4 Apr 2024. 
	
<https://www.climaterealityproject.org/sites/default/files/climate-101-tipping-points-and-feedback-loops-factsheet.pdf>.
8	
Rauis IAS. 2023. Considering Green Drought for Drought Assessment. Accessed 27 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://compass.rauias.com/current-affairs/considering-green-drought-drought-assessment/#:~:text=Green%20drought%20
	
is%20when%20the,challenging%20to%20detect%20and%20monitor.>.
9	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
10	
Walker, B., Holling, C., Carpenter, S. R. & Kinzig, A. 2004. 
	
Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 9(2): 5.
11	
IPCC. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://report.ipcc.ch/ar6/wg2/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FullReport.pdf>.
12	
Resilient Sydney. 2018. Resilient Sydney: A Strategy For City Resilience. City of Sydney. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au/-/media/corporate/files/2020-07-migrated/files_r/resilient-sydney-a-strategy-for-city-	 	
	
resilience-2018.pdf?download=true>.
13	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
14	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/november/future-disaster-resilience>.
15	
Taylor, C.M. et al. 2017. Frequency of extreme Sahelian storms tripled since 1982 in satellite observations. Nature, 544: 475-478. 
16	
IPCC. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Accessed 17 Nov 2023.
	
<https://report.ipcc.ch/ar6/wg2/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FullReport.pdf>.
17	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2022. Understanding Drought. 
	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>.
18	
O’Donnell, A.J., McCaw, W.L., Cook, E.R. and Grierson, P.F. 2021. Megadroughts and pluvials in southwest 
	
Australia: 1350–2017 CE. Climate Dynamics, 57, pp.1817-1831. Accessed 14 September 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/
	
s00382-021-05782-0
19	
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2023. Definition of Drought. National Centres for Environmental 	 	
	
	
Information. Accessed 14 September 2023. <https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/monitoring/dyk/drought-definition>.
20	
NSW Government. n.d. Key facts about drought. Accessed 14 September 2023 
	
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/environment-land-and-water/drought-in-nsw/key-facts-about-drought#:~:text=With%20one%20
	
of%20the%20most,in%20inland%20areas%20of%20NSW>.
21	
Ekström, M. et al. 2015. Central Slopes Cluster Report - Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource 
	
Management Regions: Cluster Reports, eds. Ekström, M. et al., CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Australia. Accessed 14 
	
September 2023 <https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/CENTRAL_SLOPES_
	
CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf >.
22	
Department of Regional NSW. 2023. Bathurst and Oberon Regional Economic Development Strategy - 2023 Update. NSW 
	
Government. Accessed 5 October 2023. 
	
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/Bathurst-and-Oberon-REDS-2023-Update.pdf>.
23	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2004. Previous Droughts. Australian Government. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.
24	
Fiskel, J. 2016. The New Resilience Paradigm – Essential Strategies for a Changing Risk Landscape. Accessed 16 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://irgc.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Fiksel-The-New-Resilience-Paradigm.pdf>.
25	
Future Drought Fund Farm Business Resilience – Program Framework (Appendix A), March 2021.
26	
Bathurst Regional Council. n.d. Wiradjuri People. Accessed 24 October 2023. 
	
<https://www.bathurst.nsw.gov.au/community/community_mm/aboriginal-people/92-community/aboriginal-people/
	
190-wiradjuri-people.html>.
27	
Lithgow City Council. n.d. Aboriginal Community. Accessed 24 October 2023. 
	
<https://council.lithgow.com/community/aboriginal-community/>.
28	
Oberon Council. n.d. History of Oberon. Accessed 24 October 2023. <https://www.oberon.nsw.gov.au/Oberon>.
29	
Bathurst Region. 2023. Explore the industries of the Bathurst Region. Accessed 06 October 2023. 
	
<https://bathurstliveinvest.com.au/invest/industries/#:~:text=Explore%20the%20industries%20of%20the%20Bathurst%20
	
Region&text=Food%20manufacturing%2C%20construction%20and%20property,of%20the%20Bathurst%20local%20economy>.
30	
IDcommunity. 2023. Lithgow City Council. Accessed 14 September 2023. <https://economy.id.com.au/lithgow>.
31	
Lithgow City Council. 2018. Lithgow Regional Economic Development Strategy 2018-2022. Accessed 06 October 2023. 
	
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-06/Lithgow%20REDS%C2%A0.pdf>.
32	
 Lithgow City Council. 2018. Lithgow Regional Economic Development Strategy 2018-2022. Accessed 06 October 2023. 
	
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-06/Lithgow%20REDS%C2%A0.pdf>.
33	
Lithgow City Council. 2022. Coal Mining History. Accessed 14 September 2023. 
	
<https://www.lithgow.com/coaltogold/coalhistory.html>.
34	
Oberon Council. 2022. Our Statistical Snapshot 2022. Accessed 06 Oct 2023. PCG provided. 
35	
Oberon Council. 2023. Economy. Accessed 06 October 2023. <https://www.visitoberon.com/about-oberon/economy/>.
36	
Oberon Council. 2022. Our Statistical Snapshot 2022. Accessed 06 Oct 2023. PCG provided.
37	
Regional Development Australia. 2021. Oberon LGA. Accessed 26 September 2023. 
	
<https://rdacentralwest.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/Oberon-Shire-Council.pdf>.
38	
IDcommunity. 2023. Bathurst Regional Council. Accessed 14 September 2023. <https://economy.id.com.au/bathurst>.
39	
IDcommunity. 2023. Lithgow City Council. Accessed 14 September 2023. <https://economy.id.com.au/lithgow>.
40	
Oberon Council. 2022. Our Statistical Snapshot 2022. Accessed 06 Oct 2023. PCG provided.
41	
IDcommunity. 2023. Bathurst Regional Council. Accessed 14 September 2023. <https://economy.id.com.au/bathurst>.
42	
Bathurst Regional Council. 2012. Biodiversity Management Plan for Bathurst Regional Council. Accessed 15 September 2023. 
	
<https://www.bathurst.nsw.gov.au/environment/plants-animals/strategies-and-management-plans.html>.
43	
Office of Environment and Heritage. n.d. Threatened Species found in Bathurst IBRA sub-region. Accessed 25 September 2023. 
	
<https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedspeciesapp/cmaSearchResults.aspx?SubCmaId=361>.
44	
Lithgow City Council. 2006. Marrangaroo Local Environmental Study. Accessed 15 September 2023. 
	
<https://council.lithgow.com/council/ipr/other-plan-documents/>.
45	
Lithgow Surrounded by Nature. 2021. National Parks and Wildlife- Flora and Fauna. Accessed 15 September 2023. 
	
<https://lithgow-tourism.com/flora.htm>.
46	
Oberon Council. n.d. Welcome to Oberon. Accessed 25 September 2023. <https://www.visitoberon.com/>.
47	
Office of Environment & Heritage. n.d. Threatened Species found in Oberon IBRA sub-region. Accessed 25 September 2023. 	
	
	
<https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/threatenedspeciesapp/cmaSearchResults.aspx?SubCmaId=360>.
48	
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. 2021 Census all Persons QuickStats. Accessed 26 September 2023. 
	
<https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021>.
49	
IDcommunity. 2021. Community Profile. Accessed 26 September 2023. <https://profile.id.com.au/>.
90
91
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

50	
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Index of Relative Socio-Economic Advantage and Disadvantage (IRSAD). 
	
Census of Population and Housing: Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA). Accessed 6 October 2023. 
	
<https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/32dcbb18c1d24f4aa89caf680413c741/page/IRSAD/>.
51	
Australian Bureau of Meteorology. n.d. Previous Droughts. Accessed 6 September 2023. 
	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.
52	
NSW Government. n.d. Key Facts about Drought. Accessed 6 September 2023. 
	
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/drought-in-nsw/key-facts-about-drought>.
53	
ABC News. 2007. Drought, high Aust dollar pressures Bathurst factory. Accessed 6 September 2023. 
	
< https://www.abc.net.au/news/2007-11-21/drought-high-aust-dollar-pressures-bathurst-factory/731810>.
54	
ABC News. 2011. Dam offers hope to boost water supply. Accessed 6 September 2023. 
	
< https://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-08-11/dam-offers-hope-to-boost-water-supply/2834394>.
55	
ABC News. 2005, May 16. Dry forces local council to change roadworks schedule. 
	
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2005-05-16/dry-forces-local-council-to-change-roadworks/1571428>.
56	
ABC News. 2009. Delta downplays water fears. 
	
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2009-12-04/delta-downplays-water-fears/1168376>.
57	
ABC News. 2011. Lithgow district power station’s drought-proofing project. 
	
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-01-26/lithgow-district-power-stations-drought-proofing/1917930>.
58	
Claughton, D. 2014. Liverpool Plains included in drought assistance. 
	
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/programs/nsw-country-hour/2014-03-28/liverpool-plains-drought-assistance/5352400>.
59	
ABC News. 2018. Prison inmates help drought-affected farmers catch up with maintenance jobs this Christmas. Accessed 6 
	
September 2023. < https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2018-12-19/prisoners-helping-farmers-in-times-of-drought/10631782>.
60	
NSW Government. 2020. Macquarie Valley snapshot 2017-2020 Drought. Accessed 6 September 2023. <https://www.industry.
	
nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/469253/macquarie-valley-snapshot-drought-2017-20-20210914.pdf>
61	
ABC News. 2019. Motor racing fans double down to conserve water at parched Bathurst 1000. Accessed 6 September 2023. 
	
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-10-12/bathurst-1000-water-woes/11595448>.
62	
NSW Government. 2020. Macquarie Valley snapshot 2017-2020 Drought. Accessed 6 September 2023. <https://www.industry.
	
nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/469253/macquarie-valley-snapshot-drought-2017-20-20210914.pdf>
63	
ABC News. 2019. Trains deliver water to drought-affected NSW coal mines to keep production going and save jobs. Accessed 6 
	
September 2023. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-08-08/water-train-saves-mine-and-jobs-in-lithgow/11392468>
64	
Department of Regional NSW. 2023. Bathurst and Oberon Regional Economic Development Strategy – 2023 Update. 
	
NSW Government. Accessed 6 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/Bathurst-and-Oberon-REDS-2023-Update.pdf>.
65	
Means, Tiffany. 2021. Climate Change and Droughts: What’s the Connection? Accessed 19 September 2023. 
	
<https://yaleclimateconnections.org/2021/08/climate-change-and-droughts-whats-the-connection/>.
66	
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2019. IPCC Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 °C. Accessed 19 
	
September 2023. <http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/989851589954985863/Assessing-Drought-Hazard-and-Risk-
	
Principles-and-Implementation-Guidance>.
67	
World Bank. 2019.  Assessing Drought Hazard and Risk: Principles and Implementation Guidance. Washington D.C. Accessed 19 	
	
September 2023. <http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/989851589954985863/Assessing-Drought-Hazard-and-Risk-
	
Principles-and-Implementation-Guidance >. 
68	
Climate Council. 2018. Fact Sheet: Climate Change and Drought. Accessed 19 September 2023. <https://www.climatecouncil.
	
org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf>.
69	
Climate Council. 2018. Fact Sheet: Climate Change and Drought. Accessed 11 September 2023. <https://www.climatecouncil.
	
org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf>
70	
Climate Council. 2018. Fact Sheet: Climate Change and Drought. Accessed 11 September 2023. <https://www.climatecouncil.
	
org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/CC_MVSA0146-Fact-Sheet-Drought_V2-FA_High-Res_Single-Pages.pdf>
71	
Doyle, Kate. 2018. What you need to know about droughts: Why they happen and how they are defined. Accessed 11 
	
September 2023. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-08-01/what-you-need-to-know-about-droughts/10051956>.
72	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2023. Media Releases: The Bureau Declares El Nino and Positive Indian Ocean Dipole Events. 
	
19 September 2023. Accessed 25 Sept 2023. 
	
<https://media.bom.gov.au/releases/1183/the-bureau-declares-el-nino-and-positive-indian-ocean-dipole-events/>.
73	
Department of Primary Industries. 2023. Combined Drought Indicator. NSW Government. Accessed 26 October 2023. 
	
<https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/>.
74	
Climate Change in Australia. n.d. Thresholds Calculator. Accessed 25 September 2023. 
	
<https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/threshold-calculator/#>.
75	
Ekström, M. et al. 2015. Central Slopes Cluster Report - Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource 
	
Management Regions: Cluster Reports, eds. Ekström, M. et al., CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Australia. Accessed 14 
	
September 2023 <https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/CENTRAL_SLOPES_
	
CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf >.
76	
Ekström, M. et al. 2015. Central Slopes Cluster Report - Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource 
	
Management Regions: Cluster Reports, eds. Ekström, M. et al., CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Australia. Accessed 14 
	
September 2023 <https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/CENTRAL_SLOPES_
	
CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf >.
77	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2011. Sydney Contingent Water Assets and Contingent Water Liabilities. Australian Government. 
	
Accessed 6 Nov 2023. <http://www.bom.gov.au/water/nwa/2010/sydney/future-prospects.html>.
78	
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Stakeholders. 2023. Round 1 Stakeholder and Community Engagement. WSP. 
79	
Cianconi, P., Betrò, S., & Janiri, L. 2020. The impact of climate change on mental health: a systematic descriptive review. 
	
Frontiers in psychiatry, 11, 74.
80	
Nitschke, M., Tucker, G. R., Hansen, A. L., Williams, S., Zhang, Y., & Bi, P. 2011. 
	
Impact of two recent extreme heat episodes on morbidity and mortality in Adelaide, South Australia: a case-series analysis. 
	
Accessed 05 October 2023. Environmental Health, 10(1), 1-9.
81	
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Stakeholders. 2023. Round 1 Stakeholder and Community Engagement – Phone Interviews. WSP
82	
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Stakeholders. 2023. Round 1 Stakeholder and Community Engagement. WSP.
83	
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Stakeholders. 2023. Round 1 Stakeholder and Community Engagement. WSP.
84	
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Stakeholders. 2023. Round 1 Stakeholder and Community Engagement. WSP.
85	
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Stakeholders. 2023. Round 1 Stakeholder and Community Engagement. WSP.
86	
The Dry Farming Institute. 2023. What is dry farming? Accessed 05 October 2023. 
	
<https://dryfarming.org/about/what-is-dry-farming/>.
87	
ABC News. 2021. Looming closure of Lithgow coal mines fuels concern over transition plans for hundreds of workers. 
	
Accessed 05 October 2023. 
	
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-10-03/future-of-coal-fired-power-stations-lithgow/100493820>.
88	
Yahoo News. 2019. The towns that could run out of water in months, as “day zero” looms. Accessed 05 October 2023. 
	
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/the-towns-that-could-run-out-of-water-in-months-as-drought-day-zero-looms-231154820.html>.
89	
Vins, H., Bell, J., Saha, S. & Hess, J.J. 2015. The mental health outcomes of drought: a systematic review and causal process 
	
diagram. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(10): 13251-13275.
90	
Austin, E.K., Handley, T., Kiem, A.S., Rich, J.L., Lewin, T.J., Askland, H.H., Askarimarnani, S.S., Perkins, D.A. & Kelly, B.J. 2018. 
	
Drought-related stress among farmers: findings from the Australian Rural Mental Health Study. 
	
Medical Journey of Australia, 209(4): 159-165.
91	
Brew, B., Inder, K., Allen. J., Thomas, M. & Kelly, B. 2016. 
	
The health and wellbeing of Australian farmers: a longitudinal cohort study. BMC Public Health, 16: 988.
92	
WSP. 2023. Resilience Diagnostic Assessment.
93	
Bathurst, Lithgow, Oberon Residents. 2023. Stakeholder Engagement Round One.
94	
Bathurst, Lithgow, Oberon Residents. 2023. Stakeholder Engagement Round Two.
95	
CSIRO. N.d. The Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach (RAPTA): A Guide to Design, Implementing and 
	
Assessing Interventions for Sustainable Futures. Accessed 16 Nov 2023. <https://research.csiro.au/eap/rapta/>. 
96	
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 2020. Future Drought Fund Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
	
Framework. Australian Government. Accessed 17 Nov 2023. 
	
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>.
92
93
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan
Bathurst, Lithgow, and Oberon Drought Resilience Plan

The Regional Drought Resilience Planning program is jointly funded by the Australian Government 
and NSW Government under the Future Drought Fund