Regional Drought  
Resilience Plan 
Coolamon and Junee 
June 2024

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
iiii
ABARES
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and 
Sciences
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
BoM
Bureau of Meteorology
CDI
Combined Drought Indicator
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
DAFF
Commonwealth Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
DCCEEW (NSW)
Department of Climate Change, the Environment, Energy & Water 
New South Wales; formerly Department of Planning and Environment
DPIRD
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development  
(formerly known as Department of Regional NSW and Department 
of Primary Industries)
EDIS
Enhanced Drought Information System
FDF
Future Drought Fund
FRRR
Foundation for Rural and Regional Renewal
GRDC
Grains Research and Development Corporation
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
LLS
Local Land Services (now incorporated into DPIRD)
LGA
Local Government Area
PCG
Project Control Group
REROC
Riverina Eastern Regional Organisation of Councils 
RDA
Regional Development Australia
RDC
Rural Research and Development Corporations
RFCS
Rural Financial Counselling Service
RDRP
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
RCP
Representative Concentration Pathway
SPI
Standardised Precipitation Index
SRG
Stakeholder Reference Group
SSMI
Standardised Soil Moisture Index
Term
Definition
Absorptive 
capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to continue without adapting or 
changing their behaviour in response to environmental and socioeconomic 
changes (Béné et. al., 2012).
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response 
to actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce 
vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
Adaptive 
capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to 
environmental and socioeconomic changes.
Adaptive 
governance
Co-ordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between 
systems when designing interventions and for their implementation and 
evaluation.
Co-design
The process of partnership to develop and formulate project delivery and 
agreed objectives and needs, using participatory methods. A process of 
working together utilising generative and explorative processes.
Climate Change
Global, long-term shifts in average weather conditions, such as becoming 
warmer, wetter, or drier over several decades or longer.
Drought
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, 
abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient 
to meet our normal use (BoM, 2024).
Economic 
resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and 
stressors without changing the economic status or outcomes.
Environmental 
resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope with (absorb) a diverse 
range of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural processes and 
ecosystem services. Adaptation and transformational change can be slow-
moving in natural systems.
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups 
and agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be 
formally institutionalised, or informal.
Intervention 
options
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, 
initiatives and investments that are planned to bring about change in the 
system (Maru et. al., 2018).
Abbreviations	
Key Terms

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
iii
iii
Term
Definition
Local 
knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of 
lived experience within a landscape, bearing witness to the operation of 
systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people 
interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
Preparation
Action taken to reduce the impact of an event that occurs and accelerate 
the recovery period.
Recovery
A return to longer term viability. Recovery may be a return to Business As 
Usual or require transformational change.
Resilience
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to 
maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacks (Walker et. 
al., 2004). Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic 
resilience, environmental resilience and social resilience.
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, 
recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated with such 
systems (Reisinger et. al, 2020). Drought risk refers to the difference in 
farm outcomes (e.g., profits) between ‘normal’ and ‘drought’ conditions.
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples 
include: major storms, floods, bush fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, 
terrorism and cyber-attacks’ (City of Sydney, 2018).
Social 
resilience
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks 
and stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions. 
Regarding climate change, social resilience may only be possible after 
adaptive or transformational change.
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse 
effect, e.g. drought, climate change.
Systems
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a 
complex ‘whole’. 
Term
Definition
Theory of 
change
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain 
how and why outcomes and impacts will be achieved through use, 
implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities and outputs 
(Maru et. al., 2018).
Trends
A trend is a general direction or movement towards change or a new 
development. It refers to a prevailing tendency or pattern that is emerging 
or becoming more popular over time.
Threshold
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable 
causes a system to shift to a qualitatively different regime. Also referred 
to as a tipping point (Folke et. al., 2010).
Transform
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different 
structure, functions, feedbacks and identity (Folke et al., 2010).
Trigger point
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management 
intervention. Trigger points are usually defined in the planning phase 
(Wise et. al., 2014).

iv
Acknowledgements  
and Appreciations
Our Consortium representing Coolamon and Junee Shires acknowledges the 
traditional owners of the land where we live, work and meet – the Wiradjuri. 
We pay our respect to Wiradjuri Elders both past and present and extend that 
respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who are part of 
Coolamon and Junee Shires

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
v
A note from the Mayors
We are excited to present the Regional Drought Resilience Plan for the Coolamon 
and Junee Shire Consortium Group 10. Droughts and floods are part of our Australian 
way of life. The damage that they can cause to our environment, communities and 
economy are extensive and we need to plan for how to manage our responses to these 
devastating natural events.
This report focuses on drought and how our communities can be aware of and 
prepare for the impacts that droughts have, in the hope of building resilience in our 
communities. We look forward to working in partnership with our residents, community 
groups, local businesses, and other levels of government and their agencies, to deliver 
this project.  We know that by working together we can achieve great outcomes for our 
communities and encourage every member of the Coolamon and Junee Shires to read 
this Plan and to identify how you can be involved to support this important initiative.

M31
Wagga Wagga
Junee
Illabo
Stockinbingal
Cootamundra
Narrandera
Ardlethan
Coolamon
Gundagai
Lockhart
Jugiong
Harden
Temora
Young
Wee J
State F
uckingbong
tate Forest
Red Hill
State Forest
Billapaloola
State Forest
Bung
State 
Ingalba
Nature
Reserve
Ulandra
Nature
Reserve
D
Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
vi
N

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
vii
4
2
5
3
Regional Drought  
Resilience
Resilience in the 
local region
Coolamon and Junee  
Region and 
Communities
Drought Resilience 
Actions
History of  
drought impacts
Quick Guide 
1
6
Conclusion

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
viii
viii
Contents
01	
Regional Drought Resilience
1
02	
Coolamon and Junee Region and Communities
16
03	
History of drought impacts
25
04	
Resilience in the local region
36
05	
Drought Resilience Actions
43
What has already been done to build drought resilience
44
Theme 1 – A sustainable region and a healthy and  
protected environment
46
Theme 2 – Agriculture
50
Theme 3 – Diverse and prosperous economy
52
Theme 4 – A strong and collaborative community
57
Theme 5 – Strong infrastructure and transport networks
63
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
65
06	
Conclusion
74

Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
1
Regional Drought Resilience
01

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
2
1.	 Coolamon  
and Junee Regional 
Drought Resilience 
Plan
1.1.	 Vision for the region 
Coolamon and Junee’s vision is for a 
robust and diverse economy, a progressive 
and productive agricultural sector, with 
opportunities for youth and considered 
forward planning that bolsters the region. 
The community aspires to be acknowledged 
for its adaptability, resourcefulness and 
perseverance.
1.2.	 Background 
Drought has an effect on all aspects of the community, 
resulting in major social, economic and environmental 
impacts (Abunyewah et al., 2023). The Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning (RDRP) Program is part of the 
Future Drought Fund (FDF) and is co-funded by the 
Commonwealth Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Forestry (DAFF) and the NSW Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD), supporting 
local governments to work together to proactively plan for 
drought resilience (DAFF and ABARES, 2023). 
The RDRP’s aim to:
•	 Identify ways for Councils to support their region’s 
resilience to future droughts.
•	 Devise actions communities can undertake to build 
their drought resilience across regions.
Our regional Councils recognise the importance of 
preparing for and developing a robust community 
in good times to lessen the impact of drought and 
accelerate the recovery period. This Plan looks at 
how the whole of the community can benefit from 
working together to strengthen resilience. Resilience 
is important in rural and regional communities. It 
reinforces the connectedness of its members, their 
ability to manage through seasonal conditions (that 
create uncertainty and present a challenge to their 
businesses and way of life). 
This Plan provides an opportunity to identify actions 
that will directly assist the region to strengthen social, 
economic and environmental resilience, supporting 
communities in future droughts. It builds on the wealth 
of effort, research and planning, that has been, and 
continues to be delivered in drought. 
The FDF seeks to enhance the public good by building 
drought resilience in Australia’s agricultural sector, the 
agricultural landscape and communities. The intent 
of its eight interrelated foundational programs is to 
have an innovative and profitable farming sector, a 
sustainable natural environment and adaptable rural, 
regional and remote communities, all with increased 
resilience to the impacts of drought and climate change 
(DAFF, 2024a). The eight programs include Climate 
Services for Agriculture Platform, Drought Resilience 
Self-Assessment Tool, Farm Business Resilience, 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning, Drought 
Resilience Innovation and Adoption Hubs, four grant 
programs, Drought Resilience Leaders and Networks to 
Build Drought Resilience. 
The FDF is intended to deliver against three inter-
connected strategic priorities:
•	 economic resilience for an innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector
•	 environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscapes
•	 social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities.
This Plan focuses on the community as a system where 
economic, environmental and social capacity to endure, 
respond and evolve through drought are enhanced. 
Implementation funding will be available for approved 
plans under the Australian Government’s FDF.
1.3.	 Purpose of this Plan
The Coolamon and Junee RDRP provides support to  
help our region better plan for and become more 
resilient to the impacts of drought over time. It has been 
developed in a collaborative, partnership approach, 
drawing on locally-led inputs from those who live and 
work in the region.
The purpose of this Plan is:
•	 creating stronger connectedness and greater social 
capital within the communities of Coolamon and 
Junee, contributing to wellbeing and security.
•	 increase self-reliance and improve risk mitigation by 
building on the local and regional resilience initiative 
already been undertaken. 
•	 supporting leadership and community networks  
to thrive. 
•	 improve timely and evidence-based decision making 
that meets the needs of Coolamon and Junee. 
•	 empowering communities to implement 
transformative activities that improve their resilience 
to drought.
•	 supporting more primary producers to adopt 
whole-of-system approaches to Natural Resource 
Management to improve the natural resource base, for 
long-term productivity and landscape health.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
3
This Plan has been developed between the two Councils 
and their respective communities in a collaborative 
approach that has drawn on the experience and input of 
those who live and work in our region. 
1.4.	 Key inputs to the Plan
The following documents were considered through the 
development of this Plan:
•	 Murray Darling Basin Authority Plan and related 
documents
•	 Other regional documents including: 
	– Coolamon Shire Council Local Strategic Planning 
Statement 
	– Junee Shire’s Community Strategic Plan ‘Making 
Tracks’ 2035 
	– Local economic development strategies – Junee 
Shire Economic Development Plan ‘Doing Business 
in Junee’
	– Eastern Riverina Regional Economic Development 
Strategy 2023 Update
	– Riverina Murray Regional Plan 2041
	– NSW Water Strategy 
	– Draft NSW Regional Water Strategies (Murray, 
Murrumbidgee)
	– Riverina and Murray Joint Organisation (RAMJO) 
Water Position Paper
•	 Resilience Principles: Infrastructure Australia’s 
approach to resilience
•	 QLD Government: Investment Logic Mapping Guide
•	 CSU Southern Innovation Hub - Baselining Drought - 
Developing a baseline understanding of farmer and 
community perceptions of drought
•	 Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management 
Policy (DRAMP) Framework 2018
•	 CSIRO Drought Resilience mission (2022)
•	 Economic Development Study – Murray Region (2018)
•	 Government and organisations publications 
including:
	– Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics and Sciences (ABARES) 
	– Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO) 
	– Rural Research and Development Corporation 
(RDC) 
	– Grains Research and Development Corporation 
(GRDC) 
•	 The Regional NSW Investment Attraction Strategy 
2022 - 2027 (DRNSW, 2022) that sets out the NSW 
Government’s priorities and plans to achieve long-
term social and economic success for regional 
communities across the state.
Additionally, contributions from a broad range of 
community and stakeholders - including community 
organisations, businesses, service industries, primary 
producers and, volunteers - were instrumental in the co-
design of this Pwlan.
It is intended for this Plan to be a living document and to 
be considered and factored into a range of other plans 
and strategies delivered by local government, state 
government, non-government organisations, not-for-
profits organisations, and others.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
4
1.5.	 A Plan for drought resilience
Of all climate and weather-related conditions affecting Australia, drought is often 
the most challenging. Periods of persistent drought with downward trends in rainfall 
and streamflow are well documented. Coolamon and Junee Shire's contribute 
significantly to the nation's grain, wool, and livestock production. As such, it is 
important that these communities are well-prepared and resilient in the face of 
climate change and drought.
Drought is a defining feature of the climatic cycle of the Australian landscape 
(Department of Agriculture, 2019). In a large part this owes to our geography. Our 
continent spans the latitudes of the subtropical high-pressure belt. This is an area of 
sinking, dry, stable air and usually clear skies (BoM, 2024). The far north and south 
of the country come under the influence of reasonably regular rain-bearing systems 
for at least part of the year. 
The east coast is normally well watered by moisture from weather driven by the 
Tasman and Coral Seas. However, over most of the country rainfall is low and erratic. 
Even in the wetter areas, very dry years can disrupt normal activities and lead to 
water shortages (BoM, 2024).
As such, droughts will come again, and they are anticipated to get worse in parts of 
the country as a result of a changing climate. Droughts are challenging times, not 
just for each farm, but beyond the farm gate for entire communities and regions.
The costs of drought are spread across economic, social and environmental factors. 
The toll taken on regions and their communities has been enormous and the impacts 
often linger for decades (Southern NSW Innovation Hub, 2022).
The most effective response to rising uncertainty is to plan for greater drought 
resilience. This can be achieved by building sustainable and diverse regional 
economies, reducing the vulnerability of communities to changing economic 
conditions and accelerating recovery, as well as enhancing thriving natural 
environments.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
5
1.6.	 Drought Resilience at a glance
When it comes to drought, “our best defence against 
the shocks of drought is to prepare. Planning for greater 
drought resilience across all aspects of regional and 
remote communities, not just for primary producers, will 
have the greatest impact. Resilience can be achieved by 
building sustainable and diverse regional economies, 
reducing the vulnerability of communities to changing 
economic conditions, accelerating recovery, and 
enhancing the natural environment” (DRNSW, 2022). 
It is also important to consider and understand when 
adaptation or transformational change is required to 
build resilience. 
The impact of multiple events such as the Black 
Summer bushfires, floods of 2021 and 2022, mice 
plagues, and COVID-19 related supply chain and 
labour force disruptions, are likely to compound 
any near-future drought recovery in the short term 
(DRNSW, 2022). Drought resilience goes beyond 
water management; it's a holistic approach aimed at 
safeguarding the fabric of our communities. The lasting 
effects of past droughts, including the Millennium 
Drought, serve as reminders for the need of forward-
thinking and strategic planning.
The impacts of drought are also dependent on the 
timing, duration and the area over which the drought 
occurs. These factors can affect how the community is 
able to respond. No two droughts are the same and this 
in itself presents a challenge to communities. 
The journey for developing this Plan for Coolamon 
Junee is illustrated in Figure 1. The process recognises 
communities in the region have been consulted about 
drought previously, with this Plan aiming to build on 
this work. Figure 2 provides a graphical representation 
of the insights previously gathered on the topics of 
drought and enhancing resilience in the region. It 
captures the voices, ideas, and aspirations expressed by 
the residents and stakeholders who live, work, and form 
these communities.
Figure 1	
Regional Drought Resilience Plan journey
Project Inception
	– Project Control Group
	– Engage stakeholders
Literature Review and data 
collection
	– Demographics
	– Historical droughts
	– Weather patterns
	– Future droughts
	– Climate change
Community and Stakeholder 
engagement
	– Survey
	– In person
	– Interviews
	– Stakeholder reference group
Reporting
	– Action Plan
	– Regional Drought Resilience Plan
1
2
3
4

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
6
Secure water supply
•	 Water management  
and infrastructure
•	 Water efficiency -  
water restrictions
•	 Priority of drinking water 
versus other uses
Governance
•	 Clear leadership e.g. 
understanding drought 
response and being 
prepared
•	 Clear messaging around 
drought signal e.g. 
translating climate 
change/weather
•	 Tracking of effectiveness 
of drought measures
Agriculture
•	 Resilient farm and 
agriculture businesses 
i.e. production flexibility
•	 Mental resilience to 
stressors of drought 
e.g. decision making, 
deteriorating landscape
•	 Are financial drought 
measures and grants 
effect? i.e. farm 
household allowance
Prosperous economy
•	 Diversity of income 
outside of agriculture
•	 Industry within LGA 
that is less reliant 
on agriculture e.g. 
manufacturing
•	 Maintaining diverse skills 
within the community
Connected and 
resilient community
•	 Communities that pull 
together in times of 
hardship e.g. festivalsa
•	 Fatigue from living 
through disasters e.g. 
bush fires to drought  
to flood
Reliable assets and 
infrastructure
•	 Reliable and available 
facilities when required 
e.g. emergency water 
supplies
•	 Assets are fit for purpose 
when they’re needed
•	 Maintenance of roads 
from increased traffic 
(stock, fodder, water, 
freight)
Figure 2	
Previous engagement outcomes
What we heard

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
7
1.7.	 Plan development 
The development of this Plan has been guided 
by a Project Control Group (PCG) comprising 
representatives from Coolamon Shire Council, Junee 
Council, NSW Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development and GHD through a 
three phased approach. The three phased approach 
focussed on community-led development of themes, 
vision, and actions. 
Phase 1: Understanding the community 
profile, what is known about drought in the 
region, the lessons learnt and the region’s 
greatest risks
Phase 1 involved the formation of a PCG which 
consisted of members of the two Councils, NSW 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development, and consultants. The PCG provided 
inputs and guided the development of the Plan. They 
also assisted with arrangements for community and 
stakeholder engagement activities. This phase of the 
project also included a review of literature to better 
understand the community profile, what we currently 
know about drought in the region, the lessons learnt 
from previous droughts and where the greatest risks 
lie. Some of the sources utilised are outlined in Section 
1.4. The literature review informed future phases of 
the project including identification of Plan themes and 
ensures the Plan is built on past work and programs. 
This also included looking at resilience frameworks. 
A Project Plan and Community and Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan were developed to help guide 
the project and to identify key groups to attempt to 
engage with. This included some stakeholder mapping 
and started conversations between the Councils and 
the consultants to identify key stakeholders within the 
community who should be involved in workshops and/
or one-on-one interviews.
 
•

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
8
Phase 2: Community and stakeholder 
engagement to identify, test and 
understand the regional opportunities
Phase 2 comprised the delivery of the engagement 
approach. A review of documentation from the 
consortia of Councils resulted in the development of 
five initial common key themes. The initial themes were 
tested and refined through the stakeholder reference 
groups (SRGs) to make sure they were a sound 
representation of the region’s key areas of focus. The 
PCG also provided input on the themes and the Plan’s 
vision statement. These themes were then used for 
categorising and analysing the community feedback, 
providing a summary of the region's strengths and 
needs. The themes are shown in Figure 3 below.
The outputs from Phase 1 and the seven in-person 
community engagement sessions were utilised to 
conduct a series of resilience workshops SRG meetings 
with identified regional stakeholders to test these 
findings and identify strategic opportunities. These 
workshops were held online. A range of community 
members were invited to participate. These included but 
are not limited to:
•	 Local businesses
•	 Retailers
•	 Manufacturers
•	 Service providers
•	 Primary producers, agribusinesses and agricultural 
suppliers
•	 Community committees and  associations (355 
committees, Landcare, NSW Farmers Federation, 
Junee Business and Trades, Junee Community Centre, 
Old Junee Hall Society)
•	 Aboriginal Stakeholders (LALCs)
•	 Educational providers (schools)
•	 Health providers (Hospital)
•	 Tourism transport operators
•	 Volunteer groups (Country Womens' Association, 
RSL, Mens Sheds, etc)
•	 Emergency Services
•	 Councillors and  State Government representatives
•	 NSW Government Agencies (Department of Regional 
NSW, Local Land Services).
The engagement activities were designed to encourage 
meaningful conversations and insights from a broad 
range of community. The levels of participation in SRGs 
was identified as an issue during the project, as the 
timing clashed with harvest as well as other end of 
year activities. This meant stakeholder engagement 
was lower than expected and led to the decision to 
hold a fourth SRG meeting at a later time to ensure a 
greater level of input was captured . The compressed 
timeframes of the project meant some groups were 
unable to be engaged as part of the SRG or interview 
process.
A sustainable region 
and a healthy and 
protected environment 
that efficiently utilises 
its natural resources
A resilient 
and innovative 
agricultural 
sector
Diverse and 
prosperous 
economy
A strong and 
collaborative 
community
Strong 
infrastructure 
and transport 
networks
Figure 3	
Five key themes of the Plan

Key drought related impacts (Section 3.6) were 
discussed at the SRGs and identified for each of the 
themes, with major impacts rated as low, medium or 
high. Initial ideas for actions were encouraged from the 
stakeholders and developed through discussion within 
the group.
Engagement allowed people to express information in 
their own words so that local voices and needs were 
highlighted. The engagement combined the use of 
in-person and digital methods, ensuring inclusivity 
and transparency throughout the process. An online 
survey provided an alternative way for community to 
participate and provide inputs to the plan’s development. 
An overview of the engagement activities is provided in 
Figure 4.
Community Engagement Sessions
Consulted over 60 community members at seven in-person drop-in sessions between Saturday 
14 October 2023 and Wednesday 18 October 2023, at different locations. Factsheets informing 
community about the program and the Plan were also posted in multiple locations in both the 
Coolamon and Junee LGAs to promote the engagement sessions and survey. Through undertaking 
relaxed and informal drop-in style information sessions, attendees were asked a series of questions 
which were developed through integrating the key themes of this project.
Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) meetings
Four SRG sessions were held between Thursday 23 November 2023 and Thursday 1 February 2024. 
They comprised of representatives from the local government areas, community subject matter 
experts, project team members, and other stakeholders. Over 80 stakeholders were invited to 
participate in the SRG’s. Twenty-nine members were invited to provide ideas, insights and feedback.
Targeted interviews with stakeholders
Targeted interviews with seven industry and community members to obtain more detailed input on the 
drought work already undertaken in the region.
Online survey
Using digital tools and publishing a survey enabled engagement of a broader audience and made 
participation more convenient for community members. Eleven survey responses were received and 
formed part of the feedback that informed the recommendations included within this Plan
Online meetings and phone calls
Phone calls and hosting online meetings provided the opportunity to bridge geographical gaps, 
ensuring a wider array of stakeholders could provide insights without the constraints of location.  
This method enabled in-depth discussions, capturing the communities’ perspectives, and concerns.  
A total of 7 PCG meetings were held
Email communication
Employing email outreach provided an additional channel for engaging with stakeholders. It enabled 
targeted stakeholders, in remote areas, to share their insights in a convenient manner. This approach 
not only facilitated the collection of valuable data but also allowed for a thoughtful, well-documented 
exchange of ideas and feedback.
Figure 4	
Summary of engagement activities

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
10
Phase 3: Prioritise and develop the Plan
Phase 3 consisted of prioritising the opportunities 
(through the SRG and PCG) and documenting each in 
this Plan. The investment logic framework (Section 4.2) 
was applied to the long list of actions to better identify 
priority actions. These opportunities are organised using 
the thematic framework shown in Figure 5. The themes 
highlight the public sentiment that improving drought 
resilience in the broader community and region, along 
with diversifying and value adding to the agricultural 
industry will benefit the region’s response to drought. 
The Plan identifies actions that can be progressed 
now that align with the consortia of Councils’ ability to 
influence and will improve outcomes for the community. 
The communities of Coolamon Junee have initiated 
several actions within their communities developed 
through successive droughts. Those actions have been 
built on in this Plan in an effort to improve the region’s 
drought resilience. These actions include improving 
the health and well-being of the community, improving 
the region’s wastewater infrastructure, diversifying 
the region’s economy through business attraction and 
promotion and protecting landscape health and natural 
resource management. The PCG provided final review of 
the Plan before it was sent to CSIRO for review. The PCG 
was also involved in the final updates before the Plan 
was published and publicly available. 
Key Themes of the Plan
A sustainable region and a healthy and protected environment 
that efficiently utilises its natural resources
In creating a sustainable region and a healthy environment, this Plan seeks to ensure that local  
resources are used efficiently, climate change impacts are understood, and adaptations put in 
place. Planning and management practices assist in reducing community impact on the natural 
environment and protect biodiversity.
A resilient and innovative agricultural sector
A resilient and innovative agricultural sector that is supported by a skilled workforce.
Diverse and prosperous economy
A robust local industry that is supported, heritage assets that are protected, and tourism that is 
promoted, to encourage local employment opportunities.
A strong and collaborative community
Services and housing support a healthy, active, inclusive and liveable community with good 
governance and strong sense of shared responsibility.
Strong infrastructure and transport networks
Infrastructure and transport that supports and links the region, and provides connectivity. 
Figure 5 	 Detailed five key themes of the Plan

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
11
1.8.	 Drought resilience framework 
Defining resilience
Resilience is a broad concept that encompasses a 
range of interconnected factors and conditions. For 
a system to be resilient it must have the ability to 
absorb a disturbance (sometimes referred to as shocks 
and stresses) and reorganise to maintain the existing 
functions structure and feedbacks (Walker et al., 
2004). Resilience is developed across the system by 
developing components across three broad dimensions: 
economic resilience, environmental resilience, and 
social resilience. Each of these dimensions is relevant 
in its own way and they are all strongly interconnected, 
reflecting the capacity of individuals, organisations, and 
systems to withstand and recover from shocks. 
Shocks and stresses 
Shocks and stresses in the context of this Plan refers to 
the following:
•	 Episodic shocks are sudden, large-scale disasters 
that disrupt and threaten communities. In the context 
of drought, some significant shocks may include:
	– Sudden water shortages.
	– Extreme weather events (storms, bushfires, 
landslides, earthquakes, heatwaves).
	– Infrastructure failure.
•	 Chronic stressors can be thought of as slow-moving 
disasters that affect the community. In the context of 
drought, stressors may include:
	– Food and water shortages.
	– Climate change.
	– Aging infrastructure.
Dimensions of resilience
To establish a holistic approach towards resilience, a broad range of systems must be considered, including social 
resilience, economic resilience and environmental resilience. 
Resilience capacity
Absorptive capacity is often described in traditional 
resilience terms as the ability to absorb shocks or to 
‘bounce-back’ (Haider and Cleaver, 2023). Adaptive 
capacity is often the next step on the resilience journey 
and entails having the necessary resources to learn and 
adapt the system (Haider and Cleaver, 2023). However, 
it is increasingly being recognised that adaptation is 
insufficient to deal with large-scale environmental 
issues like climate change. Transformation, which is 
the shift to a new system including change in priorities 
Social
Economic
Environment
Social – the ability of individuals 
and communities to withstand the 
psychological and social impacts 
of drought. It involves fostering 
strong social networks, community 
cohesion, and mental health support 
systems to help people cope with 
the stress and challenges associated 
with water scarcity. 
Economic – focuses on the ability 
of local economies to adapt to and 
recover from the economic shocks 
caused by drought. This may include 
diversifying the local economy, 
supporting businesses that are 
drought-resistant, and providing 
financial resources to mitigate 
economic losses during drought 
events (DPIE, 2021).
Environment – centres on the 
capacity of natural ecosystems 
and water resources to endure 
and recover from the ecological 
impacts of drought. This may involve 
protecting and restoring habitats, 
improving water conservation 
practices, and preserving biodiversity 
to maintain ecosystem services 
during and after drought.
and leading to changes across multiple scales, is 
sometimes the best way to deal with large scale 
issues. However, transformation is not always 
needed or ‘good’ and in certain circumstances 
adaptation is the best course of action (Haider and 
Cleaver, 2023).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
12
Resilience thinking
Resilience thinking incorporates the notions of 
absorption, adaptation, and transformation into a 
unified approach, as shown in Figure 6. It offers a 
structured framework for developing strategies aimed 
at enhancing resilience (Folke et. al., 2010). These 
different capacities are vital components of building 
resilience, and this holistic perspective acknowledges 
resilience is not a one-size-fits-all concept and tailored 
approaches are necessary to address the diverse and 
dynamic challenges communities, ecosystems, and 
organisations/businesses face.
Resilience framework
A resilient region is one where our people, communities, 
and systems are able to withstand and bounce back 
from drought but also prosper afterwards. Resilient 
communities have the ability to resist, absorb, 
accommodate, recover, transform and thrive in a timely, 
effective manner in response to the effects of shocks 
and stresses to enable positive economic, social, 
environmental and governance outcomes (Infrastructure 
Australia, 2022).
Understanding how to improve the resilience of a system 
requires an appreciation of the characteristics that make 
a system resilient. The following 11 principles (detailed 
in Figure 7) form the framework to measure how this 
Plans’ actions improve resilience. These resilience 
principles have been adapted from those identified by 
Infrastructure Australia and the Stockholm Resilience 
Centre (Simonsen et al., n.d.). To provide a framework of 
11 principles to by which to measure resilience. 
Figure 6 	 The Resilience Framework applied in this document
For radically changing 
the system or building 
a new system if 
maintaining and 
modifying the existing 
system won’t work.
For modifying 
the system 
when needed.
For maintaining of 
key functions and 
structures of a 
system in the face 
of shocks.
Absorptive 
capacity
Adaptive 
capacity
Transformative 
capacity

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
13
The Resilience Framework
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative
Participation: Inclusivity and connectivity
Resilient systems prioritise broad and well-functioning participation, including 
vulnerable and marginalised groups. This fosters a sense of shared ownership, 
vision, and enables high levels of connectivity between different social groups. 
This can increase information sharing and help build trust and reciprocity. This 
can enable a region to overcome and recover from disturbances more quickly
Resist: Identify supports and actions to withstand the effects of 
drought
Systems that withstand or endure shocks and stresses to prevent an impact on 
infrastructure services, assets, networks, injury and loss of life. Failure should 
not be disproportionate to the cause. Systems should be safe-to-fail, anticipate 
failures and designed strategically to ensure failure is contained and minimised
Ensure our communities are prepared for drought and ready to 
respond
Well-constructed and well-managed systems that lessen the impact of all 
hazards on communities and infrastructure services. Systems should: 
•	
anticipate and proactively plan for future shocks and stresses (this may 
include trigger points for activation of resources), and provide services and 
infrastructure tailored to community needs and preferences, at reasonable 
cost. 
•	
identify low regrets pathways that consider long-term planning horizons and 
multiple scenarios.
Recover: be equipped to respond to drought and its impacts 
A resilient system can actively recover from harm after an adverse event is over. 
A region’s ability to recover can determine its ability to evolve and or adapt to 
avoid or minimise future occurrences.
Accommodate: ensure projects and responses meet the needs of our 
community 
Systems with the capacity to deal with disruption, pressure and surges in 
demand. A core trait is the redundancy of a system, which is the ability to 
maintain operations without significant deterioration in quality or value through 
additional capacity or substitution.
Thrive: grow integrated, flexible, innovative and inclusive communities
Where possible, systems that allow communities to meet their needs and 
maintain their livelihoods before, during and after a shock or stress by 
safeguarding and minimising impact to economic, social, environmental and 
governance outcomes.
Investment: Diversity and redundancy 
More diverse communities, ecosystems, economies, 
and systems are better able to respond to 
interruptions or change, making them inherently 
more resilient. Redundancy provides assurance 
within a system by allowing certain components to 
compensate for the loss or failure of others. 
Investment in diversity and redundancy can enhance 
the resilience of people’s livelihoods because it 
enables people to adjust in response to changes in 
the market or the environment.
Management: Learning and adapting
Resilient systems adapt to uncertainty and a 
changing environment by embracing learning. They 
continually assess management plans and standards 
against emerging types and sources of knowledge. 
This allows learning from previous mistakes to be 
captured and inform future decision making
Effective: ensure place-based planning and 
development (Absorptive to Adaptive)
Systems are managed and perform as intended. 
Systems that achieve productivity, in line with 
community expectations and willingness to pay. 
Effective engagement promotes transparency, 
inclusivity and place-based approaches.
Timely: responses to drought are well 
considered, consistent, accountable, 
transparent and prompt (Absorptive to 
Adaptive)
Decisions about the system are prompt, transparent 
and made in a reasonable timeframe, using various 
communication channels, data platforms and 
engagement techniques.
Transform: accept and adapt to changing 
climatic conditions 
Systems that change, evolve, adapt and learn 
in response to current and future trends and 
uncertainty. The ability to continually assess, build 
knowledge, learn and improve to inform future 
decisions. Returning to normal does not strengthen 
resilience but consolidates it. Transformation 
involves community behavioural change and an 
understanding of how to act before, during and after 
a disaster.
Figure 7 	 11 Principles in the expanded Resilience Framework

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
14
1.8.1.		 Resilience assessment
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics and Sciences (ABARES) developed a national 
index to rank rural or regional communities by their 
potential to be adversely affected by drought (ABARES, 
2022). As shown in Figure 8 , this index combines 
drought exposure and drought sensitivity (at the farm 
enterprise level), and data representing community 
sensitivity (agricultural dependence of a community), 
to initially produce an index of ‘Potential drought 
impact’ (PDI). This PDI index can be applied consistently 
across LGAs. Whether the PDI will cause lasting loss or 
harm depends on the community‘s adaptive capacity 
(ABARES, 2022). The project is ongoing and the next 
step is to include indicators of potential adaptive 
capacity of communities, to better understand the 
likely resilience of a community to drought (ABARES, 
2022). Consequently, the output of the framework would 
be a measure of drought vulnerability and resilience, 
describing the degree to which Australian agriculturally 
dependent communities are likely to be adversely 
affected by a drought and their ability to withstand 
those impacts. 
Within the Farm Sensitivity measure there is drought 
exposure and drought sensitivity. Drought exposure 
represents the amount of external stress farm 
enterprises experience due to the climate variability 
they are exposed to at their location (ABARES, 2022). 
Drought sensitivity represents the effects that climate 
variability has on farm outcomes, reflecting the 
responsiveness of farm production systems to short-
term climate variability and short-term management 
responses (ABARES, 2022). Currently, only broadacre 
farms are represented by this indicator. 
The community sensitivity measure represents the 
reliance of a LGA on employment in agricultural 
production industries (broadacre and irrigated) and 
related downstream food and beverage manufacturing 
(for example, meat processing, dairy product 
manufacturing and fruit and vegetable processing) 
(ABARES, 2022). 
Community sensitivity is measured as the proportion of 
people employed in those agri-industries compared to 
total employment in the LGA. The PDI index highlights 
the need for drought resilience plans to consider the risk 
and exposure of a region to drought (such as considering 
the PDI ranking) and how that can be minimised, as 
well as how a community can build in adaptive capacity 
to manage the impact of droughts (overall drought 
vulnerability and resilience). 
Figure 8 	 National Index (adapted from ABARES, 2022) 
Farm sensitivity
Potential drought impact
Change in farm outcomes 
(e.g. proﬁt, household income) 
and community sensitivity
Drought vulnerability and resilience
Ability to absorb, respond and recover from drought
Drought exposure
• Rainfall volume
• Soil moisture
• Min and max temperature
Drought sensitivity
• Technology
• Management practices
• Farm ﬁxed inputs (e.g. 
land, livestock, 
equipment
• Farm and farmer 
characteristics
• Commodity mix
Community sensitivity
• Agricultural employment
• % working in agriculture
• Ratio of agriculture and 
agri-industry downstream 
employment to total 
employment
Adaptive capacity
• Physical capital
• Natural capital
• Finacial capital
• Human capital
• Social capital
• Economic diversity

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
15
While the adaptive capacity measure is yet to be fully 
developed, the economic diversity index (EDI) has been 
calculated for all LGAs. The EDI reflects the composition 
of the local economy across all industry of employment 
sectors compared to the Australian economy with a low 
score representing a less diverse economy (ABARES, 
2022). This index also correlates with population density 
and access to services, as communities that exhibit 
the highest levels of economic diversity are usually the 
larger population centres (ABARES, 2022).
The ABARES technical report (2022) lists five forms of 
capital, or resources, which are positively related to the 
communities ability to manage or cope with impacts. 
These are:
•	 human capital—labour and influences on the 
productivity of labour, including education, skills and 
health
•	 social capital—claims on others by virtue of social 
relationship
•	 natural capital—land, water, and biological resources
•	 physical capital—produced by economic activity, 
including infrastructure, equipment and technology
•	 financial capital— savings and credit
A Tableau© dashboard generates an ordinal (0 to 1) PDI 
ranking of agriculturally dependent communities based 
on their potential to be impacted by drought. The most 
sensitive LGAs (with both high farm sensitivity and high 
agricultural dependence/ community sensitivity) receive 
a ranking near one (1) and the least (with both low farm 
drought risk and low agricultural dependence) receive 
a rating near zero (0) (ABARES, 2022). Table 1 provides 
the data contained in the Tableau© dashboard as well 
as including the Index of Socio-Economic Advantage 
and Disadvantage (IRSAD). The IRSAD is one of the 
socio-economic indexes for Australia (SEIFA). The 
IRSAD summarises information about the economic 
and social conditions of people and households. SEIFA 
indexes orders areas from lowest to highest, with decile 
1 representing the most disadvantaged areas relative to 
other areas, and 10 representing the most advantaged 
areas.
Economic 
Diversity
Farm Sensitivity 
(FS)
Community 
Sensitivity (CS)
Potential 
Drought Impact 
(FS+CS)
Socio-economic 
advantage / 
disadvantage 
(SEIFA decile)
Coolamon
0.42
0.84
0.33
0.78
5
Junee
0.49
-
0.32
0.21
3
Table 1 highlights Coolamon LGA as the more vulnerable 
of the LGAs for all indicators including the SEIFA 
indicator. Coolamon has slightly lower economic 
diversity than Junee and a high PDI indicating a high 
potential for drought impact due to high farm drought 
risk. Given the lack of farm sensitivity rating for Junee, 
it could reasonably be expected that the PDI’s would 
be more aligned than presented. Coolamon has an 
IRSAD score of 5, indicating a relative average level of 
advantage/disadvantage. Junee has a lower score of 2, 
indicating a relatively greater level of disadvantage.
Table  1 	
Drought indicator framework outputs and SEIFA decile by LGA (Data source: ABS, 2021; ABARES 2022)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan 16
Coolamon and Junee Region  
and communities
02

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
17
2. Region and 
Communities
2.1.	 Introduction to the region
The Coolamon Shire covers an area of approximately 
2,494 square kilometres and has a population of 4,385 
(ABS, 2022a), comprising the three larger towns of 
Coolamon, Ganmain and Ardlethan and the smaller 
villages of Marrar, Matong and Beckom. The Coolamon 
Shire is known for its tourist attractions including The 
Coolamon Cheese Company, the Fire Museum and the 
home of the Kelpie at Ardlethan. The Up-To-Date Store 
Cultural Precinct serves as a reminder of the historical 
community; at one time you could purchase grocery, 
ironmongery, crockery, drapery, mercery, millinery, 
haberdashery, clothing and footwear (Visit Coolamon 
Shire, n.d.). There are many heritage buildings and 
items which are protected and being maintained under 
Council’s Local Environmental Plan. Chief amongst 
these is the Up-to-Date Store – incorporating the 
Mavis Furner Collection and Garth Jones Agricultural 
Collection- which are of State Heritage value. The Art 
festival on Ford is another attraction held at Ganmain.
The Junee and Coolamon Shires are 
surrounded by Bland, Narrandera, and Temora 
Shires, Cootamundra-Gundagai Regional 
council and the City of Wagga Wagga. 
The Junee LGA covers 2,030 square 
kilometres and has a population of 6,415 (ABS, 
2022a). This includes the villages of Illabo, 
Bethungra, Old Junee and Wantabadgery.
Junee is known for its agricultural sector, rail history, 
government services, and tourism (Junee Shire Council, 
2017). Some of the main attractions in the Shire include 
the region’s premier tourist attraction the Junee Licorice 
and Chocolate Factory (>120,000 visitors per year), the 
Junee Roundhouse Railway Museum (12,000 visitors per 
year) which houses a variety of railway memorabilia, the 
Victorian-era Monte Cristo Homestead which is said 
to be Australia’s most haunted house (Visit NSW, n.d.) 
and Athenium Theatre which has been magnificently 
restored and boast State Heritage status. The Illabo 
vintage speedway also meets several times a year 
attracts race enthusiasts from all across the country.
Founded in the glory days of the New South Wales 
Government Railways in the 1880’s and now home to 
some of the states most fitting tributes to those grand 
old locos, Junee Shire happily combines old world 
charm with its modern lifestyle and culture (Junee 
Shire Council, 2021a). The Junee township is centrally 
located within the Shire making it relatively accessible 
to the surrounding four village communities of Old 
Junee, Illabo, Bethungra and Wantabadgery. While 
each village has its own identity, what is common to 
each is the sense of community pride and support they 
extend to their surrounding rural residences that has 
made a lasting contribution to the Shire’s growth and 
prosperity. This has facilitated significant investment 
to community facilities over the past two decades such 
as: the Junee Junction Recreation and Aquatic Centre, 
Athenium Theatre, Library, Parks, Garden and sporting 
amenities that all residents can access and enjoy (Junee 
Shire Council, 2021b; Cooke, 2022). Each village has an 
improvement plan that focuses on its unique character 
and circumstance that intends to build upon the natural 
and built assets in each community.
Accessibility and mobility are a high priority for the 
community and is ably supported by a volunteer driver 
community transport program. Each year it provides 
one-way trips to support young and old alike who may 
lack access to personal or public transport. The quality 
of this service enables members of our community to 
enjoy access to health, community and social services.
The Coolamon and Junee Shires are some of the richest 
agricultural and pastoral districts in the Riverina. They 
are surrounded by Bland, Narrandera, and Temora 
Shires and the City of Wagga Wagga. The district is 
renowned for its production of wheat, canola, barley, 
oats and other cereal crops, as well as hay and chaff. 
Wool, lamb and beef are also important products from 
the area (ABS, 2022c). Being located within easy driving 
distance from Wagga Wagga which provides greater 
employment opportunities, many residents choose to 
live here as a lifestyle choice, and many retiring into 
Coolamon and Junee from the farm. The main industries 
of employment include agriculture, health, aged care, 
education and public administration including Local 
Government (ABS, 2022a). Coolamon and Junee Shire’s 
proximity to Wagga Wagga and advances in information 
technology, broadband and satellite communication 
systems have established positive opportunities 
for home-based business, business support and 
consultancies. Coolamon and Junee provide most of 
the essential services of a regional city with greater 
housing affordability, especially for first home buyers. 
Table 2 provides a summary of the socio-economic 
information for the two LGA’s which are statistically 
similar in a number of areas.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
18
Table 2	
Socio-economic summary (ABS, 2022a; Australian 
Government, 2023)
Coolamon
Junee
Total population
4,385
6,415
Population 
change (2016-
2021)
1.6%
1.9%
Indigenous 
population 
244 (5.6%)
587 (9.2%)
Median age
44
41
Median 
household 
income (per 
week)
$1,310
$1,398
Top industries of 
employment 
Agriculture, 
Forestry and 
Fishing (19.4%)
Agriculture, 
Forestry and 
Fishing (16.1%)
Health Care and 
Social Assistance 
(11.2%)
Health Care and 
Social Assistance 
(12.6%)
Education and 
Training (10.4%)
Public 
Administration 
and Safety (11.0%)
Labour force 
participation
58.4%
49.0%
Unemployment 
(March 2023)
1.6%
2.6%
2.2.	First nations people
The Coolamon and Junee Shire LGA's are steeped 
in the history of the Wiradjuri people, who are the 
Traditional Custodians of this land, water and sky. 
Spanning from the Kalare (the Lachlan River) to the 
Dhungala (Murray River) and from Burbong (Goulburn) 
to Melnunni (Hillston), Wiradjuri Country holds stories 
and connections that transcend time (Coolamon Shire 
Council, n.d.a). 
Wiradjuri people continue to care for Country in this 
area, now known as Coolamon Shire and Junee Shire.
Wiradjuri culture continues to thrive in this region. The 
resilience of these First Nations peoples is evident 
in their ongoing connection to the lands, waters, and 
sky. Over the years, much knowledge about Wiradjuri 
heritage has been passed down, researched, and 
recorded, providing a glimpse into their enduring culture.
Today, several places around Wagga Wagga, such 
as the Bundyi Aboriginal Cultural and Knowledge, 
Brucedale Cultural Centre and Wiradjuri Reserve along 
the Murrumbidgee River, offer insights into Wiradjuri 
heritage, culture, and Country (Coolamon Shire Council, 
n.d.a). These spaces serve as windows into the deep-
rooted history and cultural significance of the Wiradjuri 
people, embodying their continued presence and 
contributions to the region.
"Coolamon" is an Aboriginal name meaning "dish or 
vessel for holding food or water". A plan showing the 
northern boundary of Coolemon (Coolamon) Holes 
Run in 1870 shows a cluster of numerous water holes 
which he referred to as Coolamon Holes. This was the 
Indigenous name given to the holes and the origin of the 
name as applied today (Coolamon Shire Council, n.d.a). 
Junee started as a pastoral lease called the ‘Jewnee Run’. 
The name originates from the Aboriginal word meaning 
‘speak to me’ (Junee Shire Council, 2017).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
19
2.3.	 Land use 
Coolamon and Junee are both predominantly agricultural areas with the majority of 
land in the LGAs utilised for agricultural purposes (93%) (ABS, 2022b). The land use 
is reflective of dryland agriculture, which in the 2020-21 census was a relatively even 
split between cropping and grazing. Grazing consisted of 140,000 hectares of improved 
pastures and 85,000 hectares of other grazing, reflecting the strong production 
potential of the area’s soils. The majority of cropping was split across wheat (93,000 
hectares), Canola (55,000 hectares) and barley (37,000 hectares) (ABS, 2022b). The 
increase of larger corporate farms in the region has reduced diversity as many of 
these businesses are solely focused on cropping. Non-agricultural land use takes up a 
minimal 7% of overall land use (ABS, 2022b). 
The Kindra State Forest in Coolamon is a 52-hectare area of remnant bushland. The 
forest contains a range of leisurely bike and walking trails that will lead you on a 
journey of discovery, taking in the flora and fauna of the forest, seating, viewing areas 
and picnic spots (NSW Government, n.d.a). Other such native areas within the region 
include Ganmain’s Murumbang Interpretive Walk and Lester State a 2,000 acre area 
of native forest located some 8 kilometres from Coolamon. In Junee there is the 4,000 
hectares Ulandra Nature Reserve consisting of a preserved creek catchment which 
is home to a range of flora and fauna and the Bethungra Dam and Reserve, which has 
become home to many species of water and migratory birds (Junee Shire Council, 2017).
Junee Shire boasts two recreation reserves with contemporary amenities for locals 
and visitors offering free caravan and camping (Canola Trail, 2021). Sandy Beach is 
located along the bank of the Murrumbidgee River near Wantabadgery. Bethungra 
Dam Reserve was built in the 1890’s as a potable water source for residents of Junee 
and to support steam locomotives (Junee Shire Council, 2021b). The Bethungra Dam 
is supported by a native fish restocking program and walking trails that lead to fine 
examples of industrial heritage (Jacka, 2023; Canola Trail, 2021).  
2.4.	Agriculture
Coolamon and Junee are located in the Murrumbidgee catchment and are situated in 
a moderate to low rainfall area with Junee experiencing an average annual rainfall of 
527mm and Coolamon expecting 573mm (BoM, 2023). The two Shires are mapped in 
moderately high soil fertility areas and have a diverse soil profile which is favourable 
to agricultural production. Cereal crops including barley, wheat and canola are the 
dominant crops produced in the region followed by other grazing crops for cattle and 
sheep. The combined gross value of agricultural production for Coolamon and Junee is 
over $327 million (see Figure 9) (ABS, 2022c).
Figure 9	 Coolamon and Junee combined Agricultural Production Gross Value (ABS, 2022c)
Coolamon and Junee are predominantly dryland farming and livestock production. 
Water use in the region, for livestock production, is from rainfall collected in farm 
dams supplemented by Goldenfields pipeline network and some on-farm groundwater. 
Rainfall is needed across the two LGAs for grazing pastures, livestock production, 
fodder conservation and the growing of ceral crops.
Total 
$327.4M
Wheat 
$110.7M
Barley 
$34.4M
Pigs slaughtered
$4.7M
Canola 
$63.1M
19%
Hay 
$13.1M
4%
Vegetables
$2.5M
1%
Sheep and lambs slaughtered
$35M 
Livestock products
$29.3M
Cattle and Calve
slaughtereds
$32.4M 
11%
9%
10%
Other
$2.1M
1%
1%
10%
34%

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
20
Table 3 shows the variability of the value of agriculture in the region due to differing 
climatic and market conditions. The period between 2017-2023 demonstrates the change 
in overall agricultural value for the Junee LGA throughout the last drought (2019-20) 
before returning to above average seasonal conditions.
Table 3	
Output by Agriculture sector 2017-2023 in Junee (source: id Community, n.d.)
Year
Value of Agriculture ($m)
Variance to previous year
2017-18
165.3
2018-19
145.8
-12%
2019-20
139.2
-5%
2020-21
170.5
22%
2021-22
190.0
11%
2022-23
180.5
-5%
*Economic output data was not available for Coolamon Local Government Area at the time of writing this. 
Table 4  demonstrates the gross value production for the various agricultural types 
in Coolamon and Junee. As can be seen, broadacre crops contribute the most to local 
economy, followed by cattle, and then sheep. 
Table 4	
Agricultural Gross Value of Production for Junee and Coolamon (Source: DPI, n.d.a)
Junee GVP  
$122.3m*  
12.7% ER**
Coolamon GVP  
$105.9m*  
11% ER**
Broadacre crops
$82.17m
$69.51m
Cattle (Beef)
$13.54m
$13.04m
Sheep (Wool)
$11.27m
$9.66m
* Gross Value of Production  ** % ER is the % share of Eastern Riverina Region Agriculture GVP
2.5	
Water resources 
2.5.1		 Goldenfields Water 
Both Coolamon and Junee LGAs have their water supplied by Goldenfields Water 
(who supplies other LGA’s in the region as well). Goldenfields Water owns and 
operates five water treatment systems, 34 water pumping stations, 115 reservoirs, 
eight (8) bores, six re-chlorination stations, and 2,100kilometres of water mains 
(Goldenfields Water, n.d.a). Figure 10 shows Goldenfields Water’s network and 
infrastructure in Coolamon and Junee.  In 2022/23, residential water consumption 
provided by Goldenfields Water averaged 223 kilolitres per residence, and 680 
kilolitres for non-residential users. Goldenfields Water supplied rural customers an 
average of 962 kilolitres (Goldenfields Water, n.d.b).  Stage 2 upgrade works for Oura 
Water Treatment Plan commenced in September 2023 and is set for completion by 
the end of 2024 (Goldenfields Water, 2024).  The upgrade works include the addition 
of two reservoirs, transfer pipeline, multi-tray aeration unit and structural tower, as 
well as associated civil and electrical infrastructure which will ensure the region’s 
growing population has access to clean water (Goldenfields Water, 2024). 
Figure 10	Goldenfields Water Network (Source: Goldenfields Water, n.d.b)
Narrandera
Grong Grong
Ganmain
Coolamon
Junee
Gundagai
Jugiong
Harden
Young
Cootamundra
Wallendbeen
Bethungra
Temora
Ariah Park
West Wyalong
NSW context
Weethalle
Tallimba
Barellan
Goldenfields Water
supply area
Ardlethan
Naradhan
Ungarie
Barmedman
Oura
Wagga Wagga
Wantabadgery
0
25
50
75
100 km
Pump
Reservoir
Borehole
Water source
Local government
area boundaries
North
Scheme
Daylight
Hylands Bridge (non-potable)
Jugiong
Mt Arthur
Oura

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
21
Coolamon Shire Council has been recycling water since the mid-1960’s and uses the 
effluent from the Sewerage Treatment Plant on local sporting fields (Coolamon Shire 
Council, n.d.b). To reduce its use of water, Coolamon Shire Council is increasing the 
use of synthetic turf in parks, installing centralised watering systems, and replacing 
sprinklers with low water use pop-up Watermark approved systems, to attempt to 
save 3.17 million litres of water each year (Coolamon Shire Council, n.d.b).
The Junee Shire has significant challenges with regard to salinity, which can alter 
the natural water cycle, inhibit drainage and impede ground water flow (Junee Shire 
Council, 2024). Surrounding land use and geology can also add to the complex 
array of local or site specific issues as these factors also influence recharge rates, 
water movement and ground water discharge. Increased salinity can accelerate the 
deterioration of infrastructure including roads, buildings, sewerage and stormwater 
systems as well as making it difficult to maintain parks and gardens under high rates 
of salinity (Junee Shire Council, 2024). 
2.5.2	 Murrumbidgee Regional Water Strategy 
Regional Water Strategies are being developed across NSW and provide a plan to 
manage the regions water needs for the next 20-40 years. They set out a roadmap of 
actions to deliver five objectives: 
•	
Delivering and managing water for local communities
•	
Enabling economic prosperity
•	
Recognising and protecting Aboriginal water rights, interests, and access to water
•	
Protecting and enhancing the natural environment
•	
Affordability. 
The Murrumbidgee Regional Water Strategy (the Strategy), which includes Coolamon 
and Junee LGAs (Figure 11), is currently under public exhibition (DCCEEW, 2024). Its 
aim is to ensure the Region has access to safe, reliable, and resilient water sources 
for both current and future populations.  The Strategy takes into consideration the 
uncertainty associated with the impacts of a changing climate on water supply and 
demand (DCCEEW, 2024). 
The Murrumbidgee region has Australia’s third longest river system running through 
it and is linked hydrologically with the Murray River (DCCEEW, 2024). The region 
has access to surface water and groundwater for consumption, recreational uses, 
cultural, environmental needs, as well as industrial use. The Region is anticipated 
to experience higher temperatures with more hot days in conjunction with less cold 
nights which may result in more severe fire conditions (DCCEEW, 2024). The higher 
temperatures could also increase the evapotranspiration rates by 4% across the year. 
In addition, current models predict that there will be seasonal shifts in rainfall patterns 
with a potential decrease in total winter rainfall in the upper catchment by 20%, by 
11% in autumn rainfall (DCCEEW, 2024). The result of higher temperatures, increased 
evapotranspiration, reduced rainfall could result in reduced water volume flowing under 
both the regulated and unregulated rivers. 
To address the current and predicted water-related challenges for the region, the 
following focus areas have been identified (DCCEEW, 2024):
•	
Balancing competing interests in water 
•	
Improving the health and resilience of ecosystems 
•	
Addressing barriers to Aboriginal people’s water rights 
•	
Supporting existing and emerging industries and livelihoods 
Underpinning these focus areas are the priorities to ensure continued improvement 
of water management methods, improved river and catchment health, supporting 
sustainable economics and communities, and sustainable water management in the 
upper Murrumbidgee catchment. The draft Strategy has also identified a suite of 
actions under each of these priority areas in order to improve the Regions resilience and 
adaptability to a changing climate (DCCEEW, 2024).
Kilometres
0
25
50
75
100
Sydney
Barapa Barapa 
Nari Nari
Ngarigu
Ngunnawal/Ngunawal 
Nyeri Nyeri
Mutthi Mutthi
Wadi Wadi
Wemba Wemba
Wiradjuri
Wolgalu
Yita Yita
Wetlands – Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia
Snowy Hydro Limited water catchment boundary
Storages / unregulated river / creek
Regulated river
National Parks
State Forests
Cultural area
Highway
Railways
(Proposed) inland rail route
Lowbidgee boundary
Irrigated and dryland cropping and horticultural lands 
Grazing
Murrumbidgee Regional Water Strategy area
Cooma
Yass
Cootamundra
Narrandera
Gundagai
Junee
Leeton
Jerilderie
Hay
Tumut
Balranald 
Wagga Wagga
Grifﬁth
Queanbeyan
Harden
Coleambally
ACT
Abercrombie Creek
Billabong Creek
Murrumbidgee River
Fivebough and Tuckerbill Swamps
Mirrool Creek
Mirrool Creek
Colombo Creek
Boree Creek
Tarcutta Creek
Burra Ck
Houlaghans Creek
Tumut River
Goobarragandra River
Goodradigbee River
Yass River
Yanco Creek
Figure 11	 Murrumbidgee Region (Source: DCCEEW, 2024).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
22
2.6	
The regions industry
Across Junee, the agriculture, forestry and fishing industry is the largest output 
generating sector with an estimated total annual output of $210.3 million in 2021/22 
representing approximately 33.2% of the regions total economic output (Table 5).
Table 5	
Output by industry sector 2022/23* (Source: id Community, n.d.)
Junee 
$m
%
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
199.8 
31
Manufacturing
106.9
16
Transport, Postal and Warehousing
113.3
17
Total industries
652.6
-
* Economic output data from this source was not available for Coolamon Local Government Area at the time of 
writing. 
Other industries within the Junee region include grain storage, logistics and export, and 
rail. Large employers include Junee Correctional Facility (which employs approximately 
350 staff and has benefitted from a $200 million expansion since 2018), Junee Prime 
Lamb (which employs approximately 300 staff), ARTC and Qube logistics (DRNSW, 
2023). 
Coolamon Shire industry is predominantly agricultural services businesses such as 
Delta Ag, Graincorp, Emerald Grain, and Logan and Hitchens.  Coolamon Steelworks 
manufacture and design chaser bins which are sold in both the domestic and 
international markets (Coolamon, n.d.).
In 2023 Coolamon’s business park was opened. The park includes 22 lots and promises 
to bring business expansion and employment growth to the region and has been 
strategically positioned for both established businesses and start-ups (Coolamon Shire 
Council, 2023). The project was originally approved in 2019 under the Drought Stimulus 
Package. 
Coolamon Shire’s agricultural sector contributed an estimated $173 million to the 
region’s gross regional product in 2021-2022 (ABS, 2022c). 
2.7	
The regions services
2.7.1	
Education
Education services are offered within the region. Across the Junee and Coolamon 
LGAs, there are approximately 15 primary and high schools, including Eurongilly Public 
School, Illabo Public School, Junee North Public School, St Joseph’s School, Junee 
High School, Junee Public School, Marrar Public School, Coolamon Central School, St 
Michaels' Primary School (Coolamon), Ganmain Public School, Yanco Agricultural High 
School, Rosewood Public School, Matong Public School, Ardlethan Central School, 
and Beckom Public School (Australian Schools Directory, 2024). 
There are no NSW TAFE or university campuses in the LGAs of Coolamon and Junee. 
However, the region benefits from these services in neighbouring LGAs and towns. 
There are NSW TAFE campuses in the towns of Cootamundra, Temora, Narrandera, 
Leeton, and Wagga Wagga (TAFE NSW, n.d.). There is Charles Sturt University in 
Wagga Wagga, and Latrobe University in Wodonga and Shepparton. 
The Eastern Riverina Regional Economic Development Strategy (DRNSW, 2023) 
estimated that the education and training sector contributed $414 million of output for 
the Junee, Coolamon, Wagga Wagga, and Lockhart LGAs, and grew by 3.2% between 
2011 and 2020. The Development Strategy also notes that the region is seeking to 
upskill its workforce and develop clearer career pathways and local employment 
opportunities. This is particularly important as Coolamon and Junee have a lower 
number of people aged 0-19 years old (24.3% and 21% respectively) compared to the 
NSW average of 27.4%, highlighting the importance of retaining youth in the local 
workforce through education opportunities (ABS, 2022a; DRNSW, 2023). 
2.7.2	 Health and aged care
The Coolamon-Junee region has two public hospitals: the Junee Multi Purpose Service 
(Junee District Hospital) and the Coolamon-Ganmain Multi Purpose Service (AIHW, 
2024). Outside of the two LGAs, there are public hospitals in Cootamundra, Temora, 
Gundagai, Narrandera, and Wagga Wagga (AIHW, 2024). There is one private hospital 
in Wagga Wagga, Calvary Health Care Riverina (AIHW, 2024). 
Recent investments to increase and improve the health services within the region 
include the Coolamon ambulance station which was completed (2017-2018) under 
the NSW Government’s $132 million Rural Ambulance Infrastructure Reconfiguration 
(RAIR) program (NSW Government, n.d.b). The Wagga Wagga Health Services Hub 
upgrades and improvements has an estimated total project value of $431 million and 
will service the surrounding areas including Junee and Coolamon (DRNSW, 2023). 
Junee and Coolamon also have Cooinda Court and Allawah Lodge as aged care within 
the region.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
23
2.7.3	 Housing
Housing availability and affordability is another factor than can indicate a 
community’s resilience to drought. The region is argued to have affordable housing 
(cost advantage) compared to NSW (DRNSW, 2023). Table 6 depicts indicators of 
mortgage and rent affordability across the two LGAs (ABS, 2022a). Compared to 
NSW, Coolamon and Junee have a lower percentage of households with mortgage 
repayments more than 30% of household income, and a lower percentage of 
households with rent payments more than 30% of household income (Table 7). 
Furthermore, Coolamon and Junee exhibit higher rates of dwellings that are owned 
outright (45.2% and 39.2% respectively) compared to only 32% in NSW. This may 
indicate that the region experiences better housing affordability compared to broader 
NSW. 
Table 6	
Mortgage and rent affordability indicators for occupied private dwellings (2021 Census) (ABS, 
2022a). 
Coolamon
Junee
NSW
Mortgage repayments 
more than or 30% of 
imputed household 
income (%)
9.2%
7.5%
17.3%
Rent payment more 
than 30% of imputed 
household income (%)
22.2%
28.4%
35.5%
Table 7	
Total number and tenure type (owned outright, owned with a mortgage, and rented) of occupied 
private dwellings 2021 (ABS. 2022a) 
Coolamon
Junee
NSW
Total occupied private 
dwellings (2021)
1,649
2,103
2,900,468
Dwellings owned outright
745 
(28.4%)
824 
(39.2%)
914,537 
(32%)
Dwellings owned with a 
mortgage
544 
(33%)
654 
(31.1%)
942,804
(33%)
Dwelling rented
266 
(16.1%)
525 
(25%)
944,585
(33%)
Despite this observed cost advantage, housing availability within the region has 
decreased (DRNSW, 2023). Increased migration coupled with housing supply not 
keeping pace is a key factor contributing to the decreased housing availability 
(DRNSW, 2023).  Table 8 displays the number of buildings approved and their value, 
with Junee experiencing higher building approvals than Coolamon (ABS, 2022a). 
Housing availability is also predicted to worsen as workers move to the region 
to deliver major projects including solar farm developments, Inland Rail, and the 
EnergyConnect transmission project (DRNSW, 2023). 
Table 8	
Building approvals and values (year ended 30 June 2022) (ABS, 2022a) 
Coolamon
Junee
NSW
Total dwelling units (no.)
22
56
54,636
Total value of private 
sector dwelling units 
($m)
$10
$21
24,521
The decreased housing availability has reduced housing affordability (DRNSW, 2023). 
Median house prices have increased between 30% and 41% between June 2018 and 
June 2022 for the LGAs of Junee, Coolamon, Wagga Wagga, and Lockhart (DRNSW, 
2023). In June 2022, the median house price was $349,000 in Junee and $335,000 in 
Coolamon (DRNSW, 2023). A high price income ratio within the region suggests that 
if housing availability can be improved, improved housing affordability can also be 
achieved (DRNSW, 2023).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
24
2.8	
The regions infrastructure
2.8.1	 Road, air, and rail
Infrastructure including road, rail, air, and telecommunications can influence a 
community’s ability to thrive through the cyclical challenges of drought. Within the 
Coolamon and Junee region, rail infrastructure is of particular importance to the region, 
supporting the movement of freight and passengers. The Main Southern Railway 
(Sydney to Melbourne) passes through Junee with a branch line to Griffith which 
services Coolamon. Bethungra, Illabo, Harefield, Old Junee, Ganmain and Ardlethan 
(Cootamundra-Griffith Line) previously had operational railway stations, but today they 
are no longer in use (NationalMap, n.d.).  
Road infrastructure also plays an important role for the region’s accessibility. The 
Olympic Highway serves as a key road in and out of the region. It connects Junee to the 
north with Cootamundra via Bethungra, and Wagga Wagga to the south. The Gundagai 
Road and Nangus Road connects Junee to Gundagai (NSW Government, n.d.c). Canola 
Way Road links Junee and Coolamon, before becoming the Newell Highway in Grong 
Grong, and continuing west to Narrandera and connecting to the Sturt Highway (NSW 
Government, n.d.c). Coolamon is connected to Wagga Wagga via the Coolamon Road and 
is linked to Ardlethan via Ardlethan Road (NSW Government, n.d.c). 
The road network serves as critical infrastructure for people commuting to work. For 
example, in Junee, out of 2,514 employed persons aged 15 years and over, only 14 used 
at least one form of public transport to commute to work, versus 1,808 who travelled by 
car (ABS, 2022a). The road network also enables the movement of freight. While Junee 
and Coolamon lie outside what is considered the key road fright route, its location is 
still highly accessible to strategic transport routes including markets in Wagga Wagga, 
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide (NationalMap, n.d.; DRNSW, 2023). 
The Eastern Riverina Regional Economic Development Strategy – 2023 Update includes 
the Coolamon Shire Council, the Junee Shire Council, Wagga Wagga City Council, and 
Lockhart Shire Council (DRNSW, 2023). The document outlines a number of investments 
in infrastructure since 2018, estimating that $11.7 million has been spent on the 
Coolamon rail passing loop extension, $60.4 million on the Junee to Griffith rail upgrades, 
and investment into the Inland Rail – Albury to Illabo and Illabo to Stockinbingal section 
(DRNSW, 2023). Other significant investments in the region since 2018 to improve service 
provision include the Athenium Theatre Junee upgrades with an estimated total project 
value of >$2.5 million, the Coolamon showground multi-purpose exhibition and adaptive 
space ($0.56 million), and the Coolamon Business Park ($2.9 million) (DRNSW, 2023). 
Figure 12	 Junee-Coolanom Telstra 4G mobile network coverage (Source: Telstra, n.d.a)
2.8.2	 Telecommunications 
Digital connectivity and mobile coverage within the two LGAs rely on 
telecommunications infrastructure. Geographic features such as hills or mountains 
can also affect coverage (Telstra, n.d.a). In recognition of the importance of digital 
connectivity, the Federal Government’s Mobile Black Spot Program was launched in 
2015 (Telstra, n.d.b). The Program’s goal was to expand mobile coverage in regional 
and remote Australia. Across the two LGAs, one Black Spot Program (through 
Round 3) was completed in February 2019 in Wantabadgery (NationalMap, n.d.). The 
region has benefitted from other projects in neighbouring LGAs, with three projects 
completed in Temora, one in Narrandera, and one in Wagga Wagga (NationalMap, n.d.). 
Telstra is the main mobile network service provider across the region, with Figure 12 
displaying the predicted likely areas of outdoor 4G coverage (Telstra, n.d.a). Figure 
12 shows that Telstra’s 4G mobile network covers a significant portion of the Junee-
Coolamon region, however, some gaps still exist. Telstra’s newest mobile network 
technology ‘5G’ covers the towns of Junee, Coolamon, and Ganmain, and their older 
mobile network technology ‘3G’ is set to be discontinued mid-2024 (Telstra, n.d.a).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan 25
History of Drought Impacts
03

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
26
3.	 Drought, climate and impacts
Australia is the driest inhabited continent on Earth with one of the 
world’s most variable rainfall climates (Adapt NSW, n.d.; BoM, 2024). 
This makes drought a defining feature of our history, with Australia 
experiencing severe drought on average once every 18 years (NSW 
Government, 2023). Drought is set to have an increasing effect on the 
country as a result of climate change, with the frequency, intensity and 
duration of severe droughts expected to increase, particularly in inland 
areas of NSW.
3.1 What is drought
Drought is defined as “a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use” (BoM, 2024). It is difficult to 
determine a start and end, or identify when the landscape has recovered. Droughts are 
difficult to predict or compare as they differ in the seasonality, location, geographic 
extent, and duration of the associated rainfall deficiencies. Both the Bureau of 
Meteorology and Kirono et al. (2020) define four types of drought: meteorological, 
agricultural, hydrological, or socioeconomic, as shown in Figure 13 below. 
Meteorological drought: a period of months to years of low rainfall
1
3
2
4
Agricultural drought: short-term dryness in the surface soil 
layers (root-zone) at a critical time in the growing season
Hydrological drought: prolonged moisture deficits that affect surface or 
subsurface water supply, reducing streamflow, groundwater, dam and lake levels
Socio-economic drought: the effect of elements of the above droughts  
on the supply and demand of economic goods and human well-being 
Figure 13	Types of drought (BoM, 2024; Kirono et al., 2020)
Drought affects all parts of the community; from agricultural producers and suppliers, 
to industry, First Nations people, and the broader community. Droughts are challenging 
times, with water intensive industries affected by a reduction in output and increased 
costs. The economic, social, and environmental impacts are not limited to these 
industries but extend to entire communities and regions. Local loss of production 
has flow on effects to the regional economy. Drought can also impact human and 
environmental health including impacts on nutrition, exacerbation of mental health 
issues, and ecological decline for flora and fauna (Steffen, 2015). 
3.1.1. Drought monitoring in NSW
Drought monitoring over the years has become increasingly complex. The most common 
means of currently monitoring drought is through the Enhanced Drought Information 
System (EDIS) which is a publicly available drought monitoring tool that monitors 
seasonal conditions across NSW. The EDIS, shown in Figure 14 below,  was launched 
in March 2018 with the second version launched in October 2022, and is used across 
government and farming stakeholders to build drought risk awareness, emphasise 
drought preparedness and improve confidence in drought monitoring and early warning 
(DPI, n.d.b). 
Figure 14	The Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) for Coolamon and Junee LGAs in May 2024 (DPI, n.d.b)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
27
A key feature of EDIS is the development of DPIRD's 
Combined Drought Indicator (CDI) (DPI, n.d.b). The CDI 
combines meteorological, hydrological and agronomic 
definitions of drought (above) using indexes for rainfall, 
soil water, and plant growth (DPI, n.d.b.). From these, a 
fourth index, drought direction (DDI), is developed. EDIS 
is undergoing redevelopment to provide farmers with 
world-leading weather and climate data to enable better 
business decisions. It is important to recognise the CDI 
provides an aggregated view of NSW, and that on-ground 
conditions can be different to those displayed in the 
maps. They provide an 'on average' view of a particular 
region only.
Figure 11 shows the boundary of Junee and Coolamon 
LGAs and the various stages of drought that the region is 
currently in. As can be seen in the figure, the entirety of 
Junee and the southern half of Coolamon are classified 
as being drought affected, however, it is unclear as to 
whether it is in the weaking or intensifying phase. The 
northern half of Coolamon is classified as non-drought. 
Figure 15	Stage of Drought in NSW (adapted from DPI, n.d.b.)
Non drought phase
At least one indicator is above the 50th percentile.
1
Recovering phase
All indicators are below the 50th percentile but above
the 30th percentile.
2
Drought affected phases
Drought Affected Phases: one indicator is below the 30th
percentile and the rainfall is either negative or positive
over the past 90 days.
3
Drought phase
At least one indicator is below the 5th percentile.
4
Intense drought phase
All three indicators (rainfall, soil water, plant growth)
are below the 5th percentile.
5
3.1.2. Stages of drought
Used together, the indexes of the EDIS indicate 
the stage of drought (DPI, n.d.b.). The five stages 
progress from a non-drought category where all 
indicators suggest good conditions for production to 
recovery, through to a Drought Affected (weakening 
or intensifying) category, a Drought category and into 
Intense Drought. The five stages are shown in  
Figure 15 below.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
28
3.2	
Historical drought in Coolamon and Junee
Climate anomalies, such as drought, are regularly observed occurrences in southern 
and inland Australia and Coolamon and Junee are no exception. NSW naturally goes 
through cycles of wet and dry conditions, however, over the past 40 years, average 
annual rainfall in NSW has decreased, leading to widespread droughts. This is due to 
climate change increasing temperatures and affecting rainfall and climate systems 
in NSW (AdaptNSW, n.d.; AdaptNSW, 2024). Throughout the years, Australia has 
experienced a range of droughts with differing durations and intensities, as outlined in 
Table 9.
Table 9 	
Historical droughts which effected Coolamon and Junee (BoM, 2024)
Drought 
Period
Duration
Characteristics
The Federation 
Drought
1895-1902
One of Australia's worst droughts. It had far-reaching 
implications for agriculture, water availability, and the 
economy.
World War I 
Drought
1914-1915
Although relatively short, it had a significant impact 
because the severe drought conditions were occurring 
simultaneously in both southeastern and southwestern 
Australia. 
World War II 
Drought
1937-1945
Occurred frequently over eastern Australia, 
characterised by intense dry spells and breaks, similar 
to the Federation drought, but with more intermittent 
dryness. Major driver of the Black Friday bushfires in 
January 1939.
1965-1968 
Drought
1965-1968
Generally dry conditions for Australia, especially severe 
in NSW. 
1982-1983 
Drought
1982-1983
One of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th 
century, associated with a strong El Nino event. 
The 
Millennium 
Drought
1997-2009
The region experienced a prolonged dry period which 
led to water scarcity and agricultural challenges in 
the Murray-Darling Basin. This drought event was 
particularly significant because of the contrast with a 
wet period in northern Australia and its absence of major 
wet episodes. Figure 16 displays this contrast. This may 
have been the first major Australian drought that was 
impacted by the changing climate, with temperatures 
higher than ever seen before. The Millennium drought 
ended with two of the wettest years on record for 
Australia in 2010–11 (Beard et al., 2011; National Climate 
Centre and BoM, 2012).
The 2017-
2020 Drought
2017-2020
Following a wet period in 2016, this drought impacted 
the Murray-Darling Basin, with substantially below-
average rainfall in 2017, 2018, and 2019. Soil moisture 
levels in different regions hit unprecedented lows during 
this time. It saw the lowest rainfall on record in the 
Murray-Darling Basin, reduced agricultural output, led to 
increased food prices, and created tinder dry conditions 
before the Black Summer fires.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
29
Since the mid-1990s, southeast Australia has experienced a 15% decline in late 
autumn and early winter rainfall and a 25% decline in average rainfall in April and May 
(Whetton et al., 2015). The region has also experienced significant warming during 
the last 50 years (Timbal et al. 2015). This has led to the area experiencing a range 
of droughts throughout years, with differing durations and intensities. The last two 
droughts have had a significant impact to Coolamon and Junee LGAs due to both the 
duration of the Millennium Drought and the significant period of below average rainfall 
to the area in the 2017-2020 drought (shown in Figure 17) which placed the region in 
the very much below average rainfall range.
The “Millennium Drought” period between 2001-2009 was the worst drought on record 
for southeast Australia (van Dijk et al., 2013). The region experienced a prolonged dry 
period which led to water scarcity and agricultural challenges in the Murray Darling 
Basin. This drought event was particularly significant because of the contrast with a 
wet period in northern Australia and its absence of major wet episodes.  The regional 
GDP of the southern Murray-Darling Basin fell 5.7% between 2007-2008 following 
drought, with an expected 6,000 job losses (van Dijk et al., 2013; Adapt NSW, n.d.; 
Wittwer and Griffith, 2012). In southern NSW, job losses in irrigated agriculture varied 
between 22% and 84% (DELWP, 2018). Tourism to the Murray River region dropped 
severely. This caused an estimated $70 million loss to the region’s tourism industry 
(Adapt NSW, n.d). The expected recovery in jobs after the Millenium Drought did not 
occur, with job losses continuing to occur in many areas according to MDBA analysis. 
Drought also affects the mental health of people in drought-affected regions. It is 
linked to increased suicide rates across rural Australia. As drought becomes more 
severe, the risk of suicide can increase by up to 15% for rural males aged 30 to 49 
years (Adapt NSW, n.d.)
The lasting effects of past droughts, including the Millennium Drought, serve as 
reminders for the need of forward-thinking and strategic planning. Coolamon and 
Junee hold a pivotal position in Australia's agricultural landscape, contributing 
significantly to the nation's grain, and livestock production ( , 2018). As such, it is 
important that these communities are well-prepared and resilient in the face of climate 
change and drought. 
Figure 16 and Figure 17 illustrate the rainfall received during both the millennium 
drought and the most recent 2017-2020 drought. For Coolamon and Junee, this 
placed their LGAs very much below average rainfall and in some parts the lowest on 
record. Some of the initiatives and tools the region has been able to build and utilise in 
response to these past drought events and to help adapt and build resilience to future 
drought events are outlined in the case studies in Section 4. 
Figure 16 	 Rainfall deciles in Australia during the Millennium Drought (1997 – 2009) (Source: BoM, 2024)
 
Figure 17	 Rainfall deciles in Australia during drought (2017 - 2019) (Source: BoM, 2024)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
30
3.3	 Regional weather and climate
Australia’s natural climate is highly variable and experiences lower average rainfall 
and higher rainfall variability than most other nations (ABARES, n.d.). Climate change 
refers to global, long-term shifts in average weather conditions, such as becoming 
warmer, wetter, or drier over several decades or longer. There is a growing body 
of evidence that shows Australia’s climate has changed and continues to change 
significantly, particularly driven by the work of the Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), and 
Department of Climate Change, the Environment, Energy & Water New South Wales 
(DCCEEW); formerly Department of Planning and Environment (DPE). Temperatures in 
Australia have risen by about 1.47 degrees (+ or - 0.24) since national records began in 
1910 and there is a high level of scientific confidence that anthropogenic greenhouse 
gas emissions are a major driver of this increase in temperature (CSIRO and BoM 
2022).
The Coolamon and Junee LGAs are characterised as a region of "grassland warm" 
climate. This classification speaks to the prevailing conditions of consistent warmth 
and aridity. The distribution of rainfall throughout the year is relatively consistent. The 
lowest temperatures are experienced in July with an average minimum temperature of 
3°C. The highest temperatures are experienced in January with an average maximum 
temperature of 32°C.
As discussed in Section 3.1.1, DPIRD have established the CDI to aid in defining the 
various stages of drought. However, there are two key meteorological trends that 
can be observed which indicate the presence of drought. Lower than average rainfall 
couples with higher than average maximum temperatures often over a prolonged 
period of time can result in drought. Figure 18 demonstrates this trend for some of 
the historical droughts that have occurred in the Riverine Region. The figure has 
been prepared using data from Wagga Wagga weather station as it has the most 
comprehensive of meteorological data available near to Coolamon and Junee. Wagga 
Wagga is relatively close in proximity for the purpose of extrapolating drought trends 
in the Riverina Region of NSW. 
The Coolamon and Junee Shires are inherently highly sensitive to the impacts of a 
changing climate. Climate change and drought are predicted to have the greatest 
effect due to the region’s agricultural dependence. Figure 19 illustrates the drying 
trend over 22 years in Southern Australia during April to October.
Highest on record
10
8-9
4-7
2-3
1
Very much above average
Above average
Below average
Very much below average
Lowest on record
Average
Rainfall has been very low over parts of Australia 
during the southern growing season.
Figure 19	 Southern Australia has experienced a drying trend during the growing season from 1996-2015 
(Source: Steffen et al., 2018)
Figure 18	 Historical trends in rainfall and temperature data from 1942 to 2023 for Wagga Wagga.  
(Source: BoM, n.d.)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
31
3.4	
Future drought projections
Climate change is making drought conditions in southwest and southeast Australia 
worse. Climate change has contributed to a southward shift in weather systems that 
typically bring cool season rainfall to southern Australia. In addition to decreasing 
rainfall, climate change is driving an increase in the average temperature and in 
the intensity and frequency of hot days and heatwaves, leading to increased water 
losses and thus exacerbating drought conditions (Whetton et al., 2015). Climate 
variability effects the Australian agricultural industries through variations in 
commodity prices, with trends of lower rainfall and drought related to lower farm 
profits (Hughes et al., 2019).
Given the direct influence of drought on cropping activities and crop productivity 
many farms are financially impacted. Figure 20 shows farm profitability for the 
Riverina Region from 1990 to the present. As can be seen the compounding impact 
of drought results in the greatest reduction in profitability towards the tail end of 
the drought period. There was negative growth following the 1997 to 2009 drought 
as compared to the spike in growth observed following the 2017 to 2020 drought. 
The slower rate of growth following 2009 may have been due to the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC) in 2008. Given the regions strong agricultural industry it will be critical 
to continue monitoring the trends in farm profitability and the changing climate 
such that existing systems and services, including individual farmers, are financially 
prepared for future droughts.
Figure 20	 Historical trends in farm profitability for the Riverina Region. (Source: ABARES, n.d.)
There is high confidence that global temperatures will continue to rise for many decades, 
mainly due to greenhouse gases produced by human activities (NASA, 2024). This will 
exacerbate climate extremes already experienced and worsen the duration and effects 
of drought in Australia. A reduction in winter rainfall leads to a proportionately greater 
(1.5 to 4 times) reduction in surface water runoff and groundwater recharge (Walker et 
al., 2021).
As part of the Climate Services for Agriculture FDF program, the CSIRO and BoM have 
developed My Climate View, a digital product designed to help Australian farmers 
understand what the future climate might mean for their location. My Climate View 
provides primary producers and their advisers with past climate data, seasonal forecasts 
and future climate projections, tailored to various agricultural commodities, from meat 
to grains to horticulture and many more (DAFF, 2024b). Primary producers can therefore 
more easily assess how climate factors that matter to their business could change 
into the future. For example, a wheat producer can see how the timing and intensity of 
seasonal rainfall in their region might change over time and how that might impact the 
way they farm (DAFF, 2024b).
The CSIRO’s My Climate View tool was used to analyse the impact of worsening climate 
change on temperature and rainfall for the Coolamon and Junee region. Through this 
tool, we can see how the region’s climate is predicted to evolve over time using the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) representative concentration 
pathway (RCP) 8.5. Under this climate change scenario, Coolamon and Junee Shire 
Councils LGA is predicted to have, on average, a 31% increase in the number of heat 
damage days above 35°C by 2030 and 70% increase by 2050 illustrated in Figure 21 and 
Figure 22 (My Climate View, 2023). These figures also present two historical 30-year 
periods (in purple) to allow comparison across time. 
Warmer temperatures are contributing to longer droughts and harsher fire weather. This 
can make land unsuitable for agriculture, lead to crop stress and attract new pests (that 
thrive in warmer temperatures) which can impact the yield and quality of key agricultural 
commodities grown in the region, such as barley and grain. In addition to impacting grain 
yield, it adversely affects physical grain quality (weight and plumpness) and market 
value. The incidence of heat stress during grain filling is rising with global warming 
(Shirdelmoghanloo et al. 2022). Warmer temperatures and drought are also contributing 
to animal stress, decreasing production and increasing animal welfare issues. A 
reduction in winter rainfall leads to a proportionately greater (1.5 to 4 times) reduction in 
surface water runoff and groundwater recharge (Walker et al., 2021).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
32
Annual hot days
Location: Coolamon, Issued: 12/14/2023
My Climate View [myclimateview.com.au]
Years
1970 
     1980          1990           2000 
  2010 
      2020           2030           2040 
    2050         2060           2070 
 2080
Yearly data 
             Average 
        
      10th and 90th percentiles 
 
   Past  
    Future RCP8.5
This chart shows the past and future range in total annual hot days at your location.
Hot days are defined as days with a maximum temperature greater than or equal to 35°C between 1 January and 31 December
Number of days
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Annual hot days
Location: Junee, Issued: 12/14/2023
My Climate View [myclimateview.com.au]
Years
1970 
     1980          1990           2000 
  2010 
      2020           2030           2040 
    2050         2060           2070 
 2080
Yearly data 
             Average 
        
      10th and 90th percentiles 
 
   Past  
    Future RCP8.5
This chart shows the past and future range in total annual hot days at your location.
Hot days are defined as days with a maximum temperature greater than or equal to 35°C between 1 January and 31 December
Number of days
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time spent in drought is projected to increase in the future across southern Australia. 
An analysis of future temperature and rainfall Future climate change projections 
suggest that the Coolamon and Junee region will experience more time in drought, 
longer duration of drought and more intense drought (Kirono et al 2020). There is 
high confidence in decreasing soil moisture in the southern regions (particularly in 
winter and spring) driven by the projected decrease in rainfall and higher evaporative 
demand (Timbal et al. 2015). Additionally, the projected increase in Standardised Soil 
Moisture Index (SSMI) drought metrics is consistent with these projected decreases 
in seasonal mean of soil moisture, across the region.
Figure 21	 Change in number of hot days across the Junee Shire (Source: My Climate View, 2023)
Figure 22	 Change in number of hot days across the Coolamon Shire (Source: My Climate View, 2023)

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
33
Recent decades have seen trends towards lower average winter season rainfall in the 
southwest and southeast of Australia (Hughes et al., 2019). This reduced rainfall in 
the winter will have a direct impact on winter variety crop yields including Coolamon 
and Junee’s wheat, barley and canola crops which form the three largest gross value 
commodity products. 
Utilising projections from the Murray Basin Cluster report (Whetton et al., 2015), the 
My Climate View Tool (My Climate View, 2023) and Kirono et. al., 2020, the following 
findings relating to critical drought indices are presented (Table 10).
Table 10	
Climate projections for critical variables
Critical variables 
Details 
Average temperature 
Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons 
(very high confidence) By late in the century (2090), for a high 
emission scenario (RCP8.5) the projected range of warming is 
2.7 to 4.5 °C.
Extreme temperature
More hot days and warm spells are projected with very high 
confidence. Frost risk days (minimum temperatures under 
2 °C) are projected to decrease across the cluster (high 
confidence), and could halve by late in the century.
Average rainfall 
Less rainfall is projected during the cool season, with high 
confidence in 2090.
There is medium confidence that rainfall will remain 
unchanged in the warm season. For the near future natural 
variability is projected to dominate any projected changes. 
The magnitude of projected changes for late in the century 
(2090) span approximately -40 to +5 percent in winter and -15 
to +25 percent in summer for a high emissions case (RCP8.5).
Intense rainfall events
High confidence that the intensity of heavy rainfall events  
will increase
Evapotranspiration
Projections for potential evapotranspiration indicate increases 
in all seasons, with largest absolute rates projected with high 
confidence in summer by 2090.
Critical variables 
Details 
Standardised Soil Moisture 
Index (SSMI)
There is high confidence in decreasing soil moisture in the 
southern regions (particularly in winter and spring) driven 
by the projected decrease in rainfall and higher evaporative 
demand (tech report). Changes are larger in 2090, with 
simulated decreases of up to 15 % in winter in Southern 
Australia. 
Percent time spent in 
drought and extreme drought 
(Standardised Precipitation 
Index (SPI) is less than -1) 
(calculated as the fraction 
of the time in drought over a 
given period)
There is medium confidence that the time spent in 
meteorological drought will increase. 
Drought and extreme 
drought duration
(defined as the number of 
events in a given period)
For drought duration, little change is projected in moderate 
and severe drought but an increase for duration in extreme 
drought.
Drought and extreme 
drought frequency (measures 
the average length (in 
months) of drought events in 
a given period)
There is medium confidence that the frequency of extreme 
drought, will increase over the course of century under 
RCP8.5.
Drought and extreme 
drought intensity (reflects 
the average of cumulative 
SPI or SSMI from all events. 
The more negative the value 
the more intense the event.)
The multi-model median indicated that under climate change, 
Australia will spend more intense drought, particularly across 
southern and eastern Australia.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
34
3.5	 Future climate scenarios
The previous sections have highlighted the main factors that may affect the region, 
in terms of a changing climate, in the coming years, and some of the impacts of these 
challenges. To enable a more focussed approach to drought resilience planning, a 
summary of the predictions and the impacts these may have are provided below:
An increase in minimum and maximum temperatures as well as an increase in 
frequency of hot days and heatwaves, leading to increased water losses and thus 
exacerbating drought and fire conditions (DCCEW, 2024). Warmer temperatures also 
contribute to longer droughts and harsher fire weather as well as increase animal stress. 
This can make land unsuitable for agriculture, lead to crop stress and attract new pests.
Changing seasonal rainfall patterns; it is anticipated that there will be a decrease 
in total annual rainfall. By 2079, the average winter and autumn rainfall in the 
Murrumbidgee catchment is anticipated to reduce by 20% and 11% respectively. 
However, in the regulated Murrumbidgee, the average winter and spring rainfall could 
drop by 17-18% by 2079 with late summer rainfall anticipated to increase by over 30% 
(DCCEW, 2024). 
Increased rate, length, and severity of droughts; there is increased potential for 
droughts to be more frequent as a result of the increased frequency and intensity of 
higher temperatures and reduced annual rainfall (DCCEW, 2024). Primary producers 
are usually able to weather a drought for 2-3 years, however long-term droughts and 
increased frequency will likely push more primary producers off the land.
Higher evapotranspiration, an increase of around 4% evapotranspiration across the year 
is anticipated (DCCEW, 2024). This has impacts on soil moisture, water availability and 
therefore crop growth. 
Decrease in water inflows; In the region, the total volume of water flow could reduce in 
both the regulated and unregulated rivers which could have significant impacts on water 
security for the region (DCCEW, 2024). 
This information is combined with the resilience framework and helps to inform the 
actions included in this Plan, to ensure they are building resilience in the region.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
35
Social
Economic
Environment
•	 Impacts on children’s mental health from 
observing the impact of drought on their families, 
declining animal welfare and reduced educational 
opportunities.
•	 Access to suitable mental health services and 
education to support the community.
•	 Reduced attendance at at school.
•	 Impacts to the social fabric of the community 
•	 The proximity of Coolamon and Junee to larger 
regional centres can impact the strength of 
community bonds.
•	 Reductions in volunteering numbers and fatigue 
amongst those volunteers over time. 
•	 Increased pressure on the local economy from 
reduced cashflow from the agricultural sector. 
•	 Reductions in discretionary spending on non-
essential services.
•	 Loss of workers and families from the community 
from prolonged drought.
•	 Reductions in tourism to retail and food businesses 
and smaller centres that don’t have large tourist 
attractions.
•	 Reduction in business and investor confidence.
•	 Financial stress on agricultural and regional 
businesses through increasing debt levels and 
reduced incomes.
•	 Reduced business confidence for investors.
•	 Impact to groundcover, pasture and topsoil 
which has been managed to maintain positive soil 
characteristics.
•	 Greater habitation of some animals into regional 
centres e.g. kangaroos.
•	 Reduced water availability to both agriculture and 
the community. Especially those businesses without 
a permanent water supply. 
•	 Concerns with the ability to gain access to water 
(equity).
•	 Water quality issues e.g. salinity.
•	 Threat of other natural disasters such as bushfire.
•	 Reduced access to water for the environment.
•	 Impacts to culturally significant sites for First 
Nations Peoples.
Figure 23	 Summary of the key social, economic and environmental impacts experienced in the Coolamon and Junee region during the past drought
3.6	
Summary of drought related impacts
Drought impacts were identified through the drought literature reviewed as part of the 
Plan development. A key document for gaining an understanding of drought impacts 
in the region and generally was the 2022 Southern NSW Innovation Hub ‘Baselining 
Drought’ report. This long list of drought impacts was then tested with members of the 
stakeholder reference group who were asked to rate each of the impacts in relation to 
the effect on their community. This produced a priority ranking for each impact. 
This provided a customised view of the impacts that most greatly affect the 
communities within which the Plan operates. These impacts were then categorised into 
three components of social, economic and environmental. When considered together, 
these components form the foundations of drought resilience. It is important when 
considering impacts to note that droughts are difficult to predict in their duration and 
severity and due to these differences, impacts differ between drought events. Figure 
23 details the impacts that have been felt most acutely in the Shires of Coolamon and 
Junee.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan 36
Resilience in the local region
04

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
37
4.	 Local stories of resilience
The communities of Coolamon and Junee have forged their own pathways to improve resilience. The following case studies have been 
developed to showcase the activities and initiatives across the LGAs. 
Case Study – Blokes in the Kitchen (Ganmain)
The Ganmain local community took initiative-taking measures to launch the 'Blokes in 
the Kitchen' initiative. With the support of a $3,000 grant, the community orchestrated 
an 8-week program to address both social isolation and nutritional challenges faced by 
farmers, particularly during peak agricultural working seasons where farmers are 
time-poor. 
Sessions were facilitated by guest nutritionists and chefs, aiming to address nutritional 
concerns and also foster culinary skills and an awareness of eating fresh produce.
Upon the conclusion of the grant, participants expressed a collective commitment to 
sustaining the momentum. Monthly gatherings continued, and a collaborative effort 
emerged, with individuals contributing to shared meals. Additionally, the decision 
by the Advance Ganmain Committee to waive access fees to the hall provided a 
supportive environment for the initiative's longevity.
The enduring success of 'Blokes in the Kitchen' serves as a testament to the impact of 
modest initial funding and the intrinsic leadership within the community. This initiative 
not only alleviated immediate challenges but also cultivated a sense of collective 
responsibility, showing the powerful role of grassroots efforts in addressing the 
multifaceted needs of rural communities.
Case Study – Active Farmers 
 
Source: Goulburn Post, 2020
Active farmers are a not-for-profit that deploy a personal training network across rural 
Australia to involve farmers and other rural residents in fitness programs. The vision of 
the organisation is to ‘build stronger and more resilient farming communities,’ through 
captivating attendees with a ‘team sport effect.’ Illabo, Eurongilly and Ganmain all have 
recurring active farmers classes. 
The fitness sessions have been running in the region for over five years showing it to 
be sustainably successful. Both farmers and other community members attend the 
sessions although it varies across the year, reflecting different seasonal requirements 
for farming.
The provision of this non-for-profit service was possible through the support of 
sponsors and grants, along with fees for classes by participants. The classes have 
received feedback from the Coolamon and Junee region that they provide a fantastic 
opportunity to interact with others and overcome the isolation that becomes prevalent 
in rural communities in times of hardship. A notable example of building resilience 
through increased community interaction.
The programs operating in the Coolamon and Junee region aim to create greater 
awareness to reach more parts of the community in coming years.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
38
Case study – Junee Business and Trades
Source: Southern Cross newspaper, 2019
In Junee Shire, partnerships are regarded as a key to future prosperity. These can 
take the shape of long-term partnerships such as working with Junee Business and 
Trades across areas of promotion, project specific, strengthening business to business 
relationships or advocating for work experience and educational opportunities made 
available.
Junee Business and Trade initiated networks opportunities in the form of Tradie’s 
Breakfasts when large scale construction projects and planned within the Shire.  
One such example involved 55 local business and tradespeople taking up the 
opportunity to meet the principal contractor of the Junee Correction Centre expansion 
project ($150M) to gain first-hand understanding of how local business could engage 
with project.
Case study – Junee Volunteer Summit
Source: stephcooke.com.au, 2021
Prior to the COVID pandemic, Junee’s Community Development Team hosted some 
100 local and regional volunteers to the Junee Volunteer Summit. This was a full day 
of conferencing, workshops and expert speakers on the issues, barriers and benefits 
that volunteers and volunteer organisations face. Feedback from the day praised the 
organiser, 
“It was wonderful to see so many local faces young and old.” 
This summit provides opportunities for community capacity building and highlights 
how regular attention to volunteer networks is necessary.
The pandemic dramatically effected community volunteers and sporting groups. 
However, one initiative initiated during the pandemic was regular round table meets 
online to provide support and assistance. This initiative continued after the pandemic 
to provide ongoing support for respective members. 
In addition, during the pandemic free online fitness classes were organised and 
offered by staff at the Junee Recreation and Aquatic Centre.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
39
4.1	
What we heard
Consultation was undertaken in the LGA’s of Coolamon and Junee which provided clear insights into how previous droughts have impacted the 
community and the issues faced. Some key themes emerged; these are presented below with an overview of the main comments heard.
Key themes
Responses
A sustainable region and 
a healthy and protected 
environment that efficiently 
utilises its natural resources
	– Promote natural assets: The regions natural 
assets should be promoted to help enhance 
tourism prospects and attract people to live  
and stay. These assets need to be maintained  
and protected.
	– Resource efficiency: continued education on 
water efficiency measures and sustainable 
resource use is required to ensure the heath  
of the environment.
	– Governance systems: Sustainability thinking to be 
embedded in all actions to help improve health and 
wellbeing of the community and the environment.
A resilient and innovative 
agricultural sector
	– Secure Agricultural Water: Having guaranteed 
access to water and maintaining water security 
and quality during times of drought is a critical 
concern and is essential for continued agricultural 
and industry success. 
	– Streamlined Funding and Forward Planning:  
The Coolamon and Junee Communities expressed 
a strong need for local and State Governments 
to provide clear funding processes and long-term 
planning assistance/ guidance and see this as 
critical for ensuring the longevity of agriculture 
in the area. State Government relief mechanisms 
such as tax relief, low-interest loans for 
infrastructure, and containment areas were seen 
as important supports.
Key themes
Responses
Diverse and prosperous 
economy
	– Economic Diversification: Investment in industries 
and businesses beyond agriculture that support 
the local community is a priority. This will assist 
with building resilience into the local economy. 
	– Supporting local: Community festivals, 
agricultural shows and markets are seen as pivotal 
in bolstering resilience beyond the farm gate and 
into the community. 
	– Collaborative Efforts: Partnerships which 
encourage businesses from within the region to 
share, learn and mentor and provides a network to 
discuss common challenges. 
A strong and collaborative 
community
	– Community Clubs and Social Projects: Local 
clubs and social initiatives play a pivotal role 
in fostering community wellbeing and cultural 
cohesion. Maintaining sporting areas is vitally 
important as these places provide reprieve from 
drought and bring youth and other groups within 
the community together.
	– Mental Health Services: Accessible mental health 
services are seen as a high priority. However, 
mental health advice is not always given from 
professionals and therefore more mental first aid 
training is needed for adjacent industries. As noted 
in the case studies, a number of initiatives have 
been founded with the aim of improving community 
cohesion and mental health overall.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
40
Strong infrastructure and 
transport networks
•	 Rail and transport networks: The desire to maximise 
the use of the regions rail networks and roads to 
benefit the economy and provide suitable transport 
solutions that meet the community needs. 
•	 Business Estate: Attracting new businesses to the 
recently built Coolamon Business Park will create 
employment opportunities and encourage new 
families to live and work in the region.
•	 Water Infrastructure: Enhancements to water 
capture and storage were advocated for. Some 
improvements to the distribution system were noted 
as required. Use of wastewater water has extended 
the longevity of sporting precincts and parks.
Based on the valuable insights gathered from extensive community engagement, 
it is evident that the communities' future vision revolves around effective water 
management, fostering a diversified and resilient economy, and strengthening 
community bonds and overall wellbeing. The expressed concerns about water 
allocation and security emphasise the importance of this resource for a prosperous 
agricultural industry in this region. 
Diversification strategies were emphasised as essential for economic resilience during 
drought. To achieve these goals, simplifying funding application processes, boosting 
educational initiatives, and promoting cross-community collaboration are crucial steps. 
By addressing these key areas, the region can work toward securing its agricultural 
prosperity, nurturing community wellbeing, and fostering economic resilience, 
ultimately creating a more sustainable and vibrant future for all residents.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
41
4.2 
Initiatives refinement
Following community consultation, the ideas and 
initiatives from both the regional literature and 
consultation were collated. 
The investment logic from the QLD Business Case 
Development Framework was used as a means to refine 
the options for inclusion and prioritisation in the Plan. 
This process included:
1.	
Problem Statement
2.	 Key Questions
3.	 Assessment
4.	 Validation
1.	
Problem Statement
Coolamon and Junee’s economies will continue to be impacted by droughts, which are predicted to become more 
frequent and severe into the future. Drought Resilience Plans are required to identify the steps which communities 
should take to mitigate these impacts. The Councils should work together to develop the Plan and ensure it is 
actionable and relevant to individual communities.
2.	
Key Questions
•	 Impact: How are Coolamon and Junee impacted by Drought? Which impacts are most acute?
•	 Actions: What actions or initiatives could be taken to build the region’s drought resilience?
•	 Concept: What is the anticipated scope of the identified action?
•	 Benefit: How will the action benefit the region? 
•	 Prioritise: How feasible is the action and is there a level of shovel-readiness? Do Councils’ have the capacity and 
influence to undertake or support the action?
3.	
Assessment
Through the SRG, the top impacts under each theme were confirmed and rated as low, medium, or high impact to their 
respective LGAs. Each idea and initiative (potential actions) were coded with this information. A score relating to the 
relative level of Council influence and the feasibility of implementation (how shovel-ready the idea was) was given. In 
this way, each initiative had a score which enabled the prioritisation of ideas. 
Initiatives were considered best suited to the Plan where the benefit of the action was high and Councils have the 
greatest level of influence (Figure 24). 
4.	
Validation
Following initial assessment, several questions were considered to further refine the initiatives and prioritise them.
•	 Does the identified action/initiative align with Councils’ general strategic direction?
•	 Does the action align with the resilience pillars  
and framework and promote resilience pathways that exceed support through drought?
•	 Beneficiaries - what are and who receives the expected benefits of the action?
•	 Ease of implementation - is there a need for significant regulatory, political or legal changes?
•	 Timeliness - How long will the action take to complete?
•	 Financial - Is there funding available and what is the cost? What is the source of funding and who will pay?
The SRG was involved in validating the assessment and prioritised actions.
High
Expected beneﬁts
Council/regional inﬂuence
High
Low
Low
Pursue
Figure 24	 Assessment matrix

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
42
Case Study – Drought funding uplifts community (Junee)
In 2020, Junee Council received $1 million from the Federal Drought Communities 
Program, an initiative aimed at alleviating economic strain in drought-affected regions. 
Allocated to stimulate local spending, the funds provided extensive public benefit.  
With 74% of the allocation spent within a 50 kilometre radius, there is a clear 
commitment to local resources. Engaging local contractors and suppliers not only 
boosted the economy but also uplifted the agricultural community's spirits, previously 
burdened by prolonged drought conditions.
To ensure rural communities reaped the benefits of completed projects, respective 
locations spread across the rural areas of the Junee Local Government Area. With 
key successes including establishing all-ability access in various villages, reflecting a 
commitment to inclusivity. In this respective project forty individuals were employed  
by contractors, providing a substantial economic stimulus.
Case Study – Agricultural diversification (Ardlethan)
Source: www.weedsmart.org.au, 2017
Lou and Charlie Clemson are 6th generation farmers who run mixed farming 
enterprises with two of their properties located in Ardlethan in the Coolamon Shire. 
They have seen it through tough years in their last 30 years of farming. It was in the 
2013 droughts, which saw the Clemson’s adopt more effective methods in the use their 
property. 
By using government drought assistance and their own resources the Clemson’s 
sought to create a laneway through the middle of their 200 hectare property. This 
laneway allows the movement of their stock through the cropping area and allowed the 
Clemson’s to better sell their cropping country. Thus, creating confinement areas with 
troughed water and feeders to aid the breeding of cattle.  
Teaming up with Coolamon butcher, Wag Snag sausages are made free from antibiotics 
and pesticides. This new channel of Clemson’s farming enterprise, stemming from the 
struggles of the 2013 droughts has added profitable value to the business.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan 43
Drought Resilience Actions
05

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
44
5.	 Drought Resilience Actions
The themes, actions and initiatives detailed 
in this Plan have been captured from 
conversations with the community, local 
knowledge of the region and policy, planning 
documents and programs that have been 
developed through various organisations at a 
Commonwealth, State and local level. 
5.1	
What has already been done to 
build drought resilience 
Throughout the years extreme weather events, including 
droughts, have driven the communities of Coolamon and 
Junee to take action to improve their resilience to these 
events. The actions implemented within the community 
have supported improvements in social, economic, and 
environmental resilience to drought.
Some of the initiatives led by the community include: 
•	 Active Farmers in Ganmain and Illabo, which has been 
established with the aim of “building stronger and 
more resilient farming communities” through regular 
fitness classes that are run in a fun and interactive 
manner and create a sense of community and 
belonging. See the case study in Section 4.2 for more 
details of the Illabo active farmers group. 
•	 Junee Shire Council’s construction of concrete ‘v’ 
drains in the Junee urban area has improved water 
quality by 12% since their installation by eliminating 
the ability of the high salinity runoff/stormwater to 
infiltrate the groundwater. 
•	 Coolamon Shire Council increased their wastewater 
storage facilities through an upgrade to the Kindra 
Park Sporting Complex and an additional storage  
at the Showground which has saved 34ML of water 
per year.
•	 Agricultural enterprises have adopted innovative 
production techniques within their cropping and 
livestock businesses to great effect in terms of weed 
management and reducing reliance on herbicides.
Throughout the development of this Plan, resilience 
building actions and initiatives the community have 
identified as positive are listed below. These are a mix 
of absorptive, adaptive, and transformational resilience 
actions: 
•	 Illabo Showground Combined User Group were able 
to develop a strategy for the future sustainability of 
the grounds.
•	 Junee Business and Trades were able to employ a 
part-time Grant Officer to provide support to increase 
the ability and success of local organisations in 
applying for funding for local community activities. 
•	 Junee Community Centre were able to continue to 
support the community by subsidising the centre 
manager role to support organisational governance, 
partnerships, and strategy development.
•	 Junee Business and Trades have been building 
community resilience and supporting the 
development of local community networks by 
conducting a series of workshops and presentations 
in the Junee Shire, and employing a part-time 
Community Liaison Officer.
•	 Coolamon Shire Council provided a series of Big 
Dreams, Small Business training for local community 
members to discover new sources of income through 
the facilitation of free micro-business and events 
management workshops.
•	 It was noted that tax relief, farm management 
deposits/ water and freight subsidies for agricultural 
businesses are helpful however effectiveness is 
dependent on the timeliness and accessibility and 
these measures are absorptive. 
•	 Use of agricultural by-products for sustainable 
housing . e.g Biomass residues like hemp, straw, 
coconut, wood, flax for thermal insulation.
•	 Upgrade of road networks to support high-capacity 
vehicles. This will support product distribution 
(economic resilience).
The actions to be progressed from this Plan can be 
found in the following sections.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
45
5.2	
Resilience Actions
To meet the objectives of the Plan, a number of actions have been developed 
under the five themes (with accompanying sub-themes) identified 
throughout this Plan. The need, the action and the expected outcomes 
are provided, along with how these contribute to building resilience, the 
Framework is shown in Figure 25 below, and the responsible parties involved. 
Additional details regarding assumptions and metrics to measure progress 
towards these actions are provided in Section 5.3. 
Figure 25	 Resilience actions
For radically changing 
the system or building 
a new system if 
maintaining and 
modifying the existing 
system won’t work.
For modifying 
the system 
when needed.
For maintaining of 
key functions and 
structures of a 
system in the face 
of shocks.
Absorptive 
capacity
Adaptive 
capacity
Transformative 
capacity

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
46
Theme 1 
A sustainable region and 
a healthy and protected 
environment 
In creating a sustainable region and a healthy environment, this Plan 
seeks to ensure that local resources are used efficiently, climate 
change impacts are understood, and adaptations put in place. Planning 
and management practices assist in reducing community impact on the 
natural environment and protect biodiversity.
Sub-theme: Water
The importance of maintaining a healthy and protected environment was identified 
throughout the consultation, especially when it relates to the protection of the natural 
environment. This includes:
•	 addressing water issues, especially around water security and equity. 
•	 promoting sustainable use of water within the community.
•	 maintaining and protecting the region’s groundcover.
•	 promoting biodiversity and focusing on targeted and consistent pest management.
The Need: There is a need to balance the competing uses of the region’s environmental 
resources. These range from agriculture, tourism, recreation, and cultural activities, all of 
which encompass a great range of stakeholders with varying needs and priorities and are 
greatly impacted by drought. Utilising alternative water sources to reduce the demand on 
potable supplies and extending education to reduce water usage, will assist in ensuring 
water supply is extended and the multiple users are able to access a suitable water 
supply.
Actions
•	 Increase the use of wastewater and recycled water to maintain greenspaces such as 
parks, gardens and recreational areas. 
•	 Develop  a water education and awareness plan that includes the promotion and 
awareness of water efficiency measures e.g most efficient means of watering 
lawns and gardens, drought management plans. Educating the community on the 
various levels of water restrictions and when are they applied. Partnering with other 
agencies provide education on water sharing plans and water use compliance.    
•	 Increase  water education within the community including showcasing some of the 
local businesses such as the Junee Prime Lamb Abattoirs which have adopted water 
efficiency measures. 
Key outcomes 
•	 The use of wastewater reduces the reliance on potable water, extending potable 
water supplies during drought periods. 
•	 Increased community awareness of the efficient use of water can lead to adaptive 
and/or transformative change. 
•	 Education to the region’s industries to plan and adapt their businesses for reduced 
water availability will assist with long term viability. 
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Provides sustainable spaces 
for the community to 
gather, encouraging social 
cohesiveness and increases 
education and knowledge of 
efficient water use.   
Use of wastewater reduces 
Council and community 
costs.  
Allows green spaces to 
be maintained without 
increasing pressure on 
natural waterways or 
reducing availability 
for other services and 
industries.
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
47
Resilience Framework 
The Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the actions are 
outlined below:
Resist
Community, business, industry and natural environment is better 
able to withstand drought conditions. 
Transform 
Encourages the community to adapt their behaviour following 
greater awareness of water use. Some users will transform their 
systems to be more water efficient when shown new ways.
Adapt
Greater education and awareness of water restrictions and the 
triggers associated with these restrictions can help community, 
businesses and industry within the region better plan and adapt their 
systems for reductions in water availability. 
Absorb
Increased knowledge provides greater opportunities to anticipate 
and plan for decreased water availability. 
Implementation
1.	
The Shires of Coolamon and Junee should collaborate with Goldenfields Water to 
promote and expand the existing water saving and efficiency education.  
2.	 	A Water Education and Awareness Plan should be developed to expand the 
promotion and awareness of the existing water efficiency messaging for the 
community including education on drought management plans. 
3.	 The Water Education and Awareness Plan should consist of community, school 
and business information sessions. The aim would be to demonstrate water 
efficiency, improved use of greywater and deliver an understanding of the triggers 
in Goldenfields Water Drought Management Plan and how this practically aligns 
with potential water restrictions for businesses in times of drought. Promotional 
information can be developed to support schools to deliver the messaging on a 
class-by-class or more personalised level.  
 
This education can be extended to include increased information on water sharing 
plans, compliance requirements and water entitlement and allocation to support 
those with licensed water entitlements.  
 
As a part of these information sessions for the community and business, DPIRD, 
DCCEEW and Local Land Services (LLS) could attend to provide information 
on opportunities for the regions industry to improve water security through 
infrastructure upgrades e.g. National Water Grid.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
48
Delivery
Suggested Lead 
Agency 
Potential Partners
Coolamon and Junee 
Shire Councils with 
Goldenfields Water
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment 
and Water (DCCEEW NSW); Local Land Services; 
DPIRD; WaterNSW; Natural Resource Access Regulator; 
Education providers in the communities; Local business 
community and the regions industry e.g. Junee 
Correctional Facility; water licence holders.
Finance 
 
Supported by existing Council and Goldenfields Water staff to 
develop a Water Education and Awareness Plan (WEAP). This should 
be able to be completed through existing resources. 
Timeframe
 
In the short-term the WEAP can be developed and implemented 
along with educational material that supports the delivery of the 
water messaging. The information sessions could be run annually to 
bi-annually to encourage behaviour change and continued awareness 
of the messaging.
Measure of 
Success
 
Declining instances of non-compliance with water licences as 
reported by the Natural Resources Access Regulator.
Green spaces maintained year-round (report on number of 
complaints). 
Water use per person remains constant or reduces.
Sub-theme: The Environment 
The Need: Maintaining a well-protected environment has many benefits for the 
community. It helps to maintain biodiversity and attract wildlife, along with maintaining 
groundcover and reducing erosion. The region hosts several Landcare groups who work 
to improve the environment for their communities. The Kindra State Forest is a key 
environmental attraction in the region and protection of the environment is a priority for 
both Councils. 
Actions
•	 Investigate the formation of a Landcare network that brings together the smaller 
Landcare groups in the region and provides an opportunity to learn from, work 
together, and progress common challenges. This creates an opportunity to 
collaborate on projects that focus on improving the local environment (such as 
restoring wetlands) that create a sense of place and attract local and regional visitors, 
that will build economic diversity. 
•	 Collaborate  with local environmental groups such as Landcare, DPIRD and LLS to 
promote the natural environment, biodiversity and flora and fauna in with region to 
boost nature-based tourism and diversify the economy. This needs to be balanced 
with protection of the natural environment.
•	 Increase  biodiversity by focusing on targeted and consistent pest management and 
considering non-traditional methods e.g. bio-control. This will assist in providing a 
more sustainable means of protecting the environment.
•	 Consider  options to incorporate more drought tolerant parks and gardens in future 
Council planning.
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
49
Key outcomes 
•	 Bring together a collective of like-minded people to deliver enhancements to 
the natural environment that support the needs of the Coolamon and Junee 
communities and build social cohesion and environmental sustainability.
•	 Develop regional capacity to be able to deliver projects of mutual benefit, help build 
skills and share knowledge and encourage people to stay in the area.
•	 Improve the region’s biodiversity and environmental resilience so that the natural 
environment better absorb shocks and stresses of natural disasters.
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Building community and 
regional connection through 
sharing of environmental 
knowledge and working 
together.
An enhanced natural 
environment contributes to 
the attractiveness  
of the region as a tourist 
destination.
Increased capacity of local 
Landcare to support regional 
environmental initiatives.
Resilience Framework
The Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the actions 
are outlined below:
Learning and 
adapting
Allows sharing of knowledge and experience across 
communities and builds linkages between LGAs. Focussing 
on adaptation measures will assist Councils in preparing for 
drought.
Diversity 
Provides for a variety of differing experience and skills to solve 
mutual problems.  
Inclusivity
Creates shared ownership, vision, and enables high levels of 
connectivity between different communities.
Effective
Effective engagement across communities that promotes 
transparency, inclusivity and place-based approaches.
Implementation
1.	
Coolamon Landcare supported by Local Land Services and the National Landcare 
Network is to approach the other regional Landcare organisations (including Junee) 
to gauge interest in regional networking and collaboration on joint opportunities 
and projects.  
2.	 Upon obtaining consensus, LLS is to facilitate a workshop to assist the group in 
identifying joint priorities and a schedule of opportunities.
3.	 To progress joint actions, the newly formed group should look to collaborate 
with LLS and the National Landcare Network to support project planning and 
identifying funding opportunities. 
4.	 This newly formed group should connect with local Councils and the business 
community on grant writing assistance and opportunities.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agencies 
Potential Partners
Coolamon Landcare Group; Local 
Land Services; National Landcare 
Network Australia
Junee Regenerative Landcare Inc; Junee Area 
Landcare Group; Mid-Billabong Landcare 
Group; Ganmain Urban Landcare Group; 
Local Landcare Services along with other 
associated groups in the broader region, 
Coolamon and Junee Shire Councils.
Finance 
 
NSW Landcare Enabling Program 2023-2027, NSW Government has 
committed $59 million to Landcare and Landcare activities in NSW.
Timeframe
 
Short-term to make an approach across the five local  
Landcare networks. 
Medium term to deliver projects and collaborations that improve 
environmental outcomes for the region.
Measure of 
Success
 
Deliver one collaboration between the newly formed Landcare 
network that demonstrates benefit from an agreed Monitoring 
Evaluation and Reporting Framework perspective.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
50
Theme 2 
Agriculture 
The Need: A resilient and innovative agricultural sector that is supported by a skilled 
and connected workforce that shares expertise. 
For many years, primary producers have sought to prepare and adapt to the varying 
climatic conditions faced within their business. Agricultural businesses are largely 
self-empowered to find ways in which to improve their own circumstances and build 
their resilience. This has occurred through a range of activities mostly focused on 
innovative changes to agricultural production systems and has been driven by a focus 
on research, development and extension activities. 
Adoption of new practices is a key challenge and is limited by a range of factors 
including finances, risk perceptions and understanding what options are available 
for producers to consider. Greater knowledge sharing and connection between the 
innovative resilience work being conducted by research organisations and farming 
communities would assist in improving resilience in the sector. Many of the primary 
producers in the Coolamon and Junee Shire’s are mixed farmers, which is a natural way 
to diversify and therefore improves overall resilience to shocks and stresses. 
Actions
•	 Support and promote innovation and research, development and extension activities 
that are being conducted that improve drought resilience/ understanding and 
provide practical production solutions to adopt new agricultural technology and 
modernise farming systems e.g. drought tolerant crop varieties and more efficient 
animal husbandry practices. Working with regional agricultural service providers to 
translate agricultural information and knowledge that addresses local needs. Better 
sharing of information between primary producers regarding management practices 
e.g. weed and soil management.
•	 Investigate opportunities for local agricultural enterprises to collaborate with 
industry to develop more relevant region-specific research and development. 
	– Collaborating with the GRDC to bring more regional-specific research and 
development projects to the region.
•	 Early and improved messaging around drought that monitors early drought 
indicators (work being done by University of Canberra) and that translate 
information into plain English that can be understood by the broader  
community.
•	 Create opportunities for primary producers within the region to form networks to 
discuss common challenges. This also includes supporting youth in agriculture and 
providing leadership and networking opportunities.
	– Referral to external resources such as DPIRD Young Farmer Program, Local Land 
Services Drought Adoption Officers, Rural Financial Counselling Service.
•	 Building local food networks between producers and local consumers that focus on 
fair pricing, value-adding, and further opportunities to sell direct to the consumer.
•	 Support local agricultural businesses to discuss options with the regional water 
supply authority to improve water equity and quality.
•	 Investigate alternate workforce models for sharing of labour amongst farm 
businesses.
•	 Continue to build quality fodder reserves to support livestock businesses within the 
region that support pre-planning and increased storage capacity.
•	 Consider options to support early adopters of new technologies and innovations e.g. 
new/ emerging crops that require separate or new storage.
•	 Promote the success stories of resilient agricultural practices within the region to 
increase investor confidence.
Key outcomes 
•	 Brings together like-minded people to solve similar challenges and builds leadership 
in young farmers building social resilience.
•	 Increased uptake of innovative and new agricultural practices helps to deliver better 
outcomes for the environment.
•	 Increases overall business resilience by planning and adapting to climatic conditions. 
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
51
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Improved networking fosters 
social connection and brings 
together likeminded people 
to problem solve 
Improves business continuity 
through pre-planning and 
adoption of innovative 
practices.
Reduces the impact on 
the environment, through 
maintaining groundcover, 
improving soils and improved 
pest management, and at 
times enhancing biodiversity.
Resilience Framework
The Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the actions 
are outlined below:
Learning
Creates opportunitiwa to share knowledge and build networks to 
tackle problems together.
Resist
Changing systems as a result of better knowledge allows 
agricultural businesses to better withstand drought.
Recover
Farming systems that adapt and continually improve (based on 
research outcomes) will be able to recover from drought more 
quickly.
Transform
Many of these options seek to transform the way primary 
production occurs through adopting drought tolerant varieties 
and making on-farm improvements.  
Implementation
To be determined by lead agency and partners.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agencies 
Potential Partners
Local Land Services
NSW Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development, Grains and Research 
Development Corporation and other research 
agencies; NSW Farmers Federation; Local 
Agricultural Service Providers; Goldenfields 
Water; Southern Innovation Hub.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
52
Theme 3 
Diverse and prosperous 
economy
The Need: A robust local industry that is supported, heritage assets that are protected, 
and tourism that is promoted, to encourage local employment opportunities.
Sub-theme: Business attraction 
The communities of Coolamon and Junee are predominantly agricultural-based centres 
but they also rely on agricultural service suppliers, tourism, logistics and export, rail, 
and public administration and safety. 
The recent development of the Coolamon Business Park is one step taken to attract 
new business to the community and diversify the regions industry and economic base. 
Community engagement highlighted the importance of supporting both agriculture 
and industry within the region. It was also noted that at times the proximity to a larger 
regional centre (Wagga Wagga) can serve to be a detriment to smaller communities 
and make it more difficult to attract opportunities. 
Action
•	 Develop  a business plan to attract the desired businesses and industry to  
the Coolamon and Junee Shires. This Plan should consider the industries and 
services required in each LGA and opportunities to attract these businesses  
to the region. This will create a greater diversity in the community’s industries and 
services. 
Key outcomes 
•	 Builds diversity in the community and local economy by attracting new industries 
and businesses. Helps to transform the local economy and community and build 
greater resilience to drought.
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Enhances the relationship 
between community and 
local government and 
increases diversity within 
local communities; helps to 
attract new members to the 
community. 
Provides stimulation for the 
local economy, supports 
tourism and attracts new 
forms of income to the 
region.
N/A
Resilience Framework
The Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the actions 
are outlined below:
Diversity
Attracting new businesses and industry to the region provides 
more diverse communities and economies that are then more 
likely to be able to respond to changing circumstances and 
provide a buffer against agricultural downturn.
Resist
A more diverse economic base provides greater resilience and 
ability to withstand shocks and stressors.
Thrive
Broadening the industry within the region will allow the 
community to maintain their livelihoods during drought periods.
Effective
Providing a bespoke plan to meet the community need and help 
develop the region. 
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
53
Implementation
1.	
The Councils, with the assistance of their Economic Development Officers or a 
consultant, should consider designing and documenting a Business Attraction 
Plan to attract new businesses to the Coolamon Business Park and to the Junee 
Shire. This Plan will focus on industry that creates diversity within the community 
along with meeting the needs of the community. The Plan will build on the existing 
work that has been completed via the Regional Economic Development Strategies 
however bringing a greater level of focus to the communities of Coolamon and 
Junee
2.	 	The Councils should engage with DPIRD to understand what opportunities are 
available to them given their proximity to the Wagga Wagga Special Activation 
Precinct and how DPIRD might be able to use this Plan to support attracting 
industry to the region. 
3.	 	Additional marketing information that showcases the housing and education 
facilities available should be created to assist in attracting new investors to the 
region. This component of the plan could be supported by local real estate agents 
who will be able to articulate the buying power associated with Coolamon and 
Junee versus other locations. 
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Potential Partners
Coolamon and Junee Shire 
Councils
DPIRD; Local Real Estate Agents; Destination 
NSW; Regional Development Australia (RDA) 
Riverina; Local industry and businesses, 
REROC
Finance 
 
$50K - $150K to develop the Business Attraction Plan 
The Business Plan could be funded from FDF, however 
implementation of the plan including development and marketing 
costs would need to be met by Council funds or other investment.
Timeframe
 
Short-term to develop the Business Attraction Plan. 
Medium to long-term to transition new businesses to build and 
establish in Coolamon and Junee.
Measure of 
Success
 
Conversion of sales from the business attraction plan to new 
businesses to the community.
Sub-theme: Business Economy and Networks
The Need: The communities of Coolamon and Junee have identified the need to build, 
maintain and expand their business and industry networks within each community as 
well as collaborate with and learn from each other. This is important to retain and attract 
people to the region. 
Actions
•	 Formation and expansion of business networks:
	– Form a business network for the Coolamon Shire that creates opportunities for 
local businesses to meet and learn from each other along with a forum to share 
and connect with other like-minded business owners to develop networks and 
support the establishment and growth of their enterprise. 
	– Coolamon Shire should seek to collaborate with Junee Business and Trades so 
they can learn from their experience as an established business network. 
	– Support the expansion of the Junee business community (via Junee Business and 
Trades) to help diversify the local economy.
•	 Investigate opportunities to enhance grant writing assistance in both Coolamon 
and Junee Shires. In Junee Shire this would consist of additional support to Junee 
Business and Trades. In Coolamon, this may be targeted to Council grant writing 
workshops (prior to formalisation of a Coolamon business network).
Key outcomes 
•	 To improve business relationships and foster a sense of belonging amongst the 
business community, helping retain businesses and build social cohesion.
•	 Provide opportunities to problem solve and build the business community’s capacity. 
•	 The strengthening of business networks in both Shires will allow for renewed focus 
on supporting the business and tourism sectors within the region, helping diversify 
the economy. 
•	 Provides education and upskilling opportunities, helping retain skilled workers in 
the regions.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
54
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Brings together like-minded 
people to solve business 
problems and increase 
leadership skills.
Community leaders and 
businesspeople seeking 
to improve their own 
businesses and build income 
that helps build the local 
economy. 
Resilience Framework
The Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the actions 
are outlined below:
Inclusivity 
Includes community, businesses and leaders across 
all sectors and age groups and enables sharing of 
information.
Learning
Creates a forum for people to learn from each other to 
improve their resilience to drought.
Transform
Provides an opportunity to build knowledge, learn and 
improve to inform future business decisions. This also 
enables systems transformation.
Thrive
Allows communities to meet their needs and maintain 
their livelihood throughout challenging periods.
Implementation
1.	
Identify people within the community who are interested to forming a business 
network or Chamber of Commerce.
2.	 If sufficient resources can be found to support the creation of the business 
network, then it should proceed. Where this does not occur, opportunities to host 
informal meetings should be investigated to create opportunities for individuals to 
connect or access the Junee business community.
3.	 The nominated representatives will be responsible for recruitment, establishment 
operating procedures and organisation of events.
4.	 Business Network/ Chamber of Commerce will be focused on:
•	 Provide opportunities for individuals within the region to mentor/ learn and connect 
with other businesspeople.
•	 Holding community forums to discuss challenges and share knowledge on running a 
business.
•	 Encouraging businesses to cross-promote each other and collaborate to maximise 
tourism opportunities.
•	 Collaboration with other local business chambers to learn from their experience.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Potential partners
Local business owners in the 
region with Coolamon and Junee 
Shire Councils.
Junee Business and Trades; Business 
Chamber of Commerce; Local businesses 
within the region including agricultural 
services; REROC; RDA Riverina, Service NSW, 
Business Connect, Business NSW.
Finance 
 
Strengthening Rural Communities program through FRRR and 
implementation funding from FDF could be utilitsated to support 
these actions.
Timeframe
 
Short-term to initiate the formation of a business network between 
the two regions. 
Medium-term to establish an on-going collaboration.
Measure of 
Success
 
Attracting sufficient members to the group/ network to be  
self-sustaining.
Identification of agreed number of events each year.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
55
Sub-theme: Tourism
The Need: Tourism is an important contributor to the local economy and provides diverse 
opportunities for employment. Expanding and improving tourism will assist with buffering 
against economic downturns associated with drought periods.
Tourism is a key attractor of visitors to the region. In Junee, the Licorice and Chocolate 
Factory, Roundhouse Railway Museum, Monte Cristo Homestead, Athenium Theatre, 
and Broadway Museum, as well as the Junee Urban Wetland are all places to see. In 
Coolamon, the Coolamon Cheese, Fire Museum and Up-To-Date Store, as well as the 
Kindra State Forest are local attractions. The smaller towns in both Shires also offer 
both historical and natural attractions. 
Actions
•	 Promotion of the region’s tourism attractions:
	– Support and promote buy and shop local programs.
	– Ensure local events are supported by local producers.
	– Create a calendar of community events that promotes the regions sport, 
shopping, arts, cultural and historical events e.g. Barellan draught horse festival 
(which brings 7,000 visitors).
	– Investigate opportunities for Coolamon and Junee to work together to promote 
their Shires as a destination to visit. This provides opportunities to align tourism 
events.
	– Create a fund that can provide financial assistance for community led events.
	– Investigate grant opportunities through the Junee Business and Trades and 
Coolamon business networks to support regional events.
•	 Provide greater diversity within tourism in the region through adding 
complementary events such as farm and produce tours that support existing 
tourism attractions such as the Canola Trail.
Key outcomes 
•	 Build a sense of belonging and increase connections amongst the community.
•	 Expand and increase the region's economic base. 
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Improved social connection 
by bringing the community 
together in good times and 
in bad.
Provides stimulation to the 
local economy and attracts 
visitors to the region.
Promotes the region’s 
natural areas which 
increases stewardship.
Resilience Framework
The key Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the 
actions are outlined below:
Diversity 
A diverse local economy helps provide resilience. Diversity in the 
tourist attractions helps to draw a wider variety of visitors.
Inclusivity
The action supports a sense of shared ownership, vision, and 
enables high levels of connectivity between different social 
groups.
Thrive
A diverse tourism base within the region will allow the 
community to maintain their livelihoods during drought periods.
Resist
The community will be better able to absorb the shocks and 
stresses of drought due to a more resilient and diverse economy.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
56
Implementation
1.	
Utilising existing service providers such as Junee Business and Trades and the 
Tilma Group, build a calendar of events that are published and promoted within the 
community and on the Council’s websites. 
2.	 A call out should be made to the community to notify the service provider of their 
proposed events.  
3.	 In parallel, a promotion of buy and shop local and the regions tourism attractions 
should also be identified and promoted.
4.	 A series of Council organised social events should occur during drought.
5.	 Opportunities to engage local producers and suppliers should be identified, where 
businesses can work together to ensure that they are able to service the tourism 
demands.
6.	 Prior to the annual update of the events calendar, both Councils should assess 
what opportunities exist for the alignment of tourist events for the region.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Potential Partners
Junee Business and Trades; 
Coolamon Business Community
Coolamon and Junee Shire Councils, 
Destination NSW, DPIRD, not for profit 
organisations e.g Junee Community Centre, 
Lions Club 
Finance 
 
FDF / FRRR Funding
Timeframe
 
In the short term develop a calendar of events.
This calendar of events will need to be updated on an on-going basis.
Measure of 
Success
Measuring attendance at community hosted events.
Reporting on visits to the Council’s web pages to access event 
information.
Tourist numbers and profitability of tourist attractions.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
57
Theme 4
A strong and collaborative 
community
Sub-theme: Mental health 
The Need: Coolamon and Junee seek access to services and housing to support a healthy, 
active, inclusive and liveable community with good governance and a strong sense of 
shared responsibility. 
Well supported community members are better placed to endure the shocks of 
drought. By supporting mental health services and volunteers to reduce burnout and 
fatigue, the community will be better placed to endure adverse events and recover 
from hardship. Focussing on inclusivity and providing a voice for youth, women and 
First Nations People in the region are also important facets of building community 
strength. 
Actions
•	 Develop a mental health services plan that reflects the community need. This should 
be completed in partnership, through the formation of a collective of health care 
providers in the region and that builds on existing services. 
	– Advocate for mental health services that meet the needs of the community and 
are accessible in a range of mediums and formats (delivered both formally and 
informally).
	– Provide specific mental health training for those community members and 
service providers who are connected to agriculture or are likely to be involved 
with various sections of the community e.g. volunteers, service industries to 
agriculture. 
	– Develop partnerships with program providers such as headspace to bring 
leadership and mental health skills to schools.
•	 Support for community events and local gathering points e.g. She/Mens Sheds, 
soup kitchen, local shows and races. Extend the events page to include community 
group events e.g. "Welcoming Australia" 'making yourself @ home' in the community 
for new people to town, Gallery in Ganmain hosting nights for women to gather,  
talk and paint.
•	 Specific drought events supported by local community groups such as Country 
Women’s Association, Rotary, Junee Community Centre that encourage people to 
come together and connect.
Key outcomes 
•	 Builds capacity within the region to be prepared, deal with, manage and recover 
from the mental health impacts of drought.
•	 A mental health service that meets the community need and helps build resilience 
before an event occurs.
•	 Encourages and promotes a localised level of support that is accessible and 
adaptable to meet the needs of the community.  
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Improves health and well-
being for the community 
as a whole. A strong and 
healthy community will be 
more resilient to shocks and 
stresses.
Reduces loss of productivity 
through lower days of 
absence.
N/A
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
58
Resilience Framework
The key Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the 
actions are outlined below:
Inclusive 
Provides a tailored service for all community members.
Resist 
Ensures that community members are prepared and ready to 
respond and cope with adverse events.
Absorb 
A robust system that assists to lessen the impact of adverse 
events on communities. 
Accommodate
System has the capacity to deal with disruption, pressure and 
surges in demand.
Transform 
Allows for the development of services that recognise the 
changing needs and service requirements of the community.
Thrive
Mental health services meet the needs of the communities 
allowing them to maintain their livelihoods before, during and 
after drought events.
Implementation
1.	
Create an expression of interest to local and state health providers to form a 
collective to discuss mental health services for the region.
2.	 Use a facilitator to conduct a series of workshops to discuss the regions 
requirements amongst these providers.
3.	 Develop a plan that defines the mental services required for the region. 
4.	 Investigate options to deliver these services and any funding options to assist with 
the implementation of the plan.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Partners
Local Health District and Primary 
Health Network
Junee Community Centre; Local health 
providers e.g. Coolamon Regional Medical 
Centre; Program providers e.g. headspace etc; 
CSU Southern Innovation Hub, Coolamon and 
Junee Shire Councils.
Finance 
 
FDF implementation funding. Additional funding required for 
delivery/implementation of the plan. This may be from State 
Government programs such as the rural adversity mental health 
program.
Timeframe
 
Short to Medium term to develop and agree the plan.
Measure of 
Success
 
Report on:
•	 The numbers of people accessing existing mental health services.
•	 The number of new services brought to the region.
•	 The number of people accessing these new services. 
•	 Reduction in number of complaints regarding access to mental 
health services.
Sub-theme: Youth, Volunteers and a skilled workforce
The Need: Engagement with the communities of Coolamon and Junee highlighted the 
importance of focusing resilience efforts on supporting youth to stay, study and/or return 
to the region. Youth help to keep communities alive and engaged and attract education, 
health and business opportunities. 
Creating opportunities and fostering partnerships that provide leadership and support 
skills to volunteers are vital. Encouraging a broader subset of the community to 
volunteer helps with community cohesiveness and reduces volunteer burnout. The 
volunteers in the region are drawn on more so during drought and there is a need to 
provide greater support for these people.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
59
Attracting people to the region enhances diversity in the community. This growth in 
population which often includes families, increases participation at schools, sports and 
other community activities. 
The community identified frustration with red tape, especially in regard to bureaucratic 
processes that hinder development, create inflexible rules around transport, and 
immigration challenges. It was noted that it is exceptionally difficult to navigate these 
systems and encourage new residents to move to the region.
Actions
•	 Increase and formalise partnerships with local and state providers regarding 
opportunities for building leadership skills within local schools, apprenticeships, 
work experience and unpaid support roles. Examples would be; expansion of Junee 
Youth Employment partnership program, use of the Regional Youth and Community 
Development Network (YouthROC via REROC) to support local youth issues, Support 
for youth in the region to attend Take Charge Riverina Youth Leadership Forum 
(REROC Initiative) to build leadership skills.
•	 Investigate and create opportunities for youth to gain skills and education. 
Encourage youth to stay and study in the region via the education hub being 
established in nearby Wagga Wagga. 
•	 Promote the benefits of living in a smaller regional community and working 
with local providers such as RDA Riverina to encourage and assist the overseas 
community in Wagga Wagga to move to the Shires of Coolamon and Junee. 
•	 Explore alternate labour sharing options between businesses and industry to retain 
skilled workers in the region.
•	 Increasing community cohesion:
	– Investigate repurposing of council areas for shared community facilities e.g. 
community garden hub.
	– Establish connections between smaller villages and larger towns through a 
buddy system.
	– Community hubs for people to share knowledge and solve problems.
•	 Increase the frequency of the Junee Volunteers Summit to provide support 
and capacity building for volunteers within the community. The Summit should 
incorporate a focus on how to encourage more volunteers and those across 
different demographics, especially youth, to become volunteers. Coolamon Shire 
should collaborate with Junee Shire as to how to develop its own summit. 
Key outcomes 
•	 Provides support and skills to the region's volunteers to alleviate the strain of 
fatigue felt amongst this group. This increases social connections which are 
important to lean on in challenging times. 
•	 Increased opportunities for youth to stay, obtain an education and contribute to the 
local community and economy. Retention of youth leads to a boost in the economy 
and increased job demand.
•	 Encourages people of more diverse backgrounds and skills to relocate to the region 
which builds the community and provides more diversity in the local economy.
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Improves social 
cohesiveness and diversity 
within the community. 
Supports youth to stay in the 
region to take advantage of 
opportunities and contribute 
to their community. Provides 
support to volunteers and 
community leaders. Building 
social connections increases 
social resilience.
Attracting additional skilled 
workers and retaining 
those already in the region 
stimulates economic growth 
and business expansion.
N/A

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
60
Resilience Framework
The key Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the 
actions are outlined below:
Diversity 
The actions create diversity in the economy and community as 
they support new residents moving to the community who bring 
new skills. 
Inclusivity and 
connectivity
Community events and volunteering help bridge cultural divides 
and connect people from different social circles.
Absorb
Provides skills and support to volunteers to enable them to be 
better prepared to respond to the demands of drought a more 
diverse workforce and economy is better able to absorb shock and 
stresses.
Implementation
1.	
Engage with the community to understand what additional community facilities 
are required. 
2.	 Identify suitable facilities and sites available for potential repurposing.
3.	 Support formation/ expansion of community networks.
4.	 Identify and obtain funding required for development of facility/ area.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Potential Partners
Coolamon and Junee Shire 
Councils with REROC
RDA Riverina; community groups; business 
communities; community centres; recruitment 
agencies; educational facilities, registered 
training organisations e.g. local high schools; 
NSW Department of Education (Training 
Services NSW).
Finance 
 
FDF implementation funding. Alternate funding sources would need 
to be secured for ongoing support.
Timeframe
 
Medium term.
Measure of 
Success
 
Report on:
•	 Involvement in REROC programs.
•	 Number of apprenticeships in the region.
•	 Skilled worker population.
•	 Attendance at Volunteer Summits (and number of summits).

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
61
Sub-theme: Drought
The Need: Throughout the community engagement and SRGs, several key areas relating 
to drought were identified that could be improved to provide better outcomes for the 
region. Many respondents were aware that there is a lot of drought work being undertaken 
across a range of organisations. However, there is still uncertainty as to where to go to 
find out more information and to connect with the individuals and organisations involved 
in this work; the information was not always tailored to the region and it was not always 
available in a timely manner. 
Actions
•	 Grow the region’s capacity to build resilience through improved co-ordination of 
drought actions and responses e.g. through the assistance of a Resilience Officer. 
This role would assist with coordination and knowledge sharing regarding other 
natural disasters as well. This role would build on the existing LLS Drought Adoption 
Officer role and be considered to provide information that relates not just to 
agriculture but the wider community needs for drought.
•	 Build awareness  of drought preparedness within the community through the 
Resilience Officer so that the community as a collective is better prepared 
for future droughts and is better connected to available resources. The future 
Disaster Adaption Plans, required to be developed by the NSW Reconstruction 
Authority, provide an opportunity for each Council area and the region to identify 
if any additional resources are needed for coordination or information sharing and 
distribution during challenging times. 
•	 Advocate for improved timeliness and accuracy of drought declarations. Ensure the 
messaging around drought is available to all sections of the community and trigger 
points for decision making are clearly understood.
•	 Identify  and develop leaders within the community who can help co-ordinate 
networks to solve local challenges and transmit information including broader 
disaster messaging across the community. 
•	 Improve connections and assistance:
	– Connecting primary producers with farm advisors who can assist with production 
and financial advice outside of drought times (preparedness)
	– Improved connection of drought resources and funding with the community. 
This could be through a dedicated resource that facilitates this connection and 
provides grant assistance/info.
	– Connecting small business with Rural Financial Counselling Service and other 
resources that can provide support.
Key outcomes 
•	 Improve local capacity, both in the community and primary producers, to respond to 
drought. 
•	 A better informed community is able to make timely decisions that reduce the 
impacts of drought. 
•	 Increased coordination of drought resilience activities and responses improve social 
resilience.
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Grows the community 
knowledge and ability to 
respond to drought. 
Provides timely connection 
to information and financial 
resources that can support 
the region’s agriculture 
and industry, reducing the 
economic value of drought.
Improved access and 
understanding of resilience 
research has the potential 
to deliver improved 
environmental outcomes.
Resilience Framework
The key Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the 
actions are outlined below:
Inclusivity and 
connectivity
Provides better connectivity and provides more opportunities 
for knowledge sharing across the region regarding resilience 
actions that can be taken.
Consideration 
/ learning / 
adapting
Multiple avenues for learning through connecting community 
and primary producers with new research and allowing them to 
better prepare and adapt practices. 
Transform 
Increased knowledge enables community behavioural change 
and an understanding of how to act before, during and after 
drought. Industry and business can transform their systems to 
better cope with shocks and stresses.
Effective
Providing a local resource allows for a place-based approach to 
resilience that meets the community need.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
62
Timely
Having access to drought information and resources prior to, 
or in a timely manner, provides greater opportunity to plan and 
respond to drought.
Recover
Improved understanding of the drought interventions that are 
able to be accessed and when may reduce time taken to recover.
Implementation
1.	
The Shires of Coolamon and Junee should seek to engage a Resilience Officer 
to co-ordinate resilience activities and responses within the region that benefit 
the community. The Resilience Officer working across local Councils would:
	– Act as coordinator to lead the resilience actions for both Councils. This 
resource could support the response to other natural disasters. 
	– Promote the formation of business networks and coordinate local leaders so 
that they can help disseminate information. 
	– Promote the inclusion of resilience messaging across the Councils website 
that helps refer and inform the community of resources and information 
available e.g. drought indicators and messaging, water restrictions. 
	– Form connections with LLS and DPIRD to support access to the Drought Hub 
and Drought Adoption Officers for the community.
	– Making connections between community and other Commonwealth, State 
and local agencies e.g. Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) for small 
business. 
	– Connect the community to opportunities within the Southern Innovation Hub.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Potential Partners
Coolamon and Junee Shire 
Councils
LLS; DPIRD; RFCS; CSU Southern Innovation 
Hub; Local industry and business
Finance 
•	 FDF Implementation funding could be allocated to support the 
initial 1st year funding.  
•	 Council’s currently do not have funding for such a position and 
would need to advocate for its necessity. There are opportunities 
under the FDF Helping Regional Communities Prepare for Drought 
Initiative that would support some of the actions of the Resilience 
Officer.
•	 $60K - $130K depending on status of part-time to full-time 
employee.
•	 Extension of the role would need funding from other state and 
Commonwealth sources including the larger FDF. 
Timeframe
 
Short-term to identify and engage a suitable local resource with 
clear role expectations. 
Over the mid-term the Resilience Officer is to be actively engaging 
with resilience partners and coordinating the region’s resilience 
response.
Measure of 
Success
 
Metrics can be incorporated into the position description to measure 
the roles effectiveness.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
63
Theme 5
Strong infrastructure and 
transport services
Sub-theme: Infrastructure 
The Need: Infrastructure and transport that supports and links the region and provides 
connectivity to encourage business and industry and attract new residents.
Rail brings vital infrastructure, opportunities and tourism to the region. The need for 
appropriate infrastructure to support the regions has been highlighted across both 
LGAs. These infrastructure needs are being supplied by Council and advocated for 
through REROC and RDA Riverina. Councils have a vital role in ensuring the supporting 
services and infrastructure such as water, housing, waste and transport support town 
growth. The infrastructure identified as being most important for the Coolamon and 
Junee Shires was roads, rail and water.  
Actions
•	 Investigate options on how to maximise the benefit of the existing wastewater 
facilities that either allows for surplus water to be sold to a suitable buyer or to 
expand wastewater facilities to incorporate additional storage and networks to 
increase use capacity.  
•	 Investigate options in partnership with Goldenfields Water and DCCEEW on 
replacement and upgrade options for the water and wastewater infrastructure 
to provide greater security through enhanced storage capability and distribution 
systems.  
•	 Enhance existing regional assets (e.g. improve facilities) such as Bethungra Dam and 
Rocky Hill to make them more attractive for tourists and better utilised by the local 
community. 
•	 Connecting  local businesses, individuals and primary producers with grants and 
funding to upgrade their own water infrastructure. This will increase their adaptive 
capacity and increase the ability to withstand drought conditions. 
•	 Council continues to advocate for better telecommunication infrastructure to 
improve phone and internet service for the region.
Key outcomes 
•	 Provides more robust infrastructure for the benefit of the community, enhancing 
their resilience to drought and helping attract new residents.
•	 Enhances environmental resilience for community assets and/or reduces the 
pressure on natural resources.
Pillars of Resilience
Social 
Economic
Environmental
Maintenance of green spaces 
throughout drought periods 
improves mental health and 
provides locations for the 
community to gather in times 
of drought.
Commercialisation of 
wastewater has the potential 
to reduce the cost of other 
associated water projects. 
Enhanced use of wastewater 
will also reduce the cost 
associated with watering 
community assets.
Increased water security 
as the region increases 
water reuse and relies less 
on potable water to meet 
some of its needs. This also 
reduces pressure on natural 
resources.
Resilience Framework
The key Resilience Framework principles that are relevant to this theme and the actions 
are outlined below:
Diversity 
Increasing the potential sources of water to support the 
community need. 
Absorb
Extends water security to the community, proactively planning 
for future drought stress. 
Transform 
Increasing use of wastewater and extending the use of the 
regions water supply supports adaptation to climatic conditions. 
Absorptive
Adaptive
Transformative

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
64
Implementation
1.	
In the short-term, Councils may seek to run an expression of interest to understand 
potential industries which may be interested in entering into an agreement to 
purchase their surplus wastewater.   
 
If there is suitable interest Council can enter into individual agreements for 
industry to purchase the wastewater.  
2.	 To renew and expand the existing wastewater networks, both Councils should work 
in collaboration with Goldenfields Water and DCCEEW (NSW) to investigate options 
to extend the wastewater distribution network, and potential funding options. 
3.	 Further technical studies may be required to inform the options to extend and 
upgrade the wastewater network.
Delivery 
Suggested Lead Agency 
Potential Partners
Coolamon and Junee Shire 
Councils
Goldenfields Water; DCCEEW; industry; 
telecommunication providers.
Finance 
•	 Australian Government’s Off-farm Efficiency Program initiative to 
upgrade water infrastructure to reduce water losses. 
•	 Town Water Risk Reduction Scheme
•	 National Water Grid Fund
Timeframe
 
Medium term to investigate options including conducting additional 
studies to inform the concept. 
Measure of 
Success
 
Councils commercialise any surplus wastewater for sale to suitable 
industries. 
Councils are able to agree a pathway forward to renew and extend 
their existing wastewater services without significant financial 
impost to the community.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
65
5.3	 Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning
To drive improved drought resilience in the region, 
this plan has identified the steps required for change 
to meet the needs of the region. These include the 
identified priority and related actions to be imple-
mented; the outcomes that could be achieved as a 
result and specifically how each would relate to build-
ing resilience. The plan also includes steps required to 
implement the change and identifies a delivery model 
to do so. 
To ensure this Plan delivers on the actions identified, 
a Monitoring, Evaluation Learning (MEL) Framework 
should be adopted to ensure transparency, adaptive 
management, and long-term implementation. The FDF 
MEL Framework will be used to assess the effectiveness 
of implementing this Plan (DAWE, 2020). 
Figure 26 	FDF Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework
Figure 27 	Proposed Theory of change
MONITORING
EVALUATION
LEARNING
I
M
P
A
C
T
O
U
T
C
O
M
E
S
O
U
T
P
U
T
S
R
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
E
Rationale 
Do the current actions and those 
proposed in this plan align to 
the strategic priorities of Social, 
Economic and Environmental 
resilience?
Impact 
Do the drought impacts 
identified in the plan 
represent those of greatest 
impact to the region?
Outputs 
Does the implementation 
of the plan deliver the 
actions detailed in this 
Plan? 
Outcomes 
Do the benefits of implementing 
the actions improve resilience 
across the resilience framework 
and three key pillars for 
Coolamon and Junee? If not, 
what can be adjusted to improve 
the outcomes? 
The MEL framework outline in Figure 26 links to 
four major activities of impact, rationale, outputs 
and outcomes.
Theory of change
For the next update of the Plan a more explicit theory 
of change can be presented that will demonstrate the 
link between each step in the process, refer Figure 27. 
1. The Plan’s vision “for Coolamon and Junee to be 
a robust and diverse economy, a progressive and 
productive agricultural sector, with opportunities 
for youth and considered forward planning that 
bolsters the region. The community aspires to be 
acknowledged for its adaptability, resourcefulness, 
sustainability, and perseverance” and defines the 
current state of the Region’s resilience and what 
needs to change?
2. Who needs to change and what mechanism are in 
place or need to be in place to support this change? 
3. What are the risks and benefits of changing and 
other impacts that could result.
4. Implementation tasks and what is required to 
make this change e.g partners, resources.
5. Review and learn and then adapt the process. 
Vision 
what do we 
want to 
achieve?
The
change 
who needs to 
change / what 
mechanisms
Implementation  
process of what is 
required to enact 
these changes
Review
and adapt   
learn from the 
process and adapt
as needed
Risk and 
beneﬁts 
consider risks, 
beneﬁts and 
impacts

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
66
The two Councils working together with delivery 
partners including NSW State Government, not-for profit 
organisations, industry and community organisations will 
need to collaborate on the implementation of this Plan.  
The Councils have been nominated as the lead agency 
for the delivery of actions within this Plan. This is due 
to both the allocation of implementation funding via the 
FDF and the ability of Councils to lead and advocate for 
the resilience needs of their communities. However, it is 
expected that many of the initiatives will be delivered as 
a collaborative effort.  
Initial Plan measures of success have been identified 
for the first year of the Plan (Section 5). This establishes 
a starting point to measure the effectiveness and 
progress of each of the actions. 
When identifying the measures of success for each of 
the actions, the metrics should where possible have 
quantifiable terms to enable data to be gathered to 
support a clear monitoring and review process. Ideally, 
they should follow the SMART criteria: Specific, 
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound.
Where possible, metrics have been adopted from 
existing data and systems such as the Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, census data and existing reporting 
that could be obtained through Council.  The metrics 
would need to be monitored and reported to establish 
a baseline level with future years measures of success 
and metrics to be identified. 
Critical to regional-level monitoring of, and improvement 
to, the Plan will be an on-going project control 
group comprising of the four Councils with external 
stakeholders as needed. This group would have the 
role of initiating actions in line with the Plan, reviewing 
progress against the Plan objectives.
The Plan is a snapshot in time and requires regular 
update to ensure the overall actions still align with the 
region’s requirements. A short progress review should 
be published annually as part of the individual Councils 
Annual Report (as part of their Integrated Planning 
and Reporting processes), highlighting any issues 
in implementation, and reporting using the metrics 
described. A review and update of Plan should be 
scheduled every 4 years. This should include community 
consultation to ensure the needs, actions and outcomes 
are still relevant and to ensure local ownership of the 
Plan. The consortia of Councils will continue to meet 
bi-annually to assess Plan progress. This may include 
inviting other stakeholders and delivery partners to 
provide progress updates. Aside from this, the consortia 
of Councils would be involved in other implementation 
groups for specific actions.  
Some of the key parameters assumed in the 
implementation of the Plan include: 
•	 Effective cooperation between delivery partners. 
•	 Capacity of consortia of local Councils to lead and 
coordinate other stakeholders. 
•	 Capacity and engagement of other stakeholders 
to lead and coordinate actions where required.
•	 Capacity of other stakeholders and the 
community to participate and actively 
engage in implementation activities.
•	 The ability to record and share plan outcomes.
•	 The integration of the Plan with other 
local planning activities. 
•	 Stakeholders’ willingness to share knowledge 
and work with each other. 
•	 On-going funding to support implementation 
of Plan actions.
•	 The remit of delivery partners/stakeholders will 
not fundamentally change. 
•	 Implementation targets past the short-term can 
be defined and agreed.
•	 That the region is not moving directly into 
another drought and has some lead time to 
commence plan activities.
•	 Other agencies continue to deliver drought work 
that is being leveraged as a part of this Plan.
Some of the longer-term factors that may impact plan 
outcomes include:
•	 Ability to effect meaningful and longer-term 
behaviour change.
•	 Legislative and regulatory change required to 
implement the actions.
•	 Regular review and update of the Plan.
Monitoring progress and Plan outcomes 
Table 12 contains FDF MEL Framework indicators. 
Additional details regarding lead agency, partners and 
measures of success can be found in Section 5. This 
table highlights the indicators and metrics to be used 
in the short-term. Further expansion of the metrics and 
indicators for medium to long-term actions will need to 
be addressed in Plan evaluations and revisions.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
67
Theme
Outcome / priority
Year one metric
Timing
Theme 1 – A sustainable region 
and a healthy and protected 
environment
Sub-theme: Water
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed and adopted. 
Communities better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
Educational materials developed.
Initial investigations for 
extending use of wastewater/ 
recycled commenced.
Short term to develop 
materials however ongoing to 
deliver. 
Increasing use of wastewater 
and recycled water would be 
short-medium term.
Theme 1 – A sustainable region 
and a healthy and protected 
environment
Sub-theme: The Environment
(EN1) More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving 
productivity and profitability.
(EN2) More primary producers adopt whole-of-system approaches to NRM to 
improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and landscape health.
More primary producers are aware of and experimenting with transformative NRM 
practices to manage drought.
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation
Regional Landcare network 
established.
Initial investigations into 
more drought tolerant plants 
commenced. 
One workshop on alternative pest 
management techniques held.
Short-term to make an 
approach across the five local 
Landcare networks.
Medium term to deliver 
projects and collaborations 
that improve environmental 
outcomes for the region, 
including changing to more 
drought tolerant plantings.
Table 12	
Initial MEL Framework

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
68
Theme
Outcome / priority
Year one metric
Timing
Theme 2- Agriculture
(EC1) More primary producers adopt transformative strategies and technologies to 
reduce financial exposure to drought.
(EC2) More primary producers adopt risk management practices to improve their 
sustainability and resilience.
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed and adopted.
Relevant and reliable climate data are available and used for decision-making.
Primary producers and businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
(EN1) More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving 
productivity and profitability.
(EN2) More primary producers adopt whole-of-system approaches to NRM to 
improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and landscape health.
More primary producers have the skills, data and support to apply better NRM 
practices. 
Improved collaboration between NRM bodies, governments, communities and 
primary producers. 
Better use of research and co-design processes to develop NRM activities that 
directly address regional priorities.
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
Engagement with GRDC and 
monitoring levels of adoption and 
extension activities.
One youth in agriculture event 
held.
Some short term actions in 
terms of building connections, 
medium-long term/ ongoing 
delivery of actions.
Theme 3 – A Diverse and prosperous 
economy
Sub-theme: Business attraction
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed, and adopted.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation. 
Completion of the Business 
Attraction Plan.
Short-term to develop the 
Business Attraction Plan. 
Medium to long-term to 
transition new businesses 
to build and establish in 
Coolamon and Junee.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
69
Theme
Outcome / priority
Year one metric
Timing
Theme 3 – A Diverse and prosperous 
economy
Sub-theme: Business Economy and 
Networks
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
Businesses have built skills in business planning, financial and risk management.
Formation of a network. 
One event held.
One grant writing workshop held.
Short-term to initiate the 
formation of a business 
network between the two 
regions. 
Medium-term to establish an 
on-going collaboration
Theme 3 – A Diverse and prosperous 
economy 
Sub-theme: Tourism
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to well-being and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities and businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
Calendar of events hosted on 
both Council’s websites.
Short term to develop a 
calendar of events. 
This calendar of events will 
need to be updated on an on-
going basis.
Theme 4 – A strong and 
collaborative community
Sub-theme: Mental Health
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities and businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation
Collaborators identified and 
workshop held
Short - medium term to 
develop and agree the Plan.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
70
Theme
Outcome / priority
Year one metric
Timing
Theme 4 – A strong and 
collaborative community
Sub-theme: Youth, Volunteers and a 
skilled workforce
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed and adopted.
List of potential re-purposing 
areas identified 
The next Volunteer Summit 
planned.
Medium term/ ongoing for 
delivery.
Theme 4 – A strong and 
collaborative community
Sub-theme: Drought
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities and businesses better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan/prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
(EC1) More primary producers adopt transformative strategies and technologies to 
reduce financial exposure to drought.
Primary producers and businesses have built skills in business planning, financial 
and risk management. 
Relevant and reliable climate data are available, and used for decision-making.
Engagement of a suitable 
resource to support the 
requirements of the role.
Short-term to identify and 
engage a suitable local 
resource with clear role 
expectations. 
Over the mid-term the 
Resilience Officer is to 
be actively engaging with 
resilience partners and 
coordinating the region’s 
resilience response.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
71
Theme
Outcome / priority
Year one metric
Timing
Theme 5 – Strong infrastructure and 
transport services
(EC1) More primary producers adopt transformative strategies and technologies to 
reduce financial exposure to drought.
(EC2) More primary producers adopt risk management practices to improve their 
sustainability and resilience.
More innovative approaches and technologies for drought resilience are being 
developed and adopted.
(EN1) More primary producers preserve natural capital while also improving 
productivity and profitability.
Improved collaboration between NRM bodies, governments, communities and 
primary producers. 
(S1) Stronger connectedness and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security.
(S2) Communities implement transformative activities that improve their resilience to 
drought.
Communities better understand their resilience to drought.
Communities learn from and share innovative ways to build drought resilience.
Communities build their local leadership, networks and social support.
Communities proactively plan and prepare for drought, using collaboration and 
innovation.
Initial discussions commenced 
on the identified infrastructure 
options . 
(Tourist) Facilities requiring 
upgrade identified.
Short- medium term to 
investigate options.
Medium- long term for 
delivery.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
72
5.4 Future updates
CSIRO reviewed this initial plan. There were a number of suggestions for updates for 
future Plan revision. To ensure these are considered in the next revision, a summary is 
listed below.
•	 Future Plan updates could report on how partners view the quality of the 
collaborations and partnerships involved in its development and implementation 
(e.g. enquiring about how well the process worked, which aspects were valued 
most, and which aspects could be improved). In addition, more information could 
be provided about each collaboration and partnership in the form of a table 
summarising the main purpose of each collaboration or partnership, its joint 
activities, and some measures of its quality. This could be incorporated into the 
Plan as a monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) activity. Doing so would be a 
means for identifying ways to enhance existing relationships among groups and for 
determining where new collaborations and partnerships are potentially required. 
Future Plan updates could explicitly and clearly articulate the structured processes 
to support active learning and ongoing adaptation of the Plan and its actions
•	 Future updates (and any new plans) would benefit from a more nuanced 
interpretation and use of adaptive governance principles, which would be 
advantageous for building additional spare capacities, flexibility in decision-making 
to build the resilience of the region to drought and related stresses and shocks. In 
addition, more clearly articulate how structured MEL processes across the various 
plan components can further support adaptive governance of its implementation.
•	 Future Plan updates would benefit from using quantitative and empirical evidence 
in key economic and social variables over time to identify demographic shifts in 
the diversity of businesses, and livelihoods and employment opportunities for 
different community segments, in emergent versus declining types of industries, 
and in labour mobility among different industry and sectors. Graphically depicting 
and analysing such trends can reveal important insights into the vulnerability of 
different groups to drought and support more detailed economic baselines, which 
may also be used to make comparisons across regions.
•	 Future Plan updates could refer to a greater diversity of plans and policies (from 
across government, research sectors, and local community organisations) to 
provide perspectives on the region’s existing priorities in relation to future climate 
change impacts and associated adaptation strategies. Drawing from this broader 
array of past work will improve the plan’s foundational basis, and inform its further 
development by identifying useful knowledge and lessons learned. Articulating how 
these other plans and policies inform the plan’s choice of goals, priorities, actions 
and/or initiatives would also be beneficial and further support its evidence base.
•	 Future Plan updates could better reflect diverse experiences of drought and related 
stresses and shocks in the region. Assessing the impacts of droughts on economic 
activities within and beyond agriculture would be advantageous, as would developing 
a more rigorous understanding of the relationships between the regional economy 
and water availability, supply and demand.
•	 Future Plan updates could further develop the current limited resilience assessment 
to expand the evidence base on the current state and trajectory of the region to 
drought and related stresses and shocks. It could also extend the current summary 
of drought impacts by explicitly considering anticipatory, absorptive, adaptive 
and transformative capacities of the different sectors and segments of the 
regional community to drought and related stresses and shocks. Such a resilience 
assessment could also provide quantitative and empirical evidence in key economic 
and social variables over time. It could show demographic changes in the diversity 
of businesses, livelihoods and employment opportunities for different community 
segments; emergent versus declining types of industries; and labour mobility among 
different industry and sectors. Together, this evidence will better inform the analysis 
of socioeconomic resilience of the region to drought.
•	 Future Plan updates would benefit from developing a suite of plausible future 
scenarios through a participatory process with a diverse range of stakeholders. The 
development of scenarios could consider a mix of livelihoods and sectors, including 
those that rely less on agriculture and water. This scenario-building exercise would 
benefit from consultations with stakeholders about their perceptions of the likely 
future effects of drought, as well as other trends and drivers.
•	 Future Plan updates could more clearly outline how the intervention options 
proposed increase reserves, spare capacity and response options. Ideally, this 
should be informed by a resilience assessment of the current state of reserves, 
spare capacity and economic diversification. This would provide better insights on 
how effective the proposed actions are likely to be in building drought resilience in 
the region.
•	 Future Plan updates could introduce the concept of adaptation pathways that create 
options for future drought preparedness, response and recovery. Such pathways 
should also contain triggers and decision criteria to help navigate uncertainties in 
choosing which options to implement and when.
•	 Future Plan updates could assess the type and nature of change needed to the 
region’s sectors, value chains and subsystems for building resilience to drought and 
related stresses and shocks. Based on this assessment, the proposed intervention 
options may be classified according to whether they contribute to maintaining, 
modifying or transforming different aspects of the region. These exercises may also 
help with identifying additional and innovative initiatives associated with aspects of

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
73
the region that need to be modified or transformed to 
build resilience.
•	 Future Plan updates could ensure that proposed 
actions are accompanied by some criteria and means 
for assessing their contribution to resilience-building 
goals (e.g. as part of a MEL framework). In doing so, 
the degree to which the proposed actions form an 
adaptive strategy (e.g. adaptation pathways) could be 
thoroughly assessed.
•	 Future Plan updates could have a well-developed 
theory of change that explains the assumed 
mechanisms by which the proposed actions are 
intended to bring about the desired outcomes and 
impacts. This will involve working backwards from 
the vision and measures of success to identify the 
changes required and the causal mechanisms, as well 
as the outcomes, outputs and activities needed to 
achieve the desired changes. A more robust theory of 
change can also guide the development of the plan’s 
MEL framework.
•	 Future Plan updates could better articulate 
interactions and linkages with respect to the 
following key cross-cutting components: stakeholder 
engagement and partnerships; active learning and 
adaptive governance; evidence base and alignment 
with current relevant work; theory of change; and 
MEL. Doing so would demonstrate how components 
of the plan work effectively together in realising the 
stated goals.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan 74
Conclusion
06

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
75
6. 	Conclusion
This Plan has been developed by and for the communities of 
Coolamon and Junee. The Plan is an important step in voicing the 
areas of focus and the actions the community seeks to undertake 
in order to move them towards improved drought resilience. 
This Plan is a snapshot in time and reflects the key areas of importance to the 
community. These areas of focus are not static and will require regular review 
and update. 
The Plan contains a series of actions, some of which can be funded through the  
FDF implementation funding and some that will require alternate funding 
channels to be identified and obtained. 
To implement the Plan, Coolamon and Junee Shires will require both a 
collaborative effort with all levels of government, the regions industry, not-for-
profit organisations, and the community, to be partners in the delivery of the 
actions. 
The Coolamon and Junee RDRP provides a pathway to develop and build drought 
resilience into regional NSW.

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
76
References
Note: all case studies were developed in conjunction with information provided by members of Coolamon and 
June Shire’s and some publicly available information. 
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES). n.d. Climate 
and Drought. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. The Australian Government. https://www.
agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/climate
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences). 2020. Measuring drought 
risk – The exposure and sensitivity of Australian farms to drought. Department of Agriculture, Water and the 
Environment. Australian Government. https://daff.ent.sirsidynix.net.au/client/en_AU/search/asset/1030903/0
ABARES (Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences). 2022. Community 
Vulnerability and resilience to drought index – stage 1. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 
Australian Government. https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=https%3A%2F%2Fdaff.ent.
sirsidynix.net.au%2Fclient%2Fen_AU%2Fsearch%2Fasset%2F1034241%2F1&wdOrigin=BROWSELINK 
ABARES, n.d., accessed May 16 2024, from https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/data/farm-data-portal
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 2022a. Data by Region. ABS. https://dbr.abs.gov.au/
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 2022b. Agricultural commodities produced, Australia, 20201-
20212. ABS. https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/agricultural-commodities-australia/
latest-release
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). 2022c. Value of agricultural commodities, Australia, 2021-2022. 
ABS. https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/value-agricultural-commodities-produced-
australia/latest-release
ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics). 2021. Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA), Australia. ABS. https://
www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/people-and-communities/socio-economic-indexes-areas-seifa-australia/
latest-release
Abunyewah, M., Byrne, M. K., Keane, C. A., and Bressington, D. 2023. Developing Psychological Resilience 
to the Impact of Drought. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 20 (4): 3465. 
https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/20/4/3465
Adapt NSW. n.d. Climate Change Impacts on Drought. NSW Government. https://www.climatechange.
environment.nsw.gov.au/impacts-climate-change/weather-and-oceans/drought 
AdaptNSW. 2024. Climate Change Impacts on our Water Resources. NSW Government. https://www.
climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/impacts-climate-change/water-resources 
AIHW (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare). 2024a. “My Hospitals: My Local Area”. Australian 
Government. https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-data/myhospitals/my-local-area 
Australian Government. 2023. Small Area Labour Markets, September Quarter 2023. Jobs and Skills Australia. 
https://www.jobsandskills.gov.au/data/small-area-labour-markets 
Australian Schools Directory. 2024. “Schools in NSW”. Future Media Group Pty Ltd. https://www.
australianschoolsdirectory.com.au/schools-in-nsw 
Beard, G., Chandler, E., Watkins, A., Jones, D. 2011. How does the 2010–11 La Niña compare with past La Niña 
events. Bulletin of the Australian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society, 24, 17-20
Béné. C., Wood, R. G., Newsham, A., Davis, M. 2012. Resilience: New Utopia or New Tyranny? Reflection about 
the Potential Limits of the Concept of Resilience in Relation to Vulnerability Reduction Programmes. IDS 
Working Papers, 2012: 1-61. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x 
BoM (Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). 2023. Climate Data Online. The Australian Government. http://www.bom.
gov.au/climate/data/index.shtml?bookmark=201
BoM (Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). 2024. Drought Knowledge Centre. The Australian Government. http://
www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/
BoM (Bureau of Meteorology). (BoM), n.d., accessed May 16, 2024, from http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/data/ 
for the AWS Wagga Wagga AMO (072150).
Canola Trail. 2021. Canola Trail Visitor Guide. Junee Shire Council. https://www.junee.nsw.gov.au/wp-content/
uploads/2021/10/Canola_Trail_Visitor_Guide_LR_DPS_compressed-2.pdf   
City of Sydney. 2018. Resilient Sydney: A Strategy for City Resilience 2018. https://
www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjwz_
Lz87WCAxW0jVYBHQPuBiUQFnoECBUQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au%2F-
%2Fmedia%2Fcorporate%2Ffiles%2F2020-07-migrated%2Ffiles_r%2Fresilient-sydney-a-strategy-for-city-
resilience-2018.pdf%3Fdownload%3Dtrue&usg=AOvVaw1KJSxbVwMgn4YIZb9Hqs7T&opi=89978449
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIRO) and Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) (Bureau of 
Meteorology). 2018. State of the Climate 2018. The Australian Government. http://www.bom.gov.au/state-of-
the-climate/State-of-the-Climate-2018.pdf
Cooke, S. 2022. “Junee’s Athenium Theatre set for Upgrade”. Steph Cooke MP, October 4, 2022. https://
stephcooke.com.au/junees-athenium-theatre-set-for-upgrade/ 
Coolamon Shire Council. 2023. “Official Opening of Coolamon Business Park.” Coolamon Shire Council, 
September 6, 2023. https://coolamon.nsw.gov.au/news/official-opening-of-coolamon-business-park
Coolamon Shire Council. n.d.a. "Heritage." Coolamon Shire Council. Accessed June 6, 2024. https://coolamon.
nsw.gov.au/heritage
Coolamon Shire Council. n.d.b. "Environment- Water." Coolamon Shire Council. Accessed June 8, 2024. https://
coolamon.nsw.gov.au/environment
Coolamon. n.d. “Dealers”. Coolamon. Accessed June 6, 2024. https://coolamon.com.au/dealers/
CSIRO and BoM (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research and Bureau of Bureau of Meteorology). 
2022. State of the Climate 2022. The Australian Government. http://www.bom.gov.au/state-of-the-
climate/2022/documents/2022-state-of-the-climate-web.pdf 
DAFF (Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (DAFF). 2024a3. Future Drought Fund. The Australian 
Government. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fund?utm_campaign=website&utm_medium=email&utm_source=ehq_newsletter#drought-resilience-
funding-plan
DAFF (Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry). 2024b. Climate Services for Agriculture. The 
Australian Government. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-
drought-fund/climate-services
DAFF and ABARES (Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and Australian Bureau of Agricultural 
and Resource Economics). 2023. Drought Resilience. The Australian Government. https://www.agriculture.gov.
au/abares/research-topics/climate/drought/resilience 
DAWE (Department of Agriculture, Water, and the Environment (DAWE). 2020. Future Drought Fund: 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework. Australian Government. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/
sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
77
DCCEEW (Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water). 2024. Draft Regional 
Water Strategy – Murrumbidgee: Shortlisted Actions – Executive Summary. NSW Government: DCCEEW. 
murrumbidgee-rws-actions-executive-summary-may2024.pdf (nsw.gov.au) 
DELWP (Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning (DELWP) (now Department of Energy, 
Environment and Climate Action (DEECA)). 2018. Socio-economic impacts in the southern Murray-Darling 
Basin. Victorian Government.   https://www.water.vic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0030/669540/socio-
economic-impacts-in-the-southern-murray-darling-basin.pdf  
Department of Agriculture. 2019. Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness 
Plan. Australian Government. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/aust-govt-
drought-response-plan_0.pdf 
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEW). 2024. Draft Regional 
Water Strategy – Murrumbidgee: Shortlisted Actions – Executive Summary. NSW Government: DCCEW. 
murrumbidgee-rws-actions-executive-summary-may2024.pdf (nsw.gov.au) 
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). 2018. Important Agricultural Land Mapping: Riverina Murray 
Region Agricultural Profile. Factsheet No.1. NSW Government. https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0009/843363/Draft-ial-mapping-riverina-murray-agricultural-profile.pdf 
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). n.d.a. “Agriculture Industry Snapshot for Planning – Eastern 
Riverina Sub Region”. NSW Government. Accessed 6 June 2024. https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0010/1260487/Eastern-Riverina-Snapshot.pdf
DPI (NSW Department of Primary Industries). n.d.b. “Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS): Combined 
Drought Indicator”. NSW Government. Accessed 16 May 2024. https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/ 
DPIE (Department of Planning, Industry and Environment). 2021. "Resilience outcomes for the planning 
system". NSW Government. https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-03/resilience-
outcomes-for-the-planning-system.pdf
DRNSW (Department of Regional NSW). 2022. Regional NSW Investment Attraction Strategy 2022-2027. 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-05/RNSW%20Investment%20Attraction%20booklet_v30_
accessible.pdfDRNSW (Department of Regional New South Wales). 2022. Future Ready Regions 2023 Update. 
Online: NSW Government. https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-12/Regional%20Drought%20
Resilience%20Planning%20Program%20Guidelines.pdf 
DRNSW (Department of Regional NSW). 2023. Eastern Riverina Regional Economic Development Strategy – 
2023 Update. NSW Government. https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/Eastern-Riverina-REDS-
2023-Update.pdf
Folke, C., Carpenter, R., S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M,, Chapin, T., Rockstrom, J. 2010. Resilience Thinking: 
Integrating Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability. Ecology and Society, 15(4). https://www.jstor.org/
stable/26268226
Folke, C., Carpenter, S.R., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Chapin, T., Rockström, J. 2010. "Resilience Thinking: 
integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability". Ecology and Society. 15(4): 20. https://www.jstor.org/
stable/26268226
Goldenfields Water, n.d.a. "About Goldenfields Water." Accessed June 6, 2024. https://www.gwcc.nsw.gov.au/
About-Us/Our-Organisation/About-Goldenfields-Water
Goldenfields Water, n.d.b. "Our Network." Accessed June 6, 2024.https://www.gwcc.nsw.gov.au/About-Us/
Our-Organisation/Our-Network
Goldenfields Water. 2024. "Stage 2 of Oura upgrade well underway." February 13, 2024. https://www.gwcc.
nsw.gov.au/About-Us/Publications/Media-Releases/Stage-2-of-Oura-upgrade-well-underway
Haider, L.J. and Cleaver, F. 2023. “Capacities for resilience: persisting, adapting and transforming through 
bricolage.” Ecosystems and People, 19(1): 15. https://doi.org/10.1080/26395916.2023.2240434
Hughes, N., Galeano, D., Hatfield-Doggs, S. (2019). The Analysis of The effects of Drought and Climate 
Variability on Australian Farms. ABARES Insights. https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/
documents/EffectsOfDroughtAndClimateVariabilityOnAustralianFarms_v1.0.0.pdf  
id Community. n.d. Junee Shire Economic Profile. https://economy.id.com.au/junee/output-by-
industry?sEndYear=2020 https://economy.id.com.au/junee 
Infrastructure Australia. 2022. Resilience Principles Infrastructure Australia’s Approach to Resilience. 
The Australian Government. https://www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-06/
Resilience%20Principles%20-%20Infrastructure%20Australia%27s%20approach%20to%20resilience.pdf
Jacka, M. 2023. “Junee Shire Council drops logs, rocks into Bethungra Dam to boost Murray cod, golden perch 
numbers”. ABC News, July 11, 2023.  https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-07-11/bethungra-dam-revitalisation-
native-fish-junee-shire-council/102575078  
Junee Shire Council. 2017. Community Strategic Plan: Making Tracks. https://www.junee.nsw.gov.au/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/Community_Strategic_Plan_2035-Adopted_28_June_2022.pdf 
Junee Shire Council. 2021a. “You, me and Junee – History/Heritage”. Junee Shire Council. https://
youmeandjunee.com.au/history-heritage/ 
Junee Shire Council. 2021b. “You, me and Junee”. https://youmeandjunee.com.au/ 
Junee Shire Council. 2024. “Salinity in Junee Shire.” Junee Shire Council. Accessed June 8, 2024. https://
www.junee.nsw.gov.au/services/environmental-issues/salinity-in-junee-shire/#:~:text=There%20is%20
considerable%20evidence%20around,Foundations%20are%20also%20affected.
Kirono et al. 2020.Kirono, D., G., C. Round, V., Heady, C., Chiew, F., H., S., Osbrough, S. 2020. "Drought 
projections for Australia: Updated results and analysis of model simulations". Weather and Climate extremes. 
30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2020.100280  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2212094720300645
Maru, Y., T., Sparrow, A., Butler, J., R, A., Banerjee, O., Ison, R., Hall, A., Carberry, P. 2018. Towards Appropriate 
Mainstreaming of "Theory of Change" Approaches into Agricultural Research for Development: Challenges 
and Opportunities. Agricultural Systems 165: pp.344-353. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.04.010  https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0308521X17310053
My Climate View. 2023. Your Location. Your Commodity. Your Climate View. Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry. Future Drought Fund. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research and Bureau of 
Meteorology. https://myclimateview.com.au/about 
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration). 2024. The Effects of Climate Change. https://science.
nasa.gov/climate-change/effects/ 
National Climate Centre and Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). 2012. Australia's Wettest Two-Year Period on 
Record; 2010–2011. Special Climate Statement 38. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs38.
pdf 
NationalMap. n.d. NationalMap. Australian Government https://nationalmap.gov.au/ 
NSW Government, n.d.b. Coolamon NSW Ambulance Station. NSW Government. Accessed May 20, 2024. 
https://www.hinfra.health.nsw.gov.au/projects/project-search/coolamon-nsw-ambulance-station 
NSW Government. 2024023. Regional Drought Resilience Plan TemplateDrought, floods and extreme events. 
Client supplied document. Department of Planning, Housing, and Infrastructure. https://water.dpie.nsw.gov.
au/our-work/allocations-availability/drought-and-floods

Regional Drought Resilience Plan - Coolamon and Junee
78
NSW Government. n.d.a. Kindra State Forest. https://www.nsw.gov.au/visiting-and-exploring-nsw/locations-
and-attractions/kindra-state-forest 
NSW Government. n.d.c. “Spatial Collaboration Portal: NSW Base Map Topographic”. NSW 
Government. Accessed May 20, 2024. https://portal.spatial.nsw.gov.au/portal/home/webmap/viewer.
html?useExisting=1&layers=42e12fe999354e2d992423a608a6a21f  
Reisinger, A., Garschagen, M., Pathak, M., Poloczanska, E., van Aalst, M., Ruane, A., C., Howden, M., Hurlbert, 
M., Mintenbeck, K., Pedace, R., Corradi, M., R., Viner, D., Vera, C., Kreibiehl, S., O’Neill, B., Pörtner, H., Sillmann, 
J., Jones, R., Ranasinghe, R. 2020. The Concept of Risk in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report: A Summary of 
Cross-Working Group Discussions. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland. 
pp15. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2021/02/Risk-guidance-FINAL_15Feb2021.pdf 
Riverina Eastern Regional Organisation of Councils (REROC). n.d. Projects. https://reroc.com.au/projects   
Shirdelmoghanloo, H., Kefei, C., Blakely, P., H., Angessa, T., T., Westcott, S., Khan, H., A., Hill, C., B., Li, C. 2022. 
Grain Filling Rate Improves Physical Grain Quality in Barley Under Hear Stress Conditions During the Grain 
Filling Period. Frontiers in Plant Science. 13. 1664-462X. 10.3389/fpls.2022.858652 
Simonsen, S., Biggs, r., Schlüter, M., Schoon, M., Bohensky, E., Cundill, G., Dakos, V., Daw, T., Kotschy, K., 
Leitch, A., Quinlan, A., Peterson, G., Moberg, F. n.d. Applying Resilience Thinking: Seven Principles for 
Building Resilience in Social-Ecological Systems. Stockholm Resilience Centre. Stockholm University. 
https://www.stockholmresilience.org/download/18.10119fc11455d3c557d6928/1459560241272/
SRC+Applying+Resilience+final.pdf 
Southern NSW Innovation Hub. 2022. Baselining Drought: Developing a baseline understanding of farmer and 
community perceptions of drought. David Brown Consulting for Southern NSW Drought Resilience Hub. https://
cdn.csu.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/4258885/Baselining-Drought-FINAL.pdf
Steffen, W. 2015. Thirsty Country: Climate Change and Drought in Australia. Climate Council. https://www.
climatecouncil.org.au/uploads/37d4a0d2a372656332d75d0163d9e8b8.pdf 
Steffen, W., Vertessy, R., Dean, A., Hughes, L., Bambrick, H., Gergis, J., Rice, M. 2018. Deluge and Drought: 
Australia’s Water Security in a Changing Climate. Climate Council. https://www.climatecouncil.org.au/wp-
content/uploads/2018/11/Climate-Council-Water-Security-Report.pdf 
SW Government. 2018. A 20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW. https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/59ae4a2a6f4ca38d47990cd8/t/5d63391c30af730001d228a3/1566783815503/20-Year-Vision-for-
RNSW-accessible.pdf
TAFE NSW. n.d. "Locations." NSW Government. Accessed June 6, 2024. https://www.tafensw.edu.au/locations
Telstra. n.d.a. “Our coverage maps”. https://www.telstra.com.au/coverage-networks/our-coverage 
Telstra. n.d.b. “Mobile Black Spot Program”. https://www.telstra.com.au/coverage-networks/mobile-black-
spot-program 
Timbal, B., Abbs, D., Bhend, J., Chiew, F., Church, J., Ekström, M., Kirono, D., Lenton, A., Lucas, C., McInnes, K., 
Moise, A., Monselesan, D., Mpelasoka, F., Webb, L., Whetton, P. 2015. Murray Basin Cluster Report, Climate 
Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management Regions. CSIRO and Bureau of 
Meteorology. Australia. https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/
MURRAY_BASIN_CLUSTER_REPORT_1.pdf 
Transport for NSW. 2023. Regional trains and coaches. NSW Government. https://transportnsw.info/
document/1447/Regional-trains-coaches-network-map.pdf 
van Dijk, A. I. J. M., H. E. Beck, R. S. Crosbie, R. A. M. de Jeu, Y. Y. Liu, G. M. Podger, B. Timbal, and N. R. Viney. 
2013. The Millennium Drought in southeast Australia (2001–2009): Natural and human causes and implications 
for water resources, ecosystems, economy, and society, Water Resources. Research., 49, doi:10.1002/
wrcr.20123.
Visit Coolamon Shire. n.d. "Our Heritage." Coolamon Shire Council. Accessed June 6, 2024. https://
visitcoolamonshire.com.au/heritage
Visit Coolamon Shire. n.d. Up-to-Date Store Cultural Precinct. https://visitcoolamonshire.com.au/uptodate-
store-cultural-precinct 
Visit NSW. n.d. Junee. https://www.visitnsw.com/destinations/country-nsw/riverina/junee 
Walker, B., Holling, C., S., Carpenter, S., R., Kinzig, A., P. 2004. Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability in 
Social-Ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 9. [25]. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/42764046_
Resilience_Adaptability_and_Transformability_in_Social-Ecological_Systems http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-
00650-090205
Walker, G., R., Crosbie, R., S., Chiew, F., H., S., Peeters, L., Evans, R. 2021. Groundwater Impacts and 
Management under a Drying Climate in Southern Australia. Water. 2021; 13(24):3588. https://doi.org/10.3390/
w13243588
Whetton, P., Ekström, M., Gerbing, C., Grose, M., R, Bhend, J., Webb, L., Risbey, J., Holper, P., Clarke, J., M., 
Hennessy, K., J. 2015. Climate Change in Australia Information for Austra’ia's Natural Resource Management 
Regions: Technical Report. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and 
Bureau of Meteorology (BoM). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275340315_CSIRO_and_Bureau_
of_Meteorology_2015_Climate_Change_in_Australia_Information_for_Australia's_Natural_Resource_
Management_Regions_Technical_Report_CSIRO_and_Bureau_of_Meteorology_Australia_222_pages_ht#full-
text 
Wise, R., M., Fazey, I., Stafford Smith, M., Park, S., E., Eakin, H., C., Archer Van Garderen, E., R., M., Campbell, 
B. 2014. Reconceptualizing adaptation to climate change as part of pathways of change and response. 
Global Environmental Change. 28. pp. 325-336. https://research.fit.edu/media/site-specific/researchfitedu/
coast-climate-adaptation-library/australia-amp-new-zealand/australia-national/Wise-et-al.--2014.--
Reconceptualising-Adaptation-to-CC.pdf
Wittwer, G., Griffith, M. 2012. The Economic Consequences of a Prolonged Drought in the Southern Murray-
Darling Basin. Global Issues in Water Policy. 3, 119-141: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-2876-9_7

Produced by GHD
Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning 
The Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program is being delivered 
with joint funding from the Australian 
Government’s Future Drought Fund 
and the NSW Government.
The Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program provides support 
to identified Local Government Areas 
in NSW to develop drought resilience 
plans that can be implemented by 
councils and their communities.
June 2024