1
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Eyre Peninsula 
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
A Framework to Guide Future Effort and Investment
DROUGHT
RESILIENT
EYRE 
PENINSULA

2
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Acknowledgement of Country 
We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of the land on which we work, live and play and 
their continuing connection to land, sea, culture and community. We pay respect to Elders 
past and present, and extend that respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
in our community. 
In particular, we acknowledge the Aboriginal peoples of the Eyre Peninsula region covered 
by this Plan, including the Barngarla, Nauo, Wirangu, Kokatha and Mirning peoples.

3
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

4
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
​Acknowledgement of Country
01  Introduction
02 The Eyre Peninsula
03  Drought
04  Drivers of change
05  Drought resilience
06  Opportunities for action
07  Implementation, monitoring and evaluation
08  Glossary
09  References
10  Appendix A
This plan has been prepared by URPS for the Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group. 
January 2025.
PHOTO CREDITS: Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula, Agricultural Innovation & Research Eyre Peninsula, 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board, Nathan Peters.
This program is jointly funded through the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund and the 
Government of South Australia.
Contents
2
6
10
18
24
26
30
46
48
50
54

5
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

6
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The economic, social and environmental costs of 
drought on the Eyre Peninsula are immense and 
persistent. The toll drought takes on the region and 
its communities is high and the impacts can linger for 
decades. In a region where agriculture accounts for 
almost 30% of jobs outside of regional centres, past 
droughts such as the Millennium Drought (1997-2009) 
have left lasting impacts, causing crop and stock 
profits to plummet, forcing the sale of many farms 
and businesses, devastating the environment, and 
disrupting the livelihoods and wellbeing of regional 
communities. 
The projected increase in time spent in drought 
over coming decades means that preparing for 
drought is more important than ever. The cascading 
ramifications on the farms, farmers, communities, 
economies and natural landscapes of the Eyre 
Peninsula will undoubtedly be more extensive and 
potentially catastrophic if left unchecked.  
We can no longer afford to wait 
until drought hits to respond and 
recover. We need to plan now for 
the next drought and consider how 
to do things better or differently 
to ensure the heath, vibrancy and 
sustainability of our community 
and agricultural economy can be 
sustained even through extended 
periods of drought. 
Farmers on the Eyre Peninsula are not new to 
adapting to changing conditions. They have a 
long history of being leaders and innovators in 
developing and adopting new and enhanced ways 
to sustain their farms during times of reduced rainfall. 
Improved farming practices have increased crop 
yield and ground cover, reducing soil erosion during 
dry periods that would have devastated the region 
decades ago. Leveraging existing strengths and 
capitalising on new opportunities will enhance the 
resilience of all who live and work in the region and 
help the Eyre Peninsula to be in a stronger place next 
time drought hits. 
The Australian Government established the Future 
Drought Fund (FDF) to provide secure, ongoing 
funding for drought resilience initiatives. Through the 
FDF, the South Australian Government has supported 
the Eyre Peninsula to develop this Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan to prepare for and manage future 
drought risks. 
The Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory 
Group has guided the preparation of this Plan. The 
Advisory Group includes representatives of Regional 
Development Australia Eyre Peninsula (RDA EP), 
Agricultural Innovation & Research Eyre Peninsula 
(AIR EP), Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board (EPLB), 
SA Drought Hub, Local Government (Eyre Peninsula 
Local Government Association (EPLGA) and councils), 
and Department of Primary Industries and Regions 
South Australia (PIRSA). URPS were engaged to work 
with the Advisory Group to develop the Plan.
This Plan has been prepared as a framework or 
prospectus to guide future effort and investment 
in regional drought resilience. It is not a drought 
response plan and will not replace what may be 
needed to respond to drought in the future. 
01 Introduction

7
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Our vision for the Eyre Peninsula
Farming Innovation
Landscapes and 
Environments
Financially Sustainable 
Enterprises
Governance and 
Advocacy
Community Wellbeing
Regional Infrastructure 
and Services
Regional Economic 
Development
Profitable, productive and adaptive agriculture 
thriving in a variable and changing climate
Healthy soil, water and biodiversity that sustain 
productive landscapes
Long-term financially viable businesses and 
management capabilities
Local, effective and coordinated action led and 
governed by local people that understand the region
Capable individuals and healthy communities 
working together to benefit the region
Future-proofed water supplies, local services 
and infrastructure that attracts, retains and 
supports residents
Sustainable regional development that 
contributes to drought resilience
Our Goals
Eyre Peninsula farms, businesses and communities that 
are strong, sustainable, vibrant and drought resilient. 
Summary of the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan  
What is drought? 
Drought is a period of abnormally dry conditions 
that impacts negatively on water availability 
and agricultural production in a region and, 
consequently, impacts negatively on the economy 
and environment of the region and the health and 
wellbeing of its residents.
 
What is drought resilience? 
Drought resilience is the ability of communities, 
economies and environments to withstand the 
impacts of drought and adapt and find new and 
potentially transformational ways of doing things, 
enabling functions and values to be sustained 
over the longer term.

8
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
1.1 A new approach to resilience through the National Drought Agreement 
In the past, the Government of South Australia made 
declarations of drought with associated Exceptional 
Circumstances support and focused the majority 
of their drought support on the ‘during’ and ‘after’ 
phases of drought.  
This approach changed with the introduction of the 
first National Drought Agreement in 2018 and its 
recent revision (2024-2029).1 All Australian, state and 
territory governments have agreed to and signed 
the Agreement which explains how they will work 
together to help the Australian agriculture sector 
better withstand drought. 
A key feature of the agreement is a greater 
focus on enhancing drought resilience 
before drought, to enable farms, people, 
businesses and the environment to 
minimise the impact of drought rather than 
waiting until drought hits to act.
Another is the elimination of drought and Exceptional 
Circumstances declarations. Previous drought 
declarations necessitated the drawing of lines on 
maps to identify regions in drought. Community and 
stakeholders recognised that this approach was 
challenging and often flawed with some farmers in 
need being ineligible to access support. The new 
approach recognises that support needs are highly 
variable, and eligibility should be based on need, not 
activated by drought declarations.2 
The development of this Plan is consistent with the 
Agreement’s objectives to prioritise objectives and 
outcomes that enhance long-term preparedness, 
sustainability, resilience and risk management for 
farming businesses and farming communities. 
During the engagement undertaken to inform the 
development of this plan, it was evident that there 
remains a belief that drought declarations may still be 
made in South Australia. Increasing awareness and 
understand of the National Drought Agreement has 
been identified as an opportunity for action in this 
Plan. 
1.2 Preparing this Plan 
This Plan was informed by information collated 
through the following tasks: 
•	
Literature review. 
•	
Key informant interviews with local community 
leaders and subject matter experts. 
•	
Key informant interviews with drought resilience 
planners from other regions. 
•	
Regional in-person engagement across the 11 
Eyre Peninsula councils.  
•	
Aboriginal in-person workshops.  
•	
Online workshops and online surveys. 
•	
Regular Advisory Group meetings. 
98 community members and stakeholders were 
engaged in the first round of engagement to 
inform the draft Plan, each sharing a diversity of 
perspectives, experiences and priorities. A further 27 
community members and stakeholders then provided 
feedback on the draft Plan.  
All parts of this Plan have been informed by the 
literature review and engagement. The key findings 
of these tasks have been analysed, summarised and 
integrated to prepare the content of the Plan and set 
out a holistic vision for a more drought resilient Eyre 
Peninsula. Further detail and findings from all tasks 
are described in the Key Insights Paper including 
the Engagement Summary Report prepared for this 
project and provided as Attachment 1.   
Quotes from community members and stakeholders 
collected through the engagement activities are 
included in the speech bubbles throughout this 
Plan. While these quotes were raised by individuals 
to share their personal experiences and views, 
they have been included in the plan because they 
generally align with wider community views shared 
during the engagement.
“ ”
“ ”

9
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Section 1
Section 2-5
Section 6
Section 7
Introduction and summary of the Plan
Background to drought and drought resilience on the Eyre 
Peninsula
Opportunities for action - the vision, goals, strategies and 
opportunities for action for building drought resilience on 
the Eyre Peninsula
How the Plan will be implemented
1.3 How to read this Plan 
There are four key parts to the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan: 
1.4 Strategic context  
The Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan has been prepared to align with and complement other 
regional strategic plans. Some of the opportunities for action within this Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
refer to actions identified in these plans, and may be already underway. Planning for the implementation of the 
opportunities in this Plan will consider alignment with other strategic plans to maximise efficiency and minimise 
duplication of effort. 
Eyre Peninsula 
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
Eyre 
Peninsula 
Strategic 
Regional Plan⁶
AIR EP
Strategic 
Plan³
Eyre Peninsula - 
Planning 
Sustainable 
Growth Vision 
2050⁴
Eyre Peninsula 
Regional 
Landscape 
Plan⁵
Eyre Western 
Regional Plan 
(in prep)
Water 
Allocation 
Plans
Eyre Peninsula 
Water Security 
Planning
Local 
Government 
strategic plans

10
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan region encompasses the 11 Eyre Peninsula 
councils from Whyalla in the east, along the Gawler Ranges in the north, to Ceduna in the west. The 
region covers 44,290 square kilometres (Figure 1). The far west of South Australia (unincorporated areas 
beyond District Council of Ceduna) is covered by the Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan and 
is not included in this Plan.   
Figure 1 The Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan region  
District Council
of Ceduna
District
Council of
Streaky Bay
Wudinna
District
Council
District
Council
of Kimba
City of
Whyalla
District Council
of Franklin
Harbour
District Council
of Cleve
District Council
of Elliston
District
Council of
Tumby 
Bay
Lower
Eyre
Council
City of
Port Lincoln
02 The Eyre Peninsula

11
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
PORT LINCOLN
WHYALLA
CEDUNA
Upper EP experiences lower 
rainfall so is more marginal 
for cropping and relies more 
on sheep. They have lower 
outputs and lower input costs. 
Rocky ground conditions 
in some parts of 
Western EP lead to 
higher proportions of 
sheep pastoralism.
Lower EP experiences higher 
rainfall, higher outputs and higher 
input costs. A greater diversity 
of crops are grown including 
canola and pulses.
Soil conditions vary 
across the region but 
are generally light and 
prone to erosion.
The regional centres of Whyalla 
and Port Lincoln are experiencing 
growth while smaller towns are 
decreasing in population.
Characteristics such as a close-knit community atmosphere, reliance on agriculture and strong sporting 
culture are consistent across the Eyre Peninsula. However, other factors vary. Each town has unique 
characteristics, perspectives, priorities, challenges and needs. Some key characteristics that vary across the 
region are described in the figure above, including climate, soils and population trends. 
The following pages summarise key features of the Eyre Peninsula that influence its resilience to drought. 
Please refer to Attachment 1 Key Insights Paper for more information about these features. 
Figure 2 Variance in conditions across the Eyre Peninsula

12
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Eyre Peninsula
South Australia
Resident population 
56,265 people
1,781,516 people
Median age
43 years
41 years
Highest level of education
Bachelor degree level and above 
Certificate III & IV Level 
Year 12 
Year 10 
8.8% 
17.7% 
31.2% 
15.6%
22.7% 
17.6%
15.2% 
9.4%
Unemployment rate 
2.4%
5.4%
Volunteering rate
18.0%
14.1%
Top 3 industries of employment 		
	
(Entire EP region)
Health care & social assistance (14.1%) 
Agriculture, forestry & fishing (12.8%)  
Retail trade (9.9%) 
Top 3 industries of employment  
Eyre Peninsula region excluding 	
Whyalla and Port Lincoln
Agriculture, forestry & fishing (28.0%) 
Health care & social assistance (12.4%) 
Education & training (9.3%)
Total GRP (2022/23) 
Entire Eyre Peninsula region 
$4.467 billion
Table 1 Key demographics and economic statistics for the Eyre Peninsula region and SA7,8  
2.1 People and economy
The Eyre Peninsula’s population is dispersed, with major population centres in Whyalla 
and Port Lincoln and many people living on farming properties. The region enjoys a 
strong sense of community spirit and connectedness. Agriculture is the highest industry of 
employment outside the key population centres of Whyalla and Port Lincoln.  
DATA NOTE – All economic data has been soured from the RDA Eyre Peninsula Region’s economic profile from .id community. The 
area covered by this data includes all the council areas as well as the far west coast which includes Maralinga Tjarutja (AC) and 
Unincorporated SA (part).

13
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
2.2 Agriculture
The Eyre Peninsula has an extensive, productive 
agricultural industry. Approximately 80% of the 
region’s land area is owned by private enterprises 
and used for cropping and grazing, with a significant 
proportion of this land having native vegetation 
cover. Dryland broadacre cropping of wheat, barley, 
canola, lentils, lupins and oats and livestock grazing 
predominantly sheep for meat and wool are the 
most common agricultural land uses. Recent market 
conditions and innovations in farming technology 
have led to an increase in production of lentils and 
other pulses, while sheep grazing is in decline. 
The region produces approximately one quarter 
of South Australia’s cereal crops and other 
broadacre crops, valued at $1.43 billion in 2022/23. 
The total value of agricultural output accounted 
for approximately 11% of South Australia’s total 
agricultural output in 2020/21.9 
Eyre Peninsula farmers are challenged by issues 
that are unique to their environments, as well as 
constraints that are experienced more broadly across 
the state. These include: 
•	
Degraded soils, leading to soil acidification, 
dryland salinity, soil structure decline, wind 
erosion and water repellence. 
•	
Variable and challenging weather conditions such 
as low and high rainfall, extreme heat, frost and 
wind.  
•	
Decreasing populations of small towns.  
•	
Increasing costs of farming inputs driven by 
global energy prices and geopolitical events.10 
•	
Fluctuating market conditions, exacerbated by a 
heavy reliance on often volatile export markets.11 
•	
Pests, weeds, overabundant native species and 
diseases.
However, Eyre Peninsula farmers are renowned for 
their innovation. Research and development led 
innovations, improved risk management and business 
decision making, and changes to how land and 
water resources are managed has led to significant 
advances in agricultural production in the region. 
The willingness of Eyre Peninsula farmers to adopt 
new technologies and make improvements based 
on research outcomes ensure their farms are on the 
cutting edge of productivity and profitability.
The agricultural sector plays a vital role in South 
Australia’s food production, regional export revenue, 
and as a foundation of strong and cohesive rural 
communities. Continuing to support the success of 
the sector is essential.

14
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
2.3 Climate
2.3.1 Rainfall
The Eyre Peninsula region experiences a 
Mediterranean climate characterised by warm, dry 
summers and mild, wet winters. The southern areas 
have a milder, wetter climate compared with the 
warmer and drier north and northwest parts of the 
region. 
Average monthly rainfall between 1964 to 2023 for 
five locations across the Eyre Peninsula is shown in 
Figure 3. While November to March rainfall is similar 
at all locations, winter rainfall is significantly higher in 
the southern locations of Port Lincoln and Cummins. 
Rainfall has been declining in recent decades. Data from myclimateview.com.au shown 
in Table 2 indicates rainfall has reduced from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-2023, with 
reductions greater in northern locations.
Figure 3 Average monthly rainfall 1964 to 2023 in towns across the Eyre Peninsula12 
Table 2 Average annual rainfall change 1964 to 202313 
70
80
90
100
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
JAN
Ceduna
Rainfall (mm)
Cowell
Minnipa
Cummins
FEB
MAR
APRIL
MAY
JUN
JULY
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
Port Lincoln
Location
Average annual rainfall 
(1964 to 1993)
Average annual rainfall 
(1994 – 2023)
Change
Ceduna
298mm
268mm
-10%
Cowell
297mm
259mm
-13%
Minnipa
346mm
311mm
-10%
Cummins
451mm
429mm
-5%
Port Lincoln
530mm
481mm
-9%

15
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Rainfall reliability maps for 1989 to 2018 (Figure 4) show winter rainfall has been moderately 
reliable across the region (blue areas), with usually only about 40 mm difference from one year to 
the next.14 This contrasts with spring and autumn rainfall, which has been less reliable (beige and 
light red areas). 
2.3.2 Temperature 
The Eyre Peninsula experiences average annual maximum temperatures of 18 to 27°C and average 
summer maximum temperatures of 21 to 33°C.15
The Eyre Peninsula has experienced more hot days in the past 30 years. Figure 5 shows the annual 
number of days above 38 °C (red bars) with a 10-year running average (solid red line) for Ceduna.16 
Ceduna experienced an average of 16 days per year above 38 °C between 1989–2018, compared 
to an average of nine days per year above 38 °C between 1959–1988. 
Figure 4 Rainfall reliability (1989 – 2018)
Figure 5 Number of days per year over 38°C
Winter
Spring
Summer
Autumn

16
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
2.4 Water Resources
There is a scarcity of potable water resources on the Eyre Peninsula. Groundwater is the 
main source of water for public water supply, irrigation, stock and domestic use.
Table 3 Key characteristics of Eyre Peninsula’s water resources
Feature
Characteristics 
Groundwater
The Water Allocation Plan for Southern Basins and Musgrave Prescribed Wells Areas 
controls the taking and use of most of the fresh groundwater in the region.19
Three-quarters of the region’s drinking supply comes from the Uley South Basin in the 
Southern Basins Prescribed Wells Area.20 Expert modelling says water is being drawn 
from this Basin at unsustainable rates, with recorded water levels ‘below’ or ‘very much 
below average’ in almost half of its wells during the past 12 months. This was despite 
rainfall in 2021 and 2022 being well above average.21 The Department for Environment 
and Water has modelled that underground water resources in the southern basins will no 
longer be able to sustainably meet the demands for water supply on Eyre Peninsula in 
the short term.  
The Water Allocation Plan is currently under revision as a result, with the new plan to 
significantly reduce SA Water’s pumping allowance from the Southern Basins. Alternative 
water sources will be required to supply the region.
Surface water
Surface water features on the Eyre Peninsula include watercourses, lakes, dams, 
wetlands, springs and soaks.22
Most watercourses are ephemeral, experiencing peak flows during winter, and often 
ceasing to flow by late spring or early summer.23 Many wetlands and creeks are saline 
and unsuitable for drinking.
Water storages
The Tod Reservoir is the only major surface water storage on Eyre Peninsula. Due to 
deteriorating water quality, this resource has not been used as a water supply since early 
2002 and is held as an emergency supply of water only.24

17
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Figure 6 The Eyre Peninsula ‘system’ 
2.5 The Eyre Peninsula ‘system’
The Eyre Peninsula is a complex system of 
connections and interactions between people, 
industries and the natural environment. These 
connections and interactions mean that when 
one feature is impacted, flow on effects will be 
experienced by other features in the system. 
Considering these connections and interactions is 
called ‘systems thinking’. Systems thinking helps to 
identify the factors that make the system resilient or 
vulnerable to change.
Key features of the Eyre Peninsula system include 
agriculture and water resources, as these have many 
connections with other valued features. 
Maintaining agriculture and its connections to other 
features is integral to the viability of the region, as is 
provision of secure water supplies. When agriculture 
and water supply are threatened by drought, these 
impacts are also felt by the wider population, 
community groups, social fabric, services and 
regional economy. When agriculture, water supplies 
and other features are supported to be more resilient 
to drought, these benefits will also flow through the 
system. 
It is important to note that the way these cascading 
impacts and benefits are felt differs substantially 
across the region depending on the local context. 
OUTSIDE THE SYSTEM
TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT
EXPORTS
EXPORTS
EMPLOYMENT
EMPLOYMENT
COMMUNITY
COMMUNITY
CROPPING
CROPPING
SOIL
SOIL
TOURISM
TOURISM
BIODIVERSITY
BIODIVERSITY
SERVICES
SERVICES
LIVESTOCK
LIVESTOCK
FISHING AND  
AQUACULTURE
FISHING AND  
AQUACULTURE
RIVER MURRAY 
WATER
RIVER MURRAY 
WATER
MINING
MINING
WATER
WATER

18
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
03 Drought
Drought is not simply low rainfall. Rather, drought is a comparatively dry period compared 
to normal conditions that has an impact on water users including the environment.
For this plan, drought is defined as: 
A period of abnormally dry conditions that 
impacts negatively on water availability 
and agricultural production in a region and, 
consequently, impacts negatively on the 
economy and environment of the region and 
the health and wellbeing of its residents.
3.1 Drought on the Eyre Peninsula
Drought on the Eyre Peninsula is caused by 
a number of natural atmospheric conditions 
including the Positive Indian Ocean Dipole, El Niño-
Southern Oscillation and Southern Annular Mode. 
Anthropogenic climate change is also projected to 
impact on drought conditions. The Key Insights Paper 
in Attachment 1 provides more information on these 
climate drivers.  
Before European colonisation, the Aboriginal peoples 
of the Eyre Peninsula region would have experienced 
numerous drought periods.25 Since then, the region 
has experienced a number of significant droughts 
including: 
•	
The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902
•	
The 1914 to 1915 drought 
•	
The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945
•	
The 1965 to 1968 drought 
•	
The 1982 to 1983 drought
•	
The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009
•	
The 2017 to 2019 drought (the Tinderbox drought)

19
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

20
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.2 Drought impacts on the Eyre Peninsula
The impacts of drought on the Eyre Peninsula are profound. The literature and 
stakeholders have identified the following key impacts.26,27 Refer to Attachment 1 for a 
more comprehensive summary of these impacts, including Section 3.3 and 3.5 of the Key 
Insights Paper and Section 3 of the Engagement Summary Report. 
Social impacts
•
Reduced mental health and wellbeing exacerbated by loss of income, hard and
emotional decision making, stress, loss of hope and shame. This can lead to anxiety,
depression, substance abuse, social isolation and suicide in extreme cases.
•
Stress and wellbeing impacts can lead to relationship breakdowns, domestic violence,
impact on children and flow on effects to friends and the wider community.
•
When farmers are forced to shoot and bury their stock because it is too costly to send
them to market, this takes a major mental toll.
•
Reduced amenity associated with a drought affected landscape and flow on impacts on
health and wellbeing.
•
Population shrinkage as farms and businesses sell, staff are laid off and people move
away for job opportunities elsewhere, with flow-on effects including reduced social
fabric and township vibrancy, less volunteers, less local businesses and services, less
school enrolments and fewer members in sporting clubs.
Financial and business impacts 
•
Reduced income on farms as crop yields reduce, and destocking occurs, sometimes at 
low prices. High input and machinery maintenance costs remain, placing farmers in 
greater and greater debt. Some farms are forced to sell.
•
Young farmers who have had a drought in their first year are particularly affected, with a 
major impact on their finances and willingness to stay in the industry.
•
Financial hardship for other regional businesses as farmers “tighten their belts” and stop 
spending as much in communities.
•
Agricultural plan derailment as otherwise well strategically planned farming operations 
have to “throw out’’ their plans.
•
Changed farming practices as farmers destock, plant different crops which are less 
reliant on rainfall, or do not plant crops particularly in marginal country.
•
Loss of workers, particularly farm workers, other skilled agricultural allied industry 
workers and young people who are difficult to get back after
drought.
•
Lack of willingness for younger farmers to adopt family succession 
plans, instead opting to leave the district or pursue other 
professions. 
There’s a 
slow, grinding, 
wears-you-down 
effect, mentally, 
financially and 
physically
I’ve stitched old 
sheets together 
and prayed for 
new shoes for my 
kids in drought 
years

21
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Environmental impacts
•
Loss of vegetation cover and increased soil erosion, leading to loss
of topsoil and dust storms.
•
Reduction in water availability.
•
Reduced crop yield, stock numbers, native vegetation and native animals.
•
Increased bushfire risk.
•
Loss of gardens and green space.
•
Introduction of weeds as feed from other regions is brought in for stock.
Service and infrastructure impacts
•
Loss of local services as businesses are forced to close.
•
Mains water restrictions.
•
Soil erosion causes soil to accumulate on roads, causing driving hazards and in some
cases cutting properties off until roads can be cleared.
•
Lack of water for personal use such as showers.
Beneficial impacts
While minimal in comparison to the negative social impacts of drought, participants identified 
that drought can occasionally cause positive social impacts: 
•
Increased community closeness as community initiatives proliferate to bring people
together, sporting clubs become a more important lifeline than ever, and families and
friends support becomes vital.
•
Increased time for those who have less workload due to less economic activity have
more time for family, recreation, volunteering and education (if funds and mental
wellbeing allow).
•
Increased awareness of drought and how to respond which
improves forward planning and response in the next drought.
It’s very 
depressing to see 
bare paddocks, 
skinny stock and 
dead animals
What doesn’t kill 
you makes you 
stronger

22
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
3.3 Climate projections and drought
Climate projections describe what the future climate 
could be like, sourced from multiple climate models, 
and based on numerous assumptions about the 
factors that influence climate and the trajectory 
of change in greenhouse gas emissions in the 
atmosphere. Each model uses different assumptions 
and algorithms to project how climate variables 
such as temperature, rainfall and evapotranspiration 
will respond in different emissions scenarios over 
different time frames. The projections presented 
in online tools and viewers each use a different 
combination of global climate models and so show 
slightly different results. 
For this Plan, we have used the regional projections 
described by the CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology 
in Climate Change in Australia. Location specific 
projections have been taken from MyClimateView 
which downscales these regional projections to 
provide location specific projections.   
Climate change is projected to increase the amount 
of time spent in drought on the Eyre Peninsula. 
Annual rainfall is projected to decrease, and 
temperatures to increase. Climate Change in Australia 
provides the following climate projections for the 
region. 
Weather event
Projection 
Confidence* 
Rainfall
Annual rainfall
Decreasing annual rainfall
High
Winter rainfall
Decreasing winter rainfall
High
Spring rainfall
Decreasing spring rainfall
High
Summer and autumn rainfall
Unclear, although downscaling results suggest a 	
	
continuation of the observed autumn declines.
Low
Drought
Increasing time spent in drought
High
Extreme rainfall events
Increasing intensity of extreme rainfall events
High
Average, maximum and minimum 
temperatures 
Substantial increase in mean, maximum and minimum 
temperatures
Very high
Hot days and heatwaves
More hot days and warm spells
Very high
Frost
Fewer frost risk days
High
Potential evapotranspiration
Increased potential evapotranspiration in all seasons
High
Bushfire
Harsher fire-weather climate
High
Table 4 Projections for the Southern and South-Western Flatlands East sub-cluster (including the Eyre Peninsula)
*NOTE – Climate Change in Australia refers to confidence in a climate projection as a 
measure of how plausible the projected range of change is for a given emission scenario. 
High agreement of numerous, high-quality lines of evidence is needed to have high 
confidence. 
Climate Change in Australia notes that on an annual and decadal basis, natural variability in 
the climate system can act to either mask or enhance any long-term human induced trend, 
particularly in the next 20 years and for rainfall.

23
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Ceduna
Cowell
Minnipa
Cummins
Port Lincoln
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
ave
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
ave
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
ave
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
ave
(1994 – 
2023)
2050s 
ave
Total annual rainfall 
268mm
241mm
259mm
232mm
311mm
283mm
424mm
381mm
481mm
452mm
Summer rainfall 
47mm
35mm
56mm
40mm
51mm
45mm
58mm
46mm
57mm
46mm
Autumn rainfall
61mm
51mm
59mm
49mm
64mm
54mm
87mm
80mm
102mm
100mm
Winter rainfall
98mm
94mm
74mm
78mm
122mm
114mm
189mm
173mm
215mm
212mm
Spring rainfall
62mm
59mm
70mm
63mm
75mm
69mm
91mm
81mm
107mm
93mm
Average maximum 
temperature
24.0°C
25.3°C
23.9°C
25.2°C
24.6°C
26.0°C
22.0°C
23.2°C
21.2°C
22.2°C
Annual hot days 
(over 35°C)
30 days
38 days
28 days
37 days
38 days
51 days
13 days
18 days
6 days
8 days
Table 5 Selected climate projections for five Eyre Peninsula towns
Rainfall and temperature projections from 
MyClimateView for five Eyre Peninsula towns at 2050 
using a high emissions scenario (Representative 
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5) are shown in 
the table below. Total annual rainfall is projected to 
decrease in all locations. In the southern areas, the 
decrease is driven largely by decreases in spring 
rainfall, whereas further north, larger decreases are 
projected in summer and autumn rainfall. Average 
temperatures and number of hot days annually are 
projected to increase in all locations.   
The potential impacts of climate change on Australian 
agriculture are well documented and include 
reductions in crop yields, pasture growth, animal 
health, carrying capacity and soil condition as well as 
increased invasion of weeds, pests and diseases.28 
Of primary concern for farmers on the Eyre Peninsula 
is how a warming and drying climate could influence 
broadacre cropping yields and production of 
pasture for grazing. In the northern parts of the Eyre 
Peninsula greater areas of farming land may become 
marginal for cropping.29
The region has been proactively planning for climate 
change for many years through supporting research 
projects and industry and community work into 
climate change impacts and potential adaptation 
options.
Various agricultural practices that are considered 
leading edge will provide some measure of 
adaptation in the short term. However, long term 
adaptation may require more transformational 
responses.

24
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
04 Drivers of change
Weather is not the only factor that influences the success of farms, business, community 
and the environment on the Eyre Peninsula. A number of economic, social and 
environmental trends, challenges and opportunities have a direct or indirect influence 
on the resilience of the Eyre Peninsula to drought and other stressors. These have been 
summarised in the table below.30,31,32,33,34
Table 6 Drivers of change on the Eyre Peninsula 
Trend, challenge or opportunity 
Influence on the Eyre Peninsula
Improvements in farming practices
Eyre Peninsula farmers have always been on the forefront of innovative 
agricultural practice. Improvements in technology and machinery have increased 
crop yields enormously over the past few decades and will continue to do so.
Changing crop types and stocking 
rates  
Recent changes in demand and agricultural practice have led to changes in crop 
types and stocking rates. This has led to reduced sheep numbers, particularly 
merinos, an increase in more frost and drought tolerant varieties and increased 
area planted to lentils.
Lack of local agricultural value-add 
opportunities
Due to a lack of local agricultural value-add opportunities on the Eyre Peninsula, 
and the prohibitive road freight distance to many domestic markets, farmers are 
forced to bulk export only, affecting their potential profits. 
Market competition
Until recently, Viterra had a monopoly over the crop market. The introduction of 
T-Ports has created competition and significantly improved market conditions for
Eyre Peninsula farmers.
Increased agricultural input costs 
and lack of local supply of inputs
Over the last four years, the cost of agricultural inputs including seed, chemicals 
and machinery has substantially increased. This has impacted the profitability of 
Eyre Peninsula farms. 
The distance of Eyre Peninsula farms from many providers of agricultural inputs 
results in increased transport costs, reduced choice, and a need to order supplies 
so far in advance that this cannot be informed by the year’s conditions. 
Market volatility 
Sudden and unexpected widespread trade disruptions resulting from global 
pandemics, conflict, geopolitical tensions, disease, or similar events can have 
significant impacts on supply chains, demand, and commodity prices. The financial 
success of agricultural businesses is influenced by fluctuating market prices for 
agricultural goods.
Other market changes such as bans on the export of live sheep also influence the 
profitability of the agricultural industry. 
Consolidation of agricultural 
interests
Farms on the Eyre Peninsula have become bigger over the past few decades. As 
farms have been sold, neighbours or commercial entities have purchased and 
amalgamated them into larger properties, resulting in physically larger enterprises 
owned and run by fewer people.

25
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Trend, challenge or opportunity 
Influence on the Eyre Peninsula
Interest rates
Recent low interest rates have helped Eyre Peninsula farmers to service their 
debts. As interest rates rise, this has a major impact given high debt levels of many 
businesses in the sector. The higher interest rates of the 1990’s are still recognised 
as a time that changed the course of the agricultural sector on the Eyre Peninsula 
as many farmers unable to service their loans were forced to sell their farms.
Growth in new markets
The Eyre Peninsula is well positioned to capitalise on recent growth in emerging 
markets. This includes lentils, wind and solar energy, hydrogen, mining for minerals 
critical for the net-zero transition, space technology, seaweed and local processing 
and manufacturing. 
Decreasing population in 
small towns
It can be challenging for small regional towns to retain population numbers and 
compete with the economic, educational and social opportunities available in urban 
areas and regional centres. Conglomeration of farms and increasing mechanisation 
of work on farms has further exacerbated this. Younger generations are often seen 
leaving the region, resulting in ageing populations and changing social dynamics.
Tight regional labour markets
Regional areas including the Eyre Peninsula are experiencing greater difficulty in 
attracting and retaining labour across a number of industries.
Lack of services and infrastructure
A lack of services including childcare, education, medical services and housing 
present major challenges to the Eyre Peninsula community.
High reliance on volunteers
Volunteering rates are falling across the region, particularly in younger age groups. 
This has implications for the future viability of sporting and other clubs which play a 
very important role in keeping communities connected and vibrant.
Digitalisation
An increasingly digital world has opportunities for improved farming practices and 
business management, online work and study, telehealth and online shopping. With 
technology and automation come consequences for jobs and security.
Water security challenges
Decreasing groundwater levels on the Eyre Peninsula pose a major water security 
challenge for the region. Alternative water sources such as a desalination plant are 
necessary to construct as soon as possible to limit water restrictions and long-term 
negative impacts on local water resources.
Climate change and 
decarbonisation
Responding to climate change requires a shift in the agricultural sector to reduce 
carbon emissions and adapt to a new and changing climate. Mining, manufacturing, 
transport and other industries will also require transformational change.
Decline in biodiversity and 
ecosystem health
The abundance and diversity of biodiversity and ecosystems globally are in rapid 
decline. Many species have become extinct, and more are highly threatened. The 
continued effects of climate change, land clearing, pollution, invasive species and 
direct exploitation (eg wild fishing) will result in further biodiversity loss.

26
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
05 Drought resilience
For this Plan, drought resilience is defined as: 
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In some cases, disruption can be seen as an 
opportunity to move in a new direction, not just recover back to a previous state. Resilience is 
about proactively changing in order not to be changed involuntarily.  
Building resilience will help the Eyre Peninsula to get through droughts with less negative 
impacts and recover from them sooner. 
The ability of communities, economies and 
environments to withstand the impacts 
of drought and adapt and find new and 
potentially transformational ways of doing 
things, enabling functions and values to be 
sustained over the longer term.
5.1 Why is drought resilience 
important?
In the past, droughts have had serious impacts on 
the Eyre Peninsula. They have major consequences 
for the ability to grow crops or feed livestock, jobs 
and income, mental health and wellbeing, the 
size of regional populations, and the health of the 
environment.
Resilience is about taking action to try to avoid or 
minimise these negative impacts before they happen 
rather than waiting until they do occur to act, or just 
focusing on recovery. Building resilience can create 
economic, social, and environmental development 
opportunities. By having good business, financial 
and technical skills and having a plan developed 
before drought, the decision-making load and much 
of the stress of primary producers can be reduced 
when drought hits. This can help them to weather the 
drought until rains break. 
It is important to recognise that drought resilience 
is also important for the wider community, economy 
and environment beyond primary producers. Other 
people, businesses and environments are directly 
impacted by drought, and the impacts of drought on 
farms have flow on effects to the wider region. 
5.2 How will drought resilience 
change over the coming years? 
Eyre Peninsula farmers have been at the forefront of 
innovative agricultural practice to adapt to changing 
conditions and improving technologies for decades. 
This has kept their productivity and profitability on 
the rise. However, as the climate continues to change 
into the future, these incremental (small adjustments) 
and transitional (deliberately moving from one way of 
doing things to another) changes may no longer be 
enough. 
More transformational actions (fundamental shifts) 
may be required to maintain the resilience of our 
communities, economy and environment. Future 
iterations of this Plan are likely to place a greater 
focus on these type of actions in order to support 
resilience.

27
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

28
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Table 7 Characteristics of resilient individuals, communities and regions 
Key characteristics 
Social 
characteristics
•	
Strong social connections with family, friends, and the wider community facilitated through formal 
and informal networks.  
•	
Past experience and learnings of drought or other adversity.
•	
Good stress management and decision making including when under high pressure.
•	
Good mental mindset, maintaining optimism where possible.
•	
Having involved and diverse community groups, sporting clubs and other community spaces that 
support community connection and cohesion.
Economic 
characteristics
•	
Good business and financial management skills, including through formal education.
•	
Having a financial buffer. 
•	
Being prepared for drought.
•	
Good decision making in responding to drought, noting that luck can play a role given no one 
can control the weather. 
•	
Household and regional income diversification.
•	
Implementing good farming practices to maximise profitability in the long term.
•	
Having a good relationship with bank managers or other financial institutions.
•	
Being flexible and adaptable.
5.3 Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, 
and regions
We heard again and again that Eyre Peninsula farmers are inherently resilient. Eyre Peninsula 
farmers and other community members are continually faced with a suite of challenges which 
have enhanced their resilience and problem-solving skills through generations.
Particular characteristics of resilience are summarised below in Table 7. These have been 
identified though the engagement and literature.35,36,37,38,39
Nimble farmers 
can make better 
practical choices 
during drought

29
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Key characteristics 
Environmental 
characteristics
•
Implementing farming techniques that maintain and enhance soil health and minimise soil 
erosion.
•
Planting more drought-tolerant species and varieties.
•
Integrated, widespread, preventative pest plant and animal control.
•
Changing farming practices early when drought begins.
Infrastructure 
and service 
characteristics
•
Water infrastructure that provides water security and affordability.
•
Local services including childcare, healthcare, shops, housing and banks that are not just located
in regional centres.
•
Regular and ongoing social and wellbeing services.
•
Local accurate weather stations and short- and long-term weather forecasts.
•
Local, reliable and affordable supply of farming inputs.
•
Competition between local services which improves market conditions.
•
Good port access and facilities.
Innovation, 
research and 
development 
characteristics
•
Continually learning and being receptive to new technologies, techniques, varieties, chemicals etc.
•
Continual research and development into more effective farming practices, varieties etc. with 
good extension and uptake of this information in the broader agricultural community.
•
Locally specific research and development.
•
Good access to relevant information and knowledge.

30
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
06 Opportunities 
for action
This Plan sets out a vision, goals, strategies and actions to help the Eyre Peninsula to 
enhance its resilience to drought. Our vision is:
Eyre Peninsula farms, businesses and 
communities that are strong, sustainable, 
vibrant and drought resilient.
6.1 Delivery principles
The following principles will guide drought 
preparedness, response and recovery work through 
this Plan: 
•	
Investment will be focused largely during the 
preparation phase, to help people, businesses 
and the environment to set themselves up to 
minimise the impacts of drought. This will help to 
enhance long-term preparedness and resilience 
in the region. 
•	
Support will be available to everyone as needed 
and not disadvantage those that respond early to 
emerging risks or issues.
•	
Timing of delivery of programs during drought 
is critical. Policy intervention will be mobilised 
quickly to ensure an appropriate response when 
it is most needed. 
•	
Where existing, successful initiatives exist, these 
will be supported, promoted and enhanced 
where required rather than delivering new 
initiatives.   
•	
A bottom-up, community-driven approach will 
be used wherever appropriate, to understand 
what locals want and need and how to deliver 
programs in a way that suits them. This will be 
delivered through active and ongoing community 
engagement.
It is better to 
manage and 
minimise risk than 
to try to rebuild 
after a tough 
blow
Listen to the 
people on the 
ground and then 
take action to 
what they say

31
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
6.2	
Goals, Strategies and Opportunities 
The goals, strategies and opportunities to build 
drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula are 
described in the following sections. The strategies 
seek to leverage existing strategic planning and 
avoid duplication of effort by referring to the 
implementation of other regional plans. Strategies 
are high level to provide flexibility to accommodate 
changing circumstances, new evidence and evolving 
knowledge while remaining accountable to the stated 
goals, vision and regional values.
The vision and goals were developed collaboratively 
by the Advisory Group using information collected 
through the first phase of engagement. These were 
then tested with the community through the second 
phase of engagement.
The strategies and opportunities for action have 
been developed directly from the ideas raised by 
stakeholders and the community throughout the 
engagement, as the actions they believe will be most 
effective for their region. 
These have been supplemented and strengthened by 
the literature review and discussion with the Advisory 
Group. 
While targeted at the impacts of drought, this support 
provides co-benefits for broader resilience and 
adaptation.
The goals, strategies and opportunities are presented 
under the following:
•	
Farming innovation
•	
Community wellbeing
•	
Financial sustainability
•	
Landscapes and environments
•	
Governance and advocacy
•	
Regional infrastructure and services
•	
Regional economic development.
Goals
Strategies
Strategies
Strategies
Strategies
Goals
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Opportunities
for action
Stakeholder 
and community 
engagement 
and the 
literature 
review have 
guided all parts 
of the Plan
Vision

32
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Individual action 
Opportunities in the plan have been 
scoped as actions to be taken at a 
community or regional scale. However, 
many of these can also be progressed 
at an individual scale. For example, while 
regional organisations may provide 
training and grants for household income 
diversification, farms and families may be 
able to diversify their income themselves 
without external support. These sorts of 
actions are identified with a person icon.   
New initiatives 
Many of the strategies relate to work that 
is already underway, and either need 
to be extended, expanded, promoted 
or accelerated to have greater benefit. 
Other strategies present opportunities 
that are limited in their current application 
or are not at all part of current action on 
the Eyre Peninsula. These present new 
opportunities that could lead to significant 
or transformational change for the region 
and are flagged with a lightbulb icon.  
Potential partners 
Lead organisations have not been identified for each 
opportunity in this Plan.  
Responsibilities will be identified in an 
Implementation Plan (see section 7.1)  
Partners may include members of the Drought 
Resilience Advisory Group as well as other 
organisations including:  
•	
Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula 
(RDAEP) 
•	
Agricultural Innovation & Research Eyre Peninsula 
(AIR EP) 
•	
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board (EPLB) 
•	
SA Drought Hub 
•	
Local Government (including the Eyre Peninsula 
Local Government Association and councils) 
•	
Department of Primary Industries and Regions 
South Australia (PIRSA) 
•	
South Australian Research and Development 
Institute (SARDI).
Timing
The timing for delivery of each opportunity has been 
categorised according to when it would fit within the 
drought cycle.
The Plan places a focus on actions to be undertaken 
before drought hits. By focusing effort and investment 
in this phase, Eyre Peninsula farmers, communities, 
businesses and environments will be better set up to 
minimise the impacts of drought, rather than enduring 
them when they come. 
This approach will help to support the long-term 
preparedness, sustainability and resilience of farm 
businesses and communities. Nonetheless, it is 
recognised that support will still be needed during 
and after drought, and this plan will help deliver 
this support particularly during extended, severe 
droughts.
Before
During
After
Ongoing

33
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
            FARMING INNOVATION
Eyre Peninsula farmers continually look to make 
sustainable improvements to their businesses. 
They are well known for how readily they adopt 
new technologies and make improvements based 
on research outcomes to ensure their farms are 
productive and profitable. 
Ongoing research, development and extension 
is needed to continue to drive the advancement 
of farming systems on the Eyre Peninsula. There 
are many areas for further investigation to enable 
continued productive capacity, profitability and 
resilience in the face of a drying climate and changing 
market conditions. The importance of evidence-
based, practical, locally relevant information is 
recognised. 
Innovation needs to be farmer-centred, with farmers 
as an integral part of the planning and delivery of 
research, development and extension. Peer-to-peer 
learning and use of existing trusted communication 
channels will be prioritised.  
Capacity building actions will primarily occur ‘before’ 
drought to provide the greatest potential to mitigate 
drought impacts.
Continuing to provide access to information and 
support to build capacity to adapt and respond to 
risks will allow farmers to improve their practices 
and pass on healthier and more sustainable farms 
for future generations. 
Goal: Profitable, productive and adaptive agriculture thriving in a changing climate
Potential partners:
AIR EP, EPLB, PIRSA, SARDI, SA Drought Hub, Minnipa Agricultural Centre, Primary Producers SA, Livestock 
SA, Grain Producers SA, farming systems groups, agricultural service providers, Research and Development 
Corporations, Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Local Government, 
RDAEP, education institutions 
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Support capacity building and 
implementation of farm and 
land management actions that 
strengthen drought resilience
Build understanding, capacity and support for farmers to 
implement modern, locally proven agricultural practices and 
resilience building farm, business and land management 
approaches.
Before
Provide capacity building activities to support farmers to understand 
the potential benefits and application of installing infrastructure 
that can support drought resilience such as small farm scale water 
management infrastructure, on-farm or in-system feed storage, 
feedlots, weather stations and on-site energy generation and storage.  
Before
Investigate and promote funding for infrastructure that 
contributes to farm resilience, including to manage water, feed, 
stock, vegetation and soils. 
Before
Educate and communicate with the community on the weather forecast 
tools available so that better more informed decisions can be made, in 
conjunction with local knowledge. 
Before
Support farmer reflective practices, drought learning 
documentation and peer experience sharing through online 
platforms, diaries, and experience sharing forums. 
During and 
after

34
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Goal: Profitable, productive and adaptive agriculture thriving in a changing climate
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Drive adoption of on farm 
innovation through agricultural 
research, development and 
extension 
Identify and communicate key agricultural research and development 
priorities across the region through targeted engagement with 
agricultural groups, farmers, agricultural suppliers and other key 
industry stakeholders. 
Before
Invest in priority agricultural research, development, extension, cost-
benefit analysis and adoption of new farming systems, techniques, 
varieties, technologies, tools and products that increase profitability 
and climate resilience of primary production in the long-term.
Before
Regularly communicate research and development findings to farmers 
and their key influencers using a diversity of platforms, for example 
Stickybeak days, field days, workshops, podcasts, YouTube videos, 
case studies, newspaper articles, webinars, extension officers, FaB 
mentors, Rural Business Support, Ag Bureau groups, agronomists, 
demonstration farms etc. Minimise costs of information access. 
Before
Ensure Eyre Peninsula farmers have the best available information 
and local demonstrations on emerging ag tech opportunities including 
automation, artificial intelligence, monitoring technologies, data 
management and use in decision making, etc. to drive farm efficiency.
Before
Continue and expand networks with other agricultural research centres 
around Australia and overseas to build knowledge of emerging 
research and development, seek opportunities to trial approaches on 
the Eyre Peninsula and share local research findings.
Before
Identify and implement opportunities for small scale farm trials and 
demonstrations including funding for farmers to trial new techniques, 
products and practices on their own farms to validate innovations and 
new and emerging research findings. 
Before
Implement the AIR EP Strategic Plan to continue to provide leadership 
and direction to deliver relevant and innovative, farmer driven 
research, development and extension to advance agriculture on Eyre 
Peninsula.
Before
Support uptake of  
carbon farming and  
other practices that  
support income  
diversification and the transition 
to net zero
Build carbon farming literacy and identify and demonstrate 
opportunities for carbon sequestration into soils via contemporary 
farming practices and perennial vegetation.
Before
Support farmers to measure their farm emissions profile and develop 
strategies to manage on-farm emissions.
Before
Investigate and support the uptake of agricultural practices 
that increase biodiversity including regenerative agricultural 
practices, quantifying the value of biodiversity on-farm, and 
revegetation programs.
Before

35
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
         FINANCIALLY SUSTAINABLE ENTERPRISES
Farmers are no longer ‘just farmers’ – they are now 
business people, managing millions of dollars of 
inputs and outputs each year.  
Loss of income is one of the most immediate effects 
of drought on farmers. This then flows through to the 
wider economy, as farmers “tighten their belts” and 
reduce their spending at local shops and suppliers.  
The following strategies and opportunities for action 
aim to upskill and support farmers and business 
owners to manage their businesses and finances 
in a way that enables them to maintain an income 
stream, minimise debt and staff layoffs, and manage 
their business as best as possible before, during and 
after drought. This will help to support individuals 
and businesses to set themselves up to get through 
drought without the need for external financial 
handouts, and to operate their finances more 
successfully in the long term.  
The opportunities for action also identify effective 
ways to support economic activity and employment 
during droughts for those in need, which has 
beneficial flow on effects for the wider community.  
Goal: Long-term financially viable businesses and management capabilities
Potential partners:
RDAEP, Local Government, Rural Business Support, AIR EP, PIRSA, SA Drought Hub, EPLB, SARDI, Minnipa 
Agricultural Centre
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Enhance financial and business 
management literacy and 
planning that supports drought 
planning 
Provide support including training, resources, funding for 
consultants and scenario planning workshops for farmers to 
prepare a Farm Drought Plan that supports decision making 
leading in to and during drought.
Before
Support and promote locally provided education and training initiatives 
to enhance farmer’s financial and business management skills to 
support good business management, contingency planning, forward 
planning and succession planning.
Before
Scope opportunities to establish or enhance existing communities 
of practice and network approaches for farmers to continually learn, 
share and update their business, financial and technical skills with their 
peers.
Before
Promote existing mechanisms for farmers to save money in 
high income years including Farm Management Deposits 
(FMDs) to be accessed during droughts.
Before
Provide a forum for finance professionals (bankers, accountants, 
business advisers) and agricultural suppliers to interact with farm 
technical advisers (including machinery and input suppliers) to develop 
a more informed and shared understanding of farm finance decision 
making.
Before

36
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Goal: Long-term financially viable businesses and management capabilities
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Support diversification 
of income at a farm 
scale
Support farmers to explore and implement action to diversify 
on- and off-farm income, including through different crops, 
sheep, tourism, online jobs, businesses and town or transport 
jobs including through mentoring, support for business 
establishment and advocacy for improved childcare services. 
Before
Investigate and share emerging opportunities for biodiversity credits, 
carbon farming, emissions reduction and other approaches that 
enable diversification and can deliver financial benefit from nature 
positive outcomes. 
Before
Scope opportunities to support workers in the agricultural sector 
to gain additional education and skills to diversify their income, for 
example through provision of training or educational grants. 
Before, 
during
Scope local programs to keep 
locals employed and stimulate 
local economic activity during 
drought
Scope and prepare collaborative opportunities in advance for projects 
or programs that can be delivered during drought, to ensure funding 
can be spent quickly and effectively once drought hits. Prioritise 
projects that provide continuing value to the local community during 
and after drought.  
Before
Seek funding to implement these programs to stimulate local 
economic activity, provide jobs and income to local workers who may 
be out of work and source local materials from local businesses. 
During
Support aspiring farmers to 
enter the agricultural industry 
Explore opportunities to influence loan programs (eg Agristarter) to 
increase ease of accessibility into the sector for aspiring farmers. 
Before
Support young and new farmers to thrive in the agricultural industry 
through targeted capacity building, mentoring and the establishment 
of a “next generation” farming support network. 
Before

37
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

38
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
          COMMUNITY WELLBEING
Drought takes a major toll on mental health and 
wellbeing. Farmers, their families and the wider 
community need to be supported to maintain hope, 
connectedness and positivity through these trying 
times. Those who have strong connections with their 
friends, family and community, positive aspects of 
their life that they can focus on (such as sport, events 
or gatherings), and access to support when they need 
it are better able to minimise the mental health effects 
of drought.  
It is important to provide a range of initiatives that 
meet the needs of diverse communities. Not all 
people are able or willing to recognise when their 
mental health is in decline and not everyone reaches 
out when they need help. Reaching these people is 
particularly critical.  
Each community also has their own needs, and 
initiatives will be tailored to meet these. A one-size-
fits all approach will be avoided wherever possible as 
past experience has shown that this is not effective.  
There are a large number of existing successful 
regional initiatives in this space which will be 
supported and promoted through this plan.  
Goal: Capable individuals and healthy communities working together to benefit the region
Potential partners:
Local Government, SA Health, Local Health Networks, PIRSA including PIRSA Family and Business (FaB) 
mentors, rural counsellors, Centrelink, RDAEP, AIR EP, EPLB, SA Drought Hub, Rural Aid, Rural Business 
Support, Not for Profit organisations, SARDI, Minnipa Agricultural Centre, Red Cross, external/out of region 
community organisations
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Maintain and strengthen 
community health and 
wellbeing 
Coordinate and promote delivery of existing and new mechanisms 
for mental health and wellbeing counselling, mental health first 
aid training, mentoring, events (such as inspirational speakers or 
workshops), and other support services for Eyre Peninsula farmers, 
farming families and wider communities.  
Before, 
during, after
Provide formal and informal opportunities for people with experience 
of drought to share what helped them through it so others are aware 
of what might happen, and acknowledge that farmers are not alone in 
drought.  
Before, 
during, after
Facilitate community 
connection through events and 
activities 
Work with community groups to prepare and deliver a program of free 
or low-cost initiatives that bring the community together, tailored to 
community needs and different audiences, for example community 
events, workshops, presentations, comedy shows, family fun days, 
sport and art initiatives. 
Before, 
during, after
Support local sport, interest and 
service clubs and community 
leaders to continue to play their 
important role in sustaining 
community connections 
Support local sporting and other interest or service clubs to run their 
day-to-day programs as well as one-off events that facilitate community 
connection and wellbeing.  
Before, 
during
Support volunteer and volunteer organisation involvement, and review 
systems and processes to identify opportunities for improvement 
to reduce burden on volunteers and make it easy for volunteers to 
participate. 
Before, 
during
Develop local leadership capacity by delivering and encouraging 
participation in leadership programs. 
Before

39
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
         LANDSCAPES AND ENVIRONMENTS
Healthy ecosystems are more resilient to drought. By 
proactively managing, protecting and restoring our 
natural environment before drought, it will be better 
able to withstand drought and continue to provide 
benefits to our communities and economies.  
There are emerging opportunities on the Eyre 
Peninsula for nature-based solutions that can offer 
cost-effective on farm protections while delivering 
co-benefits such as carbon capture and improved 
food and water security. Sustainable natural resource 
management, including of soil, water, and biodiversity, 
must be prioritised for building resilience to drought. 
Goal: Healthy soil, water and biodiversity that sustain productive landscapes
Potential partners:
EPLB, Aboriginal groups, SA Drought Hub, Department for Environment and Water, National Parks and Wildlife 
Service, Local Government, conservation and environmental NGOs and community groups, SA Water, schools
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Protect and enhance soil health 
Implement the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board’s Land Management 
Control Policy to support landholders to minimise risk of land 
degradation. 
Before
Facilitate land management to improve soil health and vitality.
Before, 
during
Effectively manage surface 
water and groundwater 
extraction 
Effectively manage water allocation planning in Prescribed Wells Areas 
and water affecting activities to ensure the sustainable and equitable 
use of the prescribed water resources, while also making sure the 
needs of the environment are taken into account. 
Before, 
during, after
Implement water resource efficiency programs or water restrictions to 
protect the condition of local groundwater aquifers. 
Before, 
during
Control pest and overabundant 
native animals and plants  
Continue to support land managers to control priority pest 
plants and animals including through the implementation of 
the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board’s Pest Plant and Animal 
Control Policy, provision of bait for pest animals and culling of 
overabundant native animals. 
Before

40
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
         GOVERNANCE AND ADVOCACY 
This Plan will not reach its goals without effective governance. With clear leadership, coordination and 
communication the Plan can deliver on its goals in a way that is strategic, effective, minimises duplication, fills 
gaps and delivers what is most needed on the ground. Engagement with communities to understand what 
they need and how to deliver this in a way that suits them is central to this. 
There are many opportunities to partner with others to enhance and broaden outcomes. 
Goal: Local, effective and coordinated action led and governed by local people that understand the region 
Potential partners:
RDAEP, EPLB, Local Government, AIR EP, PIRSA, SA Drought Hub 
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Establish effective 	
	
drought governance 	
to support drought 
plan implementation
Continue the Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group and 
explore opportunities to expand membership. Drive implementation 
of this plan including:  
•	
Advocate for and support long-term funding.  
•	
Support review and improvement processes to ensure partner 
organisations and agencies learn from drought experiences. 
•	
Collaborate with other government agencies, not-for-profit 
organisations and private companies to identify opportunities for 
resource sharing, particularly where organisations have shared/
common goals. 
Before
Seek funding for a project officer to support the Eyre Peninsula 
Regional Drought Resilience Advisory Group to implement the 
Plan, including to support the delivery of drought resilience funding 
applications and projects, and improve the coordination of programs 
from different agencies to maximise efficiency and effectiveness and 
avoid duplication of effort.
Before
Develop a communications strategy and establish mechanisms for 
the Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group to engage 
with communities about drought plan implementation and available 
support before, during and after drought.
Before

41
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
The member organisations that make up the Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group specialise in 
a range of different sectors. Future governance will lean into the strengths of each organisation, ensuring the 
organisation most suited to the task will deliver each action. The focus areas of the Advisory Group organisations 
are summarised in the table below.  
Advisory Group member
Area of focus
Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula (RDA EP)
Regional economic development
Agricultural Innovation & Research Eyre Peninsula (AIR EP)
Agricultural research, development and extension 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board (EPLB)
Sustainable natural resource management
SA Drought Hub
Drought resilience of farmers and regional communities
Eyre Peninsula Local Government Association (EPLGA)
Service and leadership for councils
Eyre Peninsula councils
Management of local issues and community
Department of Primary Industries and Regions South Australia 
(PIRSA)
Primary industries and regions
Goal: Local, effective and coordinated action led and governed by local people that understand the region
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Promote regional primary 
production and good news 
stories to protect social licence 
to farm 
Work with other regions and organisations to improve public 
perception and appreciation in metropolitan areas of farmers and 
the important role they play in South Australia’s food security and 
economy.  
Before
Celebrate farming and community successes, promoting good practice 
that will or is strengthening drought resilience. 
Before, 
during, after
Investigate opportunities to build Eyre Peninsula’s agricultural brand. 
Before
Work in partnership with 
Aboriginal communities to build 
drought resilience 
Engage and collaborate with Aboriginal individuals and groups to 
better understand their needs and what would assist in enhancing 
the drought resilience of their communities and the environment and 
support the delivery of identified projects.
Before, 
during
Advocate for 
changes to financial 
mechanisms to support 
farmers to build savings, 
manage tax and get through 
extended droughts 
Advocate for Farm Management Deposits (FMDs) to be accessible 
during drought and available to all farms regardless of business 
structure. 
Before
Advocate for potential taxation system supports beyond FMDs to help 
farmers through drought periods.
Before
Advocate for ongoing financial support for farmers through the RIC 
(Regional Investment Corporation) or other schemes particularly to 
support farmers in subsequent years of extended droughts. Financial 
support should support forward planning and good decision making 
and not disadvantage those in need for example those working a 
second job to provide for daily needs.
During

42
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
          REGIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
Agricultural communities cannot thrive without 
adequate infrastructure and services to support them. 
Infrastructure including desalination plants, weather 
stations and ports are critical to the future of the 
Eyre Peninsula. Water security at a regional scale is 
required to continue to enable our towns and farms 
to function. Local and regional scale water supply 
planning and investment is required to address 
supply constraints and future demand.  
New and community-focused approaches to 
delivering infrastructure and services should 
be explored, for example through community 
cooperatives, that benefit the community.   
Appropriate access to services including education, 
childcare and healthcare is an ongoing challenge 
in small towns across the Eyre Peninsula. Improving 
these service offerings will make the Eyre Peninsula 
a more desirable place to live and allow residents to 
reach their full potential and lead happy, healthy and 
purposeful lives.  
Goal: Future-proofed water supplies, local services and infrastructure that attracts, retains and supports 
residents and regional investment 
Potential partners:
RDAEP, EPLGA, PIRSA, Department for Infrastructure and Transport, SA Water, Local Government, Department 
for Energy and Mining, SA Power Networks, education institutions
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Provide regional mains water 
security for the Eyre Peninsula
Advocate for investment in infrastructure to deliver water security for 
the whole Eyre Peninsula.
Before
Advocate for further investment for network upgrades and 
improvements to water security to accommodate the region’s 
projected water demand.
Before
Optimise the use of fit for 
purpose water
Advocate for wastewater reuse in towns to maintain irrigation of cool, 
green spaces.
Before
Identify opportunities to install additional water infrastructure to 
provide water for firefighting.
Before
Improve regional weather data 
collection and forecasting
Develop a business case to install a BOM compliant mesonet weather 
station network across the Eyre Peninsula to improve localised 
forecasting including inversions, frost and severe weather events.
Before
Develop a business case to install a doppler radar system that covers 
the lower, central and eastern Eyre Peninsula to allow for more 
informed on-farm decision making and reduce risk.
Before

43
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Goal: Future-proofed water supplies, local services and infrastructure that attracts, retains and supports 
residents 
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Improve the services and 
infrastructure that support, 
maintain and connect 
communities 
Invest in the places where community gather such as sporting clubs 
and other community spaces, so they provide places for activity and 
connection. 
Before
Work with the education sector to enhance local education and 
training opportunities to keep young people in the region, working 
in the agricultural sector and provide them with better school subject 
options, enhanced local teacher attraction and retention, and better 
access to technology to access online education.
Before
Advocate for improved internet and mobile connection across the 
region to allow for improved communication and enable use of on-line 
tools and information services that enhance farm and other business 
management.
Before
Implement the Eyre Peninsula Strategic Plan actions to facilitate 
investment in strategic transport infrastructure, particularly on critical 
grain and livestock transport routes, to create new cost effective 
avenues to export markets, reduce costs and facilitate opportunities for 
local processing and value adding ventures.
Before
Implement the Eyre Peninsula Strategic Plan actions relating to 
housing, healthcare, childcare and education that support the 
resilience of the community.
Before
Lobby government for a consistent region wide television and radio 
coverage (SA / Eyre Peninsula based) so that all communities across 
the region are better connected and function as a united and cohesive 
local information and promotion service. This should include the re-
introduction of a local news service.
Before
Investigate models for community cooperatives and shared farm 
infrastructure such as community owned and run grain storage 
facilities, shared transport, truck stops etc. that reduce costs and 
benefit communities.
Before

44
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
         REGIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
The Eyre Peninsula has strengths that make it 
well suited to capitalising on the benefits of new 
and emerging markets. These include renewable 
energy (wind, solar and hydrogen), mining, value-
add agribusiness, tourism and space. A new and 
exciting economy based on decarbonisation provides 
significant prospects for the Eyre Peninsula as it 
moves into a more sustainable world. 
Diversity enhances economic and social resilience 
and provides employment choice. Diversification 
also increases convenience and provides greater 
opportunities for businesses to capture local 
expenditure, allowing communities to support local 
businesses.
Goal: Sustainable regional development that contributes to drought resilience 
Potential partners:
RDAEP, Local Government, community organisations, NGOs, Eyre Peninsula Cooperative Bulk Handling, Eyre Hub
Strategies
Opportunities for action
Timing
Support diversification 
of the economy at a 
regional scale 
Implement regional strategic plans to encourage and support the 
development of new and emerging high value industries (not reliant 
on rainfall) to diversify the regional economy and decrease community 
reliance on agricultural income, including through provision of 
adequate infrastructure. 
Before
Scope and implement opportunities for local agricultural value-add 
that provides alternatives to the bulk production of a commodity 
where there is little market control, for example local mills, abattoirs, 
oil presses, feed pelletising manufacturing, protein powder 
manufacturing. 
Before
Investigate and 
advocate for 
opportunities to 
influence farming input 
and output prices and 
availability 
Explore the development of an ammonia production facility to produce 
a local supply of fertiliser to reduce reliance on global markets, provide 
security of supply, reduce travel costs and reduce emissions.
Before
Scope opportunities to enhance diversification of suppliers of the 
agricultural industry to promote competition and security of supplies 
and services.
Before
Maintain population levels in 
regional towns
Support marketing of the Eyre Peninsula as a regional “lifestyle 
destination”, to support the attraction of new residents and tourists, 
highlighting the unique selling points of each diverse part of the Eyre 
Peninsula.
Before, after
Leverage remote working opportunities to encourage workers, 
especially those with highly sought after skillsets, to live and work in 
the region.
Before
Support shopping locally  
Work with regional community and business support organisations to 
develop and implement shop local schemes during periods of drought, 
with a focus on supporting local small businesses.
During

45
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

46
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
07 Implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation 
7.1 Implementation
This Plan has been prepared as a framework or 
prospectus to guide future effort and investment in 
regional drought resilience. 
The opportunities identified in this Plan are unfunded 
and some may only be progressed with further 
investment. Funding opportunities may be through 
the Future Drought Fund, industry funding, or other 
funding streams. A central purpose of this Plan and 
the Advisory Group that governs it is to ensure the 
region is well prepared to apply for any funding 
opportunities that arise in a proactive, strategic and 
well informed manner. 
Many of the opportunities identified in this Plan will 
be delivered through other programs such as those 
run directly through the Future Drought Fund. The 
Advisory Group will monitor these opportunities to 
avoid any duplication and provide input and feedback 
as to how these programs can be delivered in a way 
that will meet the needs of the Eyre Peninsula. 
It is proposed that the Eyre Peninsula Drought 
Resilience Advisory Group established to develop this 
Plan will drive and be accountable for the delivery 
of the Plan. Implementation of specific opportunities 
may require collaboration between smaller groups of 
partners. 
Some opportunities may also be delivered in 
partnership with other regions where this can 
enhance outcomes.
The first step in delivering this Plan will be to 
develop an implementation plan that identifies 
potential partners and delivery mechanisms. These 
partners may include organisations represented on 
the Advisory Group, other government agencies, 
non-government organisations and the private 
sector. The Advisory Group will aim to identify the 
most appropriate partners for each opportunity, 
considering alignment with current or planned 
actions and existing responsibilities. As many of the 
opportunities will require an ongoing program of 
work, the capacity and capability of potential partners 
may need to be considered. Some opportunities 
relate to an expansion or acceleration of existing 
programs, and existing program leads may be best 
placed to continue their roles in these programs.  
Through the engagement to support the 
development of this Plan we have heard clearly that 
farmers and communities want to be involved in the 
decisions that affect them. Planning the delivery 
of all projects will include local stakeholders and 
community from the start, to get buy-in and support 
beneficial outcomes. 
7.2 Governance
It is proposed that the Advisory Group established 
to develop this Plan continues to coordinate and 
support project funding applications and project 
delivery to avoid duplication of effort and maximise 
local and regional benefits. Additional membership 
may be investigated. 
It is proposed the group meets regularly to maintain 
an ongoing shared understanding of emerging 
issues, report on progress of actions and track all 
related funding applications. 
As identified in the Governance and Advocacy topic, 
funding will be sought for a project officer to support 
the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience 
Advisory Group in implementing the Plan. The 
officer would help to coordinate and deliver drought 
resilience project funding applications and project 
delivery, and improve the coordination and funding 
of programs from different agencies to maximise 
efficiency and effectiveness and avoid duplication 
of effort. The officer would be hosted by one of the 
Advisory Group organisations. 
7.3 Monitoring, evaluation and reporting
This Plan and its implementation will be monitored, 
evaluated and reported on according to the Regional 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Guide prepared 
by the Department for Primary Industries and Regions 
for the South Australian Regional Drought Resilience 
Plans. 
Monitoring and evaluation are essential parts of 
delivering any plan, project or program. Undertaking 
monitoring and evaluation will help the Advisory 
Group, stakeholders and the community understand if 
the vision and goals are being progressed.

47
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
It ensures accountability and provides information to 
share with partners and stakeholders to demonstrate 
program value. 
An adaptive learning approach will be taken, with 
successes and limitations of past and current 
actions reviewed and used to assist in refining future 
approaches to optimise project outcomes. The Plan 
will be an adaptive document that is adjusted over 
its lifetime as necessary to respond to emerging 
challenges, opportunities and research and maintain 
its relevance and usefulness.
The below monitoring and evaluation framework is 
based upon a program logic approach. Program logic 
illustrates cause and effect relationships to provide 
understanding of how program resources are used 
to produce outputs and deliver outcomes in the short 
to long term. The model also acknowledges the 
interaction of assumptions and external factors with 
outputs and outcomes. The elements of the program 
logic model are defined below in Figure 7.  
Outputs: measurement of the direct actions taken, 
for example the activities and events delivered, 
the services provided and the funds spent. Output 
measures include both activities and associated 
participation. 
Assumptions: the expectations we have that the 
actions we take and the participants involved will lead 
to the outcomes or change we seek to achieve. 
Outcomes: the desired results of direct actions on 
individuals, groups, communities, organisations and 
the environment in the short-medium and medium-
long term. Outcomes in the medium-long term are 
often influenced more by external factors (actions 
undertaken by others or changes in environmental, 
social or governance factors). 
External Factors: the uncontrollable factors in the 
wider environment surrounding our programs that 
may interact with and influence outcomes. 
The program logic and monitoring indicators for 
a selection of example strategies from the Eyre 
Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan are 
provided in Appendix A. This will be reviewed, 
revised and expanded as projects are funded and 
planning for delivery commences.  
As projects are scoped for funding and then 
implemented, an evaluation process will be 
established that will consider: 
•	
How effective was the project/program in 
achieving its intended outputs and outcomes? 
•	
To what extent did the project/program contribute 
to the relevant goals, and what other things 
helped or hindered its implementation? 
Once implementation commences, a biannual 
evaluation of the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan itself will be initiated that will consider: 
•	
To what extent has the Plan been implemented 
and has impacted on regional stakeholders’ 
capacity and resources to better plan, manage 
and recover from drought? 
•	
What changes/support are/is needed to 
ensure that the Plan best provides an effective 
framework for action and stakeholders can 
effectively work together towards implementing 
those actions? 
Figure 7 Program logic model for the delivery of the Plan
Inputs
What we 
invest 
Funds, staﬀ 
Community,
stakeholders
Actions
1-5 years
impact
5-20 years
impact
Who we
reach
What we
do
Short
medium 
term
Short
long
term
Outputs
Assumptions
Monitoring and evaluation
Outcomes
External
Factors

48
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
08 Glossary
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to 
actual or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability 
and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
Climate projection
A scenario of future climate, generally resulting from running a global climate 
model with a specified greenhouse gas concentration scenario (or RCP). A 
projection differs from a prediction in that it is conditional on the representation 
of a particular global climate model and the uncertain assumptions of the model 
inputs (primarily the greenhouse gas concentration scenario, or RCP).42
Carbon farming
Carbon farming includes:
•	
sequestering carbon in the landscape through regeneration and planting 
of native vegetation; farm and plantation forestry; and improving soil 
management to ensure that carbon inputs exceed outputs. 
•	
reducing emissions, such as livestock methane emissions; fertiliser 
emissions and through manure management.43
Decarbonisation
The removal or reduction of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas outputs 
into the atmosphere.
Drought
A period of abnormally dry conditions that impacts negatively on water 
availability and agricultural production in a region and, consequently, impacts 
negatively on the economy and environment of the region and the health and 
wellbeing of its residents. 
Drought resilience 
The ability of communities, economies and environments to withstand the 
impacts of drought and adapt and find new and potentially transformational 
ways of doing things, enabling functions and values to be sustained over the 
longer term. 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
The El Niño and La Niña are part of one of the strongest climate drivers for the 
Eyre Peninsula. They are part of a natural cycle known as the El Niño–Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) and are associated with many months of warming (El Niño) or 
cooling (La Niña) in the central and eastern tropical Pacific.44
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups 
and agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be formally 
institutionalised, or informal.
Indian Ocean Dipole
The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) is defined by the difference in sea surface 
temperatures between the eastern and western tropical Indian Ocean. A 
negative phase typically sees above average winter-spring rainfall in Australia, 
while a positive phase brings drier than average seasons.45

49
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Southern Annular Mode
The Southern Annular Mode, or SAM, refers to the north/south movement of the 
strong westerly winds that blow almost continuously in the mid- to high-latitudes 
of the southern hemisphere. The SAM phase that influences rainfall on the Eyre 
Peninsula is the SAM summer negative phase which, when active, decreases 
chance of summer rain in the region.
Transformational change
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different 
structure, functions, feedbacks and identity. 
Trigger point
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management 
intervention. Trigger points are usually defined in the planning phase.

50
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
09 References
1Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024, National Drought Agreement, Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry, viewed 25 July 2024, <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/
drought/drought-policy/national-drought-agreement#:~:text=Droughts%20can%20happen%20anywhere%2C%20
anytime,Agreement%20(2024%2D2029)>.
2Drought Agreement 2022, Review of the National Drought Agreement, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 
Canberra, December. CC BY 4.0., <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/nda-review-report.pdf>.
3Air EP 2021, AIR EP Strategic Plan 2021 – 2026, <https://airep.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/AIR-EP-
Strategic-Plan-2021-V1-adopted-June-2021.pdf>.  
4AIR EP, SARDI & Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2023, ‘Eyre Peninsula – Planning Sustainable Growth Vision 2050 - 
A shared Vision for farming on the Eyre Peninsula in 2050’, AIR EP, SARDI & Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board, viewed 
16 July 2024 <https://airep.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Farming-on-the-EP-Vision-2050-d4b.pdf>.
5Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021, Eyre Peninsula Regional Landscape Plan 2021-2026, Landscape South Australia 
Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/EP-landscape-plan-2021.pdf>. 
6Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, and Eyre Peninsula 
Local Government Association 2022, Eyre Peninsula Strategic Regional Plan 2023-2026, Regional Development 
Australia Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://www.rdaep.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/RDA-Eyre-
Peninsula-Strategic-Plan-2023-2026-FINAL.pdf>    
7Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021, Search Census data, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 26 July 2024, 
<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area>.
8Profile.id 2023, RDA Eyre Peninsula Region Community Profile, .idcommunity, viewed 26 July 2024, 	
	
<https://profile.id.com.au/rda-eyre-peninsula>.
9Profile.id 2023, RDA Eyre Peninsula Region Economic Profile, .idcommunity, viewed 26 July 2024, 	
	
<https://economy.id.com.au/rda-eyre-peninsula>.
10Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024, Analysis – How global energy prices are affecting the 
price of Australian farm inputs, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, viewed 16 July 2024,<https://
www.agriculture.gov.au/about/news/analysis-how-global-energy-prices-are-affecting-price-australian-farm-inputs>
11South Australian Research and Development Institute (SARDI) 2023, Eyre Peninsula Farming Systems Summary 
2022, Department of Primary Industries and Regions, South Australia, <https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0007/432619/epfs-summary-2022.pdf>.
12My Climate View 2024, Your location. Your commodity. Your climate. My Climate View, viewed 12 June, 	
	
<https://myclimateview.com.au/>.
13My Climate View 2024, Your location. Your commodity. Your climate. My Climate View, viewed 12 June, 	
	
<https://myclimateview.com.au/>.
14Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate Guides, Commonwealth of Australia, Bureau 
of Meteorology, viewed 18 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/guides/046-Eyre-Peninsula-
SA-Climate-Guide.pdf>.
15Bureau of Meteorology 2022, Average monthly and annual temperature maps, Commonwealth of Australia, 
viewed 20 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/>.

51
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
16Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate Guides, Commonwealth of Australia, Bureau 
of Meteorology, viewed 18 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/guides/046-Eyre-Peninsula-
SA-Climate-Guide.pdf>.
17Eyre Peninsula Natural Resources Management Board 2016, Water Allocation Plan for the Southern Basins and 
Musgrave Prescribed Wells Areas, Government of South Australia, South Australia, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.
au/landscape/docs/ep/water_allocation_plan_southern_basins_musgrave_pwas_web.pdf>.
18SA Water 2024b, Eyre Peninsula’s water supply update July 2024, <https://AIR EP.com.au/wp-content/
uploads/2024/07/SA-Water-July-2024-update.pdf>.
19Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024d, Revision of Eyre Peninsula Water Allocation Plan to commence, 
Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, viewed 17 July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/news/110424-
ep-water-revision>.
20Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024b, Future Water Security, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, viewed 17 
July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/sustainable-agriculture/sustainable-agriculture/future-water-security>.
21Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021a, Eyre Peninsula Regional Landscape Plan 2021-2026, Landscape South Australia 
Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/EP-landscape-plan-2021.pdf>.
22Green, G, Gibbs, M, Alcoe, D and Wood, C 2012, Impacts of Climate Change on Water Resources Phase 3 Volume 2: 
Eyre Peninsula Natural Resources Management Region, Government of South Australia through Department for Water, 
Adelaide, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/2021_control_policy_land_management.pdf>.
23Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 17 June 2024,	
	
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.
24Lehmann E 2023, Understanding the true cost of drought, CSIRO, viewed 26 July 2024, 	 	
	
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2023/July/cost-of-drought%20>.
25Fleming-Muñoz DA, Whitten S & Bonnett GD 2023, The economics of drought: A review of impacts and costs, The 
Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, vol #64, no#4, viewed 14 June 2024, 	 	
	
<https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-8489.12527>.
26Siebentritt, M, Halsey, N and Stafford-Smith, M 2014, Regional Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Eyre 
Peninsula, Eyre Peninsula Integrated Climate Change Agreement Committee, South Australia, 	
	
	
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/ep-regional-climate-change-adaptation-plan.pdf>.
27Nidumolu, UB, Hayman, PT, Howden, SM and Alexander, BM 2012, ‘Re-evaluating the margin of the South 
Australian grain belt in a changing climate’, Climate Research, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 249-260, 	 	
	
	
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/24874996>.
28Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, and Eyre Peninsula 
Local Government Association 2022, Eyre Peninsula Strategic Regional Plan 2023-2026,  Regional Development 
Australia Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://www.rdaep.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/RDA-Eyre-
Peninsula-Strategic-Plan-2023-2026-FINAL.pdf>.
29CSIRO 2022, Seven megatrends that will shape the next 20 years, CSIRO, viewed 14 June 2024, 		
	
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-20-years>.
30PwC 2022, Megatrends - Five global shifts reshaping the world we live in, Price Waterhouse Coopers, viewed 14 
June 2024, <https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.html><https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.
html>.
31Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021, Search Census data, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area>.
32Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021c, Subregional descriptions, Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board, viewed 16 
July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/about-us/landscape-plan>.
33SA Drought Hub 2021, Node Co-Design Workshops Report, viewed June 3 2024, <https://sadroughthub.com.au/

52
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
wp-content/uploads/2022/08/FINAL_SA-Drought-Hub_Node-Co-Design-Workshops-Report-1.pdf>.
34Council of Australian Governments 2018, National Drought Agreement, <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/
default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/ag-food/drought/drought-policy/national-drought-agreement.pdf>.
35South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission, 2019, South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 
2019-2024, viewed 27 June, <https://resources-production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20
Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINET%20VERSION%20%281%29.pdf>.
36Walker B. 2020. Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecology and Society, vol 25, no 2, <https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_nothttps://www.researchgate.net/publication/341139019_
Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_not>.
37Pearson, J and Foster, B 2008, Drought Policy and Exceptional Circumstances Review, Eyre Peninsula Drought 
Task Force, South Australia, <https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/drought/submissions/sub011.pdf>.
38Department for Environment and Water 2022, Guide to Climate Projections for Risk Assessment and Planning 
in South Australia 2022, Government of South Australia, through the Department for Environment and Water, 
Adelaide. <https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20
for%20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf>.
39Government of South Australia 2022, Carbon Farming Road Map, <https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0007/428893/carbon-farming-roadmap.pdf>.
40Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Australian Water Information Dictionary, Bureau of Meteorology <http://www.bom.
gov.au/water/awid/id-180.shtml>.
41Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Climate Driver Update, Bureau of Meteorology <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/
enso/#tabs=Indian-Ocean>.

53
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan

54
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
10 Appendix A
Program logic and monitoring indicators for selected strategies
The table below describes the program logic for selected strategies in the Eyre Peninsula Drought 
Resilience Plan and identifies proposed monitoring indicators for outputs and outcomes. 
Program logic illustrates cause and effect relationships to provide understanding of how program 
resources are used to produce outputs and deliver outcomes in the short to long term. The model 
also acknowledges the interaction of assumptions and external factors with outputs and outcomes. 
Inputs
What we 
invest 
Funds, staﬀ 
Community,
stakeholders
Actions
1-5 years
impact
5-20 years
impact
Who we
reach
Measures of the direct actions taken, 
for example the activities and events 
delivered, services provided and funds 
spent.
The results of direct action on individuals or 
groups and the environment. Medium-long 
term outcomes are inﬂuenced more by 
external factors (actions undertaken by 
others or changes in environmental, social 
or governance factors) than shorter term 
outcomes.
What we
do
Short
medium 
term
Short
long
term
Outputs
Assumptions
Monitoring and evaluation
Outcomes
External
Factors

55
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
STRATEGY - SUPPORT CAPACITY BUILDING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF FARM AND LAND MANAGEMENT 
ACTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE THAT STRENGTHEN DROUGHT RESILIENCE 
Opportunities for action
•	
Capacity building for resilience-building farm and land management approaches 
•	
Integrated agricultural weed and pest management 
•	
Education to enhance understanding of weather forecasts and decision making 
•	
Support young and new farmers to thrive in the agricultural industry 
•	
Capacity building for drought-resilient infrastructure 
•	
Promotion and provision of infrastructure funding
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of workshops, 
training sessions, and field 
days conducted 
•	
Number of farmers 
participating in capacity-
building activities 
•	
Number of successful 
grant applications or 
funding approvals for 
infrastructure projects 
Profitable, productive and 
adaptive agriculture thriving in 
a changing climate
•	
Implementation of 
resilience-building 
farm and land 
management practices 
(target increase) 
•	
Pest plant and animal 
populations and 
distribution (target 
decrease) 
•	
Young and new 
farmers employed 
in the agricultural 
industry (target 
increase)
•	
Adoption of 
sustainable and 
resilient farming 
practices across 
the region (target 
increase) 
•	
Continued use and 
optimisation of 
infrastructure for 
managing water, feed, 
stock, and soils (target 
increase) 
•	
Farm productivity and 
profitability (target 
maintain or increase)

56
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
STRATEGY - DRIVE ADOPTION OF ON FARM INNOVATION THROUGH AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, 
DEVELOPMENT AND EXTENSION  
Opportunities for action
•	
Identify and communicate research priorities with stakeholders 
•	
Expand research networks 
•	
Investment in priority agricultural research 
•	
Share information on emerging agricultural  technologies  
•	
Small-scale farm trials 
•	
Communicate research findings 
•	
Events or activities to share learnings and experiences 
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of new research 
initiated or expanded on 
the Eyre Peninsula 
•	
Investment in research 
and development projects 
•	
Number of communication 
materials developed and 
shared 
•	
Number of farm trials
•	
Number of extension 
events or activities to 
share learnings
Profitable, productive and 
adaptive agriculture thriving in 
a changing climate 
•	
Adoption of new 
farming systems, 
technologies, and 
practices (target 
increase)
•	
Number of 
farmers accessing 
communication 
materials
•	
Sustained adoption 
of innovative farming 
practices and 
technologies (target 
increase)
•	
Established culture of 
continuous learning, 
reflection, and 
knowledge sharing 
among farmers (target 
increase)
STRATEGY - SUPPORT DIVERSIFICATION OF INCOME AT AN ENTERPRISE SCALE   
Opportunities for action
•	
Explore and share opportunities for farm income diversification on Eyre Peninsula  
•	
Provide education and training in business establishment 
•	
Advocate for improved childcare services 
•	
Investigate and share information on biodiversity credits, carbon farming and emissions reduction 
•	
Provide education and training to build new skills 
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of education and 
training programs run 
•	
Participants in education 
and training programs 
•	
Information prepared 
on viable diversification 
options 
•	
Information prepared 
on local application of 
biodiversity and carbon 
credits and emissions 
reduction 
Long-term financially viable 
businesses and management 
capabilities  
•	
Local employment and 
income generation 
(target increase) 
•	
Local economic 
activity and business 
continuity during 
drought periods (target 
increase) 
•	
Community support 
for biodiversity or 
carbon farming (target 
increase) 
•	
Farm enterprise 
sustainability (target 
zero loss of farm 
businesses due to 
drought) 
•	
Area of land managed 
for biodiversity or 
carbon farming (target 
increase)

57
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
STRATEGY - PROVIDE REGIONAL MAINS WATER SECURITY FOR THE EYRE PENINSULA  
Opportunities for action
•	
Advocate for water infrastructure investment 
•	
Network upgrades and town water security improvements 
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Investment in water 
infrastructure projects 
•	
Number of network 
upgrade projects 
completed 
Future-proofed water 
supplies, local services and 
infrastructure that attracts, 
retains and supports residents 
and investment 
•	
Funding allocated to 
water security projects 
in the Eyre Peninsula 
(target increase) 
•	
Water supply 
interruptions and 
shortages across 
the region (target 
decrease) 
•	
Significant reduction 
in water-related risks 
for residents and 
businesses in the 
Eyre Peninsula (target 
decrease)
•	
Attraction of new 
residents, businesses, 
and investments to 
the region (target 
increase)
•	
Ongoing 
improvements in 
water infrastructure, 
keeping pace 
with technological 
advancements and 
population growth 
(target increase) 
STRATEGY - SUPPORT LOCAL SPORT, INTEREST AND SERVICE CLUBS AND COMMUNITY LEADERS TO 
CONTINUE TO PLAY THEIR IMPORTANT ROLE IN SUSTAINING COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS  
Opportunities for action
•	
Provide support for clubs and organisations to run programs and events 
•	
Identify and progress opportunities to support volunteer-run organisations’ administration and finance 
•	
Continue to deliver community leadership programs
POTENTIAL OUTPUTS 
Activities and participation 
DESIRED OUTCOMES 
Related goal
OUTCOME INDICATORS
1-5 years
5-15 years
•	
Number of community 
groups, programs and 
events supported  
•	
Investment in community 
groups and programs 
•	
Number of community 
members participating 
•	
Number of volunteer 
groups supported to 
reduce load  
•	
Number of participants in 
leadership programs 
Strong, healthy individuals 
and connected communities 
learning and working together 
for a positive future
•	
Membership of 
community groups and 
organisations (target 
maintain or increase)
•	
Number of functioning 
and viable community 
groups and 
organisations (target 
sustain)
•	
Community 
volunteering  (target 
maintain or increase) 
•	
Community physical 
and mental health 
(PHIDU* self-reported 
(target increase)
* Public Health 
Information 
Development Unit - 
Torrens University

58
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan
DROUGHT
RESILIENT
EYRE 
PENINSULA

Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group  
24ADL-0635 
January 2025 
ATTACHMENT 1 
Eyre Peninsula 
Regional 
Drought 
Resilience Plan - 
Key Insights 
Paper 
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan

Key Insights Paper 
January 2025 
 
Lead consultant 
URPS 
27 Halifax Street 
Enter via Symonds Pl 
Adelaide  SA  5000 
(08) 8333 7999 
urps.com.au  
In association with 
Strategy Road & 
Richardson Consulting 
Prepared for 
Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group 
Consultant Project Manager 
Anna Pannell, Associate Director 
apannell@urps.com.au 
URPS Ref 
24ADL-0635 
 
Document history and status 
Revision 
Date 
Author 
Reviewed 
Details 
V1 
18.07.24 
E. Mansfield, R Liew, A 
Pannell 
A Pannell, T Forrest  
Draft paper for Advisory Group review 
V2 
30.08.24 
E. Mansfield, A. Pannell 
Advisory Group, E. 
Mansfield 
Updated paper following Advisory Group 
review 
V3 
07.12.24 
E. Mansfield, A. Pannell 
A. Pannell 
Minor update following CSIRO review

Key Insights Paper  |  Contents | i 
 
Contents 
Acknowledgement of Country................................................................................ iii 
 
Introduction ............................................................................................... 1 
 
Preparing the Key Insights Paper .............................................................................. 1 
 
The Eyre Peninsula Region .......................................................................... 4 
 
The Eyre Peninsula “system” ..................................................................................... 4 
 
Population ............................................................................................................... 5 
 
Economy ................................................................................................................. 8 
 
Agriculture ............................................................................................................... 8 
 
Natural environment............................................................................................... 11 
 
Climate .................................................................................................................. 14 
 
Assets and infrastructure ........................................................................................ 20 
 
Governance ........................................................................................................... 23 
 
Drought ................................................................................................... 26 
 
A definition of drought............................................................................................ 26 
 
Causes of drought .................................................................................................. 27 
 
Previous droughts .................................................................................................. 30 
 
Future climate and drought projections ................................................................... 35 
 
Impacts of drought on water availability .................................................................. 38 
 
Drivers of change ..................................................................................... 42 
 
Drought resilience ..................................................................................... 46 
 
A definition of resilience ......................................................................................... 46 
 
The importance of drought resilience ...................................................................... 49 
 
Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, and regions .................. 49 
 
Approaches to drought resilience planning ................................................. 52 
 
Learnings from other planning regions .................................................................... 52 
 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework ..... 54 
 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy .......................................................... 55 
 
Types of change .................................................................................................... 56

Key Insights Paper  |  Contents | ii 
 
 
Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula .......... 57 
 
Financial and business opportunities........................................................................ 57 
 
Social and community opportunities ........................................................................ 60 
 
Innovation, research and development opportunities ................................................ 62 
 
Farming operations opportunities ............................................................................ 63 
 
Services and infrastructure opportunities ................................................................. 64 
 
Governance and advocacy opportunities .................................................................. 66 
 
Environmental opportunities ................................................................................... 68 
 
References ............................................................................................... 70 
 
Tools and resources ............................................................................................... 76 
Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary Report .......................................... 77

Key Insights Paper | Acknowledgement of Country  | iii 
 
Acknowledgement of Country  
We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of the land on which we work, live and play and their continuing 
connection to land, sea, culture and community. We pay respect to Elders past and present, and extend that 
respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in our community. 
In particular, we acknowledge the Aboriginal peoples of the Eyre Peninsula region covered by this Plan, 
including the Barngala, Nauo, Wirangu, Kokatha and Mirning peoples.

Key Insights Paper | Introduction  |  1 
 
 Introduction  
Drought poses a major challenge to the future prosperity of Eyre Peninsula's agricultural productivity, 
natural environments, and communities. The projected increase in time spent in drought over coming 
decades means that preparing for drought is more important than ever.  
Drought resilience refers to the ability for communities, economies and environments to withstand the 
impacts of drought and adapt and find new and potentially transformational ways of doing things, enabling 
functions and values to be sustained over the longer term. 
Farmers on the Eyre Peninsula are not new to adapting to changing conditions. They have a long history of 
being leaders and innovators in developing enhanced and new ways to sustain their farms during times of 
reduced rainfall and drought or other challenges. The region will benefit from leveraging existing strengths 
and capitalising on new opportunities to enhance drought resilience.  
The Australian Government established the Future Drought Fund (FDF) to provide secure, continuous 
funding for drought resilience initiatives. Through the FDF, the Australian Government is working with the 
South Australian Government to support the Eyre Peninsula region in developing a Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan to prepare for and manage future drought risks. 
The Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group is guiding the preparation of a Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan for the Eyre Peninsula. The Advisory Group includes representatives of Regional 
Development Australia Eyre Peninsula (RDA EP), Agricultural Innovation & Research Eyre Peninsula (AIR 
EP), Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board (EPLB), SA Drought Hub, Local Government (Eyre Peninsula Local 
Government Association (EPLGA) and councils), and Department of Primary Industries and Regions South 
Australia (PIRSA). URPS has been engaged to work with the Advisory Committee to develop the Plan. 
The Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan will document how the region’s shared values might be 
impacted by drought, describe a desired future vision that acknowledges increasing impacts of drought and 
identify strategies and actions to build resilience to ensure regional values are maintained and economic and 
social development opportunities are optimised. The Plan must recognise that agriculture on the Eyre 
Peninsula does not occur in isolation; what happens on farms has flow on impacts to communities, the 
natural environment and regional economy. 
This Key Insights Paper will be the foundation for preparing the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan. 
 Preparing the Key Insights Paper  
This Key Insights Paper was prepared through the following tasks: 
• Literature review: collation and synthesis of information about the region and shared values, 
challenges and opportunities through review of regional plans and strategies and other relevant regional 
documents. The review also looked at literature on leading resilience practice, planning and 
implementation from elsewhere to identify ‘lessons learnt’ or ideas for action. 
• Key informant interviews with local community leaders and subject matter experts to 
understand how drought has impacted the Eyre Peninsula in the past, what programs have worked well 
to build drought resilience and how the Regional Drought Resilience Plan can best be implemented. 
Interviews were held with the following stakeholders:

Key Insights Paper | Introduction  |  2 
 
‒ Bill Long: farmer and farm consultant, current AIR EP Chair 
‒ Brett Klau: Landowner Information Services Officer, Rural Business Solutions, former ABB Grain, 
Australian Wheat Board, Ag Engineer 
‒ Brian and Tim Wibberley: accountants and agricultural scientists   
‒ Bryan Smith: farmer, former SAGIT Board member and former AIR EP and EPARF Chair 
‒ Chris Fitzgerald: farmer, Rural Financial Counsellor, Rural Business Solutions 
‒ Chris Miller: Senior Agribusiness Relationship Manager Bendigo Bank Cummins 
‒ Heather Baldock: farmer, RDA Board Member, Founding Member Workshop 26, former Chair EP 
Landscape Board 
‒ Issac Gill: farmer 
‒ Karen Baines: farmer, Board Member and Executive Officer EP Cooperative Bulk Handling 
‒ Peter Kuhlmann: farmer, Former SAGIT and EPARF Board member 
‒ Tim Scholz: farmer, Managing Director EP Cooperative Bulk Handling, former Wudinna Mayor, former 
President South Australian Farmers Federation (SAFF) and former Vice President National Farmers 
Federation (NFF) 
‒ Tristan Baldock: farmer. 
• Key informant interviews with drought resilience planners from other regions to learn from 
the experiences of other regions and gain insights into how the Regional Drought Resilience Plan can be 
prepared most effectively for the Eyre Peninsula. Interviews were held with drought resilience planners 
who worked on the following Regional Drought Resilience Plans:  
‒ Northern and Yorke Regional Drought Resilience Plan  
‒ South West Queensland Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
‒ The Murraylands and Riverland Plan  
‒ Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
‒ Adelaide Hills, Fleurieu and Kangaroo Island Regional Drought Resilience Plan. 
• Regional engagement with 56 people across Eyre Peninsula to understand how drought impacts the 
region, what makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought, and what the region needs 
to build its resilience to drought. Workshops were held in every Eyre Peninsula council area in the 
following locations: 
Ceduna 
Cummins 
Kimba 
Streaky Bay  
Port Lincoln  
Cowell 
Wudinna  
Tumby Bay  
Whyalla  
Elliston  
Cleve  
 
• First Nations engagement with three First Nations people across two First Nations workshops held in 
Ceduna and Port Lincoln.

Key Insights Paper | Introduction  |  3 
 
• Online workshop and an online survey to engage stakeholders and community unable to attend the 
regional workshops. 26 survey responses were provided.  
A summary of all engagement activities is provided in Appendix A - Regional Engagement Summary Report.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  4 
 
 The Eyre Peninsula Region 
The Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Plan Region encompasses the 11 Eyre Peninsula councils from 
Whyalla in the east, along the Gawler Ranges in the north, to Ceduna in the west. The region covers about 
44,290 square kilometres (Figure 1). The far west of South Australia (unincorporated areas beyond District 
Council of Ceduna) is covered by the Outback SA Regional Drought Resilience Plan and will not be included 
in this Plan.   
 
Figure 1 The Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan region  
 The Eyre Peninsula “system”  
The Eyre Peninsula is a complex system of connections and interactions between people, industries and the 
natural environment. These connections and interactions mean that when one feature is impacted, flow on 
effects will be experienced by other features in the system. Considering these connections and interactions is 
called ‘systems thinking’. Systems thinking helps to identify the factors that make the system resilient or 
vulnerable to change.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  5 
 
Key features of the Eyre Peninsula system include agriculture and water resources, as these have many 
connections with other valued features (Figure 2). Maintaining agriculture and its connections to other 
features is integral to the viability of the region, as is provision of secure water supplies. Without viable 
agriculture and water to support the population, community groups, social fabric, service provision and the 
regional economy will be at risk.  
Figure 2 Eyre Peninsula systems map 
 
 Population  
The Eyre Peninsula’s population is dispersed, with major population centres in Whyalla and Port Lincoln and 
many people living on farming properties. Key features of the region’s population include: 
• 
A stable total population with lower rates of growth projected than for the rest of South Australia.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  6 
 
• 
A larger proportion of children aged 0-14 years and adults aged 50-79 years. 
• 
A less culturally and linguistically diverse community. 
• 
A higher proportion of residents identifying as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. 
• 
A smaller proportion of the population with university qualifications and more households in middle 
income brackets. 
• 
Lower rates of unemployment. 
• 
Higher rates of volunteering. 
Key demographic statistics from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2021 Census and REMPLAN have 
been summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1 Key demographics for the Eyre Peninsula and SA (ABS 2021, REMPLAN Community 2011) 
 
Eyre Peninsula  
South Australia 
Resident population  
56,265 people 
1,781,516 people 
Population change 
Increasing population (1.1% 
increase from 2011 to 2021) 
Increasing population (11.3% 
increase from 2011 to 2021) 
Projected population (Plan 
SA, for Eyre Peninsula & 
South West and Whyalla 
regions) 
15.5% increase from 2021-2041 
(medium growth scenario) 
22.0% increase from 2021-2041 
(medium growth scenario) 
Median age 
43 years 
41 years 
Ages cohorts 
As compared to SA: 
Higher proportion of young 
people 0-14 years and people 
aged 50-79 years 
Lower proportion of people aged 
15-44 years 
N/A 
Aboriginal and Torres 
Islander peoples 
6.0% 
2.4% 
Households where a non-
English language is used 
4.6% 
19.0% 
Most common language 
other than English used at 
home 
Tagalog (0.4%) 
Mandarin (1.8% speak at home) 
Highest level of education  
   Bachelor degree level and 
above 
   Certificate III & IV Level 
   Year 12 
   Year 10  
 
8.8% 
 
17.7% 
31.2% 
15.6% 
 
22.7% 
 
17.6% 
15.2% 
9.4%

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  7 
 
 
Eyre Peninsula  
South Australia 
Labour force (includes 
employed and unemployed) 
26,169 people 
834,812 people 
Unemployment rate  
2.4% 
5.4% 
Population that needs 
assistance with core 
activities  
6.3% 
6.7% 
Volunteering rate 
18.0% 
14.1% 
Proportion of households 
earning less than $650 per 
week 
14.8% 
19.6% 
Proportion of households 
earning more than $3000 
per week 
13.2% 
17.7% 
SEIFA Index of Relative 
Socio-economic 
Disadvantage 
(The lower the number, the 
greater disadvantage) 
Lower Eyre: 1033 
Kimba: 1020 
Wudinna: 1009 
Streaky Bay: 1000 
Cleve: 989 
Elliston: 959 
Franklin Harbour: 959 
Port Lincoln: 948 
Tumby Bay: 994 
Ceduna: 943 
Whyalla: 883 
982 
2.2.1 Aboriginal people   
Aboriginal people have lived on the Eyre Peninsula for thousands of years. Aboriginal people have a strong 
connection to this Country, in particular the Barngala, Nauo, Wirangu, Kokatha and Mirning peoples, and 
there are many sites of cultural importance. The regional population has a higher proportion of Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander people when compared to South Australia as a whole. Larger Aboriginal 
populations are located in Ceduna, Port Lincoln and Whyalla.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  8 
 
 Economy 
The Eyre Peninsula generated $4.47 billion in gross regional product in 2022-23.  
Agriculture is the highest industry of employment outside the key population centres of Whyalla and Port 
Lincoln (Table 2).  
Manufacturing (dominated by primary metal and metal products) is the highest output generating industry 
sector, followed closely by agriculture and construction.  
DATA NOTE – All economic data has been soured from the RDA Eyre Peninsula Region’s economic profile 
from .id community. The area covered by this data includes all the council areas as well as the far west 
coast which includes Maralinga Tjarutja (AC) and Unincorporated SA (part). 
Table 2 Economic characteristics of the Eyre Peninsula region (Profile.id, 2023) 
Indicator 
Measure  
Top 3 industries of employment 
(Entire EP region)  
Health care & social assistance (14.1%) 
Agriculture, forestry & fishing (12.8%)  
Retail trade (9.9%)  
Top 3 industries of employment 
(EP region excluding Whyalla 
and Port Lincoln) 
Agriculture, forestry & fishing (28.0%) 
Health care & social assistance (12.4%) 
Education & training (9.3%) 
Total gross regional product 
(GRP) (2022/23) 
$4,468,000,000 
GRP per capita (2022/23 
$75,495 per capita 
GRP per worker (2022/23) 
$177.875,470 per worker 
Top 5 industries by value of 
economic output (2022/23) 
 
Industry 
Output 
($m) 
Manufacturing 
1613.7 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing 
1430 
Construction 
1376.4 
Mining 
920.9 
Health Care and Social Assistance 
409.2 
 Agriculture  
The Eyre Peninsula has a highly productive agriculture industry. The total value of agricultural output in 
2020/21 was $801 million, producing approximately 11% of South Australia’s total agricultural output in that 
year (Profile.id 2024; ABS 2021). Table 3 shows the value of key agricultural outputs and the proportion of 
the state’s agricultural output produced on Eyre Peninsula. Data has been used for 2020/21 to enable 
comparison with the whole state. 
In 2023/23 the total value of agricultural output on Eyre Peninsula was $1.04 billion.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  9 
 
Approximately 83% of the region’s land area is owned and farmed by private enterprises, including cropping, 
grazing and native vegetation. Dryland broadacre cropping of wheat, barley, oats, canola and pulses and 
livestock grazing predominantly sheep for meat and wool, are the most common agricultural land uses. 
Table 3 Value of agriculture production 2020/2021 (RDA EP Economic Profile 2023; ABS 2021) 
Outputs (product) 
Eyre Peninsula 
Value $m 
South Australia 
Value $m 
Percentage of EP 
vs SA 
Total cereal crops and other 
broadacre crops 
659.1 
2,520.9 
26% 
Wheat for grain  
396.3 
1,628.5 
24% 
Barley for grain 
114.4 
1,118.9 
10% 
Canola 
103.3 
251.3 
41% 
Lentils 
16.5 
251.7 
7% 
Lupins 
13.2 
31.2 
42% 
Oats for grain 
8.8 
48.4 
18% 
All other cereal crops for grain and 
broadacre crops 
6.6 
228.5 
3% 
Total livestock slaughtering 
71.4 
1,650.5 
4% 
Sheep and lambs 
67.2 
457.3 
15% 
Cattle and calves 
2.8 
273.6 
1% 
Pigs 
1.4 
325.4 
0% 
Crops for Hay 
14.6 
338.0 
4% 
Grapes (wine and table) 
 
3.8 
707.2 
1% 
Nurseries & cut flowers 
 
0.3 
77.2 
0% 
Vegetables 
0.1 
575.3 
0% 
Total agriculture 
$801.2 
$7,232.6 
11% 
2.4.1 Challenges to agriculture on the Eyre Peninsula 
Eyre Peninsula farmers are challenged by issues that are unique to their environments, as well as constraints 
that are experienced more broadly across the state. This includes poor quality soils (including soil 
acidification, calcareous soils with low phosphorus, sandy soils, dryland salinity, soil structure decline, wind 
erosion and water repellent soils), adverse weather conditions, pests, weeds and diseases, decreasing small 
town populations and fluctuating markets (SARDI, 2023). As a region whose agricultural products are 
primarily exported, the sector is exposed to international trade forces more than many other agricultural 
regions in Australia. 
Pests of particular concern include mice, snails, invertebrates, rabbits, foxes and dingoes. Overabundant 
native species including kangaroos and emus can also compete with stock for feed and water.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  10 
 
Adverse weather conditions can cause devastation to crops and livestock, including:  
• High rainfall can cause “wet droughts”, soil erosion, limit paddock access and encourage weed growth. 
Low rainfall or drought can affect seed germination and limit pasture growth and stock water availability. 
• Extreme heat impacts livestock condition, crop condition and growth and grain fill. 
• Frost at the wrong times can cause crop failure. 
• Wind can cause soil erosion and damage crops. 
However, Eyre Peninsula farmers are renowned for their innovation. Investment in research and 
development has led to significant advances in grain production, resulting in increased yield (SARDI 2023). 
The willingness of Eyre Peninsula farmers to adopt new technologies and make improvements based on 
research outcomes ensure their farms are on the cutting edge of productivity and profitability.  
2.4.2 Increasing costs of farming inputs 
Over the past few years, farmers on the Eyre Peninsula and across Australia have faced a significant 
increase in the cost of farming inputs, driven by global energy prices and geopolitical events. The war in 
Ukraine has notably exacerbated these costs, particularly for essential inputs like fertiliser, pesticide, seed 
and machinery. From February 2020 to July 2022, the average import price of Australian fertiliser surged by 
153%, largely due to high natural gas prices and export restrictions by Russia and China (Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024a).  
Diesel prices have also spiked, affecting the cost of operating machinery and transporting goods. These 
rising input costs have strained profit margins, with some crops becoming financially unviable to grow 
(Prendergast 2024). The increased costs are not only impacting profitability but also leading to higher 
grocery prices. For farmers in the Eyre Peninsula, who heavily rely on efficient and affordable inputs, these 
challenges are particularly critical. As global food prices fluctuate and seasonal conditions remain 
unpredictable, the financial strain on the agricultural sector is likely to persist, further highlighting the need 
for strategic planning and support to ensure long-term sustainability. 
2.4.3 Rural Landholder Benchmarking Report 2020 
In 2020, a partnership between AIREP, EPLB (formerly Eyre Peninsula Natural Resource Management 
Board), Southern Cross University, Charles Sturt University and the Soil Cooperative Research Centre 
undertook a benchmarking survey to understand the drivers of on-farm decision making on Eyre Peninsula 
as part of a national survey (Luke et al, 2020). Key findings of this survey relevant to drought resilience and 
farming are provided below: 
• The ‘ability to pass on a healthier and more sustainable farm for future generations’ was the most 
important value attached to the property for both full- and part-time farmers on the Eyre Peninsula. 
• ‘Looking after my family and their needs’ was the most important “held” value across all farmer types, 
followed by the environmental value of ‘preventing pollution and protecting natural resources’, though 
this ranked as even more important for hobby and non-farmers. 
• Water security ranked in the top three issues for all farmer types. 
• Despite the high levels of concern for water security, this was not necessarily linked to accelerated 
climate change, and did not seem to have a clear influence on action around climate change.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  11 
 
• All landholder types engaged with farming practices indicated a very high degree of openness toward 
new ideas about farming. 
• Less than 50% of farmers consider themselves to have a sufficient knowledge-level to act on a range of 
topics and practices, meaning there remains substantial opportunity to improve farmer knowledge on a 
range of topics. 
• 25% of full-time farmers indicated that they were not coping well with the associated stresses and 
challenges of managing their farm. 
 Natural environment 
The Eyre Peninsula is fringed by the Southern Ocean on the west coast, the Spencer Gulf on the east coast 
and the Gawler Ranges in the north. The topography of the Eyre Peninsula is varied and includes rolling hills 
and ranges, granite outcrops, shallow limestone plains, and extensive farmlands that support a variety of 
native plants and animals. The region is home to several national parks including the Lincoln National Park 
and Coffin Bay National Park which play an important role in conserving the region’s biodiversity. Key 
features and characteristics of the region’s natural environment are described in Table 4. 
Table 4 Key features and characteristic of the Eyre Peninsula’s natural environment 
Theme 
Key features and characteristics 
Protected areas 
 
Eyre Peninsula includes 3 National Parks, 3 Wilderness Protection Areas, 58 
Conservation Parks and 9 Conservation Reserves that cover approximately 12% of 
the Eyre Peninsula’s land area 
Species and 
communities with 
conservation 
status 
 
 
The Eyre and Far West National Parks District record: 
• 25 flora species and 72 fauna species with national conservation ratings under 
the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 
• 208 flora species and 166 fauna species with state conservation ratings under 
the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972 
At least 40 plant species endemic (occurs nowhere else) to Eyre Peninsula (Eyre 
Peninsula Landscape Board 2024c) 
Several endemic animal species including the Eyre Peninsula Southern Emu-wren; 
the Pearson Island Black-footed Rock-wallaby; the Sandhill Dunnart; and the Eyre 
Peninsula Dragon (Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024c) 
Four nationally threatened vegetation communities: The Southern Temperate 
Coastal Saltmarsh, Peppermint Box (Eucalyptus odorata) Grassy Woodland of SA, 
Drooping Sheoak (Allocasuarina verticillata) Grassy Woodland on Calcrete of the 
Eyre Yorke Block Bioregion and the Eyre Peninsula Blue Gum communities (Eyre 
Peninsula Landscape Board 2024c)

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  12 
 
Theme 
Key features and characteristics 
Pest species 
Priority pest animals include rabbits, foxes, dingos/wild dogs, feral cats, feral 
deer, and feral goats 
Priority pest plants include buffel grass, white weeping broom, African lovegrass, 
bridal veil, boneseed and many more 
2.5.1 Water resources 
There is a scarcity of drinkable water resources on the Eyre Peninsula. The region has no major surface 
water supplies. Groundwater is the main source of water for public water supply, irrigation, stock and 
domestic use. Dwindling groundwater supplies mean that securing an alternative water source for the Eyre 
Peninsula is a priority in the short term.  
Table 5 Key characteristics of Eyre Peninsula’s water resources 
Feature 
Characteristics  
Groundwater 
 
The Water Allocation Plan for Southern Basins and Musgrave Prescribed Wells Areas 
controls the taking and use of most of the fresh groundwater in the region (Eyre Peninsula 
Natural Resources Management Board 2016).  
Three-quarters of the region’s drinking supply comes from the Uley South Basin in the 
Southern Basins Prescribed Wells Area (SA Water 2024b). Expert modelling says water is 
being drawn from this Basin at unsustainable rates, with recorded water levels ‘below’ or 
‘very much below average’ in almost half of its wells during the past 12 months. This was 
despite rainfall in 2021 and 2022 being well above average (Eyre Peninsula Landscape 
Board 2024d). The Department for Environment and Water has modelled that 
underground water resources in the southern basins will no longer be able to sustainably 
meet the demands for water supply on Eyre Peninsula in the short term.   
The Water Allocation Plan is currently under revision as a result, with the new plan to 
significantly reduce SA Water’s pumping allowance from the Southern Basins (Eyre 
Peninsula Landscape Board 2024d). 
Desalination 
plant 
 
To address water security concerns on the Eyre Peninsula driven by the reduction in 
groundwater resources, SA Water are currently planning to develop a 5.3 gigalitre per 
annum reverse osmosis desalination plant at Billy Lights Point in Port Lincoln, to be 
operational by mid-2026. Construction is proposed to commence in 2024. 
Surface water 
Surface water features on the Eyre Peninsula include watercourses, lakes, dams, 
wetlands, springs and soaks (Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024b).

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  13 
 
Feature 
Characteristics  
 
Most watercourses are ephemeral, experiencing peak flows during winter, and often 
ceasing to flow by late spring or early summer (Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021a). 
Water 
storages 
The Tod Reservoir is the only major surface water storage on Eyre Peninsula. Due to 
deteriorating water quality, this resource has not been used as a water supply since early 
2002 and is held as an emergency supply of water only (Green et al. 2012). 
Saline water  
 
There is a prevalence of saline water resources including large saline wetland complexes, 
brackish creeks and saline aquifers on the Eyre Peninsula (Eyre Peninsula Landscape 
Board 2021a). 
Groundwater 
Groundwater is used extensively on the Eyre Peninsula with the largest potable groundwater supplies 
coming from shallow freshwater zones of Quaternary Limestone aquifers in the Southern Basins Prescribed 
Wells Area (PWA) and Musgrave PWA further west (Figure 3). The taking of groundwater is regulated 
through a water allocation plan for both PWAs. There was around 69 ML of groundwater taken from the 
Musgrave PWA in 2020-21 (DEW, 2022) and 5,449 ML from the Southern Basins with most of that coming 
from Uley South water source (supplying 75% of water used across Eyre Peninsula). 
Figure 3 Prescribed wells areas on the Eyre Peninsula

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  14 
 
2.5.2 Soils 
The Eyre Peninsula region has 15 main soil groups ranging from calcareous soils, hard red-brown soils over 
alkaline sub soils, deep loamy textured soils, and deep sands to ironstone soils. Land management risks 
differ across the region and include soil acidification, low nutrition, dryland salinity, soil structure decline, 
wind erosion and water repellent soils (Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021b). These soil characteristics 
pose limitations to the agricultural system, and farmers implement a range of practises to maintain healthy 
soil management to increase their agricultural productivity and general health of their land.   
 Climate 
2.6.1 Rainfall 
The Eyre Peninsula experiences a Mediterranean climate characterised by warm, dry summers and mild, wet 
winters. The southern areas have a milder, wetter climate compared with the warmer and drier north and 
northwest parts of the region.  
Average monthly rainfall 1964 to 2023 for five locations across the Eyre Peninsula is show in Figure 4. While 
November to March rainfall is similar at all locations, winter rainfall is significantly higher in the southern 
locations of Port Lincoln and Cummins. 
Figure 4 Average monthly rainfall 1964 to 2023 in towns across the Eyre Peninsula (My Climate View 
2024) 
 
 
Rainfall has been decreasing in recent decades. Data from myclimateview.com.au shown in Table 6 shows 
rainfall has reduced from the period 1964-1983 to 1984-2023. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Rainfall (millimetres)
Ceduna
Cowell
Cummins
Minnipa
Port Lincoln

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  15 
 
Table 6 Average annual rainfall change 1964 to 2023 (myclimateview.com.au) 
Location 
Average annual 
rainfall (1964 to 
1993) 
Average annual 
rainfall (1994 – 
2023) 
Change 
Ceduna 
298mm 
268mm 
-10% 
Cowell 
297mm 
259mm 
-13% 
Cummins 
451mm 
429mm 
-5% 
Minnipa 
346mm 
311mm 
-10% 
Port Lincoln 
530mm 
481mm 
-9% 
 
Rainfall reliability maps for the past 30 years (Figure 5) show winter rainfall has been moderately reliable 
across the region (blue areas), with usually only about 40 mm difference from one year to the next (Bureau 
of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). This contrasts with spring and autumn rainfall, which has been less reliable 
(beige and light red areas). Summer rainfall has been unreliable across the region (red areas), and although 
there have been some wet summers in the past 30 years, summer rainfall has not been reliable from year to 
year. 
Figure 5 Rainfall reliability (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019) 
 
2.6.2 Impact of rainfall on agricultural yield 
Using data reported in PIRSA crop and pasture reports, growing season rainfall and wheat yield for three 
reporting regions since 2000 have been analysed. Figure 6, Figure 7 and Figure 8 show that yields follow 
rainfall trends in most years, for example lower growing season rainfall in 2007 - 2009 saw lower yields. 
There have been some years when high yields occurred when rainfall was lower (2017) and other years 
when high rainfall did not see higher yields (2000 and 2003).

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  16 
 
Figure 6 Southern Eyre Peninsula wheat yield vs rainfall (Cummins) 2000 – 2023 (PIRSA 2024a; My 
Climate View 2024) 
 
 
Figure 7 Eastern Eyre Peninsula wheat yield vs rainfall (Cleve) 2000 – 2023 (PIRSA 2024a; My Climate 
View 2024) 
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Yield (t/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Wheat yield
Growing season rainfall
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Yield (t/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Wheat yield
Growing season rainfall

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  17 
 
Figure 8 Western Eyre Peninsula wheat yield vs rainfall (Minnipa) 2000 – 2023 (Source: PIRSA 2024a; My 
Climate View 2024) 
 
2.6.3 Temperature  
The Eyre Peninsula experiences average annual maximum temperatures of 18 to 27 °C and average summer 
maximum temperatures of 21 to 33°C (Bureau of Meteorology 2022). 
The Eyre Peninsula has experienced more hot days in the past 30 years. Figure 9 shows the annual number 
of days above 38 °C (red bars) with a 10-year running average (solid red line) for Ceduna (Bureau of 
Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). Ceduna experienced an average of 16 days per year above 38 °C between 
1989–2018, compared to an average of nine days per year above 38 °C between 1959–1988. 
Figure 9 Number of days per year over 38oC (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019) 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
Yield (tonnes/ha)
Growing season rainfall (mm)
Wheat yield
Growing season rainfall

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  18 
 
2.6.4 Evapotranspiration  
Evapotranspiration is a collective term for the transfer of water, as water vapour, to the atmosphere from 
both vegetated and un-vegetated land surfaces. It is affected by climate, availability of water and 
vegetation.  
Point potential evapotranspiration in the region is between 1.4 meters in the south and 2 meters in the north 
(refer Figure 10) (BOM 2005). 
Figure 10 Average point potential evapotranspiration 1961 to 1990 (total annual) (Bureau of Meteorology, 
2005) 
 
 
2.6.5 Wind 
The Eyre Peninsula is characterised by strong and persistent winds, which significantly influence the region's 
climate and environmental conditions. These winds predominantly blow from the west and southwest, 
bringing with them moisture from the Southern Ocean. Their strength and frequency can lead to several 
challenges for the region. 
One of the primary impacts of strong winds is the increased rate of evaporation, which exacerbates the 
already dry conditions of the semi-arid climate. This accelerated loss of moisture from the soil can intensify 
drought conditions, making it more difficult for crops and vegetation to grow. 
Wind erosion is a significant concern on the Eyre Peninsula. Powerful winds can lift and transport topsoil, 
leading to soil degradation and loss of fertility. This process not only diminishes the land's agricultural

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  19 
 
productivity but also contributes to the dust storms that can affect air quality and visibility (Eyre Peninsula 
Landscape Board 2024e). When vegetation cover is low due to drought conditions, wind erosion impacts are 
exacerbated. Loss of topsoil is an impact that can take many years to recover from.  
2.6.6 Frost 
The Eyre Peninsula experiences a relatively low number of frost days. Figure 11 shows that the number of 
frost days on average ranges from 0-10 days along the more coastal regions, to 10-20 days in the central 
Eyre Peninsula (Bureau of Meteorology 2024a). Frost can have devastating impacts on crop yield.   
Frosts have tended to occur through dry winter and spring periods, when soil moisture is low and cloud 
cover infrequent. In an average year at Kyancutta, there are eight more potential frost nights during a dry 
winter and spring than during a wetter one (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). 
Figure 11 Potential frost days (BoM, 2006) 
 
Figure 12 shows the number of potential frosts has decreased at Ceduna and Kyancutta between 1989–2018 
(orange bars) compared with 1959–1988 (blue bars) (Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019). Although 
projections suggest frost risk will continue to decline, in southern regions of Australia, despite global 
warming, the number of spring frosts has increased and the period of frost occurrence has changed (Crimp 
et al, 2016).

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  20 
 
Figure 12 Frost potential at Ceduna and Kyancutta (BOM, 2019) 
 
 
 Assets and infrastructure  
The Eyre Peninsula relies on infrastructure that supports individuals, communities and industries. RDA Eyre 
Peninsula reports that the limited capacity, condition and age of the region’s infrastructure is a major issue 
and substantial upgrades are required to facilitate future development. The region is reliant on limited 
climate dependant water supplies including from outside the region (River Murray water). 
Promoting strategic infrastructure investment is a key goal of the Eyre Peninsula’s Strategic Regional Plan 
(RDA EP et al. 2022) including in transport (roads/ports/rail), power supply, water security and 
telecommunications connectivity.  
Critical infrastructure assets on the Eyre Peninsula are described in Table 7.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  21 
 
Table 7 Key infrastructure assets (RDA EP, 2024) 
Infrastructure  
Description  
Water 
 
Approximately 75% of total Eyre Peninsula water supply is sourced from the Uley 
South Basin (Southern Basins Prescribed Wells Area) with about 24% from the 
River Murray at Morgan via the Morgan-Whyalla pipeline. 
Groundwater levels in the Uley South Basin have been declining and the EP 
Landscape Board have identified that water allocations are likely to be significantly 
reduced (EPLB 2024d).   
Increasing concerns about water security on the Eyre Peninsula have led SA Water 
to propose the construction of a desalination plant at Billy Lights Point (SA Water 
2024a). 
The proposed Northern Water project will involve the construction of another 
desalination plant in the Spencer Gulf which will be piped along the east coast of 
the Eyre Peninsula as well as to the north of the state (Government of South 
Australia 2023). 
Ports  
 
Major ports are located at Ceduna (Thevandard), Port Lincoln, Whyalla and Lucky 
Bay and facilitate the export of iron ore, grain and mineral products. Port facilities 
also support fishing and aquaculture. Ports are currently for bulk-export only.  
Additional deep-sea ports have been proposed for Port Spencer and Cape Hardy. 
Rail transport 
 
The narrow-gauge railway network was closed in 2019 resulting in the subsequent 
growth in grain cartage by road. A number of developments in planning and 
approval phases have identified opportunities to develop standard gauge heavy rail 
to support transport of iron ore or grain. 
Road transport 
 
State maintained roads that provide key freight routes include The Eyre Highway 
(Port Augusta west to the border), Lincoln Highway (along the east coast to Port 
Lincoln), Flinders Highway (Port Lincoln to Ceduna) and the central Tod and 
Birdseye Highways. 
There is an extensive network of sealed and unsealed roads that connect towns 
and highways, most of which are the responsibility of the relevant local 
governments.  
Air transport 
 
Commercial domestic airports are located at Whyalla, Port Lincoln and Ceduna. 
Smaller aerodromes and landing strips are located throughout the region and are 
used for private flying, charter, firefighting operations and Royal Flying Doctor 
Service aircraft.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  22 
 
Infrastructure  
Description  
Tele-
communications 
 
Telecommunications are being improved across the Eyre Peninsula however there 
continue to be areas with no or limited connectivity. The closure of the Telstra 3G 
network on 31 August 2024 may lead to some users being unable to access the 
mobile network if their devices are older and unable to connect to newer networks. 
Starlink (satellite) infrastructure for high-speed Wi-Fi is increasingly being accessed 
by remote properties.  
Health services  
 
Major hospitals are located in Whyalla, Port Lincoln and Ceduna with smaller 
hospitals in eight locations across the region.  
Community health centres are provided in a number of larger centres and 
dedicated Aboriginal health centres are located in Port Lincoln, Ceduna and 
Whyalla. 
The Royal Flying Doctors Service provides patient retrieval services across the 
region.  
Education 
 
37 government and five private schools are located in the region. 
The University of South Australia has a campus at Whyalla and study centres at 
Port Lincoln and Ceduna. 
There are several TAFE campuses located at Port Lincoln, Whyalla, Ceduna, and 
Wudinna. Training is also offered at various local venues like libraries, council 
chambers, restaurants, and sports clubs (TAFE SA n.d.).  
Port Lincoln is the only campus in the region that offers specialised agricultural 
programs, including agriculture, rural operations, agribusiness, aquaculture, and 
horticulture.  
Additionally, online courses are available including certifications in agribusiness and 
pest management.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  23 
 
 Governance 
There are a range of organisations with responsibilities that include aspects that do or could contribute to 
drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula. These organisations are described in Table 8. 
Table 8 Roles and responsibilities of regional organisations 
Organisation 
Roles and responsibilities 
RDA Eyre Peninsula 
(Regional 
Development 
Australia Eyre 
Peninsula 2023) 
General role – 
• 
Encourage partnership between all levels of government and industry to 
enhance the growth and development of Australia’s regional 
communities. 
• 
Develop and review the region’s Strategic Plan. 
• 
Facilitate sustainable industry growth and diversification. 
• 
Support regional procurement and job creation. 
• 
Encourage regional tourism initiatives to grow the visitor economy. 
• 
Advocate for the provision of economic enabling infrastructure. 
• 
Assist with regional workforce attraction, retention, and development. 
• 
Promote greater regional awareness of and engagement with 
government policies, grants, and programs. 
• 
Improve regional policy making by providing intelligence and evidence-
based advice to governments on regional development issues. 
Drought related –  
• 
Facilitate sustainable agricultural practices to ensure productive 
landscapes. 
• 
Secure scalable sources of non-climate dependent water to support 
population and industry growth. 
Eyre Peninsula 
Landscape Board 
(Eyre Peninsula 
Landscape Board 
2024a; Eyre 
Peninsula 
Landscape Board 
2024f) 
 
General –  
• 
Work with community, industry, and other government agencies to 
sustainably manage the region's natural resources, with a focus on soil, 
water management, biodiversity, and pest plant and animal control. 
• 
Develop simple and accessible five-year regional landscape plans based 
on community and stakeholder input. 
• 
Develop water allocation plans for prescribed water resources. 
• 
Operate as the relevant authority for a range of water, land protection 
and animal and plant control activities.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  24 
 
Organisation 
Roles and responsibilities 
Drought – 
• 
Support landholders to reduce the risk of land degradation to protect the 
region’s valuable soils. 
• 
Provide grants and funding for environmental and agricultural projects 
(e.g., Sustainable Agriculture Facilitator, Agricultural Projects and 
grassroots grants). 
• 
Provide information on water use efficiency and managing water affecting 
activities.  
• 
Support landholders to control prioritised pest plants and animals, as well 
as reduce threats from impact-causing native species.  
PIRSA 
(PIRSA 2023; 
PIRSA 2024b) 
SARDI Minnipa 
Agricultural Centre 
(MAC) 
 
General – 
• 
Maintain the prosperity and support the development and sustainability of 
the state's primary industries and regions. 
Drought – 
• 
Collaborate across government and industry to help the state adapt, 
prepare, and respond to climate change – including drought. 
• 
Provide technical and financial assistance to farmers and agribusinesses. 
• 
Promote carbon farming/sequestration. 
• 
Provide information on how to manage drought. 
• 
Coordinate the Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program and Farm 
Business Resilience Program funded through the Australian Government’s 
Future Drought Fund. 
• 
Promote research and innovation to enhance industry productivity and 
sustainability (SARDI MAC) including in response to drought.  
SA Drought Hub 
(SA Drought Hub 
2024) 
 
General – 
• 
Serve as a central resource for drought-related information and support 
services. 
• 
Coordinate research and innovation efforts to improve drought resilience. 
Drought – 
• 
Support a wide range of projects with the objective of enhancing drought 
resilience and recovery across all farming sectors, along with the 
industries and communities they support. 
• 
Facilitate access to drought-related research, tools, and technologies. 
• 
Disseminate up-to-date information and resources. 
AIR EP 
(AIR EP 2024; AIR 
EP n.d.) 
General – 
• 
Deliver quality applied research for the benefit of farmers on the Eyre 
Peninsula. 
• 
Develop relationships and partnerships in collaboration with government 
and the private sector.

Key Insights Paper | The Eyre Peninsula Region  |  25 
 
Organisation 
Roles and responsibilities 
Drought –  
• 
Support diverse projects aimed at enhancing drought resilience and 
recovery. 
• 
Build resilience and capacity of the agricultural sector through education, 
training, and extension. 
EP LGA 
(Eyre Peninsula 
LGA 2024) 
General – 
• 
Act as a platform for Member Councils keen to advocate on legislation 
and policy changes. 
• 
Assist in coordinating a range of activities seeking efficiencies for Councils 
at the operational level. 
Drought – 
• 
Support other organisations and efforts in building drought resilience. 
Councils 
General – 
• 
Provide local governance and deliver essential services to communities. 
• 
Manage local infrastructure, planning, and development projects. 
• 
Support community well-being through health, recreation, and cultural 
programs. 
Drought – 
• 
Support the integration of drought resilience into local planning and 
policy frameworks.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  26 
 
  Drought  
  A definition of drought 
Because people use and view water in so many different ways, there is no universally agreed definition of 
drought. It is measured in different ways and at different timescales, for example (Kirono et al, 2020):  
• Meteorological drought – below normal rainfall. 
• Agricultural or soil moisture drought – below-normal water storage in the saturated soil zone. 
• Hydrological drought – below-normal water availability in streams, lakes and/or groundwater. 
• Socioeconomic drought – when water needs cannot be met.  
This lack of a clear definition can present a barrier to effective drought planning (Hughes et al. 2022). 
Governments often select meteorological indicators (such as rainfall and temperature) to serve as drought 
policy triggers due to their objectivity and transparency. However, this fails to capture the socio-economic 
outcomes of drought, which can lead to some non-drought affected areas receiving assistance and vice 
versa. 
The Bureau of Meteorology defines drought as a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use (Bureau of Meteorology, 2024). 
Drought is not simply low rainfall. Rather, drought is a comparatively dry period compared to normal 
conditions. It also considers the ability of those affected to cope with drier than usual conditions.  
For the purpose of the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan, drought is defined as:  
A period of abnormally dry conditions that impacts negatively on water availability and 
agricultural production in a region and, consequently, impacts negatively on the economy 
and environment of the region and the health and w ellbeing of its residents. 
3.1.1 The National Drought Agreement 
Many primary producers and other stakeholders associate drought being when a drought is officially 
‘declared’ by the government. 
It is important to note that the Government of South Australian no longer makes any declaration of drought, 
consistent with the National Drought Agreement.  
In December 2018, the Council of Australian Governments agreed and signed a National Drought Agreement 
that sets out a joint approach to drought preparedness, responses and recovery (Council of Australian 
Governments 2018). One of the principles underpinning this agreement was that ‘there should no longer be 
Exceptional Circumstances declarations and associated lines on maps’. This means that all government 
agreed that drought declarations would no longer be made as a trigger for support becoming available. 
A review of the 2018 NDA was published in 2022, including recommendations to strengthen the Agreement 
to ensure that farm businesses, farming families and farming communities across the country are 
appropriately supported in advance of, during, and post drought events. Recommendation 25 describes 
proposed updated principles for the next iteration of the Agreement, including that ‘support needs are highly

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  27 
 
variable, and eligibility should be based on need, not activated by drought declarations (Drought Agreement 
2022). 
The development of this Plan is consistent with the Agreement’s objectives to prioritise objectives and 
outcomes that enhance long-term preparedness, sustainability, resilience and risk management for farming 
businesses and farming communities in Australia. A key feature of the agreement is a greater focus on 
enhancing drought resilience before drought, to enable farms, people, businesses and the environment to 
minimise the impact of drought rather than waiting until drought hits to act.   
  Causes of drought  
Drought on the Eyre Peninsula is caused by a number of natural atmospheric conditions including the 
Positive Indian Ocean Dipole, El Niño-Southern Oscillation and Southern Annular Mode. Anthropogenic 
climate change is also projected to impact on drought conditions. The following descriptions have been 
adapted from the Bureau of Meteorology website. 
3.2.1 El Niño  
The El Niño and La Niña are part of one of the strongest climate drivers for the Eyre Peninsula (Bureau of 
Meteorology 2021b). They are a part of a natural cycle known as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
and are associated with many months of warming (El Niño) or cooling (La Niña) in the central and eastern 
tropical Pacific. The ENSO cycle loosely operates over timescales from one to eight years. 
El Niño typically results in: 
• Reduced rainfall across most of the region (refer Figure 13) 
• Warmer temperatures 
• Shift in temperature extremes 
• Increased frost risk 
• Reduced tropical cyclone numbers 
• Later monsoon onset 
• Increased fire danger in southeast Australia. 
An El Niño occurs when sea surface temperatures in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean become 
substantially warmer than average, which causes a shift in atmospheric circulation. Typically, the equatorial 
trade winds blow from east to west across the Pacific Ocean. El Niño events are associated with a 
weakening, or even reversal, of the prevailing trade winds. 
The shift in rainfall away from the western Pacific, associated with El Niño, means that Australian rainfall 
is usually reduced through winter–spring, particularly across the eastern and northern parts of the continent. 
Although most major Australian droughts have been associated with El Niño, analysis of past El Niño events 
shows that widespread drought does not occur with every event, and the strength of an El Niño is not 
directly proportional to the rainfall impacts.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  28 
 
Figure 13 Winter-spring mean rainfall deciles during El Niño years (Bureau of Meteorology, 2021a) 
 
 
3.2.2 Positive Indian Ocean Dipole 
The Indian Ocean Dipole is another major influencer of drought conditions on the Eyre Peninsula. The Indian 
Ocean Dipole refers to sustained changes in the difference between sea surface temperatures of the tropical 
western and eastern Indian Ocean (Bureau of Meteorology 2021a). The Indian Ocean Dipole has three 
phases: neutral, positive, and negative. 
During the positive Indian Ocean Dipole phase, westerly winds weaken along the equator allowing warm 
water to shift towards Africa. Changes in the winds also allow cool water to rise up from the deep ocean in 
the east. This sets up a temperature difference across the tropical Indian Ocean with cooler than normal 
water in the east and warmer than normal water in the west. Generally, this means there is less moisture 
than normal in the atmosphere to the northwest of Australia. This changes the path of weather systems 
coming from Australia's west, often resulting in less rainfall and higher than normal temperatures over parts 
of Australia during winter and spring. 
A positive Indian Ocean Dipole typically means: 
• 
Less rainfall across most of the region (see Figure 14) 
• 
Higher than normal temperatures during winter and spring.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  29 
 
Figure 14 Winter-spring mean rainfall deciles during positive Indian Ocean Dipole years (Bureau of 
Meteorology, 2021a) 
 
3.2.3 Southern Annular Mode 
The Southern Annular Mode, or SAM, is another climate driver that can influence rainfall and temperature in 
southern Australia (Bureau of Meteorology 2024b). The SAM refers to the north/south movement of the 
strong westerly winds that blow almost continuously in the mid- to high-latitudes of the southern hemisphere. 
This belt of westerly winds is also associated with storms and cold fronts that move from west to east, 
bringing rainfall to southern Australia. 
The SAM phase that influences rainfall on the Eyre Peninsula is the SAM summer negative phase which, 
when active, decreases chance of summer rain in the region (see Figure 15). This occurs when there is an 
increased dry air flow from the interior of Australia during summer. Positive or negative phases can last from 
a week to several months.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  30 
 
Figure 15 Negative summer phase of Southern Annual Mode (SAM) (Bureau of Meteorology, 2024b) 
 
 Previous droughts 
Before European colonisation, Aboriginal people across the Eyre Peninsula would have experienced 
numerous drought periods. Since then, the region has experienced a number of significant droughts 
including (Bureau of Meteorology 2020): 
• The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902 
• The 1914 to 1915 drought  
• The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945 
• The 1965 to 1968 drought  
• The 1982 to 1983 drought 
• The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009 
• The 2017 to 2019 drought (the Tinderbox drought)

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  31 
 
3.3.1 Impacts of droughts 
The impacts of drought on the Eyre Peninsula are profound. The literature and stakeholders have identified 
the following key impacts (Lehmann 2023; Fleming-Muñoz, Whitten & Bonnett 2023; Appendix A – Regional 
Engagement Summary Report). 
Social impacts 
• Reduced mental health and wellbeing: 
‒ Increased hard and emotional decision making, with significant associated stakes. 
‒ Social isolation and a lack of desire to engage in social activities. 
‒ Increased feelings of stress, panic, anxiety, depression, loss of purpose and hope.  
‒ Personal pride impact and feelings of shame. 
‒ Change in amount of time working – increased workload for some and less workload and more 
time to worry for others.  
‒ When farmers are forced to shoot and bury their stock because it is too costly to send them to 
market, this takes a major mental toll.  
‒ Loss of crops, stock, trees, native fauna and greenery has a significant mental wellbeing impact. 
‒ Increased substance abuse. 
‒ These mental health and wellbeing impacts can lead to suicide in extreme cases. 
‒ Impacts on wellbeing are felt across the community – no one is spared during a long drought. 
“There’s a slow, grinding, wears-you-down effect, mentally, financially and physically.” 
• Stress and wellbeing impacts for family and friends: 
‒ Stress and mental health impacts can lead to relationship breakdowns, divorce and domestic 
violence.  
‒ Impact on children as they observe their parent’s stress, miss out on sport, school camps, 
boarding school, university etc. due to a lack of money. 
‒ Withdrawal from friends and taking out personal stress on others. 
‒ Poor mindsets ripple into the community more broadly – “loss of community morale”.  
• Population shrinkage as people move away for job opportunities elsewhere:  
‒ Some farms are forced to sell up, with farmers and their families leaving the region. These are 
usually bought by neighbours, resulting in bigger farms with less people to contribute to 
community life in the long-term.  
‒ Some businesses are forced to sell up as less money is spent in the region, with business owners 
and their families moving elsewhere to find work.  
‒ Farms and businesses lay off workers who are forced to leave the region to find work elsewhere.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  32 
 
‒ Young people move elsewhere for better work and lifestyle opportunities, and may be less 
inclined to come back due to their experience of drought. 
‒ This decrease in population has many flow-on effects including reduced social fabric and 
township vibrancy, less volunteers, less local business and services including people with 
specialist technical skills, less school enrolments which result in quality of school facilities 
reducing, and fewer members in sporting clubs. This is very hard to rebuild following drought.  
‒ “When we moved here 30 years ago, there were 16 other farms and farming families. Today, 
there are two other farms, and they’re both managed remotely / absentee owners.” 
• Loss of income, and therefore less money to spend on things that provide fulfilment, medical treatment, 
or sponsorship of volunteer organisations and clubs. 
While minimal in comparison to the negative social impacts of drought, participants identified that drought 
can occasionally cause positive social impacts:  
• Community closeness – community initiatives proliferate to bring people together, sporting clubs become 
a more important lifeline than ever, families and friends support becomes vital, innovation from 
passionate people creates a sense of town pride.  
• Increased time – those who have less workload due to less economic activity have more time for family, 
recreation, volunteering and education (if funds and mental wellbeing allow). 
• Increased awareness of drought and how to respond – those who have experienced a drought reflected 
that this experience helps them during the next droughts – “what doesn’t kill you makes your stronger”.  
Financial and business impacts  
The immediate major impact of drought is on crop yields and pasture production, resulting in a decline in 
profit with many businesses incurring significant financial losses and erosion of financial reserves and assets 
(Pearson and Foster 2008). 
• Financial hardship on farms:  
‒ Farm productivity suffers, resulting in reduced cash flow particularly in subsequent years of 
drought. This makes it hard for farming families to continue to make ends meet. 
‒ High input costs remain, placing farmers in greater and greater debt.  
‒ Destocking at low prices, followed by restocking at high prices. Some farmers are forced to shoot 
their own stock when it is more costly to send them to market. 
‒ Prices for freight and grain for seeding and feed increase due to undersupply and high demand. 
Sometimes Eyre Peninsula farmers are not able to access feed due to lack of supply or extremely 
high price.  
‒ Some farms are forced to sell.  
‒ Workers are laid off.  
‒ Loss of income restricts capital improvement and the ability to invest in or adopt the best farming 
practices., creating a negative spiral.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  33 
 
‒ Young farmers who have had a drought in their first year are particularly affected, with a major 
impact on their finances and willingness to stay in the industry.  
‒ If they are not making a profit, farmers are not able to get tax deductions on Super 
contributions, impacting on their ability to retire.  
“I’ve stitched old sheets together and prayed for new shoes for my kids in drought years”. 
• Financial hardship for other businesses/industries: 
‒ Farmers “tighten their belts” and stop spending as much in communities, which reduces income 
for other businesses, particularly agricultural allied industries and businesses that supply ‘luxury’ 
goods and services such as hairdressers, cafes, car dealerships etc.  
‒ Some businesses are forced to sell.  
‒ Workers are laid off.  
‒ Lack of water for industries such as mining, fish production etc. with subsequent impact on jobs 
and the economy. 
‒ Less ability to pay rates which impacts Councils’ ability to continue to provide services and 
infrastructure. 
• Agricultural plan derailment: 
‒ Otherwise well strategically planned farming operations have to “thrown out’’ their plans.  
‒ Succession plans get tested as it becomes more appealing to sell to corporates / large farms than 
to children. 
‒ Off-farm income needs pursuing (which hurts the farm). 
‒ Farmers become more risk averse in following years.  
• Changed farming practises: 
‒ Destocking. 
‒ Planting of different crops which are less reliant on rainfall. 
‒ Crops not planted particularly in marginal country, or only half of the land planted as a risk 
management strategy. 
• Loss of workers:  
‒ Loss of farm workers, other skilled workers and young people which are difficult to get back after 
drought. 
While the negative impacts on businesses and finances are profound, some participants identified that as a 
result of drought they and their business became much better at forward planning and risk management and 
would better understand what actions to take during the next drought.  
Environmental impacts 
• Soil erosion:

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  34 
 
‒ Loss of soil due to lack of vegetation and dry conditions exacerbating wind and water erosion. 
Soil impacts increase in subsequent years of drought and can take many years to recover.  
‒ Dust and dust storms. 
• Reduction in water availability:  
‒ Rainwater tanks and other surface water catchments run dry. 
‒ Increased groundwater use leads to a reduction in aquifer levels. 
‒ Lack of rainwater recharge to aquifers.  
‒ Water restrictions. 
‒ Some properties are forced to truck in water for stock and personal use in if they are not 
connected to mains water.  
‒ Pest and native animals compete with stock for water.  
• Reduced crop yield.  
• Heat and water stress in livestock, and less stock feed available.  
• Loss of native vegetation: 
‒ Loss of native vegetation due to lack of water. 
‒ Overgrazing by stock and native animals (primary producers occasionally release their livestock 
into native vegetation when there is not enough feed on farms to sustain them, although this has 
become less prevalent over time).  
‒ Subsequent impact on amenity, tourism, habitat availability and soil condition.  
• Pressure from pest plants and animals: 
‒ Pest plant and animal abundance increases in good years, meaning that in the bad years that 
follow pests have a bigger impact. 
‒ Fox baiting reduces as there are less sheep on farms, which means fox numbers increase. 
‒ Goats and deer migrate from the north in search for water and vegetation. 
• Impact on native animals: 
‒ Native wildlife dies due to a lack of vegetation and water.  
‒ Kangaroos, emus (from conservation areas) and dingoes migrate from the north in search of 
water and vegetation. 
• Increased bushfire risk. 
• Loss of gardens and green space.  
• Bringing in feed for stock from other districts can introduce new weeds. 
• Illegal dumping increases as people cannot afford to pay dumping fees.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  35 
 
Service and infrastructure impacts  
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on infrastructure:  
•  Loss of local services as businesses are forced to close. 
• SA Water mains restrictions. 
• Soil erosion causes soil to accumulate on roads, causing driving hazards and in some cases cutting 
properties off until roads can be cleared.  
• Lack of water for personal use such as showers and home gardens.  
 
 Future climate and drought projections 
Climate projections describe what the future climate could be like, sourced from multiple climate models, 
and based on numerous assumptions about the factors that influence climate and the trajectory of change in 
greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere. 
The CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology have used up to 40 global climate models to develop projections for 
different parts of Australia. Each model uses different assumptions and algorithms to project how climate 
variables such as temperature, rainfall and evapotranspiration will respond in different emissions scenarios 
over different time frames. The projections presented in online tools and viewers each use a different 
combination of global climate models and so show slightly different results. Three of the projections tools 
most commonly used in South Australia are described in the following sections: 
1. My Climate View (national focus) 
2. Climate Change in Australia (national focus) 
3. DEW South Australian Climate Projections Viewer (SA focus). 
Analysis of multiple global climate model simulations of rainfall and soil moisture for the historical (1900–
2005) and future (2006–2100) climates undertaken by Kirono et al (2020) indicated that under climate 
change, Australia will spend more time under drought conditions, with longer drought duration and more 
intense drought, particularly across southern and eastern Australia. Kirono et al defined drought as when the 
Standardised Precipitation Index (SPI) and Standardised Soil Moisture Index (SSM) were negative for a 
period of 3 months or more, and reached a value of -1.0 to define drought and -2.0 to define extreme 
drought. Drought intensity is defined by the cumulative SPI or SSMI from all events, with the more negative 
the value, the more intense the event.  
Figure 16 shows the percentage of models showing a projected increase in percentage of time spent in 
drought and extreme drought, and the intensity of drought and extreme drought in the 21st century (2006–
2100) under a high emissions scenario (Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5 (RCP8.5)), relative to the 
20th century (1900–2005).  
Model results in southern Australia showed lower levels of uncertainty than the rest of Australia with high 
model agreement on the increase in time spent in drought.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  36 
 
Figure 16 Increase in percentage of time spent in drought and intensity of drought (from Kirono et al., 
2020). 
 
 
3.4.1 My Climate View (myclimateview.com.au) 
My Climate View is a collaboration between Australia's national science agency CSIRO and the Bureau of 
Meteorology and has been designed together with Australian farmers as part of the Climate Services for 
Agriculture program with funding from the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund. Climate trends for 
specific commodities at a local scale are presented to support decision making. 
My Climate View presents projected future rainfall, temperature, and relative humidity data from Climate 
Change in Australia (see following section), using its Application-Ready dataset. It also presents seasonal 
forecast data from the Bureau of Meteorology.  
My Climate View allows users to select a location and if desired, a commodity (for example wheat or sheep). 
Projections include key commodity climate factors, for example for wheat it will include growing season 
rainfall, frost at flowering and heat damage at flowering and grain fill. For sheep it will include winter rainfall 
for pasture growth and cold exposure at lambing. A default growing season is defined for each location but 
can be altered in the tool. 
Data is presented for each location and commodity at 2050 for a medium emissions scenario (RCP 4.5) as a 
default, with users able to explore 2030, 2050 and 2070 at a medium or high (RCP 8.5) emissions scenario,

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  37 
 
Data is not mapped across the region. Rainfall and temperature projections for three locations at 2050 using 
RCP 8.5 are shown in Table 9. 
Table 9 Selected climate projections for three Eyre Peninsula region locations (myclimateview.com.au)  
 
Ceduna 
Cummins 
Kimba 
 
Recent 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
(1994 – 
2023) 
2050s 
average 
Total annual 
rainfall  
268 mm 
241 mm 
424 mm 
381 mm 
326 mm 
290 mm 
Summer rainfall  
47 mm 
35 mm 
58 mm 
46 mm 
67 mm 
58 mm 
Autumn rainfall 
61 mm 
51 mm 
87 mm 
80 mm 
65 mm 
62 mm 
Winter rainfall 
98 mm 
94 mm 
189 mm 
173 mm 
114 mm 
105 mm 
Spring rainfall 
62 mm 
59 mm 
91 mm 
81 mm 
81 mm 
74 mm 
Average 
maximum 
temperature 
24.0oC 
25.3 oC 
22.0 oC 
23.2 oC 
23.7 oC 
25.2 oC 
Annual hot days 
(over 35oC) 
30 days 
38 days 
13 days 
18 days 
31 days 
45 days 
 
3.4.2 Climate Change in Australia (climatechangeinaustralia.gov.au) 
Climate Change in Australia was developed by the CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology and provides a 
number of data products and tools that present projections at different scales for four timescales (centred 
on 2030, 2050, 2070 and 2090) and three emissions scenarios (RCPs 2.5, 4.5 and 8.5).   
The Regional Climate Change Explorer provides a summary of projections across large “cluster” areas. The 
Eyre Peninsula region is within the Southern and South-Western Flatlands East sub-cluster as shown in 
Figure 17.  
Figure 17 Southern and South-Western Flatlands East Cluster area  
Key messages for the cluster are described below:

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  38 
 
• 
Time spent in drought is projected (with high confidence) to increase over the course of the century. 
• 
Average temperatures will continue to increase in all seasons (very high confidence). 
• 
More hot days and warm spells are projected with very high confidence. Fewer frosts are projected 
with high confidence. 
• 
A continuation of the trend of decreasing winter rainfall is projected with high confidence. Spring 
rainfall decreases are also projected with high confidence. Changes in other seasons unclear, 
although downscaling results suggest a continuation of the observed autumn declines. 
• 
Increased intensity of extreme rainfall events is projected, with high confidence. 
• 
A harsher fire-weather climate in the future (high confidence). 
• 
Potential evapotranspiration is projected to increase in all seasons as warming progresses (high 
confidence). 
• 
A tendency for a decline in relative humidity is projected for winter and spring although changes in 
the near term will be small (high confidence). 
On annual and decadal basis, natural variability in the climate system can act to either mask or enhance any 
long-term human induced trend, particularly in the next 20 years and for rainfall. 
3.4.3 DEW South Australian Climate Projections and Viewer  
The Guide to climate projections for risk assessment and planning in South Australia (DEW 2022) provides a 
summary of the changes in climate and sea levels likely to occur in South Australia, together with guidance 
on the use of climate projections for risk assessment and planning. Projections are presented for landscape 
management regions including the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Region. 
The guide identifies that by 2030, time spent in drought (over a 20-year period) is projected to nearly 
double in the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Region which means that up to 65% of time could be in drought. 
Additionally, the frequency of extreme drought will more than double by 2030. Looking further ahead, by 
2050, time spend in drought is projected to more than double, potentially reaching up to 70%. 
By 2030, the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Region’s mean daily spring maximum temperatures are projected to 
increase by 1.3 °C compared to 1.0 °C for mean daily winter maximums. By 2030 the Eyre Peninsula’s 
annual rainfall is projected to decline by 4.6%. The region will also experience an increase in annual 
potential evapotranspiration of 2.7% by 2030 and 4.6% by 2050. 
 Impacts of drought on water availability 
Drought can lead to a range of changes to the availability of water over shorter timeframes and can be 
better characterised by factors such as (Fowler et al. 2023): 
• 
Increasingly less run-off for a given rainfall. 
• 
Changes in rainfall seasonality. 
• 
Increased time spent in spells of little or no rainfall. 
• 
Decreases in frequency of high-rainfall events. 
• 
Increases in evaporative demand.

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  39 
 
A reduction in cool-season rainfall is likely to reduce recharge to groundwater systems. Recharge to the 
Quaternary limestone aquifer is likely to occur when there are more than 10 days of rainfall of more than 10 
mm between the months of May and October (DEW, 2022b). 
Higher temperatures and lower rainfall will lead to higher potential evapotranspiration, which may affect 
groundwater demand and evaporative discharge.  
The availability of groundwater has declined significantly over the past several years across Eyre Peninsula 
with declining rainfall (and declining recharge) coupled with continued extraction and increasing demand.  
This is most prominently seen at Uley-South Public Water Supply (PWS) where SA Water extracts water to 
feed into its reticulated system. Water levels are declining and ongoing extraction is increasing the risk of 
salinisation of groundwater. It is likely that SA Water’s access to these groundwater supplies will be 
restricted to preserve the aquifers. 
Several smaller freshwater lenses are no longer able to provide water for use. For example, licensed 
extraction from the Polda consumptive pool (around 35 km northeast of Elliston) was zero in 2021-22 due to 
lack of groundwater storage. 
Figure 18 shows an example of long-term decline in groundwater levels in the Uley-South PWS (DEW, 
2022b). Note this decline is influenced by both reductions in rainfall and increases in use.  
Figure 18 Hydrograph for well ULE102 in the Uley South PWS (DEW, 2022b) 
  
3.5.1 Implications for agriculture 
The impact of drought on agriculture is varied and depends on many factors including (but not limited to) 
(Department of Environment, Water and Natural Resources 2013): 
• 
Climate regime (e.g. drier climates are usually more susceptible). 
• 
Type of crop/stock.  
• 
Soil type and ability to retain moisture.  
• 
Type of water source and availability of alternatives (e.g. groundwater resources can be more 
resilient than surface water resources in extended dry periods).

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  40 
 
• 
The condition of the farming enterprise leading into drought, including the availability of grain 
reserves and financial position.  
Extended or seasonal dry conditions in dryland agricultural areas can deplete soil moisture storage leading to 
lack of production of crops, and reduction in feed for stock and livestock which causes loss of condition 
where feed cannot be imported and destocking is not undertaken (Department of Environment, Water and 
Natural Resources 2013). Drought also reduces the availability of sources of water for stock watering. 
Declining growing-season rainfall results in less profitable and reliable crop production and less crop and 
stock feed biomass. 
Soil health can deteriorate during drought making production following a drought more difficult. Lack of 
cover on dry soils increases erosion potential, causes compaction (creating problems for root penetration) 
and potentially leads to increased water repellence. 
The impact of drought is likely to be felt most where rainfall is less, and less reliable (see Figure 19 below). 
This map complied by BOM and CSIRO shows that timing of autumn breaks is variable across the region, 
based on data over the last 30 years (1989-2018). The autumn break is generally designed as at least 15mm 
of rainfall over three days.  
It would be expected that the northern and western areas of Eyre Peninsula will be more sensitive to dry 
autumns. 
Figure 19 Timing of the autumn outbreak on the Eyre Peninsula (BOM, 2019) 
 
 
3.5.2 Planning for a changing climate

Key Insights Paper | Drought  |  41 
 
The potential impacts of climate change on Australian agriculture are well documented and include increased 
invasion of weeds, pests and diseases and changes in crop yields, pasture growth, animal health, carrying 
capacity and soil condition (Siebentritt, Halsey and Stafford-Smith 2014).  
Of primary concern for farmers on the Eyre Peninsula is how a warming and drying climate could influence 
broadacre cropping yields and production of pasture for grazing. In the northern parts of the Eyre Peninsula 
greater areas of farming land may become marginal for cropping (Nidumolu et al. 2012). Increased use of 
livestock in areas that become marginal for cropping will increase the need for livestock water supplies, 
which are also affected by climate change. 
The region has been proactively planning for climate change for many years through supporting research 
projects and industry and community work into climate change impacts and potential adaptation options. 
Various agricultural practices that are considered leading edge will provide some measure of adaptation in 
the short term. However, long term adaptation may require more transformational responses.

Key Insights Paper | Drivers of change  |  42 
 
 Drivers of change 
A number of broad economic, social and environmental trends, challenges and opportunities directly or 
indirectly influence the resilience of the Eyre Peninsula to drought. These are occurring at different scales 
and have different implications for the region. These are identified in Table 10 (RDAEP, EPLGA and EPLB 
2022; CSIRO 2022; PwC 2022; Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021; Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021c, 
engagement summary report (Appendix A)).  
Table 10 Drivers of change on the Eyre Peninsula 
Trend, 
challenge or 
opportunity  
How this is experienced on the Eyre Peninsula 
Improvements 
in farming 
practises 
Eyre Peninsula farmers have always been renowned for being on the forefront of 
innovative agricultural practise. Improvements in technology and machinery, changes 
in practises such as no-till farming, improvements in crop varieties, improvements in 
pest control and other advances have increased crop yield enormously over the past 
few decades. In particular, improvements in soil moisture retention and erosion 
prevention have helped to address the challenging soil conditions and lack of rainfall.   
Increased 
agricultural 
input costs and 
lack of local 
supply of inputs 
Over the last four years, the cost of agricultural inputs including seed, chemicals and 
machinery has spiked. This has had major impacts on the profitability of Eyre 
Peninsula farms, and makes them more financially vulnerable if a crop fails due to 
drought, frost, pests, disease or other impacts.  
The distance of the Eyre Peninsula farms from many providers of agricultural inputs 
results in increased transport costs, reduced choice, and a need to order supplies so 
far in advance that this cannot be informed by the year’s conditions. Increasing local 
production of agricultural inputs could help to address this challenge.  
Market 
volatility  
Sudden and unexpected widespread trade disruptions brought through global 
pandemics, conflict, geopolitical tensions, disease, or similar events can have 
significant impacts on supply chains, demand, and commodity prices. The agricultural 
sector in particular is influenced by fluctuating market prices for agricultural goods, 
upon which they have little control.  
Lack of local 
agricultural 
value-add 
opportunities 
Due to a lack of local agricultural value-add opportunities on the Eyre Peninsula, 
farmers are forced to bulk export only. There are significant opportunities to increase 
value-add services which would increase economic generation in the region and 
move the Eyre Peninsula agricultural sector from price-takers to price-makers. This 
could include a local abattoir, mill, oil press, pelletising feed, protein powder etc. A 
containerised port service would be required to effectively facilitate many of these 
value-add options.  
Interest rates 
As interest rates rise, this has a major impact given high debt levels for farmers. The 
extremely high interest rates of the 1990’s are still recognised as a time that changed 
the course of the agricultural sector on the Eyre Peninsula as many farmers unable to 
service their loans were forced to sell their farms.

Key Insights Paper | Drivers of change  |  43 
 
Trend, 
challenge or 
opportunity  
How this is experienced on the Eyre Peninsula 
Market 
competition 
Until recently, Viterra had a monopoly over the crop market. The introduction of T-
Ports has introduced competition and significantly improved market conditions for 
Eyre Peninsula farmers.  
Changing crop 
types and 
stocking rates  
Recent changes in market conditions and agricultural practise have led to changes in 
crop types and stocking rates. Many farmers are reducing their sheep stocking rates 
or getting out of sheep all together due to low profit margins and recent bans on live 
sheep exports. Others are shifting from merinos to dorpers and other meat sheep. 
Many farmers are planting less traditional crops such as lentils and canola, which 
have high start-up costs but can provide significantly higher profitability than other 
commodities once established. Increasing food demand from developing countries 
such as India will continue strong demand for lentils.  
Consolidation 
of agricultural 
interests 
Farms on the Eyre Peninsula have become bigger and bigger over the past few 
decades. As farms have been sold, neighbours or commercial entities have purchased 
these and amalgamated them into bigger properties. This improves economies-of-
scale. However, as people leave the region due to less demand for labour, this has 
implications for community vibrancy and viability in the long run.  
Decreasing 
population in 
small towns 
Larger towns and cities and high amenity areas continue to draw population growth 
and economic activity away from smaller towns. It can be challenging for small towns 
to retain population numbers and compete with the economic, education and social 
opportunities available in urban areas and regional centres. Conglomeration of farms 
and increasing mechanisation of work on farms has further exacerbated this. 
Younger generations are often seen leaving the regions, resulting in ageing 
populations.  
This reducing population in small towns has significant flow on effects, often 
resulting in less community diversity, vibrancy, resources, services and a reduction in 
skilled labour which can impact productivity. 
Tight regional 
labour markets 
Regional areas including the Eyre Peninsula are experiencing greater difficulty in 
attracting and retaining labour. There is an opportunity to target new groups 
including backpackers, grey nomads and migrants to meet workforce shortages. 
Lack of 
childcare 
A lack of childcare capacity on the Eyre Peninsula presents a major challenge. This 
often means parents must stay at home to look after their children, influencing their 
ability to re-enter the workforce.  
Lack of housing 
supply 
The Eyre Peninsula has traditionally benefitted from ample housing and 
accommodation. For various reasons this supply is now unavailable, with rental 
properties and short-term accommodation vacancy rates at unprecedented low 
levels. The demand for accommodation is at all levels – community, affordable, 
family-style, executive; (one to four-bedroom) and quality.

Key Insights Paper | Drivers of change  |  44 
 
Trend, 
challenge or 
opportunity  
How this is experienced on the Eyre Peninsula 
Lack of higher 
education 
including senior 
school and 
tertiary 
education 
Lack of senior and tertiary education opportunities on the Eyre Peninsula means 
many young people leave the region for study. This has impacts on family connection 
and financial savings, and some young people do not return to the Eyre Peninsula at 
the competition of their studies. The lack of local educational opportunities prevents 
some residents from accessing the education they would otherwise acquire, with 
consequences for the skill levels of the local workforce.  
Lack of medical 
services  
The Eyre Peninsula is suffering from a lack of medical services, including for mental 
health, and a lack of consistency in medical practitioners.  
The research and engagement for this project highlighted the significant adverse 
impacts on the mental health of the people and communities experiencing drought 
and the need for increased health services in rural areas and for primary producers. 
The increase in availability of tele-health (consultation with a healthcare provider by 
phone or video call) post COVID-19 is beneficial for rural communities, but cannot 
replace face-to-face healthcare.  
Ageing 
population 
The Eyre Peninsula’s population is ageing. This has consequences for economic 
growth, labour force participation and demand for services including medical 
services. 
High reliance 
on volunteers 
Volunteers play a critical role in the vitality of the Eyre Peninsula. However, an 
overdependence on these volunteers can lead to burnout. Volunteering rates are 
falling across the region, particularly in young age groups. This has implications for 
the future viability of sporting and other clubs which play such an important role in 
the region.  
Digitalisation  
A new digital world is filled with opportunities for improved farming practises and 
business management, online work and study, telehealth, online shopping, and 
digital currency. With technology and automation come consequences for jobs and 
security.  
Water security 
challenges 
Decreasing groundwater levels on the Eyre Peninsula is posing a major water security 
challenge for the region. Alternative water sources including a desalination plant are 
necessary to construct as soon as possible to limit water restrictions and long-term 
negative impacts on local groundwater systems. Industrial expansion including 
mining will expand demand for secure water supplies into the future.   
Growth in new 
markets  
Eyre Peninsula is well positioned to capitalise on recent growth in emerging markets. 
This includes wind and solar energy, hydrogen, mining for minerals critical for the 
net-zero transition, space technology, seaweed and local processing and 
manufacturing.

Key Insights Paper | Drivers of change  |  45 
 
Trend, 
challenge or 
opportunity  
How this is experienced on the Eyre Peninsula 
Climate change 
and 
decarbonisation 
Rising greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere are causing temperatures to rise, 
rainfall to reduce, and extreme weather events to become more frequent and more 
severe. Responding to climate change requires a shift in the global economy to 
reduce carbon emissions and action to adapt to a new and changing climate. The 
primary production sector on the Eyre Peninsula will need to adapt to a changing 
climate. Mining, manufacturing and transport industries are key sources of 
greenhouse gas emissions and will require transformation change to reduce these. 
This transition will present opportunities particularly in the renewable energy (solar, 
wind and hydrogen) and green manufacturing sectors. 
Decline in 
biodiversity and 
ecosystem 
health 
The abundance and diversity of biodiversity and ecosystems globally are in rapid 
decline. Many species have become extinct, and more are highly threatened. The 
continued effects of climate change, land clearing, pollution, invasive species and 
direct exploitation (e.g. wild fishing) will result in further biodiversity loss.

Key Insights Paper | Drought resilience  |  46 
 
 Drought resilience 
  A definition of resilience 
The term ‘resilience’ is commonly used in a number of subject areas from health and wellbeing to natural 
resources and the economy. A range of Regional Drought Resilience Plans and literature were analysed to 
compare their definitions of ‘drought resilience’. These are presented in Table 11. From this analysis, the 
following definition of drought was prepared to reflect what drought resilience means for the Eyre Peninsula: 
The ability of communities, economies and environments to withstand the impacts of 
drought and adapt and find new and potentially transformational ways of doing things, 
enabling functions and values to be sustained over the longer term.  
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In many cases, the intent is to use disruption as an opportunity 
to move in a new direction, not just recover back to a previous state. It is about changing proactively in 
order not to be changed involuntarily. 
Building resilience will help the Eyre Peninsula region to endure droughts with less negative impacts and 
recover from them sooner. 
Table 11 Definitions of resilience from various drought plans 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
Future Drought Fund 
(Drought Resilience 
Funding Plan 2020 to 
2024) Determination 
2020 (Department of 
Agriculture, Water and 
the Environment 2020) 
Drought resilience means the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in 
response to changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall 
and changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, environmental and 
social wellbeing. 
Regional Drought Resilience Plans (Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024b) 
South West 
Queensland  
‘Resilience’ is harder to define. The World Bank has defined resilience as the 
ability “… to anticipate, absorb, accommodate or recover from the effects of a 
hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner”. 
Australia’s CSIRO perhaps more specifically states: “drought resilience will 
result in a regional Australia that can endure deeper, longer droughts, and 
recover from them sooner. This will allow our food and agribusinesses to boost 
national farm income, increase food security, and protect the regional jobs that 
rely on agriculture. It will increase the resilience of rural and regional 
communities that depend on agriculture and improve environmental outcomes 
Murraylands & 
Riverlands  
Resilience is more than just bouncing back. In many cases, we want to use 
disruption as an opportunity to move in a new direction, not just recover back 
to exactly where we were.  
Northern & 
Yorke 
Resilience has multiple definitions; common traits of resilience include the 
ability of a system, organisation or individual to withstand adversity and 
bounce back. For the purpose of the NYRDRP, the definition of resilience has 
been taken from the Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024 and is 
described as: “the ability to adapt, reorganise or transform in response to

Key Insights Paper | Drought resilience  |  47 
 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
changing temperature, increasing variability and scarcity of rainfall and 
changed seasonality of rainfall, for improved economic, environmental and 
social wellbeing”. (Australian Government, 2019).  
Also includes a quote from a participant: Resilience is the ability to withstand 
bad times or disasters – not to just get back up, but figure out how to move 
forward, progress and grow in capacity to prevent it from happening again. 
Must be able to adapt to prevent. - Anita Kuss, Unihub Spencer Gulf 
ACT 
While resilience can be defined as “The capacity of a system to absorb 
disturbance and reorganise so as to retain essentially the same function, 
structure and feedbacks”, rather than framing resilience as “bouncing back”, it 
could be more accurately described as adapting or transforming as needed in 
response to change. 
Gippsland 
Victoria  
Walker (2020) defines resilience as the capacity of a system to absorb a 
disturbance and reorganise so as to keep functioning in the same kind of way. 
Rather than just ‘bouncing back,’ resilience is all about changing and adapting 
to circumstances, rather than having them change you. 
For the purpose of this document, resilience is used to describe the ability to 
respond positively to the known impacts of drought and maintain business 
functions. It is about being able to adapt, thrive and take advantage of 
opportunities when encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ 
of the current situation, or being stoic, resilience includes the ability to adapt 
and be decisive during uncertainty and change. 
Wimmera 
Victoria  
For the purpose of this document, resilience is defined as the ability of a 
system to effectively respond to disruptions, like drought, while maintaining 
function. It is about being able to consistently and collectively develop, hone 
and create the tools to adapt, thrive and take advantage of opportunities when 
encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent maintenance’ of the current 
situation resilience includes the ability to adapt and potentially transform the 
way things are done during periods of uncertainty and change. 
Mid West WA  
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system 
to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks 
so as to continue to deliver values. 
Southern 
Wheatbelt WA 
The capacity of a rural community and landscape as a social-ecological system 
to absorb disturbance, reorganize, maintain or change functions and feedbacks 
so as to continue to deliver values. 
Maru et al. 2017 
The capacity of a linked social-ecological system to absorb disturbance and 
reorganize so as to retain essentially the same function, structure, and 
feedbacks – to have the same identity. Resilience thinking embraces the ideas 
of adaptation of the current system, and also transformation to a different kind 
of system when the existing one is in an irreversibly undesirable state, or on a 
trajectory towards such a state. 
Walker 2020  
The simplest definition of resilience is the ability to cope with shocks and to 
keep functioning in much the same kind of way. It is a measure of how much

Key Insights Paper | Drought resilience  |  48 
 
The Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Plan is focused on drought resilience. However, enhancing drought 
resilience will help the region respond to and recover from other stresses or pressures such as bushfires, 
flooding rains, pandemics, and economic market changes. 
 
Source 
Definition of resilience/excerpt  
an ecosystem, a business, a society can change before it crosses a tipping 
point into some other kind of state that it then tends to stay in. 
Possibly the most common misinterpretation of resilience is “bouncing back.” 
Resilience is in fact the ability to adapt and change, to reorganize, while coping 
with disturbance. It is all about changing in order not to be changed. A 
resilient system responds to a disturbance by changing the relative amounts of 
its different parts and how they interact, thereby changing the way it 
functions. It stays the same kind of system by learning from a disturbance, to 
be able to better cope with a similar disturbance in the future. It does not 
bounce back to look and behave exactly like it did before. Resilient systems are 
learning systems. 
Resilience is largely about learning how to change in order not to be changed. 
Trying to protect a system by keeping it in a constant state reduces its 
resilience. 
Carpenter et al. 2012 
Resilience, in the context of environmental management and sustainability, is 
the capacity of a social-ecological system to absorb disturbance, reorganize, 
and thereby retain essential functions, structures and feedbacks. 
South Australian Fire 
and Emergency Services 
Commission, 2019 
The ability to survive, adapt and grow, no matter what happens. 
Macbeth, 2024 
“Resilience is the capacity to really build your future on your own terms and to 
get on the front foot… The whole notion of resilience depends on adaptive 
capacity - the ability to adapt to new conditions as the world changes. We’ve 
come to realise that drought is a reality of life in Australia - so it shouldn’t be a 
shock.” – Professor John Cole, former Executive Director of the University of 
Southern Queensland’s Institute for Resilient Regions. 
Resilience is not just about how a community responds to a shock or a 
challenge such as drought. It also involves a community that’s stronger for the 
everyday - that is socially connected and inclusive, and that is capable of 
working together in good times to prepare for tougher times. This involves 
developing a shared awareness of what future challenges might be, and 
planning and adapting accordingly so that infrastructure and services can 
withstand future shocks. 
Arbon 2024 
How people, communities, and businesses cope in the face of change and 
uncertainty and build capacity to survive better through (often unexpected and 
cascading) consequences of disruptions that threaten our complex and 
interconnected social systems.

Key Insights Paper | Drought resilience  |  49 
 
  The importance of drought resilience  
In the past, droughts have had serious impacts on the Eyre Peninsula. It has had major consequences on 
the ability to grow crops and feed livestock, jobs and income, mental health and wellbeing, the size of 
regional populations, and the health of the environment.  
Resilience is about taking action to try to avoid or minimise these negative impacts before they happen 
rather than waiting until they do occur to act, or just focusing on recovery. Building resilience can help to 
create economic, social, and environmental development opportunities. By having good business, financial 
and technical skills and having a plan developed before drought, the decision-making load and much of the 
stress of primary producers can be reduced when drought hits. This can help them to weather the drought 
until rains break.  
It is important to recognise that drought resilience is also important for the wider community, economy and 
environment beyond primary producers. The impacts of drought on farms are also felt across the wider 
region.  
 Characteristics of drought resilient individuals, communities, and 
regions 
Eyre Peninsula farmers and other community members are continually faced with a wide range of challenges 
which has enhanced their resilience and problem-solving skills through generations. 
Particular characteristics of resilience are summarised in Table 12. These have been identified though the 
engagement and literature (SA Drought Hub 2021, Pearson and Foster 2008, Council of Australian 
Governments 2011; South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission 2019; Walker 2020, 
Appendix A – Engagement Summary Report)  
Table 12 Characteristics of resilient individuals, communities and regions  
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Social 
characteristics 
• Strong social connections with family, friends, and the wider community facilitated 
through formal and informal networks.   
• Past experience and learnings of drought or other adversity. 
• A community that helps each other out in times of need. 
• Sharing of knowledge, experiences and expertise with others including friends and 
younger generations. 
• Good stress management and decision making including when under high pressure. 
• Good mental mindset, maintaining optimism where possible and accepting that you 
cannot control the weather. 
• Having involved and diverse community groups, sporting clubs and other community 
spaces that support community connection and cohesion and where people can look 
out for and support each other. This involves having a strong volunteer base who are 
willing and able to put in the work for the benefit of their community. 
• Good population base. 
• A desire to stay farming on the Eyre Peninsula.

Key Insights Paper | Drought resilience  |  50 
 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
Economic 
characteristics 
• Good business and financial management skills, including through formal education. 
• Having a financial buffer, which could include money in the bank or stockpiles of feed 
and which allows for flexibility in decision making. 
• Being prepared for drought – understanding that drought will happen and having a 
plan prepared in advance to assist with decision making, identifying key trigger points 
and implementing associated actions. 
• Good decision making in responding to drought, noting that luck can play a role given 
no one can control the weather.  
• Personal/household income diversification including off-farm income streams not 
reliant on rainfall, and/or on-farm diversification (stock, different grain varieties, 
farms in different locations). 
• Implementing good farming practices such as improving soil quality, crop rotation, 
new crop varieties, managing sustainable levels of total grazing pressure etc. to 
maximise profitability in the long term.  
• Having a good relationship with bank managers or other financial institutions, 
especially when they have a good understanding of agricultural business on the Eyre 
Peninsula. 
• Being flexible and adaptable and waiting for the right time with the weather to sow 
and harvest, planting different crop varieties etc. – “nimble farmers can make better 
practical choices during drought”. 
• Regional economic diversity with both on-farm and off-farm jobs available for local 
people. 
• Local spending in the local economy. 
• Good succession planning. 
Environmental 
characteristics 
• Implementing farming techniques that maintain and enhance soil health and 
minimise soil erosion. 
• Maintaining vegetation cover. 
• Planting more drought-tolerant species and varieties. 
• Integrated, widespread, preventative pest plant and animal control with a focus in 
good years when these species proliferate.  
• Changing farming practises when drought begins, such as destocking or hand feeding 
stock to minimise overgrazing. 
Infrastructure 
and service 
characteristics 
• Water infrastructure that provides water security and affordability, including access to 
mains water as well as personal water storage such as water tanks, sheeted 
catchments, dams, bores and stock watering infrastructure. 
• Local services including childcare, healthcare, shops, housing and banks that are not 
just located in regional centres. 
• Regular and ongoing social and wellbeing services (including in times outside of 
drought).  
• Local accurate weather stations and weather predictions which support farmers to 
make the right decisions early.

Key Insights Paper | Drought resilience  |  51 
 
Theme 
Key characteristics  
• Local, reliable and affordable supply of feed, fuel, fertiliser, seed etc. 
• Competition between local services which improve market conditions (eg T-Ports and 
Viterra, multiple local fertiliser/machinery suppliers etc.). 
• Stores of feed (either on farm storage, standing perennial fodder, or in the system). 
• Good port access and facilities. 
Innovation, 
research and 
development 
characteristics 
• Continually learning and being receptive to new technologies, techniques, varieties, 
chemicals etc. 
• Continual research and development into more effective farming practises, seed 
varieties etc. with good dissemination of this information out into the broader 
agricultural community. 
• Locally specific research and development. 
• Good access to relevant information and knowledge.

Key Insights Paper | Approaches to drought resilience planning  |  52 
 
 Approaches to drought resilience 
planning 
 Learnings from other planning regions 
Many other regions across Australia have already prepared draft or final Regional Drought Resilience Plans 
through the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program. A desktop review of these plans and online 
meetings with a number of plan leaders has helped to: 
• Understand what has worked well or not worked well in the process of preparing Regional Drought 
Resilience Plans in other regions around Australia, including in engagement, research, reporting and 
review phases.  
• Identify the types of strategies and actions proposed for other regions and the collated evidence that 
suggests they will be successful in building drought resilience. 
The key findings of this review and engagement are summarised in Table 13.  
Table 13 Key learnings from other planning regions 
Planning 
element 
Key findings 
Structure of 
plan 
• Short, simple, easy to read plans with lots of graphics are more effective than long, 
context-heavy plans.  
• Having a Background Paper to accompany the plan and host background information 
is an effective way to provide more detail about the plan while keeping the plan itself 
user-friendly.  
• Ensure the plan is written for the target audience (ie the people who make decisions 
about what to do about drought, from community based organisations and local 
business owners through to local, state and federal agencies). 
• Drought resilience plans should enable flexibility in implementation and can be 
considered as a ‘prospectus’.  
• Including some tools such as My Climate View can be useful for those who want 
something more tangible from the plan.  
• Plans differ in their allocation of responsibilities. Some plans identify particular lead 
organisations for each strategy/action. Others provide a list of potential partners to 
enable flexibility.  
• Preparing a ‘plan on a page’ summary of the plan is a useful approach for those who 
do not want to read the entire plan. 
• Some content on implementation, governance, monitoring and evaluation of the plan 
should be included.  
Strategies 
and actions 
• Strategies and actions should be grouped by themes. 
• For agricultural areas, the plan should have a strong agricultural focus.  
• However plans should also have an emphasis on social impacts and opportunities 
given the significant social impact of drought on communities and individuals. Other 
aspects of the systems should also be considered.

Key Insights Paper | Approaches to drought resilience planning  |  53 
 
Planning 
element 
Key findings 
• Supporting community clubs/organisations to deliver their own community programs 
is a very successful approach and helps to ensure the community can continue to 
implement the plan themselves, and that actions are led by and designed for the 
community. This should be managed appropriately to minimise overloading local 
volunteers.  
• Actions should be considered across a range of change types (eg incremental, 
transitional and transformational) with some in each category. 
• Actions for preparing for, responding to and recovering from drought should be 
identified.  
• Identifying a number of key priorities in the plan can help with implementation of 
early actions.  
Engagement • Leverage existing relationships and networks to increase engagement, including for 
First Nations engagement. 
• Tailor engagement messaging to ensure you reach all parts of the community.  
• Recognise diversity across the region – use stakeholder engagement to identify what 
is unique about each part of the region and reflect this in the plan.  
• Online engagement can work well, but face to face should be the focus.  
• Invest in up front engagement to inform the development of the draft plan.  
• Including key quotes and case studies in plans can help stakeholders and community 
to ‘see themselves’ in the plan.  
Approach 
• A systems-thinking approach is effective.  
• A risk assessment framework approach is effective.   
• Using the Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) 
Framework (Crossman, 2018) is an effective approach.  
 
Pinnaroo Project  
Through the engagement, the Pinnaroo Project was identified as an example of what could be applied on 
Eyre Peninsula through this Plan.  
The Pinnaroo Project was a three year arts and health initiative that aimed to improve the health and 
wellbeing of the Pinnaroo community. This project encompassed a variety of creative activities designed to 
celebrate the rich heritage and culture of the region. Through workshops, performances and community art 
installations, residents of all ages were encouraged to engage in artistic expression, fostering a sense of 
connection and community spirit. The project not only highlighted the unique cultural identity of Pinnaroo 
but also promoted mental wellbeing and physical health by providing an outlet for creativity and social 
interaction. By integrating arts into everyday life, the Pinnaroo Project successfully enhanced the overall 
quality of life for its participants, leaving a lasting impact on the community (The Pinnaroo Project n.d.). 
In order to evaluate both the physical and mental aspects of health, residents completed a health and 
lifestyle questionnaire and brief set of clinical measurements such as blood pressure, height, weight, and a 
finger-prick test for blood sugar and cholesterol. This collection of data will be evaluated to hopefully prove a

Key Insights Paper | Approaches to drought resilience planning  |  54 
 
correlation between the participation in art and wellbeing events and the positive impact on health within 
the community. 
Key takeaways from this project include:  
• 
Community health and social connectedness can be improved through arts and culture. 
• 
Ensuring the project was community led and co-designed contributed to its success. 
• 
Art can be an alternative to other social activities like sports, pubs, clubs, etc. 
• 
The project changed the culture of the community – less smoking, less drinking days, more exercise, 
more consumption of fruit, etc. 
• 
The project was about bringing a town/community together, contributing to community resilience. 
• 
This project or something similar could be integrated in various towns across the Eyre Peninsula –
ensuring that it is catered to the individual area/community and their needs. 
 
  The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy 
(DRAMP) Framework 
The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman, 2018) 
published by the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) takes an integrated, multi-
pronged approach to reduce risks and impacts of drought. The Framework includes six goals, aligned with 
three pillars of drought risk reduction illustrated in Figure 20. 
Figure 20 The Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework (Crossman, 
2018)

Key Insights Paper | Approaches to drought resilience planning  |  55 
 
The six goals of the DRAMP Framework are: 
1. Reduce exposure to drought: reduce the potential for loss of people, livelihoods, ecosystem services 
and resources, infrastructure, as well as economic, social or cultural assets in places that could be 
adversely affected by drought. 
2. Reduce vulnerability to drought: reduce tendency to be adversely affected by drought. 
3. Increase resilience to drought risk: strengthen the ability of communities, ecosystems and 
economies to anticipate, absorb, accommodate or recover from the effects of drought quickly and 
efficiently by ensuring the preservation, restoration or improvement of natural capital. 
4. Transformation: alter fundamental attributes of social, economic and ecological systems, including 
value systems; regulatory, legislative, or bureaucratic regimes; financial institutions; and 
technological or biological systems. 
5. Prepare, respond, and recover from drought: the backbone of management and planning 
approaches to reduce drought risk, including development of comprehensive drought monitoring and 
early warning systems.  
6. Transfer and share drought risks: distribute risks among wider section of society to include those 
who benefit directly and indirectly from robust drought risk management. 
  South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 
South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy was prepared to provide a foundation upon which state and 
local government, non-government organisations, businesses, and communities can work together to make 
a safer, more resilient South Australia. The Strategy includes eight guiding principles described in Figure 21 
for building disaster resilience that are applicable to drought resilience planning. 
Figure 21 Guiding principles for building disaster resilience (Government of South Australia, 2019)

Key Insights Paper | Approaches to drought resilience planning  |  56 
 
 Types of change  
Continuing to build the resilience of the Eyre Peninsula to drought will require various changes in practices 
and processes. There are many ways and scales in which change can be approached. Three types of change 
often referred to in resilience planning are described below (Roggema et al, 2012): 
• Incremental change – associated with slow processes and small adjustments, which modify the landscape 
only slightly. They are often associated with ongoing improvements in current practice. An example of 
this change type on the Eyre Peninsula would be continuing to use improved fertilisers to support crop 
growth. 
• Transitional change – associated with moving from one way of doing things to another in a deliberate 
way. An example of this change type on the Eyre Peninsula would be the move from sheep to cropping in 
many parts of the region.  
• Transformational change – associated with a fundamental shift in the system. They are usually multi-
actor, multi-scale processes, where the change is highly non-linear. Examples may be initially 
controversial or cause wide-spread apprehension, for example if there was no further extraction of 
groundwater in the region or if marginal parts of the region could no longer be viably used for primary 
production (NOTE – this is not proposed, it is provided as an example of something that would be 
transformational).

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  57 
 
 Opportunities for increasing drought 
resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  
The following strategies and opportunities have been identified through the engagement (see Appendix A – 
Regional Engagement Summary Report) and the literature review. Where opportunities align with key 
strategies and plans of the Advisory Group this has been identified in the tables below (Eyre Peninsula 
Landscape Board 2024g, AIR EP, SARDI Minnipa Agricultural Centre & Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 
2023, AIR EP 2021, Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021a, SA Drought Hub 2021, Siebentritt 2014). 
Relevant strategies from the Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan (similar agricultural and 
social setting) have also been reviewed and correlation identified (Wheatbelt Development Commission 
2022). Other opportunities have been drawn from other references through the literature review (including 
Luke et al. 2020, Pearson & Foster 2008) which are not identified individually in the table below.  
 Financial and business opportunities 
Table 14 Financial and business opportunities to build drought resilience 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Deliver farmer/business owner financial and business education and training: 
‒ Education to increase financial and business management skills, 
forward planning skills, succession planning, farm business models, 
digital literacy, data management skills and technical skills.  
‒ Acknowledge that a one size fits all approach does not work. 
‒ Support successful existing initiatives such as Rural Business Support 
and Next Gen. 
‒ Establish communities of practice and network approaches to 
continually learning, sharing and updating skills serves both 
educational and social purposes. 
‒ “Financial literacy and supporting programs to develop it is the number 
one thing – farming isn’t a lifestyle now, it’s a business” 
Engagement 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Provide financial incentives to plan ahead and save money in good years: 
‒ It was commonly acknowledged that supporting farmers to save their 
own money in good years to get through bad years is a better 
approach than encouraging reliance on financial handouts during 
droughts (noting that it is hard to save for very extended droughts and 
financial support may be required in these circumstances).  
‒ Promote and enhance existing vehicles including Farm Management 
Deposits (FMDs) – “Farm Management Deposits (FMDs) are an 
excellent drought proofing tool”. 
‒ Consider whether improvements to FMDs could be made to ensure 
they are accessed during drought rather than treated as a retirement 
fund, and are available to all farms regardless of their business 
structure. Consider whether greater tax concessions could be made 
when farmers access FMDs during drought.  
‒ Explore taxation system supports beyond FMDs 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Drought 
Taskforce 
Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Plan for the EP 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  58 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Provide financial, business and social support for local non-farming businesses 
in farming regions.  
‒ Allow other rural businesses in farming regions to access FMDs or 
other mechanisms to put money away in good times to employ in 
drought times without undue tax stresses. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
• Support farms to plan in advance for drought:  
‒ Provide support (eg training, resources, money to hire a consultant, 
scenario planning workshops etc.) for farmers to prepare a Farm 
Drought Plan or Water Plan including with trigger points and 
associated decisions, strategies and procedures.  
‒ “It’s vital to have a roadmap that tells you what you’ll do when tough 
times come, allows you to have a vision and a sense of some control 
during difficult years, reminds you to remember that we planned for 
this and we’re getting through.” 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Provide funding for local infrastructure programs to keep locals employed and 
stimulate local economic activity during drought: 
‒ Scope opportunities in advance for infrastructure programs that should 
be delivered once drought hits, to ensure funding is delivered quickly 
in the right places during drought.  
‒ During drought, implement these infrastructure programs to stimulate 
local economic activity, provide jobs and income to local workers who 
may be out of work, source local materials from local businesses etc. 
‒ Prioritise projects that “give people a sense of pride in where they are, 
provides some relief from seeing dryness and dirt everywhere they 
look, boosts morale and confidence”.  
Engagement 
• Diversify the economy at a regional scale: 
‒ Advocate for and deliver new industries on the Eyre Peninsula which 
are not reliant on rainfall, to decrease community reliance on 
agricultural income. 
‒ Participants suggested that this could include renewable energy (in 
particular wind farms), Northern Water, new ports including with 
containerisation capacity, mining, desalination plant, hydrogen 
production, ammonia production, transport hubs for trucks (food, 
showers, accommodation, mechanic – eg Eyre Hub at Kimba), online 
businesses, technology, space, Workshop26, earthworks/road building, 
recycling and seaweed.  
• In particular explore opportunities for local agricultural value add (eg mill, 
abattoir, oil press, pelletising feed, protein powder etc.) 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EP Drought 
Taskforce 
EG Ag Vision 2050 
 
• Support diversification of income at an individual/household scale: 
‒ Diversification on-farm: eg different crops, sheep, saltbush, carbon 
sequestration, agritourism, farms in different regions. 
‒ Diversification off-farm: shares, property, online businesses, jobs in 
town, online jobs, trucking company. 
‒ This could include mentoring/business support to set up new 
businesses, subsidies during drought for educational improvement etc.  
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  59 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Provide additional agricultural value add opportunities. 
• Provide trade and market development assistance, creating some true value 
adding opportunity that, over time, provides alternatives to the bulk production 
of a commodity where there is little market control. 
• Continue to support development of export markets and explore additional 
domestic value-add markets. 
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EP Drought 
Taskforce 
• Investigate and advocate for opportunities to influence farming input prices: 
‒ Participants commonly identified the extreme increase in the cost of 
inputs over the past few years, as well as the uncertainty of supply of 
inputs at times, as a major challenge. To address this, the following 
suggestions were made: 
‒ Continue diversification of suppliers to support competition eg T-
Ports and Viterra, multiple chemical companies etc.  
• Support local production of inputs. In particular, explore the opportunity for a 
local ammonia production facility to produce a local supply of fertiliser for the 
Eyre Peninsula to reduce reliance on global markets, provide security of 
supply, reduce travel costs and reduce emissions. 
Engagement 
• Work with banks to increase their understanding of agricultural business and 
how to provide appropriate support that acknowledge the social, emotional, 
business and financial impacts of drought.  
Engagement 
• Provide direct financial support for those in need: 
‒ For example Centrelink, Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) low 
interest loans, tax subsidies, council rate subsidies, Job Keeper type 
programs, interest rate subsidies, Farm Household Support, PIRSA 
farmers assistance packages, freight and feed subsidies etc. “The RIC 
loans that were made available in 2020 were a saviour. It bought us 
some time to work our way through it.”’ “The Council Rate rebate was 
extremely easy to apply for and the funding very helpful”. 
‒ Ensure that financial support and incentives support the right people – 
for example if someone is working a second job on the weekend to put 
food on the table, this shouldn’t mean they are ineligible for financial 
support. Consider how financial support can promote good decision 
making (those who have prepared well for drought should not be 
penalised for this). 
‒ Ensure financial support available is well promoted, easy to access and 
minimises paperwork/red tape. Provide direct financial counselling to 
help people access financial support and understand what is available. 
‒ Provide financial support for other rural businesses in farming areas, 
not just for farmers. 
‒ Provide an easily accessible, central information source to identify 
where hay or grain can be bought from. Support hay donations (eg 
Rural Aid), ensuring that this is done in an equitable way, does not 
bring in weeds, and provides an opportunity for farmers to get 
together and support each other. 
Engagement 
• Support young farmers, financially and through knowledge acquisition. 
Engagement 
EG Ag Vision 2050

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  60 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Implement shop local schemes: 
‒ For example, shop-local vouchers for local small businesses.  
Engagement 
 
 Social and community opportunities  
Table 15 Social and community opportunities to build drought resilience 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Provide mental health and wellbeing services: 
‒ Mental health and wellbeing support delivered in a range of ways to 
meet differing needs. For example, private counselling, mental health 
talks/events/workshops run by experts, inspirational speakers or 
farmers sharing their experiences (eg Beautiful Bogan, Kate Burke, 
Lain Montgomery, Sarah Prime, Dennis Hoiberg), bringing in 
counselling dogs. 
‒ Ensure mental health support: 
‒ Considers the differing needs of men, women and children. 
‒ Is delivered at appropriate times and locations to ensure they are 
accessible. 
‒ Provides opportunity for people to seek help confidentially. 
‒ Support existing services and programs to deliver mental health 
support where possible to avoid saturation/ duplication. Many 
successful programs were identified, including Mentally Fit EP, Our 
Town groups, Fat Farmers, local sporting clubs, Rural Business 
Support, Comedy, Beer & BBQ, FaB mentors, council programs, local 
Suicide Prevention Boards, Community Support Hubs, Ceduna 
Wellbeing Group, Beacon of Hope, IFarmWell, Lock Community 
Centre, Streaky Bay Wellbeing Hub and FRRR. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EG Ag Vision 2050 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
 
• Deliver mental health first aid training:  
‒ Provide training to the community to assist them in being able to 
support others who they notice are suffering mental health issues, and 
connect them to the right services.  
‒ In particular, focus on training on those who interact with large 
numbers of community members such as sports coaches, agronomists 
and community leaders. 
‒ Tap into, support and/or expand existing initiatives such as the Are 
You Ok campaign, Movember, suicide prevention week, Red Cross 
Drought Resilience Program etc. 
‒ Encourage people to “check in with their mates” in an informal way. 
Engagement 
• Facilitate community connection: 
Engagement

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  61 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
‒ Deliver initiatives that bring the community together, for example 
community events, workshops, presenters with appropriate skills and 
messages, comedians, family fun day, sport, art. Enable the 
community to play an active role in selecting which initiatives best suit 
their town/needs. 
‒ Deliver diverse initiatives to suit different needs, including for men, 
women and children.  
‒ Ensure these events are free/accessible. Consider providing fuel 
vouchers for those in need to support them to attend.  
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Encourage farmer-to-farmer experience transfer: 
‒ Provide formal and informal opportunities for people with experience 
of drought to share what helped them through it, and acknowledge 
that farmers are not alone in doing it tough. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Support local sport, interest and service clubs to continue to play their 
important role in the community:  
‒ The importance of sports and other clubs on the EP was emphasised 
again and again.  
‒ Support these clubs to run their day-to-day programs as well as one-
off events that facilitate community connection and wellbeing.  
‒ Provide funding to pay sporting club fees to enable those without an 
income to retain membership. 
‒ Support volunteer participation 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Raise awareness of what support is available: 
‒ Raise awareness of mental health and financial support available 
through a range of formats to suit different needs. For example, a 
central website for information, or workshops/events that bring 
community together to hear from Centrelink, rural financial assistance, 
tools for wellbeing, to hear from a farmer who shares their own lived 
experience etc.  
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Consider providing people from outside the region to help farmers to shoot 
their stock, as this is extremely mentally challenging for farmers to do 
themselves.  
Engagement 
• Retain and attract people to the Eyre Peninsula, for research, to farm and to 
live and work in local communities. Attract, develop and utilise specialist skill 
sets. 
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EP Ag Vision 2050  
AirEP Strategic Plan 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  62 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Support local community leaders to continue to play their important role. 
Engagement 
EP Ag Vision 2050  
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
 
 Innovation, research and development opportunities 
Table 16 Innovation, research and development opportunities to build drought resilience 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Invest in agricultural research and development: 
‒ Develop new farming techniques, varieties, technologies and chemicals 
that increase profitability and climate resilience in the long-term. This 
includes approaches to maintain soil health and moisture, maintain 
vegetation cover, increase crop yield, minimize the impact of pest 
plants and animals, minimize input costs and volumes, increase 
capture and use of data etc.  
‒ Research and development needs to be locally specific 
‒ Ensure information is affordable/free to access.  
 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Plan for the EP 
EP Drought 
Taskforce 
AirEP Strategic Plan 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Encourage uptake of new, best practise farming techniques in the wider 
community:  
‒ Regularly communicate research & development findings and 
encourage uptake in the community to increase efficiency and 
effectiveness of farm practices including during drought. 
‒ Support the extension and application of already-undertaken R&D 
projects that have clearly demonstrated benefits to drought-resilient 
farming. 
‒ Use a diversity of platforms to disseminate information, for example, 
Stickybeak days, Field days, SARDI Minnipa Agricultural Centre Farmer 
meetings, SARDI Eyre Peninsula Farming Systems Summary 
workshops, podcasts, YouTube videos, case studies, articles in Stock 
Journal, webinars, Minnipa Agricultural Centre research staff, 
extension officers, FaB mentors, Rural Business Support, Ag Bureau 
groups, agronomists, demonstration farms etc.  
‒ Have options for in-person attendance as well as being able to access 
the information on demand at a time that suits.  
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Drought 
Taskforce 
AirEP Strategic Plan 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  63 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
‒ Support the Minnipa Agricultural Centre to undertake their research 
and extend information into the community.  
• Provide funding for farmers to trial new techniques, varieties etc. on their own 
farms given the importance of locally specific research and development. 
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Ensure there is an appropriate supply of trusted, credible agronomists on the 
Eyre Peninsula. 
Engagement 
AirEP Strategic Plan 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
• Facilitate sharing of farmer-to-farmer knowledge.  
• Encourage farmers to reflect on their experiences following a drought, noting 
what worked, what didn’t work and what they could try next time to get 
through drought better. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
 Farming operations opportunities 
Table 17 Farming operations opportunities to build drought resilience 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Support farmers to always implement sustainable, best practise cropping, 
pasture/fodder and livestock management practises more adaptable to 
conditions. Encourage approaches that maintain soil moisture and condition, 
maintain vegetation cover, minimise use of chemicals, maintain sustainable 
grazing pressure, increase data capture and management to inform decision 
making on farms etc. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop  
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EPLB Emergency 
Plan and Landscape 
Plan  
EP Ag Vision 2050 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Plan for the EP 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Identify and promote mechanisms to increase landowner capacity to 
implement programs to manage pest plants and animals.  
‒ Innovation of best practise, integrated weed and pest control 
techniques, tools and chemicals.  
‒ Promote modern agricultural weed and pest management practices 
that are selective and integrated while minimising impacts to 
surrounding natural environments. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EPLB Landscape Plan

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  64 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
 
 Services and infrastructure opportunities 
Table 18 Service and infrastructure opportunities to build drought resilience  
Opportunity 
Source 
• Provide regional mains water security for Eyre Peninsula: 
‒ Deliver the desalination plant at Billy Lights Point as soon as possible 
to provide mains water security for Eyre Peninsula.  
‒ Notify farmers as soon as possible about any upcoming water 
restrictions before the desalination plant is completed, so that they can 
undertake appropriate forward planning.  
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Plan for the EP 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Explore options for increasing town water security: 
‒ Ceduna: investigate build a water tank at the area in town where 
water naturally accumulates. SA Water to take over Council managed 
pipeline. 
‒ Smoky Bay: build a more effective wastewater treatment plant. 
‒ Kimba: upgrade or build a new SA Water rainwater tank or other 
community water storage infrastructure. 
‒ General: increase wastewater reuse in towns to maintain irrigation of 
cool, green spaces. 
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Increase capacity of farm/household scale water harvesting and storage 
infrastructure  
‒ Provide a water infrastructure rebate scheme for water tanks, sheeted 
catchments, dams, solar pumps, troughs, pipes and bores on personal 
properties (on farms and in town). Ensure this is delivered before 
drought so that households have the financial ability to fund the 
remaining cost. “Even if it’s a small subsidy, it makes us feel like you 
care”.  
‒ Educate and raise awareness of how to install personal water 
infrastructure including through case studies and cost-benefit analysis.  
Engagement 
Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Plan for the EP 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Build more localised weather stations and provide more short- and long-term 
weather forecasts: 
‒ Install a doppler Radar System for eastern Eyre Peninsula. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  65 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
‒ Investigate development of a mesonet automatic weather station 
network for the Eyre Peninsula 
‒ Improve media reporting on rainfall received in rural areas, including 
via nightly TV weather reports   
‒ Bring back Dale Grey (or similar) who provided a predictive fortnightly 
and monthly forecast regarding weather patterns, wind direction, 
rainfall, climate indicators etc.   
‒ Ensure BOM climate scientists in Adelaide have a comprehensive 
understanding of the agricultural system on the Eyre Peninsula. 
‒ Support early detection of drought in the Eyre Peninsula context. 
‒ Support the installation of on-farm weather stations (eg AgByte) on 
individual farming properties to deliver the most accurate and hyper-
local weather information to support better decisions. 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Increase local crop storage capacity: 
‒ Support farmers to build on-farm storage for harvested crop and seed, 
to enable them to store feed for stock or save crop to sell when 
market conditions are stronger, and to enable flexibility in sowing 
programs respectively.  
‒ Consider opportunities for community owned and run grain storage 
facilities to reduce double handling, transport costs and management 
fees.  
‒ Encourage farmers to store grain in the system, eg in Viterra or T-
Ports silos.  
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
• Increase childcare capacity of the Eyre Peninsula: 
‒ Advocate for more commercial childcares and increased caps of 
government run Rural Cares to provide more childcare places and free 
up partners to re-enter the workforce and provide households with a 
source of off-farm income.  
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
• Support construction and implementation of other farm infrastructure and 
technology: 
‒ Provide rebates for containment feedlots which helps farmers to 
maintain good paddock vegetation cover and avoid erosion. 
‒ Support uptake of technology such as remote water monitoring, 
automated feeding, drones, virtual fencing, soil moisture probes etc.  
‒ Stock water shading infrastructure to minimise evaporation  
‒ Better collection of quality data on farm.  
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EPLB Emergency 
Plan 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
• Provide local education, training and employment opportunities to keep people 
in the region, with a focus on the agricultural sector and allied industries. 
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  66 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Invest in the places where community gather such as sporting clubs and other 
community spaces. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Continue to provide good transport options for export of agricultural goods: 
‒ Continue competition between Viterra and T-Ports  
‒ Explore opportunities to build a new multi-purpose sea port with 
containerised capacity  
‒ Improve road quality  
‒ Reducing freight costs (road, rail, ports) 
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EG Ag Vision 2050 
• Monitor for early warning signs of drought. 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop  
EPLB Emergency 
Plan 
• Progress opportunities for energy transformation, reducing reliance on fossil 
fuels, and delivering more localised generation and distribution. 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EG Ag Vision 2050 
• Encourage community cooperatives and other collaborative farming such as 
bulk buys, community storage solutions etc.  
Engagement 
EG Ag Vision 2050 
• Enhance local infrastructure for manufacturing, processing, storage and 
shipping. 
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EG Ag Vision 2050 
 
 Governance and advocacy opportunities 
Table 19 Governance and advocacy opportunities to build drought resilience  
Opportunity 
Source 
• Coordinate delivery of drought programs to maximise efficiency and 
effectiveness.  
Engagement 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
• Deliver programs and funding in a way that suits the local communities – 
understand what people need and how to deliver in a way that suits them. Use 
a bottom-up, community-driven approach where possible. 
• Have farmers and agricultural groups engaged and involved at all levels when 
it comes to decision-making, future planning and critically assessing outcomes 
of relevant initiatives. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EPLB Landscape Plan

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  67 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Ensure proactive communication when droughts are projected, encourage 
farmers to act early and help them to make decisions.  
• Improve communication of what drought support and other support is 
available. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Improve public perception in metropolitan areas of agriculture and farmers and 
the important role they play in South Australia’s food security and economy, 
and increase appreciation for their hard work.  
• Enhance social license through better storytelling and demystifying agriculture. 
Engagement 
EP Ag Vision 2050  
• Ensure drought resilience programs minimise paperwork and red tape for 
regional organisations and individuals. 
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Work with the media to help to promote grants, share good stories, support 
public perception of farmers, and avoid promotion of the wrong things (eg 
dramatising weather predictions etc.). 
Engagement 
• Engage and collaborate with Aboriginal individuals and groups. 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Scope projects prior to funding becoming available, to ensure the Eyre 
Peninsula is funding and project ready. 
Engagement 
AirEP Strategic Plan 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
• Progressively evolve Eyre Peninsula farmers from price-takers to price-makers 
by de-commoditising offerings wherever possible via collective marking and 
other strategies to build brand strength and market appetite for Eyre Peninsula 
grain and value-added agricultural products. 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
• Ensure drought programs are locally relevant to the Eyre Peninsula and to 
particular regions within the Eyre Peninsula. 
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  68 
 
 Environmental opportunities 
Table 20 Environmental opportunities to build drought resilience 
Opportunity 
Source 
• Identify and promote mechanisms to increase landowner capacity to 
implement programs to manage pest plants and animals: 
‒ Continue to support landholders to control pest plants and animals 
including through provision of bait for pest animals and culling of 
overabundant native animals. 
‒ Continue to monitor for new incursions of pest animals and plants (eg 
Buffel Grass) and control/eradicate as required. 
Engagement 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EPLB Landscape Plan 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
• Effectively manage water allocation planning and water affecting activities in 
prescribed water areas. 
• Monitor groundwater and other natural resource condition. 
Engagement 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
EPLB Landscape Plan 
• Work with SA Water to implement interim water resource efficiency program 
and any water restrictions that may occur to protect the condition of local 
groundwater aquifers. Ensure the agricultural sector and community are 
notified of any upcoming water restrictions well in advance, and support them 
to put in place measures to reduce their water use or secure other water 
supplies.  
Engagement 
 
• Protect high value agricultural areas from development. 
Engagement 
• Maintain township green space – “having just a little oasis of green can really 
bolster spirits”.  
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Support bushfire preparedness, including water availability for fighting fires. 
Engagement 
• Work with Aboriginal individuals, communities and organisations to learn from 
their knowledge of native vegetation cover to maintain soil moisture. 
Engagement 
Southern Wheatbelt 
RDRP 
• Investigate and support the uptake of agricultural practises that increase 
biodiversity such as regenerative agricultural practises, quantifying the value of 
biodiversity on-farm.  
• Improve the quality of existing biodiversity/revegetation programs and develop 
income streams to support activities/programs/incentives. 
SA Drought Hub 
Node Workshop 
• Promote opportunities for carbon sequestration into soils via contemporary 
farming practices and perennial vegetation. 
• Build carbon farming literacy through delivery of workshops and accessible 
information. 
EP Strategic Regional 
Plan 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
Regional Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Plan for the EP

Key Insights Paper | Opportunities for increasing drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula  |  69 
 
Opportunity 
Source 
EP Drought 
Taskforce 
• Own and adapt to the challenge of net zero emissions targets locally through 
diverse initiatives (eg hydrogen powered machinery, slow-release fertilisers, 
decreased livestock, increased legumes). 
EP Ag Vision 2050 
SARDI Strategic Plan 
• Investigate opportunities to build Eyre Peninsula’s agricultural brand with low 
emissions grain / ESG supporting products as a brand tenet. 
EP Ag Vision 2050

Key Insights Paper | References  |  70 
 
 References  
Air EP 2021, AIR EP Strategic Plan 2021 – 2026, <https://airep.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/AIR-
EP-Strategic-Plan-2021-V1-adopted-June-2021.pdf> 
AIR EP 2024, Project List, AIR EP, viewed 17 July 2024, <https://airep.com.au/research-project-list/>. 
AIR EP n.d., About AIR EP, AIR EP, viewed 17 July 2024, <https://airep.com.au/about/air-ep/>. 
AIR EP, SARDI & Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2023, ‘Eyre Peninsula – Planning Sustainable Growth 
Vision 2050 - A shared Vision for farming on the Eyre Peninsula in 2050’, AIR EP, SARDI & Eyre Peninsula 
Landscape Board, viewed 16 July 2024 <https://airep.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Farming-on-the-
EP-Vision-2050-d4b.pdf>. 
Arbon, P 2024, ‘Torrens Resilience’, presentation notes from Rural Resilience: Enhancing Wellbeing 
Strengthening Communities, Flinders University and SA Drought Hub, on 14 June 2024.  
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 2021, Search Census data, Australian Bureau of Statistics, viewed 11 
July 2024, <https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/search-by-area>. 
Bureau of Meteorology & CSIRO 2019, Regional Weather and Climate Guides, Commonwealth of Australia, 
Bureau of Meteorology, viewed 18 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/climate-guides/guides/046-
Eyre-Peninsula-SA-Climate-Guide.pdf>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2005, Average annual and monthly evapotranspiration maps, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 18 June 2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/evapotranspiration/ 
Bureau of Meteorology 2019, Explainer: what is drought?, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 18 June 
2024, <https://media.bom.gov.au/social/blog/2179/explainer-what-is-drought/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Previous droughts, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2021a, Average annual, seasonal and monthly rainfall maps, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 20 June 2024, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rainfall/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2021b, What is El Niño and how does it impact Australia?, Commonwealth of 
Australia, viewed 17 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/updates/articles/a008-el-nino-and-
australia.shtml>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2022, Average monthly and annual temperature maps, Commonwealth of Australia, 
viewed 20 June 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/temperature/>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2024, Understanding drought, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 20 June2024, 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>. 
Bureau of Meteorology 2024a, Annual and monthly potential frost days, Bureau of Meteorology, viewed XYZ 
2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/frost/>.  
Bureau of Meteorology 2024b, Southern Annular Mode and the Australian climate, Bureau of Meteorology, 
viewed XYZ 2024, <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/sam/#tabs=SAM-in-winter>.

Key Insights Paper | References  |  71 
 
Carpenter, S. R., K. J. Arrow, S. Barrett, R. Biggs, W. A. Brock, A.-S. Crépin, G. Engström, C. Folke, T. P. 
Hughes, N. Kautsky, C.-Z. Li , G. McCarney, K. Meng , K.-G. Mäler, S. Polasky, M. Scheffer, J. Shogren, T. 
Sterner, J. R. Vincent, B. Walker, A. Xepapadeas, and A. De Zeeuw. 2012, General resilience to cope with 
extreme events. Sustainability, 4(12):3248-3259. <https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/4/12/3248>  
Council of Australian Governments 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience, Commonwealth of 
Australia, <https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/emergency/files/national-strategy-disaster-resilience.pdf>. 
Council of Australian Governments 2018, National Drought Agreement, 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/sitecollectiondocuments/ag-food/drought/drought-
policy/national-drought-agreement.pdf>. 
Crimp, S., Zheng, B., Khimashia, N., Gobbett, D. L., Chapman, S., Howden, S. M., & Nicholls, N, 2016, 
Recent changes in southern Australian frost occurrence: implications for wheat production risk, Crop & 
Pasture Science, 67(8), 801-811. https://doi.org/10.1071/CP16056  
Crossman, 2018, Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Management Policy (DRAMP) Framework, UNCCD, 
Bonn, viewed 15 June 2024,  <https://knowledge.unccd.int/sites/default/files/2019-
04/DRAMP_Policy_Framework.pdf>. 
CSIRO 2022, Seven megatrends that will shape the next 20 years, CSIRO, viewed 14 June 2024, 
https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2022/july/seven-megatrends-that-will-shape-the-next-20-years 
Department for Environment and Water 2022, Guide to Climate Projections for Risk Assessment and 
Planning in South Australia, Government of South Australia through the Department for Environment, 
Adelaide, 
<https://data.environment.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/Guide%20to%20climate%20projections%20for%
20risk%20assessment%20and%20planning%20in%20South%20Australia%202022.pdf>. 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024a, Analysis – How global energy prices are affecting 
the price of Australian farm inputs, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, viewed 16 July 
2024,<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/about/news/analysis-how-global-energy-prices-are-affecting-price-
australian-farm-inputs>. 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 2024b, Regional Drought Resilience Planning, Australian 
Government, viewed 14 January, <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/drought/future-drought-fund/regional-drought-resilience-planning>. 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment 2020, Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2020 to 2024, 
Australian Government, viewed 15 June 2024, https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/drought/future-drought-fund>. 
Department of Environment, Water and Natural Resources 2013, Investigating Climate Change Impacts in 
South Australia’s Cropping Zone, viewed 15 August, 
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/kb-fact-climate-change-erosion.pdf>. 
Department of Primary Industries and Regions 2023, SARDI Strategic Plan 2023-2028, viewed 15 August, 
<https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/300856/sardi-strategic-plan.pdf>. 
DEW 2022b, Musgrave and Southern Basins Prescribed Wells Area: 2020–21 water resources assessment, 
DEW Technical Note 2022/18, Government of South Australia, Department for Environment and Water,

Key Insights Paper | References  |  72 
 
Adelaide, 
<https://www.waterconnect.sa.gov.au/Content/Publications/DEW/Eyre_Peninsula_2020_21_WRA_TN.pdf> 
Drought Agreement 2022, Review of the National Drought Agreement, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries 
and Forestry, Canberra, December. CC BY 4.0., 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/nda-review-report.pdf>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021a, Eyre Peninsula Regional Landscape Plan 2021-2026, Landscape 
South Australia Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/EP-
landscape-plan-2021.pdf>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021b, Land Management Control Policy, Landscape South Australia Eyre 
Peninsula, South Australia, 
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/2021_control_policy_land_management.pdf>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2021c, Subregional descriptions, viewed 16 July 2024, 
<https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/about-us/landscape-plan> 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024a, About landscape management, Landscape South Australia Eyre 
Peninsula, viewed 17 July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/about-us/about-landscape-
management>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024b, Future Water Security, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, 
viewed 17 July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/sustainable-agriculture/sustainable-
agriculture/future-water-security>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024c, Native plants, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, viewed  17 
July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/plants-and-animals/native-plants-and-animals/native-
plants>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024d, Revision of Eyre Peninsula Water Allocation Plan to commence, 
Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, viewed 17 July 2024, 
<https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/news/110424-ep-water-revision>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024e, Soil management, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, 
viewed XYZ 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/sustainable-agriculture/sustainable-agriculture/soil-
management>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024f, Sustainable agriculture, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, 
viewed 17 July 2024, <https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/sustainable-agriculture/sustainable-
agriculture#:~:text=The%20agricultural%20area%20of%20Eyre,oilseed%20crops%20in%20the%20rotatio
ns>. 
Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board 2024g, Biodiversity and Agricultural Natural Capital Assets Emergency 
Preparedness and Response Plan for the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Region. 
Eyre Peninsula LGA 2024, About the EPLGA, Eyre Peninsula LGA, viewed 17 July 2024, 
<https://eplga.com.au/about>. 
Eyre Peninsula Natural Resources Management Board 2016, Water Allocation Plan for the Southern Basins 
and Musgrave Prescribed Wells Areas, Government of South Australia, South Australia,

Key Insights Paper | References  |  73 
 
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/water_allocation_plan_southern_basins_musgrave_
pwas_web.pdf>. 
Fleming-Muñoz DA, Whitten S & Bonnett GD 2023, The economics of drought: A review of impacts and 
costs, The Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, vol 64, no 4, viewed 14 June 2024, 
<https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1467-8489.12527>. 
Fowler, K., Peel, M., Saft, M., Peterson, T., Western, A., Band, L, Petheram, Dharmadi, S., Tan, KS.,  Zhang, 
Lu, Lane, P., , Anthony Kiem, Lucy Marshall, Anne Griebel, Belinda E. Medlyn, Dongryeol Ryu, Giancarlo 
Bonotto, Conrad Wasko, Anna Ukkola, Clare Stephens, Andrew Frost, Hansini Gardiya Weligamage, Patricia 
Saco, Hongxing Zheng, Francis Chiew, Edoardo Daly, Glen Walker, R. Willem Vervoort12, Justin Hughes, 
Luca Trotter, Brad Neal, Ian Cartwright, and Rory Nathan 2023, Explaining changes in rainfall–runoff 
relationships during and after Australia’s Millennium Drought: a community perspective. 
Government of South Australia 2019, South Australia’s Disaster Resilience Strategy 2019 – 2024,  viewed 17 
July 2024, <https://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINET%20V
ERSION%20%281%29.pdf>. 
Government of South Australia 2023, Home, Northern Water, viewed 17 July 2024, 
<https://www.northernwater.sa.gov.au/>. 
Green, G, Gibbs, M, Alcoe, D and Wood, C 2012, Impacts of Climate Change on Water Resources Phase 3 
Volume 2: Eyre Peninsula Natural Resources Management Region, Government of South Australia through 
Department for Water, Adelaide, 
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/landscape/docs/ep/2021_control_policy_land_management.pdf>. 
Hughes N, Soh WY, Boult C & Lawson K 2022, Defining drought from the perspective of Australian farmers, 
Climate Risk Management, vol #35, viewed 14 June 2024, 
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096322000274https://www.sciencedirect.com/scie
nce/article/pii/S2212096322000274>. 
Kirono, D.G., Round, V., Heady, C., Chiew, F.H. and Osbrough, S 2020, Drought projections for Australia: 
Updated results and analysis of model simulations. Weather and Climate Extremes, 30, p.100280. 
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212094720300645>. 
Lehmann E 2023, Understanding the true cost of drought, CSIRO, viewed 14 February 2024, 
<https://www.csiro.au/en/news/All/Articles/2023/July/cost-of-drought%20>. 
Luke, H, Baker, C, Allan, C and McDonald, S 2020,  Agriculture on the Eyre Peninsula: Rural Landholder 
Social Benchmarking Report 2020. Southern Cross University, New South Wales, <https://airep.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2021/03/Eyre-Peninsula-Social-Benchmarking-Report-2020.pdf>. 
Macbeth, SM 2024, Building the future on your own terms in Resilient Communities in Dry Times Research 
Report, May 2024, no. 22, pp. 2-4, <https://assets-global.website-
files.com/63331877e8a75200a4d7078e/662f6d13aae0b90d943ca938_KondininDrought_May02_24_WEB.pdf
>. 
Maru Y, O’Connell D, Grigg N, Abel N, Cowie A, Stone-Jovicich S, Butler J, Wise R, Walker B, Million AB, 
Fleming A, Meharg S, Meyers J 2017, Making ‘resilience’, ‘adaptation’ and ‘transformation’ real for the design

Key Insights Paper | References  |  74 
 
of sustainable development projects: piloting the Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation 
Assessment (RAPTA) framework in Ethiopia, CSIRO, Australia. 
My Climate View 2024, Your location. Your commodity. Your climate. My Climate View, viewed 12 June, 
<https://myclimateview.com.au/https://myclimateview.com.au/>. 
Nidumolu, UB, Hayman, PT, Howden, SM and Alexander, BM 2012, ‘Re-evaluating the margin of the South 
Australian grain belt in a changing climate’, Climate Research, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 249-260, 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/24874996>. 
Pearson, J and Foster, B 2008, Drought Policy and Exceptional Circumstances Review, Eyre Peninsula 
Drought Task Force, South Australia, 
<https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/drought/submissions/sub011.pdf>. 
PIRSA 2023, Climate change adaptation, PIRSA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/climate_change_adaptation>. 
PIRSA 2024a, Crop and pasture reports, PIRSA, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/grains/crop_and_pasture_reports?shorturl_crop-report>. 
PIRSA 2024b, Managing drought, PIRSA, viewed 16 July 2024, 
<https://pir.sa.gov.au/emergencies_and_recovery/drought/managing_drought>. 
Prendergast, J 2024, ‘Farmers around the world to grow fewer grain crops as increased production costs 
narrow profit margins’, ABC News, 24 April, viewed 16 July 2024, 
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2024-04-18/global-grain-prices-down-input-costs-up-less-corn-wheat-
planted/103739024>. 
Profile.id 2023, RDA Eyre Peninsula Region Economic Profile, economy.id, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://profile.id.com.au/>. 
PwC 2022, Megatrends - Five global shifts reshaping the world we live in, Price Waterhouse Coopers, viewed 
14 June 2024, 
<https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.htmlhttps://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/megatrends.html
>. 
Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula 2022, Strategic Regional Plan 2023-2026, Regional 
Development Australia Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://www.rdaep.org.au/wp-
content/uploads/2023/05/RDA-Eyre-Peninsula-Strategic-Plan-2023-2026-FINAL.pdf>. 
Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula 2023, Regional Development, Regional Development 
Australia Eyre Peninsula, viewed 17 July 2024 <https://www.rdaep.org.au/economic-programs/>. 
Regional Development Australia Eyre Peninsula, Landscape South Australia Eyre Peninsula, and Eyre 
Peninsula Local Government Association 2022, Eyre Peninsula Strategic Regional Plan 2023-2026,  Regional 
Development Australia Eyre Peninsula, South Australia, <https://www.rdaep.org.au/wp-
content/uploads/2023/05/RDA-Eyre-Peninsula-Strategic-Plan-2023-2026-FINAL.pdf>. 
REMPLAN Community 2021, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.remplan.com.au/community/>. 
REMPLAN Economy 2023, Reports, REMPLAN, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://www.remplan.com.au/economy/>.

Key Insights Paper | References  |  75 
 
Roggema R, Vermeend T, Dobbelsteen AVd. Incremental Change, Transition or Transformation? Optimising 
Change Pathways for Climate Adaptation in Spatial Planning. Sustainability. 2012; 4(10):2525-2549. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525https://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525htt
ps://doi.org/10.3390/su4102525  
SA Drought Hub 2021, Node Co-Design Workshops Report, viewed June 3 2024, < 
https://sadroughthub.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/FINAL_SA-Drought-Hub_Node-Co-Design-
Workshops-Report-1.pdf>  
SA Drought Hub 2024, About, SA Drought Hub, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://sadroughthub.com.au/about/>. 
SA Water 2008, SA Water’s Long Term Plan for Eyre Region, Government of South Australia, South Australia, 
<https://www.sawater.com.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/55262/Eyre-Region-Long-Term-Plan.pdf>. 
SA Water 2024a, Additional actions to protect long-term water security for Eyre Peninsula - April 2024, SA 
Water, viewed 11 July 2024, <https://watertalks.sawater.com.au/getthefacts/news_feed/april-2024-water-
resources-no-longer-able-to-sustainably-meet-short-term-demands-for-water-supply-to-the-eyre-peninsula>. 
SA Water 2024b, Eyre Peninsula’s water supply update July 2024, viewed 11 July 2024, 
<https://airep.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/SA-Water-July-2024-update.pdf>. 
Siebentritt, M, Halsey, N and Stafford-Smith, M 2014, Regional Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Eyre 
Peninsula, Eyre Peninsula Integrated Climate Change Agreement Committee, South Australia, 
<https://cdn.environment.sa.gov.au/environment/docs/ep-regional-climate-change-adaptation-plan.pdf>. 
South Australian Fire and Emergency Services Commission, 2019, South Australia’s Disaster Resilience 
Strategy 2019-2024, viewed 27 June, <https://resources-
production.safecom.sa.gov.au/current/docs/SA%27s%20Disaster%20Strategy%20FINAL%20CABINET%20V
ERSION%20%281%29.pdf>. 
South Australian Research and Development Institute (SARDI) 2023, Eyre Peninsula Farming Systems 
Summary 2022, Department of Primary Industries ands Regions, South Australia, 
<https://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/432619/epfs-summary-2022.pdf>. 
State Planning Commission 2024, What we heard - Eyre and Western Regional Plan Visioning Workshop’, 
viewed 17 July 2024, < https://plan.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/1219029/Eyre-and-Western-
Regional-Plan-Visioning-Workshop-What-We-Heard.pdf>   
TAFE SA n.d., TAFE SA on the Eyre Peninsula, TAFE SA, viewed 16 July 2024, 
<https://www.tafesa.edu.au/locations/whyalla-eyre-peninsula>. 
Taylor, B, Walton, A, Loechel, B, Measham, T & Fleming, D 2017, Strategic foresight for regional Australia: 
Megatrends, scenarios and implications, CSIRO and the Australian Government Department of 
Infrastructure, Regional Development and Cities, Canberra, Australia, 
<https://publications.csiro.au/publications/publication/PIcsiro:EP175665>. 
 The Pinnaroo Project n.d., About the Pinnaroo heart Project, The Pinnaroo Project, viewed 5 July 2024, 
<https://thepinnarooproject.com.au/history/>.

Key Insights Paper | References  |  76 
 
Walker B. 2020. Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecology and Society, vol 25, no 2, 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_nothttps://www.resea
rchgate.net/publication/341139019_Resilience_what_it_is_and_is_not>. 
Wheatbelt Development Commission 2022, Southern Wheatbelt Regional Drought Resilience Plan, viewed 18 
July 2024, 
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/Southern%20Wheatbelt%20Regional%20Dro
ught%20Resilience%20Plan.pdf>. 
 
 Tools and resources 
Through the research and engagement, tools and resources to support landholders and stakeholders have 
been identified and shared: 
• IFarmWell https://ifarmwell.com.au/  
• Kondinin Group case studies and research reports https://www.droughtinfo.com.au/drought-reports  
• Drought Hub Knowledge Base https://sadroughthub.com.au/resources/knowledge-base/  
• AirEP projects https://airep.com.au/research-project-list/  
• SARDI - Eyre Peninsula Farming Systems Summary 2023 SARDI - Minnipa Agricultural Centre 
https://www.pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/465939/epfs-summary-2023.pdf  
• Landscape Boards links to tools and resources https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/sustainable-
agriculture/sustainable-agriculture/farming-hard-times  
• Landscape Board case studies https://www.landscape.sa.gov.au/ep/sustainable-agriculture/regenerative-
agriculture  
• PIRSA’s drought support page https://www.pir.sa.gov.au/emergencies_and_recovery/drought  
• The Future Drought Fund’s Farm Business Resilience Program 
https://pir.sa.gov.au/emergencies_and_recovery/drought/future_drought_fund_programs  
• All Future Drought Fund programs https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-
drought/drought/future-drought-fund  
• The Future Drought Fund’s Helping Regional Communities Prepare for Drought Initiative 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund/helping-
regional-communities-prepare-for-drought-initiative

Key Insights Paper | Appendix A – Regional Engagement Summary Report  |  77 
 
Appendix A – Regional Engagement 
Summary Report

OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group 
24ADL-0635 
August 2024 
Eyre Peninsula 
Regional 
Drought 
Resilience Plan 
– Engagement 
Summary Report 
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan

https://urpsau.sharepoint.com/sites/Synergy/Shared Documents/Projects/24ADL/24ADL-0635 - EP Regional Drought Resilience Plan/Reports/241205_R6_v2_Engagement Summary Report.docx 
 
 
 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – 
Engagement Summary Report 
August 2024 
 
Lead consultant 
URPS 
27 Halifax Street 
Enter via Symonds Pl 
Adelaide  SA  5000 
(08) 8333 7999 
urps.com.au  
Prepared for 
Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group 
Consultant Project Manager 
Anna Pannell, Associate Director 
apannell@urps.com.au 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document history and status 
Revision 
Date 
Author 
Reviewed 
Details 
V1 
17/07/24 
E. Mansfield 
A. Pannell 
Draft report for Advisory Group review  
V2 
15/08/24 
E. Mansfield  
Advisory Group 
Updated report following Advisory Group review 
 
 
We acknowledge the Kaurna People as the Traditional Custodians of the land on which we work and pay respect to their Elders past, present and emerging. 
© URPS. All rights reserved; these materials are copyright. No part may be reproduced or copied in any way, form or by any means without prior permission.  
This report has been prepared for URPS’ client. URPS and its associated consultants are not liable to any person or entity for any damage or loss that has occurred, 
or may occur, in relation to that person or entity taking or not taking action in respect of any representation, statement, opinion or advice referred to herein.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  |  Contents | i 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Contents 
Acknowledgement of Country................................................................................ 1 
Executive Summary .............................................................................................. 2 
 
Introduction ............................................................................................... 4 
 
What we wanted to know ......................................................................................... 4 
 
How we engaged ..................................................................................................... 4 
 
Our key findings ....................................................................................................... 6 
 
What makes individuals, communities, and regions resilient to drought? ........ 7 
 
Social characteristics ................................................................................................ 7 
 
Financial and business characteristics ........................................................................ 7 
 
Environmental characteristics .................................................................................... 8 
 
Infrastructure and services characteristics ................................................................. 8 
 
Innovation, research and development characteristics ................................................ 8 
 
How does drought impact the Eyre Peninsula? ............................................ 10 
 
Social impacts ........................................................................................................ 10 
 
Financial and business impacts ............................................................................... 12 
 
Environmental impacts ........................................................................................... 13 
 
Service and infrastructure impacts .......................................................................... 14 
 
What would help enhance drought resilience? ............................................ 15 
 
Financial and business opportunities........................................................................ 15 
 
Social and community opportunities ........................................................................ 18 
 
Innovation, research and development opportunities ................................................ 19 
 
Services and infrastructure opportunities ................................................................. 20 
 
Governance and advocacy opportunities .................................................................. 22 
 
Environmental opportunities ................................................................................... 23 
 
Principles .................................................................................................. 24 
 
Other challenges and opportunities ............................................................ 25 
 
Regional characteristics ............................................................................. 27

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report | Executive Summary  |  1 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Acknowledgement of Country 
We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of the land on which we work, live and play and their continuing 
connection to land, sea, culture and community. We pay respect to Elders past and present, and extend that 
respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in our community. 
In particular, we acknowledge the Aboriginal peoples of the Eyre Peninsula region covered by this Plan, 
including the Barngala, Nauo, Wirangu, Kokatha and Mirning peoples.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report | Executive Summary  |  2 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Executive Summary 
The Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group is currently preparing a Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan for the Eyre Peninsula.  
Regional forums were held with stakeholders and community in each of the 11 council areas in the region to 
gather insights to inform the preparation of the plan. Two First Nations workshops were held in Port Lincoln 
and Ceduna, to bring together leaders and representatives of First Nations groups and organisations. 
Opportunities for online engagement were provided through an online survey and online workshop. Key 
informant interviews were also held with 12 selected individuals across the region to gather deep insights 
into their experiences with drought and ideas about building drought resilience on the Eyre Peninsula. In 
total, 98 individuals took part in the engagement. 
The regional engagement helped the project team to understand: 
• What makes individuals, communities and regions resilient to drought?  
• How is the Eyre Peninsula impacted by drought? 
• How can the resilience of the Eyre Peninsula to drought be maintained and enhanced?  
Community members and stakeholders shared a wide diversity of perspectives, experiences and priorities. 
These have been summarised in this report and will be used to inform the draft Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan.  
Some of the comments which were raised most frequently through the engagement included the following:  
What makes people, communities and regions resilient to drought?  
• Social connection and good relationships/support. 
• Experience from previous droughts or other hardships. 
• Good stress management and decision making including when under high pressure. 
• Long term financial and business planning that accounts for good and bad years.  
• Water infrastructure that provides water security. 
• Implementation of good farming practices that maintain and enhance soil health and maximise 
profitability in the long term. 
• Continually innovating, learning and being receptive to new technologies, techniques, varieties, 
chemicals, etc. 
• Diverse sources of household and region income, including through avenues that are not reliant on 
rainfall.  
How does drought impact the Eyre Peninsula?  
• The impacts of drought on mental health and wellbeing were highlighted again and again. The loss of 
crops, stock and income, and the mental toll of big decision making can lead to stress, depression, social 
withdrawal, loss of purpose and hope, shame and in the most devastating of circumstances, suicide. 
Mental health and wellbeing impacts are felt by farmers and business owners but also their family, 
friends and the wider community.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report | Executive Summary  |  3 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
• Loss of income and high and ongoing input costs leads to financial hardship for farms and other business, 
increasing their debt, and can cause some to sell if they are no longer viable.  
• Loss of jobs and difficult conditions can cause people to leave the region in search of better economic 
and lifestyle opportunities, and many of these people will not return following the drought. This has 
significant flow on effects for towns and the community.  
• Rainwater tanks and dams dry up, increasing demand for mains water with associated impacts on water 
security.  
• Soil and vegetation condition decline, leading to soil erosion which can take many years to recover.  
How can resilience to drought be enhanced on the Eyre Peninsula?  
• Deliver financial and business management education and training for farmers and other business 
owners.  
• Provide mental health and wellbeing counselling, support and training. 
• Invest in agricultural research and development and disseminate findings to the broader agricultural 
community effectively.  
• Provide regional mains water security for the Eyre Peninsula. 
• Encourage use of financial incentives to plan ahead and save money in good years, including through 
Farm Management Deposits. 
• Support farms to plan in advance of drought. 
• Support increasing household and farm scale water infrastructure. 
• Provide funding for local infrastructure programs to keep locals employed and stimulate local economic 
activity during drought. 
• Build more localised weather stations/doppler radar sites and provide more short- and long-term weather 
forecasts, especially for central and eastern Eyre Peninsula.  
• Diversify the economy at a regional and household scale. 
• Facilitate community connection through events, sports or other initiatives. 
• Deliver programs and funding in a way that suits the local communities – understand what people need 
and how to deliver this locally in a way that suits them.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 4 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
Introduction  
 
What we wanted to know  
The Eyre Peninsula Drought Resilience Advisory Group is currently preparing a Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan for the Eyre Peninsula. The Regional Drought Resilience Plan will identify opportunities to enhance the 
region’s ability to prepare for, respond to and recover from drought, which will also help them be more 
resilient to other stresses or pressures. 
The regional engagement helped the project team to understand: 
• What makes individuals, communities and regions resilient?  
• How is the Eyre Peninsula impacted by drought? 
• How can the resilience of the Eyre Peninsula to drought be maintained and enhanced?  
Community members and stakeholders shared a wide diversity of perspectives, experiences and priorities. 
These have been summarised in this report and will be used as the foundation of the draft Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan.  
 
How we engaged  
11 regional forums were held through early July 2024 with stakeholders and community members in each of 
the 11 council areas in the region to gather insights for the preparation of the plan. 56 people participated in 
the workshops.  
These workshops were held in the following locations:  
• Whyalla  
• Kimba 
• Ceduna 
• Streaky Bay 
• Elliston 
• Port Lincoln 
• Cummins 
• Wudinna 
• Cleve 
• Cowell 
• Tumby Bay 
Two First Nations workshops were held in Port Lincoln and Ceduna in early July, to bring together leaders 
and representatives of First Nations groups and organisations and gather their input to the plan. Three 
people attended these workshops.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 5 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunities for online engagement were provided through an online survey and online workshop. 26 
responses to the survey were provided.  
Key informant interviews were also held with 12 selected individuals across the region to gather deep 
insights into their experiences with drought and ideas about building drought resilience on the Eyre 
Peninsula. Key informants included the following community members: 
• Bill Long: farmer and farm consultant, current AIR EP Chair 
• Brett Klau: Landowner Information Services Officer, Rural Business Solutions, former ABB Grain, 
Australian Wheat Board, Ag Engineer 
• Brian and Tim Wibberley: accountants and agricultural scientists   
• Bryan Smith: farmer, former SAGIT Board member and former AIR EP and EPARF Chair 
• Chris Fitzgerald: farmer, Rural Financial Counsellor, Rural Business Solutions 
• Chris Miller: Senior Agribusiness Relationship Manager Bendigo Bank Cummins 
• Heather Baldock: farmer, RDA Board Member, Founding Member Workshop 26, former Chair EP 
Landscape Board 
• Issac Gill: farmer 
• Karen Baines: farmer, Board Member and Executive Officer EP Cooperative Bulk Handling 
• Peter Kuhlmann: farmer, Former SAGIT and EPARF Board member 
• Tim Scholz: farmer, Managing Director EP Cooperative Bulk Handling, former Wudinna Mayor, former 
President South Australian Farmers Federation (SAFF) and former Vice President National Farmers 
Federation (NFF) 
• Tristan Baldock: farmer 
In total, 98 individuals took part in the engagement. Participants included representatives from the following 
groups: 
• Farmers (farm owners, families of farm owners, and employees)  
• Staff and Board Members from the Advisory Group organisations including Regional Development 
Australia Eyre Peninsula, Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board, SA Drought Hub, PIRSA (Primary Industries 
and Resources South Australia) and AIR EP 
• First Nations groups including Far West Coast Aboriginal Partnership and Eyre Plus 
• Members of local sporting and community organisations/clubs 
• Elected Members 
• Other government staff including council staff, SARDI (South Australian Research and Development 
Institute) Minnipa Agricultural Centre, and PIRSA Family and Business (FaB) mentors 
• Workers of agricultural allied industries including farm machinery and chemicals, grain brokers and grain 
storage and transport 
• Agronomists, agricultural scientists, farm consultants

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 6 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
• Rural Business Support staff 
• Members of peak bodies  
• Bankers and accountants  
• Not-for-profit organisations  
• SA Police 
• ABC Radio 
• General community members 
 
Our key findings  
The following report summarises the key themes of the workshops, key informant interviews and survey. 
Detailed workshop notes, survey responses and key informant interview notes can be provided on request 
from the RDA EP.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 7 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
What makes individuals, communities, and regions 
resilient to drought? 
Community and stakeholders were invited to explore the characteristics which make individuals, 
communities and regions resilient to drought.  
We heard again and again that Eyre Peninsula farmers are inherently resilient. Participants noted that “our 
farmers are not strangers to lean years and tough times”. They are continually faced with a wide suite of 
challenges which has enhanced their resilience and problem-solving skills through generations.  
Particular characteristics that were commonly identified through the engagement as core aspects of 
resilience are summarised below.  
 
Social characteristics 
• Strong social connections with family, friends, and the wider community facilitated through formal and 
informal networks.   
• Past experience and learnings of drought or other adversity. 
• A community that helps each other out in times of need. 
• Sharing of knowledge, experiences and expertise with others including friends and younger generations. 
• Good stress management and decision making including when under high pressure. 
• Good mental mindset, maintaining optimism where possible and accepting that you cannot control the 
weather. 
• Having involved and diverse community groups, sporting clubs and other community spaces that support 
community connection and cohesion and where people can look out for and support each other. This 
involves having a strong volunteer base who are willing and able to put in the work for the benefit of 
their community. 
• Good population base. 
• A desire to stay farming on the Eyre Peninsula. 
 
Financial and business characteristics 
• Good business and financial management skills, including through formal education. 
• Having a financial buffer, which could include money in the bank or stockpiles of feed and which allows 
for flexibility in decision making. 
• Being prepared for drought – understanding that drought will happen and having a plan prepared in 
advance to assist with decision making, identifying key trigger points and implementing associated 
actions. 
• Good decision making in responding to drought, noting that luck can play a role given no one can control 
the weather.  
• Personal/household income diversification including off-farm income streams not reliant on rainfall, 
and/or on-farm diversification (stock, different grain varieties, farms in different locations).

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 8 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
• Implementing good farming practices such as improving soil quality, crop rotation, new crop varieties, 
managing sustainable levels of total grazing pressure etc. to maximise profitability in the long term.  
• Having a good relationship with bank managers or other financial institutions, especially when they have 
a good understanding of agricultural business on the Eyre Peninsula. 
• Being flexible, knowledgeable and adaptable and waiting for the right time with the weather to sow and 
harvest, planting different crop varieties etc. – “nimble farmers can make better practical choices during 
drought”.  
• Regional economic diversity with both on-farm and off-farm jobs available for local people. 
• Local spending in the local economy. 
• Good succession planning. 
 
Environmental characteristics 
• Implementing farming techniques that maintain and enhance soil health and minimise soil erosion. 
• Maintaining vegetation cover. 
• Planting more drought-tolerant species and varieties. 
• Integrated, widespread, preventative pest plant and animal control with a focus in good years when 
these species proliferate.  
• Changing farming practises when drought begins, such as destocking, feed lotting or hand feeding stock 
to minimise overgrazing. 
 
Infrastructure and services characteristics 
• Water infrastructure that provides water security and affordability, including access to mains water as 
well as personal water storage such as water tanks, sheeted catchments, dams, bores and stock watering 
infrastructure. 
• Local services including childcare, healthcare, shops, housing and banks that are not just located in 
regional centres. 
• Regular and ongoing social and wellbeing services (including in times outside of drought).  
• Local accurate weather stations and weather predictions which support farmers to make the right 
decisions early. 
• Local, reliable and affordable supply of feed, fuel, fertiliser, seed etc. 
• Competition between local services which improve market conditions (eg T-Ports and Viterra, multiple 
local fertiliser/machinery suppliers, etc.). 
• Stores of feed (either on farm storage or in the silo delivery system). 
• Good port access and facilities. 
 
Innovation, research and development characteristics  
• Continually learning and being receptive to new technologies, techniques, varieties, chemicals, etc.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 9 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
• Continual research and development into more effective farming practices, seed varieties, herbicides, etc. 
with good dissemination of this information out into the broader agricultural community. 
• Locally specific research and development. 
• Good access to relevant information and knowledge.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 10 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
How does drought impact the Eyre Peninsula? 
Community and stakeholders were asked how drought impacts the Eyre Peninsula. A wide range of impacts 
on the community, economy, environment, services and infrastructure were identified.  
Community and stakeholders consistently noted that the mental health impacts of drought are significant. 
This was the first impact to be raised at many of the workshops. Drought is a mentally trying time for all. 
High pressure, a loss of crop, stock and income, a dying landscape, soil erosion and stress lead to significant 
mental health and wellbeing impacts, leading to suicide in the most devastating of circumstances.  
It was commonly recognised that the impacts of drought differ widely across the Eyre Peninsula. Drought is 
felt particularly deeply in the drier, more marginal regions of the upper Eyre Peninsula. Lower Eyre Peninsula 
regions including around Cummins still feel the impacts of drought, but generally receive a higher rainfall. 
These southern regions are also challenged by other factors including higher input costs and “wet droughts”.  
Participants emphasised that when drought occurs at the same time as low commodity prices and high 
interest rates, this confluence of events causes much more significant impacts than any of these factors 
alone. Many noted that the recent increase in input costs has made many farmers more financially 
vulnerable to drought.  
It was commonly identified that extended periods of drought are much more difficult to weather, with 
impacts increasing in subsequent years of drought. It was emphasised that the impacts of drought continue 
well after the first rains as people begin to rebuild their finances, soil condition and wellbeing.  
Key impacts identified through the engagement have been summarised by theme below.  
 
Social impacts 
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on the community and individuals: 
• Reduced mental health and wellbeing: 
‒ Increased difficulty in decision making – hard, emotional decisions to make, uncertainty as to 
what the right decision is, associated regret if the decision doesn’t pay off. High levels of 
uncertainty as to whether a drought is starting and how long it will be – “hardest thing is not 
knowing how long it will last”. Can lead to “decision paralysis”, exhaustion and impact on income. 
Risk appetites and confidence in decision making erodes. 
‒ Social isolation – reduced spending capacity and lower self-esteem results in self-isolation, a lot 
of facades are put up to save face (but few know what people’s actual situation is), people “go to 
ground” and retract from community life and events. 
‒ When farmers are forced to shoot and bury their stock because it is too costly to feed them or 
send them to market, this takes a major mental tool. The loss of a flock that was built up and 
bred over many years can be devastating and stressful.  
‒ Increased feelings of stress, panic, anxiety, depression, loss of purpose and hope. “There’s a 
slow, grinding, wears-you-down effect, mentally, financially and physically.” 
‒ Personal pride impact and feelings of shame – people feel that they have “failed”.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 11 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
‒ Change in amount of time working – those who have an increased workload with hand watering 
and feeding stock or working a second job to make ends meet become overworked and have less 
time for themselves and their family and friends. Those who have a decreased workload if they 
are only cropping have more time to worry.  
‒ Loss of crops, stock, trees, native fauna, gardens and greenery has a significant mental wellbeing 
impact – “when everything around you is dying that’s really tough”, “it’s soul destroying”. 
‒ Increased substance abuse – “my generation turned to tobacco and booze, younger farmers turn 
to other drugs”. 
‒ These mental health and wellbeing impacts can lead to suicide in extreme cases. 
• Stress and wellbeing impacts for family and friends: 
‒ Stress and mental health impacts can lead to relationship breakdowns, divorce and domestic 
violence.  
‒ Impact on children as they observe their parent’s stress, miss out on sport, school camps, 
boarding school, university etc. due to a lack of money. 
‒ Withdrawal from friends and taking out personal stress on others. 
‒ Poor mindsets ripple into the community more broadly – “loss of community moral”.  
• Population shrinkage as people move away for job opportunities elsewhere:  
‒ Some farms are forced to sell up, with farmers and their families leaving the region. These are 
usually bought by neighbours, resulting in bigger farms with less people to contribute to 
community life in the long-term.  
‒ Some businesses are forced to sell up as less money is spent in the region, with business owners 
and their families moving elsewhere to find work.  
‒ Farms and businesses lay off workers who are forced to leave the region to find work elsewhere. 
‒ Young people move elsewhere for better work and lifestyle opportunities, and may be less 
inclined to come back due to their experience of drought. 
‒ This decrease in population has many flow-on effects including reduced social fabric and 
township vibrancy, less volunteers, less local business and services, less school enrolments which 
result in quality of school facilities reducing, fewer members in sporting clubs and increased 
volunteer workload on less people. This is very hard to rebuild following drought.  
‒ “When we moved here 30 years ago, there were 16 other farms and farming families. Today, 
there are two other farms, and they’re both managed remotely / absentee owners.” 
• Loss of income, and therefore less money to spend on things that provide fulfilment, medical treatment, 
or sponsorship of volunteer organisations and clubs. 
While minimal in comparison to the negative social impacts of drought, participants identified that drought 
can occasionally cause positive social impacts:  
• Community closeness – community initiatives proliferate to bring people together, sporting clubs become 
a more important lifeline than ever, families and friends support becomes vital, innovation from

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 12 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
passionate people creates a sense of town / region pride and genuine human upsides (but needs drivers 
and supporters which is harder as populations decline) 
• Increased time – those who have less workload due to less economic activity have more time for family, 
recreation, volunteering and education (if funds and mental wellbeing allow). 
• Increased awareness of drought and how to respond – those who have experienced a drought reflected 
that this experience helps them during the next droughts – “what doesn’t kill you makes your stronger”.  
 
Financial and business impacts  
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on the economy:  
• Financial hardship on farms:  
‒ Farm productivity suffers, resulting in a loss of income particularly in subsequent years of 
drought. This makes it hard for farming families to continue to make ends meet – “I’ve stitched 
old sheets together and prayed for new shoes for my kids in drought years”.  
‒ High input costs remain, placing farmers in greater and greater debt. This has become more 
extreme in recent years, with farmers needing to spend more and more money upfront in 
modern farming, meaning they have “all their chips on the table” and there are less exit points. 
‒ Destocking at low prices, followed by restocking at high prices. Some farmers are forced to shoot 
their own stock when it is more costly to feed or send them to market– this is “gut wrenching”.  
‒ Prices for freight and grain for seeding and feed increase due to undersupply and high demand. 
Sometimes Eyre Peninsula farmers are not able to access feed due to lack of supply or extremely 
high price (hay is often bought and donated to farmers on the East Coast, reducing supply for 
the Eyre Peninsula).  
‒ Some farms are forced to sell.  
‒ Workers are laid off.  
‒ Loss of income restricts capital improvement.  
‒ Young farmers who have had a drought in their first year are particularly affected, with a major 
impact on their finances and willingness to stay in the industry.  
‒ If they are not making a profit, farmers are not able to get tax deductions on Super 
contributions, impacting on their ability to retire.  
• Financial hardship for other businesses/industries: 
‒ Farmers “tighten their belts” and stop spending as much in communities, which reduces income 
for other businesses such as car and machinery dealerships, chemical suppliers, grain brokers, 
local shops, etc. This is particularly true for agricultural allied industries and businesses that 
supply ‘luxury’ goods and services such as hairdressers, cafes, car dealerships, etc.  
‒ Workers are laid off and some businesses are forced to sell.  
‒ Lack of water for industries such as mining, fish production, etc. with subsequent impact on jobs 
and the economy.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 13 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
‒ Less ability to pay rates which impacts Councils’ ability to continue to provide services and 
infrastructure. 
• Agricultural plan derailment: 
‒ Otherwise well strategically planned farming operations have to recalibrate. Farming program is 
“thrown out’’ regarding what was planned to be planted and when, which has a flow-on effect to 
subsequent months/years.  
‒ Succession plans get tested as it becomes more appealing to sell to corporates / large farms than 
to children. 
‒ Off-farm income needs pursuing (which hurts the farm business). 
‒ Farmers become more risk averse in following years. 
• Changed farming practises: 
‒ Destocking (some agist, most sell, some have to shoot stock if they have left destocking too 
late). 
‒ Planting of different crops which are less reliant on rainfall. 
‒ Crops not planted particularly in marginal country or a smaller portion of planned cropping 
program planted as a risk management strategy. 
• Loss of workers:  
‒ Loss of farm workers, other skilled workers and young people which are difficult to get back after 
drought. 
While the negative impacts on businesses and finances are profound, some participants identified that as a 
result of drought they and their business became much better at forward planning and risk management, 
and would better understand what actions to take during the next drought.  
 
Environmental impacts 
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on the environment:  
• Soil erosion: 
‒ Loss of soil due to lack of vegetation, overgrazing and dry conditions exacerbating wind and 
water erosion. Soil impacts increase in subsequent years of drought and can take many years to 
recover.  
‒ Dust storms and the impact on living with constant dust. 
• Reduction in water availability:  
‒ Rainwater tanks and other surface water catchments run dry. 
‒ Increased groundwater use leads to a reduction in aquifer levels. 
‒ Lack of rainwater recharge to aquifers.  
‒ Water restrictions.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 14 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
‒ Some properties are forced to truck in water for stock and personal use in if they are not 
connected to mains water.  
‒ Pest and native animals compete with stock for water.  
• Reduced crop yield and less feed for stock. 
• Loss of native vegetation: 
‒ Loss of native vegetation due to lack of water. 
‒ Overgrazing by stock and native animals (primary producers occasionally release their livestock 
into native vegetation when there is not enough feed on farms to sustain them, although this has 
become less prevalent over time).  
‒ Subsequent impact on amenity, tourism, habitat availability and soil condition.  
• Pressure from pest plants and animals: 
‒ Pest plant and animal abundance increases in good years, meaning that in the bad years that 
follow pests have a bigger impact. 
‒ Fox baiting reduces as there are less sheep on farms, which means fox numbers increase. 
‒ Goats and deer migrate from the north in search of water and vegetation. 
• Impact on native animals: 
‒ Native wildlife dies due to a lack of vegetation and water.  
‒ Kangaroos, emus and dingoes migrate from the north (from conservation areas) in search of 
water and vegetation. 
• Increased bushfire risk. 
• Loss of gardens and green space.  
• Bringing in feed for stock from other districts can introduce new weeds. 
• Illegal dumping increases as people cannot afford to pay dumping fees. 
 
Service and infrastructure impacts  
Participants identified the following impacts of drought on infrastructure:  
• Loss of local services as businesses are forced to close. 
• SA Water mains restrictions. 
• Soil erosion causes soil to accumulate on roads, causing driving hazards and in some cases cutting 
properties off until roads can be cleared.  
• Lack of water for personal use such as showers and gardens.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 15 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
What would help enhance drought resilience? 
Community and stakeholders were asked to identify opportunities for enhancing drought resilience on the 
Eyre Peninsula. Opportunities to implement before, during and after drought were identified.  
The focus of this plan is on actions that can be taken at an organisational level (from sporting or community 
clubs through to state and federal government organisations) to support the Eyre Peninsula’s resilience to 
drought. Therefore, the opportunities below have been framed as actions that can be taken at an 
organisational level.  
However, there are many actions farmers and others in the region can take individually to enhance their and 
their community’s resilience to drought. Farmers are usually at the forefront of best practise, and already 
know of many of the actions they can take to enhance their drought resilience. Many of the actions 
identified below can also be initiated at an individual level, without the need to wait for a particular program 
or incentive to be delivered. These type of opportunities will be identified in the draft Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan.  
Commonly raised opportunities have been summarised by theme below.  
 
Financial and business opportunities 
Participants identified the following financial and business-based opportunities for enhancing drought 
resilience: 
Opportunity 
• Deliver farmer and business owner education and training: 
‒ Education to increase financial and business management skills, forward planning skills, 
succession planning, tax management strategies, digital literacy and technical skills.  
‒ Acknowledge that a one size fits all approach does not work. 
‒ Support successful existing initiatives such as Rural Business Support and Next Gen. 
‒ “Financial literacy and supporting programs to develop it is the number one thing – farming 
isn’t a lifestyle now, it’s a business” 
• Provide financial incentives to plan ahead and save money in good years: 
‒ It was commonly acknowledged that supporting farmers to save their own money in good 
years to get through bad years is a better approach than encouraging reliance on financial 
handouts during droughts (noting that it is hard to save for very extended droughts and 
financial support may be required in these circumstances).  
‒ Promote and enhance existing vehicles including Farm Management Deposits (FMDs) – “Farm 
Management Deposits (FMDs) are an excellent drought proofing tool”. 
‒ Consider whether improvements to FMDs could be made to ensure they are accessed during 
drought rather than treated as a retirement fund, and are available to all farms regardless of

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 16 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunity 
their business structure. Consider whether greater tax concessions could be made when 
farmers access FMDs during drought.  
‒ Allow other rural businesses in farming regions to access FMDs. 
• Support farms to plan in advance for drought:  
‒ Provide support (eg training, resources, money to hire a consultant, scenario planning 
workshops etc.) for farmers to prepare a Farm Drought Plan including with trigger points and 
associated decisions, strategies and procedures.  
‒ “It’s vital to have a roadmap that tells you what you’ll do when tough times come, allows you 
to have a vision and a sense of some control during difficult years, reminds you to remember 
that we planned for this and we’re getting through.” 
• Provide funding for local infrastructure programs to keep locals employed and stimulate local economic 
activity during drought: 
‒ Scope opportunities in advance for infrastructure programs that should be delivered once 
drought hits, to ensure funding is delivered quickly in the right places during drought.  
‒ During drought, implement these infrastructure programs to stimulate local economic activity, 
provide jobs and income to local workers who may be out of work, source local materials from 
local businesses, etc. 
‒ Prioritise projects that “give people a sense of pride in where they are, provides some relief 
from seeing dryness and dirt everywhere they look, boosts morale and confidence”.  
• Diversify the economy at a regional scale: 
‒ Advocate for and deliver new industries on the Eyre Peninsula which are not reliant on rainfall, 
to decrease community reliance on agricultural income. 
‒ Participants suggested that this could include renewable energy (in particular wind farms), 
Northern Water, new ports including with containerisation capacity, local agricultural value add 
(eg mill, abattoir, oil press, pelletising feed, protein powder etc.), mining, desalination plant, 
hydrogen production, ammonia production, transport hubs for trucks (food, showers, 
accommodation, mechanic – eg Eyre Hub at Kimba), online businesses, technology, space, 
Workshop26, earthworks/road building and seaweed.  
• Support diversification of income at an individual/household scale: 
‒ Diversification on-farm: eg different crops, sheep, saltbush, carbon sequestration, agritourism, 
farms in different regions. 
‒ Diversification off-farm: shares, property, online businesses, regional employment 
opportunities, jobs in town, online jobs, trucking company.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 17 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunity 
‒ This could include mentoring/business support to set up new businesses, subsidies during 
drought for educational improvement, etc.  
• Work with banks to increase their understanding of agricultural business and how to provide 
appropriate support.  
• Provide direct financial support for those in need: 
‒ For example Centrelink, Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) low interest loans, tax 
subsidies, council rate subsidies, Job Keeper type programs, interest rate subsidies, Farm 
Household Support, PIRSA farmers assistance packages, freight and feed subsidies etc. “The 
RIC loans that were made available in 2020 were a saviour. It bought us some time to work 
our way through it.”’ “The Council Rate rebate was extremely easy to apply for and the 
funding very helpful”. 
‒ Ensure that financial support and incentives support the right people – for example if someone 
is working a second job on the weekend to put food on the table, this shouldn’t mean they are 
ineligible for financial support. Consider how financial support can promote good decision 
making (those who have prepared well for drought should not be penalised for this). 
‒ Ensure financial support available is well promoted, easy to access and minimises 
paperwork/red tape. Provide direct financial counselling to help people access financial support 
and understand what is available. 
‒ Provide financial support for other rural businesses in farming areas, not just for farmers. 
• Implement shop local schemes: 
‒ For example shop-local vouchers for local small businesses.  
• Support farmers to access feed for stock during drought: 
‒ Provide an easily accessible, central information source to identify where hay or grain can be 
bought from. 
‒ Support hay donations (eg Rural Aid), ensuring that this is done in an equitable way, does not 
bring in weeds, and provides an opportunity for farmers to get together and support each 
other.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 18 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
Social and community opportunities  
Community focused drought resilience opportunities identified by participants included: 
Opportunity 
• Provide mental health and wellbeing counselling: 
‒ Mental health and wellbeing support delivered in a range of ways to meet differing needs. For 
example, private counselling, mental health talks/events/workshops run by experts, 
inspirational speakers or farmers sharing their experiences (eg Beautiful Bogan, Kate Burke, 
Lain Montgomery, Sarah Prime, Dennis Hoiberg), bringing in counselling dogs. 
‒ Ensure mental health support: 
‒ Considers the differing needs of men, women and children. 
‒ Is delivered at appropriate times and locations to ensure they are accessible. 
‒ Provides opportunity for people to seek help confidentially. 
‒ Support existing services and programs to deliver mental health support where possible to 
avoid saturation/ duplication. Many successful programs were identified, including Mentally Fit 
EP, Our Town groups, Fat Farmers, local sporting clubs, Rural Business Support, Comedy, Beer 
& BBQ, FaB mentors, council programs, local Suicide Prevention Boards, Community Support 
Hubs, Ceduna Wellbeing Group, Beacon of Hope, IFarmWell, Lock Community Centre, Streaky 
Bay Wellbeing Hub and FRRR. 
• Deliver mental health first aid training:  
‒ Provide training to the community to assist them in being able to support others who they 
notice are suffering mental health issues, and connect them to the right services.  
‒ In particular, focus on training on those who interact with large numbers of community 
members such as sports coaches, agronomists and community leaders. 
‒ Tap into, support and/or expand existing initiatives such as the Are You Ok campaign, 
Movember, and suicide prevention week. 
‒ Encourage people to “check in with their mates” in an informal way. 
• Facilitate community connection: 
‒ Deliver initiatives that bring the community together, for example community events, 
workshops, presenters with appropriate skills and messages, comedians, family fun day, sport. 
Enable the community to play an active role in selecting which initiatives best suit their local 
town/needs. 
‒ Deliver diverse initiatives to suit different needs, including for men, women and children.  
‒ Ensure these events are free/accessible. Consider providing fuel vouchers for those in need to 
support them to attend.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 19 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunity 
• Encourage cross-generational experience transfer: 
‒ Provide formal and informal opportunities for people with experience of drought to share what 
worked and what didn’t work with others including young farmers. 
• Support local sport, interest and service clubs to continue to play their important role in the 
community:  
‒ The importance of sports and other clubs on the EP was emphasised again and again.  
‒ Support these clubs to run their day-to-day programs as well as one-off events that facilitate 
community connection and wellbeing.  
‒ Provide funding to pay sporting club fees to enable those without an income to retain 
membership. 
• Raise awareness of what support is available: 
‒ Raise awareness of mental health and financial support available through a range of formats to 
suit different needs. For example, a central website for information, or workshops/events that 
bring community together to hear from Centrelink, rural financial assistance, tools for 
wellbeing, to hear from a farmer who shares their own lived experience, etc.  
• Consider providing people from outside the region to help farmers to shoot their stock, as this is 
extremely mentally challenging for farmers to do themselves.  
 
 
Innovation, research and development opportunities 
Engagement participants identified the following opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
Opportunity 
• Invest in agricultural research and development: 
‒ Develop new farming techniques, varieties, technologies and chemicals that increase 
profitability and increase climate resilience.  
‒ Research and development needs to be locally specific. 
‒ Ensure information is affordable/free to access.  
• Raise awareness about best practise farming techniques in the wider community:  
‒ Regularly communicate research & development findings and encourage uptake in the 
community to increase efficiency and effectiveness of farm practices including during drought.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 20 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunity 
‒ Use a diversity of platforms to disseminate information, for example Stickybeak days. Field 
days, workshops, podcasts, YouTube videos, case studies, articles in Stock Journal, webinars, 
field days, extension officers, FaB mentors, Rural Business Support, Ag Bureau groups etc.  
‒ Support the Minnipa Agricultural Centre (MAC) undertake their research and extend their 
findings into the farming community including through Extension Officer roles. 
• Encourage farmers to reflect on their experiences following a drought, noting what worked, what didn’t 
work and what they could try next time to get through drought better including sharing learnings with 
others. 
• Provide funding for accountants or other business advisors to help farmers to work through the 
economic benefits of trying new techniques, approaches or business models, to help with educated 
decision making. 
• Provide funding and support for farmers to trial new techniques, varieties etc. on their own farms 
given the importance of locally specific research and development. 
• Ensure there is an appropriate supply of trusted, credible agronomists on the Eyre Peninsula.  
 
 
Services and infrastructure opportunities 
Participants identified the following infrastructure-based opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
Opportunity 
• Provide regional mains water security for Eyre Peninsula: 
‒ Deliver the desalination plant at Billy Lights Point as soon as possible to provide mains water 
security for Eyre Peninsula.  
‒ Notify farmers as soon as possible about any upcoming water restrictions before the 
desalination plant is completed, so that they can undertake appropriate forward planning.  
• Explore options for increasing town water security: 
‒ Ceduna: investigate build a water tank at the area in town where water naturally accumulates. 
SA Water to take over Council managed pipeline. 
‒ Smoky Bay: build a more effective wastewater treatment plant. 
‒ Kimba: upgrade or build a new SA Water rainwater tank or other community water storage 
infrastructure. 
‒ General: increase wastewater reuse in towns to maintain irrigation of cool, green spaces.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 21 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunity 
• Increase capacity of farm/household scale water storage infrastructure  
‒ Provide a water infrastructure rebate scheme for water tanks, sheeted catchments, dams, 
solar pumps, troughs, pipes, bores and water monitoring systems on personal properties (on 
farms and in town). Ensure this is delivered before drought so that households have the 
financial ability to fund the remaining cost. “Even if it’s a small subsidy, it makes us feel like 
you care”.  
‒ Educate and raise awareness of how to install personal water infrastructure including through 
case studies and cost-benefit analysis.  
• Build more localised weather stations and provide more short- and long-term weather forecasts: 
‒ Establish a doppler radar site to ensure contiguous coverage across Eyre Peninsula. This will 
enable better monitoring of rainfall events, allowing for more timely herbicide applications, 
reduction of herbicide losses, and improved grower time management. 
‒ Bring back Dale Grey (or similar) who provided a predictive fortnightly and monthly forecast 
regarding weather patterns, wind direction, rainfall, climate indicators, etc.   
‒ Ensure BOM climate scientists in Adelaide have a comprehensive understanding of the 
agricultural systems on the Eyre Peninsula. 
• Increase local crop storage capacity: 
‒ Support farmers to build on-farm storage for harvested crop, to enable them to store feed for 
stock or save crop to sell when market conditions are stronger.  
‒ Consider opportunities for community owned and run grain storage facilities to reduce double 
handling, transport costs and management fees.  
‒ Encourage farmers to store grain in the system, eg in Viterra or T-Ports silos.  
• Where possible, control and minimise farming input prices: 
‒ Participants commonly identified the extreme increase in the cost of inputs over the past few 
years, as well as the uncertainty of supply of inputs at times, as a major challenge. To address 
this, the following suggestions were made: 
‒ Continue diversification of suppliers to support competition eg T-Ports and Viterra, multiple 
chemical companies, etc.  
‒ Support local production of inputs. In particular, explore the opportunity for a local 
ammonia production facility to produce a local supply of fertiliser for the Eyre Peninsula to 
reduce reliance on global markets, provide security of supply, reduce travel costs and 
reduce emissions. 
• Increase childcare capacity of the Eyre Peninsula:

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 22 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
Opportunity 
‒ Advocate for more commercial childcares and increased caps of government run Rural Cares to 
provide more childcare places and free up partners to re-enter the workforce and provide 
households with a source of off-farm income.  
• Support construction of feedlots  
‒ Provide rebates for containment feedlots which helps farmers to maintain good paddock 
vegetation cover and avoid erosion. 
• Provide local education, training and employment opportunities to keep people in the region. 
• Invest in the places where community gather such as sporting clubs and pubs. 
 
 
Governance and advocacy opportunities 
Participants identified the following governance and advocacy-based opportunities for enhancing drought 
resilience: 
Opportunity 
• Coordinate delivery of drought programs to maximise efficiency and effectiveness.  
• Deliver programs and funding in a way that suits the local communities – understand what people 
need and how to deliver in a way that suits them. 
• Ensure proactive communication when droughts are projected, encourage farmers to act early and 
help them to make decisions.  
• Improve public perception in metropolitan areas of agriculture and farmers and the important role they 
play in South Australia’s food security and economy, and increase appreciation for their hard work.  
• Ensure drought resilience programs minimise paperwork and red tape for regional organisations and 
individuals. 
• Improve communication of what drought support is available. 
• Work with the media to help to promote grants, share good stories, support public perception of 
farmers, and avoid promotion of the wrong things (eg dramatising weather predictions etc.).

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 23 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
Environmental opportunities 
Participants identified the following environment-based opportunities for enhancing drought resilience: 
Opportunity 
• Deliver widespread pest plant and animal control: 
‒ Continue to support landholders to control pest plants and animals including through provision 
of bait for pest animals and culling of overabundant native animals.  
‒ Key pest animals include mice, snails, locusts, foxes and rabbits. Overabundant native species 
include kangaroos and emus. 
• Support land owners to implement farm management systems/approaches that maintain soil moisture 
and condition, minimise use of chemicals etc.  
• Monitor groundwater and other natural resource condition. 
• Protect high value agricultural areas from development. 
• Maintain township green space – “having just a little oasis of green can really bolster spirits”.  
• Support bushfire preparedness, including water availability for fighting fires. 
• Implement the Eyre Peninsula Landscape Board Disaster Resilience Strategy. 
• Work with First Nations peoples to learn from their knowledge of native vegetation cover to maintain 
soil moisture.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 24 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
Principles  
A number of comments were made by participants which relate to ‘principles’ of best practise drought 
resilience support. These have been summarised below.  
• Focus effort and investment at the preparation phase. “It is better to manage and minimise risk than to 
try to rebuild after a tough blow”. 
• Timing of delivery of programs during drought is critical. Ensure government policy intervention is 
mobilised quickly.  
• Recognise that drought support needs to continue past the end of the drought to help people recover 
their land, stock and wellbeing. “The first rain doesn’t stop the drought”. 
• Ensure investment is focused on locally driven projects (what locals need, planned for and implemented 
by local people). “Listen to the people on the ground and then take action to what they say”. Engage 
with each community at a local level, understand what they want and need, and work with the 
community to deliver this. “Connect to where people are, rather than asking them to come to you”.  
• Drive action through regional organisations where possible as opposed to delivering programs from 
Adelaide.  
• Support existing successful local groups and initiative to deliver programs where possible.  
• Ensure consistency of government programs that work well – do not reinvent the wheel every time if this 
is not necessary.  
• Avoid building overreliance on financial handouts – focus on resilience building financial savings before 
drought. 
• Ensure financial support helps the right people. 
• Ensure support is easily accessible and well communicated.  
• Use local trades, businesses and people to help deliver projects to generate local economic activity and 
employment. 
• Ensure drought programs recognise the variability of drought across the region – drawing boundaries on 
a map is problematic as one farm can receive rain and the neighbours may not have received any.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 25 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
Other challenges and opportunities  
While not a focus of the engagement, a number of broad challenges, opportunities and trends experienced 
on the Eyre Peninsula were identified by participants. While not directly related to drought, these challenges 
and opportunities are part of the Eyre Peninsula system and have a flow on effect to the agricultural system 
and allied industries. These challenges and opportunities can either exacerbate or alleviate the impacts of 
drought.  
Identified challenges and opportunities are summarised below.  
Prices  
• Sharply increasing input costs. 
• Fluctuating commodity prices. 
• High interest rates, when they occur.   
Services, housing and employment 
• Lack of childcare, which influences the ability for parents to re-enter the workforce. 
• Lack of skilled workforce for full time and part time/seasonal roles. 
• Lack of higher education including senior school and tertiary education. 
• Lack of diverse employment options. 
• Lack of housing.  
• Lack of medical services, including for mental health, and a lack of consistency in medical practitioners. 
• Opportunity to target backpackers, grey nomads and migrants to meet workforce shortages.  
Community  
• Reducing population in townships outside of regional centres. 
• Reduction in volunteering particularly in younger age groups.  
• Volunteer burn-out. 
• Increasing proportion of lower socio-economic classes drawn by low-cost housing.  
Regional infrastructure 
• Water security challenges on the Eyre Peninsula, including the need for a desalination plant and advance 
warning about any upcoming water restrictions.  
• Distance from good and services increases transport costs, reduces choice, and forces farmers to order in 
supplies so far in advance they cannot adapt their purchases based on the year’s conditions.  
• Lack of a local abattoir, containerised port services, or other local agricultural value-add opportunities.  
• Lack of mobile signal in some areas. 
• Common electrical outages in some areas.  
Agriculture

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 26 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
• Reduction in sheep for many farmers due to lack of strong market conditions in recent years, as well as a 
shift from merinos to dorpers/other meat sheep. 
• Increasing planting of lentils, which have high start-up costs but can provide significantly higher 
profitability than other commodities once established.

Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan – Engagement Summary Report  | 27 
 
OFFICIAL 
OFFICIAL 
 
Regional characteristics  
Going to every Council on the Eyre Peninsula highlighted the diversity of Eyre Peninsula. Some 
characteristics such as close-knit community atmosphere, reliance on agriculture and a strong sporting 
culture are consistent across the region. However, other factors vary. Each town has their own 
characteristics, perspectives, priorities, challenges and needs. 
It is important that the Eyre Peninsula Regional Drought Resilience Plan considers and works with the 
regional characteristics that are consistent across the region, while also acknowledging and catering to 
regional differences where possible.  
Key unique features identified through the engagement are summarised below.  
Rainfall  
Upper Eyre Peninsula experiences lower, more variable rainfall while lower Eyre Peninsula experiences 
higher, more consistent rainfall.  
Agriculture  
Upper Eyre Peninsula is more marginal for farming. As a result, this region focuses on traditional agriculture 
such as wheat and sheep. Weeds are less prolific, which lowers input costs.  
Lower Eyre Peninsula enjoys higher productivity. Its higher rainfall means higher value crops such as canola 
and lentils can be planted. Cropping on lower Eyre Peninsula has higher input costs with higher value seed 
and greater need for fertiliser, pesticide and herbicides. Higher rainfall makes them more vulnerable to water 
logging and disease. Higher input costs result in higher losses if crops are lost to events such as frost.  
Along the coast from Streaky Bay to Port Lincoln there is a higher proportion of sheep pastoralism than 
cropping due to rocky ground conditions.  
Soil 
Soil types differ across the region. The Eyre Peninsula region has 15 main soil groups. These present a 
variety of challenges including soil acidification, calcareous soils with lower nutrition due to phosphorus tie-
up, sandy soils, dryland salinity, soil structure decline, wind erosion, water repellent soils and soil borne root 
diseases. This influences the productivity of the soil, what crops can be sown, and what techniques should 
be used. Generally, the upper Eyre Peninsula suffers from lower soil nutrition, less adaptable rotational 
options and greater soil erosion.  
Population  
Regional centres including Port Lincoln and Whyalla are experiencing population growth. These centres have 
greater access to services. Outside these centres, townships are experiencing a decreasing population and 
have less access to services.