Far West 
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan

Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge the Barkandji, Maljangapa, Wilyakali (Wiljali) and Ngiyampaa 
(Ngemba) people as the Traditional Custodians of the lands and waters where we 
live and work, and pay our respected to Elders past and present.
We value the vital involvement of members of the primary production, service 
industries, health and education, First Nations and broader communities of 
Central Darling Shire, Broken Hill City and the Unincorporated Area of NSW to the 
formulation of this plan and extend our thanks to those who contributed.
The project was prepared by Meridian Urban and supported by 
Central Darling Shire Council, Broken Hill City Council and Regional 
Development Australia (RDA) Far West, through funding from the Australian 
Government’s Future Drought Fund and NSW Government.

Contents
Introduction
1
Far West drought resilience vision
2
Purpose of this plan 
3
How this plan supports drought resilience in the Far West 
4
Why we need a local plan
4
Region snapshot
7
The Far West region
8
People and community
9
Economy
10
Environment 
10
How this plan was prepared 
12
Alignment 
14
How our region is impacted by drought 
17
Interconnected drought impacts
17
Trends and stressors
24
Drought history
25
A focus on the 2017-2019 drought 
27
Future drought projections
28
Far West drought resilience 
33
Drought resilience strengths and opportunities 
36
Tilpa and Tibooburra area	
36
Wilcannia, Menindee, Ivanhoe and White Cliffs area	
36
Packsaddle and Milparinka area	
36
Broken Hill, Silverton and Scotia area	
36
The action plan
37
Priority activities
38
Pathways and actions 
39
Implementation 
46
Appendix A – Drought history 
51
Appendix B — Concepts to guide adaptive learning
58

Glossary
Key terms used throughout this plan are defined below.
ADAPTATION
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual or expected shocks and 
stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and socio-economic changes.
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE
Coordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between systems when designing interventions 
and for their implementation and evaluation.
COPING CAPACITY
Communities that may be constrained in their capacity to use available resources to cope with adverse 
events and to prepare for, absorb and recover.
DROUGHT
Drought means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors without changing the 
economic status or outcomes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
natural processes and ecosystem services.
GOVERNANCE
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a society share 
power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or informal.
INTERVENTION OPTIONS
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, initiatives and investments that are 
planned to bring about change in the system.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of lived experience within a landscape, 
bearing witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people 
interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
PATHWAYS
Understanding the future range of potential scenarios and the various pathways for adaptation relative to 
the systems that can be influenced.
RESILIENCE
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to maintain the existing functions, 
structure and feedbacks. 
RISK
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values 
and objectives associated with such systems.
SHOCK
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples include: major storms, floods, bush fires, 
heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism and cyber-attacks’.
SOCIAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
existing social and community functions.
STRESSOR
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect, e.g. drought.
SYSTEMS
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
THEORY OF CHANGE
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain how and why outcomes and impacts 
will be achieved through use, implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities and outputs.
TRENDS
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and are expected to shape change 
into the future.
THRESHOLD
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable causes a system to shift to a 
qualitatively different regime. Also referred to as a tipping point.
TRANSFORM
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, functions, feedbacks 
and identity.
TRIGGER POINT
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management intervention. Trigger points are 
usually defined in the planning phase
VULNERABILITY
The propensity to be adversely affected by a hazard, including elements of sensitivity and susceptibility, or 
differential patterns of capacities to cope or adapt.
IV
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP) program focuses on innovative 
actions to build regional drought resilience, taking steps to plan now to stem the 
impact of future drought on our region. The program is one of five focus areas 
under the Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought Fund1 and is jointly funded 
by the NSW Government to support regional consortiums of local governments and 
partner stakeholders to plan pragmatically and proactively for drought resilience.
1 Other focus areas under the Future Drought Fund include farm business resilience, roll-out of the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool, and 
better land management practices that support landscape resilience.
Introduction
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP) is a collaboration between Central Darling 
Shire Council, Broken Hill City Council and Regional Development Australia (RDA) 
Far West on behalf of the Unincorporated Area, alongside community and industries, 
working together to advance the region’s focus on its resilience to the impacts 
of drought. 
Drought is a recurring and challenging experience 
in Australia, not just on-farm but, for entire 
communities and regions. The impacts from 
drought are significant, extending across economic, 
social and environmental arenas. Even when 
drought breaks, the impacts for people, businesses 
and communities can linger for some time after. 
The Far West region of New South Wales (NSW) is 
exceptional for a range of reasons. It is a landscape 
of contrasts. It is the largest RDRP region in NSW, 
with the most dispersed population. Its contribution 
to the state and national economy is significant. 
The Far West is the first to enter drought in NSW 
and usually the last to cycle out of it. This is why 
our proactive efforts in drought preparedness is not 
only important to us; but, is factored into almost all 
that we do. 
The Far West experiences periods of persistent 
drought, set between cycles of good years. When 
dry times arrive, reduced groundcover, reduced 
access to water and feed, stretched budgets, 
increased workload, and reduced streamflow in 
the Darling (Baaka) system all take a toll. This plan 
looks at the region’s diverse impacts from droughts, 
using this knowledge and experience to inform how 
we, as a community, contribute toward enhanced 
drought preparedness into the future – before, 
during and after drought. 
While drought may be cyclical and nothing new, 
the stakes are rising. A plan can’t make it rain, but 
it can help by putting in place a series of options 
and opportunities to alleviate the stresses we have 
previously experienced during drought times, and 
position us well ahead of future dry periods. 
1
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Far West drought 
resilience vision
The drought resilience vision for the Far West 
acknowledges the drying climate of this part of 
Australia. It brings a sharp focus on the inter-
relationships and dependencies that exist which 
underpin the region’s economy, community 
connection and environmental systems. This is 
particularly poignant for the Far West, given the 
connection with the Darling (Baaka) River and its 
tributaries which sustain us in so many different 
ways. The river is mother, the heartbeat of the 
Traditional Custodians, the Barkandji people, of the 
Far West.
The vision is based upon a grassroots 
consideration of what can be realistically achieved 
by this foundational RDRP, acknowledging the new 
way in which planning for drought resilience is 
undertaken across Australia. As momentum builds 
and opportunities identified from the plan come 
to fruition, the ability to advance this vision will 
continue to grow. 
As the Far West is formed by many distinct and 
different communities, the needs across these 
communities are diverse. Not everyone is affected 
in the same way, to the same degree, or at the 
same time by drought. Different circumstances 
exist. Despite this, the region’s shared aspirations 
for drought resilience bring uniformity.
This vision has emerged from diverse and 
comprehensive stakeholder input. It recognises that 
for the Far West, a focus is needed on continuous 
improvement and proactive adaptation, facilitated 
by an integrated approach to how we plan for and 
act on drought preparedness. 
The vision, pathways and outcomes of this plan, 
together with the priorities of the Future Drought 
Fund provide the context for how drought resilience 
is contemplated for the Far West.
The pathways which support this vision reflect four 
key themes and associated outcomes that were 
highlighted through the stakeholder and community 
consultation process, presented in Figure 1. 
To continuously improve 
upon integrated drought 
preparedness and 
proactive adaptation, to 
position the region to 
weather the impacts of 
drought times and emerge 
stronger than before. 

image-landscape
Resilient
landscapes
Healthy Country and 
waters to sustain 
people and culture, 
environmental and 
industry needs

water
Resilient 
water
Water availability 
that can sustain 
the region, used 
efficiently to share 
and maximise 
its benefit

group-arrows-rotate
Resilient
communities
Connected people, 
families and 
communities that 
are supported by 
coordinated and 
resourced services

money-check-dollar
Resilient
business 
and economy
Innovative 
and adaptable 
enterprises which 
leverage changes in 
climate and market 
conditions 
Figure 1 — Far West’s drought resilience outcomes
2
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Purpose of this plan 
The Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
provides locally informed pathways and actions to 
strengthen existing local drought resilience and 
support an integrated approach across the region 
to navigate the complex effects of drought. The 
plan builds upon the local strengths, knowledge, 
and networks of communities, industries 
and services.
The plan recognises the role of healthy Country 
and waters in supporting the region’s economic and 
social functions, and the cultural connection to the 
lands and waters which the region’s First Nations 
people have maintained for tens of thousands of 
years. 
It is easy to say that we must plan and prepare for 
drought. Importantly, it must be acknowledged how 
challenging and complex this is. 
No two droughts are the same. Our circumstances 
are different with each drought and these change 
as drought continues. This is the chronic and 
persistent nature of drought that sets it apart from 
other climate or natural hazards.
The objectives of the Far West RDRP are to:
	
→Increase the understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought resilience, 
considering the region’s unique economic, 
environmental and community characteristics
	
→Identify drought priorities in the communities’ 
voice, and recognise each community’s 
strengths from which to build 
	
→Combine First Nations’ and local knowledge, 
with resilience and risk data and information, to 
make informed decisions
	
→Identify opportunities and actions available in 
the short, medium and long-term 
	
→Provide a platform and evidence-base 
to support public and private drought 
preparedness, response and recovery 
investment in the region, in a meaningful and 
impactful way.
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is supported 
by a separate comprehensive Resilience 
Assessment that provides the technical evidence 
base for the plan. The assessment captures 
drought impacts, history of drought in the region, 
future climate trends, and builds an understanding 
of the local context which may present certain 
vulnerability to drought. However, the core 
component of the plan is the diverse community, 
industry and service provider contribution to its 
development. 
The insights and direction that evolved through 
engagement sheds light on the local knowledge 
of the land and its function. It is informed by  the 
realities of how drought affects primary producers, 
workers, industry, children, families and our First 
Nations’ communities across the Far West. These 
communities stretch across a larges area including 
at Tibooburra, Milparinka, Packsaddle, Tilpa, White 
Cliffs, Wilcannia, Menindee, Ivanhoe, Silverton 
and Broken Hill, and the stations and properties 
in between.
Drought resilience, 
as described by the 
CSIRO (2022):
‘will ensure regional Australia can 
endure deeper, longer droughts, and 
recover from them sooner. This will 
help Australia’s agricultural industries 
maintain national farm income, increase 
food security, and protect the regional 
jobs that rely on agriculture during the 
toughest years. Importantly, it will also 
increase the resilience of rural and 
regional communities and improve 
environmental outcomes’.
3
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How this plan supports drought 
resilience in the Far West 
Looking back at the previous impacts of drought 
provides some indication as to what drought might 
look like in the future. While we don’t have a crystal 
ball to predict the future, we can consider these 
past impacts alongside future climate scenarios to 
consider responses under different drought futures. 
Building a collective understanding of how 
issues arise and persist from drought, and what 
has worked in the past to alleviate the extent of 
impacts, provides a useful guidepost to where our 
future focus should be. 
Through this framing, we can recognise the 
symptoms and understand the signals to support 
action. These actions can be scaled and directed 
under several pathways.
These pathways of absorb, adapt and transform 
provide a view of the priorities identified by 
this plan relative to different components of the 
drought cycle, effort and/or costs associated. Some 
opportunities are short-term and more immediate, 
whilst others are more transformative in nature and 
require long-term effort to generate change.
This concept forms part of a resilience ‘theory 
of change’ model2 which helps to break down 
and consider the complex elements of drought 
resilience and interlinkages across issues. This 
makes clear both how and why its impacts run so 
deep, and why an integrated and adaption-driven 
approach is required. This framing also helps to 
inform decision-making for enhanced resilience and 
adaptation as conditions and circumstances change 
over time.
2 The RDRP integrates the ‘Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach’ (RAPTA) developed by CSIRO which provides a framework to map 
resilience interventions. For more information on RAPTA, visit https://research.csiro.au/eap/rapta/ 
Why we need a local plan
Having a plan enables us to think and act 
strategically, rather than on an ad hoc basis once 
the pressures of drought are upon us. Ad hoc 
approaches tend to be limited in the options or 
opportunities that can be considered, and are 
often too late. The plan helps us coordinate and 
direct effort, resourcing, funding and investment to 
actions that offer maximum benefit. 
The state of NSW doesn’t end at Dubbo — a 
feeling strongly expressed through the stakeholder 
engagement process that has informed this 
plan. This engagement highlighted the existing 
resilience of the pastoralist and agricultural sector, 
and communities of the region, and the role that 
established networks play in supporting this 
resilience. It also has demonstrated that drought 
can impact communities and economic sectors 
outside of agricultural production differently, 
exacerbating existing vulnerabilities. 
Stakeholder and community consultation also 
highlighted the challenges of living in the Far West, 
underpinned by a common frustration of not feeling 
heard or seen. The city / bush divide can, in some 
ways, compound the trauma experienced during 
drought, and a strong shared desire for remote 
communities to be better understood by those 
outside of the region is critical to bridging this gap. 
Despite the physical distance between 
communities of the Far West, many have common 
challenges, priorities and aspirations when it comes 
to drought. The plan seeks to reflect local priorities 
and regional needs, supporting the strengthening 
of resilience to drought cycles. 
sun-plant-wilt
Absorb
impacts through tried 
and tested approaches
swap-arrows
Adapt
to changing 
conditions
seedling
Transform
to meet new or 
escalating challenges
Figure 2 — Action pathways
4
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
adopts a focus to: 
umbrella	
Anticipate effects 
people-group 	 Act together
dollar 	
Advocate for funding 
and action 
timeline-arrow 	 Advance regional strengths 
and opportunities.
The 2017-2019 drought was NSW’s worst drought 
on record. It lasted much longer in the Far West. 
In a changing climate, we need to ensure we take 
learnings from the past to be better prepared for 
next time.
The key ways that this drought resilience plan 
seeks to achieve this is through:
	
→Understanding how people, businesses, and 
service organisations act in building grassroots 
resilience and ensuring they’re supported by 
and advocated for in drought resilience actions 
	
→Presenting a unified voice that informs more 
effective resourcing, advocacy and funding 
	
→Having projects ready for pre, during and post-
drought implementation and taking advantage 
of funding opportunities with relevant and well-
developed projects or activities.
Developing the Far West Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan is about taking a local view for local 
benefit amidst a drought cycle that can affect large 
parts of the state and nation at the one time. 
A plan can’t bring rain, but it can work to make 
things a bit easier in its absence.
Image: Packsaddle (Supplied by RDA Far West)
5
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Regional Drought Resilience Plan Framework
Drought resilience vision
To continuously improve upon integrated drought preparedness 
and proactive adaptation, to position the region to weather the 
impacts of drought times and emerge stronger than before. 
Monitoring 
Evaluation and learning 
Outcomes
Action Pathways
	
›
Wilcannia weir replacement project
	
›
Water security
	
›
Water efficiency
	
›
Water quality
	
›
Greening, open space management and recreation
Specific 
Actions

(Absorbing,
adapting and 
transforming)
Resilient 
water
	
›
Weather intelligence
	
›
Community connection and wellbeing
	
›
Support for youth
	
›
Sustainable communities
	
›
Governance and collaboration
Resilient 
communities
	
›
Advocacy
	
›
Rural business planning
	
›
Local business and value adding opportunities
	
›
Infrastructure to support competitive market access
Resilient 
businesses 
and economy
	
›
Biosecurity
	
›
Rangelands management
Resilient 
landscapes
Implementation
Resilient water
Water availability that can sustain the 
region, used efficiently to share and 
maximise its benefit
Resilient communities
Connected people, facilities and 
communities that are supported by 
coordinated and resourced services
Resilient businesses and economy
Innovative and adaptable enterprises 
which leverage changes in climate and 
market conditions
Resilient landscapes
Healthy Country and waters to sustain 
people and culture, environmental and 
industry needs
Plan outcomes
Interconnected drought impacts
PEOPLE AND 
COMMUNITIES
FAMILIES
TOWNS AND 
VILLAGES
ECONOMIC
PRIMARY 
PRODUCERS
FIRST 
NATIONS
ENVIRONMENTAL
Figure 3 — Plan framework
6
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Region snapshot
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY 
GROSS VALUE
Central Darling $31.3M
Broken Hill $3.95M
Unincorporated Far West $31.6M
PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL 
COMMODITIES 
cow Livestock (+90%)
sheep Sheep and cattle
shirt Wool pig Other livestock
wheat Broadacre crops peanut crate-apple Fruit and nuts
people-roof
20,441
population as at 2022
First Nations population
13.2%
(3.4% NSW average)
person-sign
Unemployment
Central Darling: 7%
Broken Hill: 4.9%
Unincorporated Far West: 4%
user-tie
Median age
42
(39 NSW average)
car-building
Gross Regional Product 
Central Darling $90M
Broken Hill $1.3B 
Unincorporated Far West $77M
shop
Local businesses
1,297
user-doctor-hair
Local jobs
8,508
LARGEST INDUSTRIES 
(BY EMPLOYMENT)
star-of-life Health Care and 
Social Assistance
pickaxe Mining 
tractor Agriculture
TERTIARY 
INSTITUTIONS
building-columns Country Universities 
Centre Far West
building-columns TAFE NSW
building-columns Robinson College
building-columns Broken Hill University 
Department of Rural Health
AREAS OF SIGNIFICANCE
water Barwon–Darling (Baaka) 
River system
water Paroo River
water Menindee Lakes
trees Mutawintji, Sturt, and 
Kinchenga National Parks
trees Living Desert State Park
cactus Mundi Mundi Plains
Information sourced from: ABS 2021 Census data, Regional Development Australia, Far West NSW Workforce Development Report, and 
AgTrack - Agricultural and Land Use Dashboard
7
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Silverton
PAROO RIVER
BAAKA
(DARLING)
RIVER
MENINDEE
LAKES
The Far West region
The Far West borders South Australia to the west, Queensland to 
the north, Bourke, Cobar and Carrathool local government areas 
(LGAs) to the east, and Wentworth and Balranald LGAs to the 
south. The region spans approximately 146,170 square kilometres, 
extending across the outback semi-arid landscapes of NSW, home to 
geologically unique and mineral rich areas and important waterways. 
The role of water is a significant feature of the region’s rangelands (arid and semi-
arid) environment. The Darling (Baaka) River flows through Central Darling Shire, a 
focus of community connection – particularly for the Barkandji people. The river plays 
an integral role connecting the northern basin of the Murray-Darling system to the 
southern basin which connects with the Murray River to the south before continuing 
to flow into South Australia. 
The extent of the region, and its position at the middle of the large, complex 
and heavily regulated basin of the Murray-Darling Basin invites a number of 
challenges relevant to drought resilience. Water supply arrangements are vital to 
any conversation about drought and the management of water within the water 
systems that flow through, and support Central Darling Shire, Broken Hill City and the 
Unincorporated Area. 
Key environmental values include the Paroo River in the north which joins the Baaka 
River to the north-west of Wilcannia, flowing through to Menindee Lakes to the 
south. Numerous national parks and reserves are protected throughout the region. 
Mining activity has strong foundations in the region’s European settlement history, 
underpinning the growth of Broken Hill. Alongside mining, the Far West is supported 
by its longstanding agricultural strengths, particularly in the livestock industry. 
The regional city of Broken Hill is a hub for services, supplies and social activity for 
the region and beyond, including residents of South Australia. Smaller townships are 
located throughout Central Darling Shire including Wilcannia, Menindee, Ivanhoe, 
White Cliffs and Tilpa. The Unincorporated Area includes a number of townships, 
villages and rural communities including Silverton, Milparinka, Packsaddle and 
Tibooburra. While not part of any LGA, it is supported by considerable advocacy from 
RDA Far West. The majority of both Central Darling Shire and the Unincorporated 
Area comprises large-scale pastoral properties that support the agricultural and 
economic productivity of NSW. The region’s unique landscapes have made it home to 
a thriving film, television and advertising industry.
Whilst the scale of the region can give rise to a range of challenges, the remoteness 
and connection to land are part of the many charms which has demanded the region 
build its own capabilities. 
Figure 2 — The Far West region
8
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Image supplied by RDA Far West
People and community
Small towns and village centres are scattered 
across the large area of the Far West, with the 
majority of residents concentrated in Broken 
Hill. As the regional centre in the region, Broken 
Hill provides a range of health care, retail and 
community services. Smaller community services 
are dispersed across townships within the Central 
Darling Shire including at Wilcannia, Menindee 
and Ivanhoe. These townships, as well as White 
Cliffs, Tilpa and villages of Silverton, Tibooburra, 
Packsaddle and Milparinka, and the properties 
around these villages, are supported by a network 
of rural services, including primary and mental 
health services. Many people retain connections 
with other centres at Mildura, Cobar, Bourke and 
Adelaide given their proximity and access to 
specialist services.
The Far West has experienced a slight decrease 
in population over the years, attributed to a range 
of factors including the impacts of drought, and 
access to employment, education and health care. 
The mechanisation of mining over past decades 
and changing economic conditions has also shaped 
population decline. While at the state-level there 
is a projected population decline for the region, 
local governments are confident in the potential to 
leverage a range of key projects and investment 
to stabilise this trend. Attraction of families remains 
a priority to support the region’s long-term growth 
ambitions and support the retention of key services 
and workers across the region. 
The Far West, particularly in Wilcannia, Menindee 
and Ivanhoe, is home to a proportionally higher 
First Nations population compared to the state 
average, with a relatively young population. Cultural 
practices in the region link to water resources and 
land stewardship, with strong connection over 
generations to the Baaka. 
First Nations peoples
The Traditional Owners and Custodians of the 
Far West Region are the Barkandji, Maljangapa, 
Wilyakali (Wiljali) and Ngiyampaa (Ngemba) 
peoples. Given the deep connection with these 
lands, First Nations peoples involvement is 
essential in developing a holistic and sustainable 
approach to drought resilience, with a number of 
First Nations representative groups consulted as 
part of the preparation of this plan.
Barkandji and Maljangapa First Nations people 
have existing rights to land and water in the 
region, however not flowing water as described 
in the Native Title Determination by the Federal 
Court. Aboriginal lore maintains that if we care for 
Country, it will care for us. This requires Country to 
be cared for throughout the process of design and 
development. 
First Nations people’s centuries-old relationship 
with the Far West region is crucial to upholding 
their livelihoods, culture, and heritage. Broken Hill 
City Council has endorsed a Reconciliation Action 
Plan (RAP) to remain committed to strengthening 
the relationship with the local Aboriginal community 
through identified initiatives. The Central Darling 
Shire Council is involved in a variety of initiatives to 
support the preservation of Indigenous culture in 
the region. 
The Baaka River is an example of the deep 
connection to water and as a place for community 
and family gatherings, it is important to understand 
and consider its broader cultural role within the 
drought plan. The depletion of the river system has 
critical implications to First Nations communities’ 
way of life and in particular their social and mental 
wellbeing. When the river is sick, the community is 
sick. 
9
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Economy
The Far West region supports 8,508 jobs with 
a Gross Regional Product of $1.4B in 2020. The 
key economic activities are in the mining and 
agricultural sectors. Both sectors are highly 
influential on the community make-up, and 
fluctuations in markets relative to each have 
impacts across communities in the Far West. As 
a regional city, Broken Hill has high employment 
in the health care and social assistance sector, 
supporting the needs of Broken Hill and acting as 
base for delivery of services for the region. 
Opportunities for growth in these dominant sectors 
is primarily associated with significant value-add 
activities. This relates to industrial development 
and manufacturing capabilities in Broken Hill, and 
emerging agribusiness in the broader Far West, 
as well as supply chain expansion. The draw of 
Outback NSW, through unique rock formation, 
starry skies, and rich Aboriginal culture, provides 
the backdrop for a growing visitor economy 
supporting the traditional agricultural backbone and 
mining strengths. 
Renewable energy is an emerging industry in 
the region. The availability of land and suitable 
environmental conditions, lends itself to effective 
energy generation, and benefits from nearby 
energy demands.
Environment 
Since European colonisation there has been 
substantial modification of the vegetation and 
landscape through the expansion of pastoral 
activities, the use of groundwater resources, and 
the introduction of feral animals to the region. 
Changes in the landscape have also occurred as 
intensification of land uses in the Murray-Darling 
Basin and water allocations have altered more 
broadly how ecosystems are functioning, including 
degradation of water quality. How native species 
use the area and vegetation in the riparian areas 
has also changed as a result. 
The waterways, floodplains and riparian lands in 
the region have long supported rural communities 
and ecosystems. Importantly they have long formed 
both an important resource base and cultural link 
for Aboriginal people, both historic and continued 
today. 
3 https://water.dpie.nsw.gov.au/our-work/plans-and-strategies/regional-water-strategies/final/western-regional-water-strategy 
Other sites such as the Paroo River and Mutawintji 
and Kinchega National Parks, are part of the rich 
cultural and environmental heritage of the region. 
Water security in the Far West
Water security is a key issue for people of the Far 
West. The Western Regional Water Strategy3 is a 
20-year strategy to improve security and certainty 
of the region’s water resources. It identifies the key 
regional challenges to be tackled over the coming 
decades and outlines the actions to respond to 
those challenges.
The elements of the strategy that align to 
drought and water security are summarised 
below. These provide a comprehensive evidence 
base for developing RDRP actions, alongside 
insights and experience drawn from local 
stakeholder consultation.
The Western Regional Water Strategy key 
insights include:
	
→Environment, ecosystem health and 
water quality
	
→Aboriginal knowledge and connection 
to Country
	
→Water security for towns and small communities
	
›
Managing water demand and improving 
water-use efficiency were identified as key 
priorities. 
	
›
Further investigation of options for water 
recycling and managed aquifer recharge 
were also suggested. 
	
›
The impacts of water scarcity on town water 
supply remains of widespread concern due 
to a range of issues, including impacts on 
mental health and potential loss of critical 
industries and skills. 
	
›
While groundwater was recognised as 
important to address future climate-related 
water scarcity issues, there was also concern 
about potential impacts arising from over-
reliance on, and lack of understanding 
about groundwater.
10
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

→Insecure water supplies affect the viability 
of businesses
	
›
Water security was recognised as critical for 
economic growth, with support for providing 
greater certainty around the implementation 
and lifting of water restrictions by including 
triggers in water sharing plans. 
	
→Investigating water efficiency measures was 
commonly raised as a priority to help address 
climate change impacts.
	
→	Water management
	
›
Increasing the transparency of water 
management information was supported. 
There was also support for providing 
greater opportunities for inter-jurisdictional 
collaboration to manage water, 
environmental, social, and cultural needs. 
	
›
Adapting water management to 
address climate change impacts 
and meet environmental needs was 
considered important.
Many communities and districts within the Far West 
do not maintain secure town water supplies, with 
many relying on water drawn from waterways which 
cease to flow in certain drought events. Agricultural 
and related industries away from towns and villages 
rely on low and irregular rainfall, limited river water 
supplies and groundwater.
The Strategy recognises that while there are many 
sources of groundwater across the region, its 
availability and quality vary according to location 
and geology. Potable groundwater is limited, and 
all shallow groundwater sources need to be treated 
to meet drinking water guidelines. The water 
from artesian bores is often at high temperatures, 
which can also make it challenging for towns to 
use this groundwater. Groundwater salinity is a 
major challenge in the region and salt interception 
schemes are in place to help manage the risks of 
saline groundwater discharging into surface water 
ecosystems. 
The strategy sets out 20 actions across the 
themes of:
droplet	
Improving water security 
for towns, industries 
and communities
flower-tulip	
Improving the resilience 
of natural systems, and 
link	
Improving connectivity 
across the northern basin.
Image supplied by RDA Far West
11
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How this plan was prepared 
The Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan was prepared with the valued contribution 
of community members, representatives and organisations, producers, industry 
representatives, service agencies, not for profit organisations, local businesses, local and 
state government. 
list
The consultation and engagement 
process worked to:
	
→Involve diverse perspectives and 
insights from across demographic and 
industry groups
	
→Leverage local knowledge and experience 
with past drought effects to understand 
what worked, and what could have 
worked better
	
→Discuss opportunities to address drought 
resilience in an integrated manner 
over time
	
→Maximise participation by providing 
a range of consultation options in 
recognition of the scale of the region and 
dispersed population.
handshake
Key consultation and engagement 
strategies included:
	
→Online community and business surveys 
	
→Industry, service provider and government 
agency workshops (online and in-person)
	
→A consultation stall at AgFair and 
distribution of surveys to a network of 
AgFair stalls
	
→Targeted consultations, interviews and 
discussions with community, industry and 
service provider representatives.




The consultation and engagement process adopted a principle of ‘appreciative enquiry’ whereby a diversity 
of stakeholders were engaged in a fair and non-discriminatory way to ensure the plan is well-informed by 
local views, experience, knowledge and values. Whilst it is acknowledged that the process was unable to 
individually hear from everyone, engagement sought to tap into key trusted local service providers who 
understand large segments of the regional population and have reach into existing networks in order to 
understand strategic and systemic trends. 
12
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Participation in the plan and generous contribution 
of time and insights was given by (but not 
limited to):
	
→Local pastoralists and primary producers 
	
→Local residents
	
→Community group representatives 
	
→Royal Flying Doctor Service South Eastern 
Section (RFDSSE)
	
→Far West Rural Services Network (RSN)
	
→Pastoralists Association of West Darling (PAWD)
	
→Regional Tech Hub
	
→Rural Financial Counselling Service
	
→National Emergency Management Agency
	
→Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development
	
→Department of Education and Training
	
→Business NSW
	
→Rural Adversity Mental Health Program (RAMHP)
	
→Foundation for Rural and Regional 
Renewal (FRRR)
	
→Salvation Army
	
→Red Cross
	
→Lifeline Broken Hill
	
→Contact Inc
	
→Outback Mobile Resource Unit (Toy Library)
	
→NSW Police
	
→State Emergency Services
	
→NSW Rural Fire Service
	
→Southern NSW Drought Innovation and 
Resilience Hub
	
→Local Land Services 
	
→RFDSSE ‘We’ve Got Your Back’ Champions
	
→Western Landcare
	
→Isolated Children’s Parents’ Association
	
→Business Far West
	
→Foundation Broken Hill
	
→Silverton Village Committee
	
→Sunset Strip Progress Association
	
→Barkandji Native Title PBC
	
→Maari Maa Health Aboriginal Corporation
	
→Local Aboriginal Land Councils
	
→National Indigenous Australian Agency
	
→Wilcannia Domestic Violence Safe House
	
→Menindee Central School.
Image: Consultation at AgFair 2024
13
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Alignment 
This plan provides strategic alignment with international-scale goals and commitments including the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, with national-
scale strategic frameworks and state-level strategic and policy instruments. This alignment demonstrates how 
working locally contributes to broader sustainability and resilience outcomes. 
Key documents to which this plan aligns includes (but is not limited to):
	
→Murray-Darling Basin Plan 
	
→Great Artesian Basin Strategic Management Plan
	
→Western Region Water Management Strategy
	
→NSW State Disaster Mitigation Plan 2024 – 2026
	
→NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
	
→Draft Far West Regional Plan 2041 
	
→Far West Regional Economic Development Strategy (2023 update) and associated industry plans
	
→NSW water strategies (Western Regional, and Lachlan Regional (draft), and Aboriginal Water Strategy)
	
→Southern NSW Drought Resilience Adaptation and Innovation Hub research
	
→Department of Primary Industry and Regional Development’s DroughtHub
	
→Department of Primary Industry and Regional Development’s Drought Signals Dashboard
	
→Commonwealth Government’s Drought Resilience Self Assessment tool
	
→Department of Primary Industry and Regional Development’s Climate Vulnerability Assessment
	
→Various local government strategies and plans, and industry group studies, plans, strategies and reports. 
Image supplied by Broken Hill City Council
14
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Key insights 
Key insights communicated from the consultation and engagement 
process include:
notes-medical	 Existing challenges in relation to access 
to services, health care and education 
can be made more difficult under drought 
conditions. A range of factors influence 
this such as increased workloads and loss 
of support staff on properties. This makes 
accessing services difficult, alongside the 
financial costs while under strained times 
and considering resourcing constraints.
user-helmet-safety	 Workforce retention can play into this 
aspect of service availability for the 
community. Staff may need to be let go 
due to financial impacts from drought and 
it is often difficult and time consuming to 
rehire. This also plays into broader issues 
of continuity of services.
sun-plant-wilt	 The impacts on families are significant 
throughout drought. The pressures on 
individuals and couples can be transferred 
to children, who also are struggling 
to understand. These pressures are 
exacerbated by financial stress, increases 
in workloads, uncertainty of time, stigma 
in asking for help and higher levels 
of isolation.
comments	 Business and industry workshops, or other 
community-style events, offer the chance 
to share knowledge, build capacity and 
capability, but also create the setting for 
community connections to organically 
occur, and alleviate feelings of isolation. 
cross	
There are many community members 
and key trusted organisations which 
people look to in times of crisis. Outside 
of drought they operate in different ways 
to proactively build community resilience, 
and demonstrate an understanding of the 
community needs. Their ongoing support 
is critical to this community, but they are 
put under pressure during drought as 
demand rises.
alarm-clock	 The flow of support for services can be 
too late when relying on formal drought 
declarations. The region is so large that 
some areas are experiencing the impacts 
well before any declaration or support is 
offered. Drought relief often kicks in two 
years too late.
link	 There’s a connection to the land, 
community and inter-generational identity, 
which is why people value the Far 
West, however the cumulative impacts 
from a range of stresses takes its toll in 
drought times.
water	 Waterways and water bodies hold 
significance amongst the community, in 
particular the Baaka represents a system 
with a long and continuous relationship 
with the Barkandji people. Other 
waterbodies represent opportunities for 
recreation and reprieve from dry conditions 
which is important for wellbeing.
dollar	
There can be a range of financial levers 
available for drought assistance but some 
people are not aware of them or know how 
to access them, and the process is seen 
as arduous to navigate – even more so 
when people are time poor from increased 
workloads and in a stressed frame of mind. 
These processes can compound.
arrows-cross	 The Wilcannia Weir and changes to its 
design is not supported by the Central 
Darling Shire community. The original 
design, which was the outcome of 
significant community engagement, 
remains the preferred option. The revised 
option offers limited drought resilience 
benefit, particularly for the community of 
Wilcannia. 
15
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

CASE STUDY 
Wilcannia Weir 
Replacement Project 
Water security has been a long-term issue facing the township of 
Wilcannia and the wider Central Darling Shire. An upgrade of the 
existing Wilcannia Weir was initially tabled almost 50 years ago. The 
existing Wilcannia Weir pool currently supplies six to nine months 
of water supply (subject to weather conditions), before the water 
becomes too saline to drink.
In 2018, the Federal and NSW Governments allocated approximately 
$30 million for the construction of the new Wilcannia Weir in an effort 
to ensure this long-term water security for the township of Wilcannia 
and the wider region, simultaneously improving outcomes for 
Indigenous communities who rely on cultural water flows. 
A business case was undertaken in 2019 to identify the most 
appropriate location for the new weir, involving significant consultation 
on the design. Consultation on the business case took place with 
unanimous community support for the construction of a new weir from 
local government, Indigenous groups and organisations, and broader 
members of the community. Construction on the weir was initially 
anticipated to be complete by 2021.
In 2022, work on the new weir had not yet commenced owing to 
several iterations of revised designs. The community agreed to a final 
weir design one metre above the current weir height approximately 
five kilometres downstream from the Wilcannia township. This design 
anticipated a minimum of 5 years of sustainable water supply. A revised 
costing was forecasted for the project of approximately $45 million 
(including the construction new Wilcannia weir and associated works 
and the part removal of the existing weir).
In late-2023, a revised design was released for the weir (and 
associated fish passage) by the State Government without community 
consultation. This design was considered more appropriate by 
the State Government owing to lower construction and ongoing 
maintenance costs and lesser environmental impacts, amongst 
other things. The design of the new proposed weir is 1m lower than 
previously agreed by the community (i.e. the revised design is now the 
equivalent height of the existing weir) and will not provide additional 
water storage during drought periods than currently facilitated by the 
existing weir. This represents a significant lost opportunity for drought 
preparedness. The recently revised designs have been met with strong 
community desire to maintain the originally proposed weir. 
The Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan reflects the strong 
community desire to revert to the previous weir design to aid the 
drought resilience of Wilcannia and the broader population of Central 
Darling Shire.
Image: Sheba_Also 43,000 photos, CC BY-SA 2.0, via Wikimedia Commons
16
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How our region is impacted by 
drought 
The onset of drought in terms of the rate, and severity can vary substantially across the 
Far West. Given its scale, parts of the region can experience the effects of drought, long 
before a drought declaration is made. This limits the opportunity for enterprises, of all 
scales, to access assistance to make a difference. 
Interconnected drought impacts
The impacts of drought don’t happen in isolation, instead they are interconnected and felt across how 
the community functions. The relationship of the Far West to land and water is closely tied with economic 
prosperity due to the agricultural strengths of the region, particularly livestock management. Waterways 
and waterbodies form the foundations for community to connect, and for Aboriginal people to connect 
with culture. 
Understanding how drought impacts are felt across the system both direct and indirect, helps to develop a 
range of actions which can address multiple impacts, or which at first glance may not seem directly related to 
drought. 
people
People and community impacts
	
→Looking after physical and mental 
health can be put aside to manage 
the increasing workloads or due to 
financial constraints
	
→Mental health impacts and knowing 
how to go about accessing support can 
be challenging, particularly in a small 
town environment
	
→Other issues like domestic violence 
levels, alcohol or pre-existing social 
issues can be exacerbated
	
→The broader challenges of living remote 
are exacerbated, relating to access and 
discontinuity of services and for children 
on property accessing education 
	
→Access to recreation opportunities and 
broader liveability within the community
	
→An expected reliance on bore water, 
which from the community’s perspective, 
isn’t desirable and has both liveability 
and health concerns in the community.
Image: Copi Hollow camping (image 
supplied by Broken Hill City Council)
17
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

CASE STUDY 
We’ve Got Your Back 
We’ve Got Your Back (WGYB) is a program led by the Royal Flying Doctor Service South Eastern 
Section in partnership with Lifeline Regional SA & Far West NSW. The program launched in 2019 
during the last drought and is a peer focused mental health and wellbeing program specifically 
servicing Far West NSW. The program provides local advocates or ‘champions’ who have lived 
experience with adversities faced in rural areas, to support and raise the mental health of individuals 
and the wellbeing of communities. 
With the impacts of drought and the unique hardships of living in remote areas, mental health is a 
major risk. Whilst there are clinical services available, access can be a challenge due to distance, 
confidentiality, stigma, and lack of awareness. By appointing peer based, and drought tailored 
programs, the program extends and localises the support, on land and outside clinical hours. 
The program has been very successful, with 143 individuals accessing this program in one year 
during the region’s last major drought. Those seeking support through the program included 
farmers experiencing extreme distress over the repeated loss of animals, as well as those trying to 
avoid severe financial impacts including foreclosure and repossession, and mental health, marital or 
relationship difficulties. These examples highlight the vital importance of supporting the emotional 
and mental wellbeing of rural communities during difficult times.
WGYB Champion user pen
“My (Champion) role is like a portal…. I knew I would be able to help my peers. People 
are screaming out for help… we hope that people will identify with what we have been 
through and we can relate to them, they can draw from our lived experiences and we can 
then help them channel where they need to go to get help. 
I’ve seen people come out the other side already in a better space, so it’s a program 
that works.”
RFDS Base (image supplied by Broken Hill City Council)
18
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

chart-waterfall
Economic impacts 
	
→Reduced productivity cascades 
into a number of other economic 
drought impacts such as reduced 
income, increasing debt levels 
to maintain operations, and less 
discretionary spending
	
→Business in towns directly and indirectly 
impacted, not just on farm
	
→Any economic changes can be 
significant with a small population and 
employment base
	
→Cumulative impacts from other stressors 
and shocks have impacted business, 
particularly in the major centre of Broken 
Hill which provides for retail activity
	
→The increase in expenses and then a 
decrease in the value of the commodity 
	
→Capacity to retain key support staff and 
services, impacting across periods of the 
cycle and beyond recovery
	
→Potential risks from major downturns in 
other sectors such as mining, subject to 
external conditions pairing with climatic 
impacts on agriculture
	
→Challenges in skills transfer to other 
sectors, like mining, which require 
highly specialised qualifications and 
skillsets. This is seen by stakeholders as 
a limitation
	
→The isolation of the Far West limits the 
opportunity for certain opportunities 
for on-property income diversification, 
like agri-tourism, which may be an 
opportunity in other drought-affected 
areas but occurs to a lesser degree in 
the Far West.
seedling
Environmental impacts 
	
→Low-flow and cease to flow periods in 
the Barwon-Darling system
	
→Water quality impacts in the Darling 
system and Menindee Lakes system 
	
→Reduced soil moisture
	
→Loss in abundance of bird species, 
impacts on fish through range of factors 
impacting water quality
	
→Health effects from dust and dust 
storms, and liveability
	
→Health impacts of relying on bore water, 
particularly for those vulnerable
	
→Liveability impacts, with reluctance from 
the community for bore water 
	
→Impacts on the local environment and 
community infrastructure both public 
open space, private green space and 
maintaining planted areas for both visual 
amenity and civic activity 
	
→Starvation and malnutrition of livestock 
and native animals
	
→Environmental management issues 
exacerbated like top soil loss, erosion, 
weed and pest management, combined 
with impacts under changing climate.
Many of the impacts outlined above affect the entire community, while other impacts are felt more heavily 
by certain groups in the community depending on vulnerability, exposure and a range of factors linked to 
drought in the Far West. Detail below delves further into these impacts across a number of groups within the 
community, drawn from engagement. While not an exhaustive list, it paints a picture of where specific actions 
are needed, or where some may overlap.
19
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

CASE STUDY 
Barkandji River Rangers Program 
In 2015, the Federal Court recognised native title rights to the Barkandji and Malyangapa Peoples 
as the traditional owners of land from Wentworth to Wilcannia and from Mutawintji to Mungo. The 
Barkandji Prescribed Body Corporate (PBC) has since been dedicated to preserving, protecting, 
and providing access to traditional lands and cultural water, ensuring the welfare of its community 
for present and future generations. The Barkandji River Rangers Program, established in 2021 with 
funding secured until 2028, currently operates in Menindee and Wilcannia.
Although in its infancy, the River Rangers program offers career pathways for Barkandji traditional 
owners by integrating their ancestral knowledge with formal conservation and land management 
training. In collaboration with the wider Barkandji community and stakeholders, the rangers 
implement the Barkandji Healthy Country Plan, focusing on the protection of threatened and 
endangered species, local water sources and the preservation of community values. On a daily 
basis, the rangers play a vital role in their communities, assisting Elders with everyday tasks and 
assisting organising community events. 
The Barkandji PBC continues to actively pursue other on-Country initiatives to create more 
employment opportunities for First Nations people in the region, further strengthening their 
community and environmental resilience.
First Nations communities
	
→When the Baaka River is low or dry, our First Nations people’s mood becomes sullen and low 
due to lost opportunity to connect with family, culture and to gather
	
→Reliance on bore water is not preferred and can cause adverse skin irritation, eye and 
health issues
	
→There are cost and sustainability implications for reliance on bottled water 
	
→Disruptions to traditional practices such as fishing, hunting, gathering bush foods, and lost 
opportunities to teach younger generations 
	
→Further cost of living impacts relating to power, fuel and food both in towns and associated with 
travel to other centres. Some are forced to hunt for food
	
→Environmental degradation, affecting biodiversity and the health of ecosystems, has had an 
impact. Impacts on environmental flows affects ability to engage in traditional practices 
	
→Housing maintenance is a challenge, exacerbated by high reliance on social housing and 
rentals. Many are not designed for existing climate (poor ventilation and air conditioning).
Image supplied by RDA Far West
20
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

CASE STUDY 
Pastoralists’ Association of 
West Darling 
The Pastoralists’ Association of West Darling (PAWD) has 
represented pastoralists in the Far West of NSW since 
1907. Directed by an objective to preserve and promote 
pastoral and agricultural enterprises in the Western 
Division of NSW, the group retains an important advocacy 
role in the region while shedding important primary 
producer insight into some of the impacts of recent 
droughts: 
	
→The deficits in rainfall are exacerbated by heatwaves 
and frosts, dust storms and record numbers 
of kangaroos
	
→Pasture reserves completely exhausted
	
→Hard work of pastoralists to keep their core breeding 
livestock alive and were physically, emotionally and 
financially exhausted
	
→The cashflow drought will persist long after the 
physical drought breaks.
Shifting from ‘impact’ to ‘what can be done’ is a focus 
for the group. It’s about addressing issues identified 
across the system like suitable road infrastructure to 
assist in fodder delivery, the importance of good bore 
to retain core breeding stock, first flush protection and 
connectivity throughout the Basin and need for long range 
weather forecasting.
Kangaroo management and pest management remain 
critical outside of drought, with contribution to grazing 
pressures and the take up of water. Actions like dam 
fencing can address this, while reducing issues on stock. 
Tax write-offs for small businesses in regional, rural and 
remote areas is also seen as a critical opportunity to 
manage debt and reduce loan stress. In addition, funding 
pools for community groups to utilise to run social network 
events, retention of freight subsidies, emergency water 
infrastructure rebate, and new subsidies and incentives for 
farm staff (including HECS-HELP contributions) would help 
to support the working community, retain staff and skills 
and maintain important resource redundancy. Reduced 
impost of application processes is strongly advocated for.
While not an extensive list of all actions, the knowledge 
of these impacts demonstrate the insight from those on 
the ground to understand what works during drought, 
and what doesn’t - to ensure we are using resources 
effectively throughout the drought cycle.
cow
Primary producers 
	
→There is no blueprint for drought. 
What works for one enterprise 
may not work for others. 
Aversion to risk is different and 
circumstances are different
	
→Uncertainty has impacts 
on strategies for drought 
whether to de-stock, or feed 
bloodstock, or a combination, 
which also need to consider 
the flow on implications. A ‘wait 
and see’ mentality doesn’t 
support outcomes
	
→Farmers need greater support 
for decision-making based 
on weather and ground 
conditions, as well as water and 
feed availability
	
→The tyranny of distance can 
complicate access to resources, 
support services, materials and 
market opportunities
	
→Compounding challenges of 
consecutive hazard events and 
economic stresses is having an 
effect on wellbeing
	
→Accessing drought relief 
funding and loans is hindered 
by extensive paperwork, 
discouraging those that are 
eligible in applying 
	
→Fixed costs such as leases, 
registration, roadworthys and 
rates, become a greater burden 
during drought and add to the 
financial stress of producers 
during drought
	
→Many business enterprises 
struggle with succession 
planning, which often comes to 
the fore during dry times
	
→Mental health is inextricably 
linked to financial and 
operational stress, and it impacts 
on family dynamics.
Image: Wilcannia, Central Darling Shire
21
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

family
Families
	
→Drought resilience in the Far West is an 
opportunity, through multiple means, to 
alleviate stress on the family dynamic. 
Drought is often thought about from a 
financial and economic perspective and 
whilst these might be the catalysts of 
stress during dry periods, the enterprise 
itself is for the benefit of family and inter-
generational legacy.
	
→There are financial and psychological 
challenges with managing children’s 
education. This starts at a young age as 
children on properties access School of 
Air, either requiring parental supervision, or 
the need to hire a governess. Governesses 
are pivotal to the family unit and require 
more network support which in turn, better 
supports families
	
→The financial impact of sending children 
away to boarding school is profound for 
many families, irrespective of the known 
costs well in advance. These associated 
costs and distance can lead to feelings of 
guilt and stress among children and parents 
during times of drought. This is compounded 
by the limited options for in-region education, 
recently exacerbated by the closure of 
Allison House, a student boarding facility, in 
Broken Hill
	
→The changing role of mothers on-property, 
from educating children when young to 
the time they go to boarding school can be 
challenging with mixed feeling of identity 
and role
	
→Social isolation, especially outside of town, 
has varying effects. During drought, families 
can be financially constrained which has flow 
on effects for participation in social events, 
but also ability to access services 
	
→Women are often the backbone of 
communities, supporting their partners, 
families and the people around them during 
hard times as well as providing education for 
children, running households, running the 
business books and working on the property. 
In drought the competing demands on time 
can be amplified
 CASE STUDY  
Contact Inc.
Contact Inc. is renowned for its expertise in 
delivering impactful programs for children, 
parents, and communities, specifically targeting 
isolated, vulnerable, and disadvantaged 
families in need. Operating in rural and remote 
areas across Australia including the Far West, 
their mission is to address local service gaps, 
enhance support offerings, and disseminate 
essential information to foster sustainable 
communities through community-led, locally 
tailored solutions.
In the Far West, community members face 
significant disadvantages due to isolation 
and prolonged drought periods. Contact Inc. 
is designed to meet the unique needs of 
these communities, advocating for improved 
services, facilitating access to crucial support, 
and fostering responsive connections and 
collaborations that integrate holistic child and 
family services.
As a trusted collaborator, Contact Inc. works 
closely with policy-makers and funders 
and actively partners with value-based 
organisations to extend their reach and impact.
Contact Inc. ran a series of community and 
family and children days in the Far West during 
the last drought, collaborating with other 
agencies and service providers to offer a range 
of services alongside awareness, education 
and social activities. Contact Inc. continue to 
run these events, subject to funding availability.
Through these initiatives, Contact Inc. 
continues to make a profound impact 
on the lives of those in rural and remote 
communities, fostering resilience and 
strengthening communities.
Image supplied by RDA Far West
22
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

user-helmet-safety 
Workers (managers, contractors, 
governesses, skilled labour, etc.) 
	
→Instability due to prolonged drought 
conditions leads to job losses and 
reduced work opportunities, particularly in 
seasonal employment
	
→High cost of living, driven by the scarcity 
of local goods and increased prices, 
elevates financial pressures on workers 
and their families
	
→Recruiting and retaining workers, 
especially governesses and contractors, 
is a persistent challenge
	
→Maintaining contractors and governesses 
on-properties during drought addresses 
a range of systemic issues. This includes 
increased workloads which limit capacity 
to leave property, multiple competing 
demands on time, reduced ability to 
maintain awareness of and prepare 
applications for grants and subsidies
	
→The employment, health and wellbeing 
of workers is often overlooked by 
government subsidies and grants, 
despite their critical role on-property 
during drought.
house-day
Township and village communities
	
→Many workers who are let go 
from properties come to towns for 
employment, but during drought 
economic downturn is also present 
in town. This increases employment 
competition and without work, people 
subsequently must leave the region 
	
→Housing pressures are growing, as is 
cost of living which is exacerbated by 
long distances to transport goods. The 
risk of poverty and housing stress during 
drought therefore increases
	
→Drought creates further challenges to 
retaining young people and attracting 
skilled professionals to the region 
	
→Impact of drought on local parks, ovals, 
and vegetation affects ability for social 
interaction and increases dust and 
heat intensity.
 CASE STUDY   
Rural Adversity Mental Health Program (RAMHP)
Established in 2007 and funded by the NSW 
Ministry of Health, the Rural Adversity Mental Health 
Program (RAMHP) has evolved over the last 15 
years. Starting with a focus on supporting farmers 
across NSW who were experiencing mental ill-
health because of drought affecting their livelihood, 
the program has changed focus and expanded 
to encompass the broader mental health and 
wellbeing of regional, rural, and remote people and 
communities of NSW.
With 20 Coordinators across NSW, RAMHP are 
embedded within the communities they work. They 
understand the strengths, challenges, and unique 
characteristics of rural life. 
RAMHP works to inform, train, partner and link 
individuals, communities, and workplaces with 
appropriate mental health services and programs. 
They help equip the people of rural, regional, and 
remote NSW with the tools they need to support the 
mental and emotional wellbeing of themselves and 
others during tough times, fostering connections 
and building networks that enable communities 
and agencies to prepare for and better respond 
in adversity.
An example of a RAMHP activity recently held in 
the region was the ‘Men’s mental health butchering 
days’, which provided a safe space and allowed 
men the opportunity to learn a new skill and 
engage with others. The sessions provided an 
opportunity for rural men to come together, who 
have historically been difficult to engage with yet 
experience negative impacts due to drought.
Image: Broken Hill, image supplied by Broken Hill City Council
23
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Trends and stressors
Beyond the consideration of climatic projections, trends, stressors and shocks will continue to have impact 
within drought cycles. This is an important consideration for our adaptability to changing conditions and 
circumstances. It is also important in terms of the Councils’ governance arrangements and strategic priorities. 
Key trends and stressors that may interface with drought resilience in the Far West include:
family
People and community
	
→Water security
	
→Distance to access 
services, availability of 
services, and continuity of 
services 
	
→Availability of suitable 
education, and support to 
attend education offerings 
for children outside of town
	
→Reliance on boarding 
school education for high 
school children
	
→Reduced spending
	
→Housing supply, and quality 
of housing in some areas
	
→Population changes 
(attraction of young 
population and 
aging workforce)
	
→Catering to all ages in the 
community, aged care 
services 
	
→High costs of living
	
→Increased risk of motor 
vehicle accident due to 
increased animal strikes
coin
Economic
	
→Supply chain disruptions
	
→Local employment 
pathways, aligned with 
local training access
	
→Local 
employment retention
	
→Land values
	
→External market conditions, 
commodities and 
energy policy
	
→Input costs, transport, 
logistics, general 
business costs
	
→Water prices
	
→Resource scarcity
	
→Input costs: energy, labour, 
fertiliser, feed and fuel 
	
→Shifts in government 
spending and priorities 
	
→Rising rents for business, 
housing affordability 
for locals
	
→Digital transformation 
and aligned access 
to telecommunications
	
→Impacts of road quality on 
market access
sun
Environment
	
→Drying climate
	
→Water management of the 
Murray-Darling Basin 
	
→Increasing impacts of pests 
and other non-natives, 
particularly impacts to 
riparian lands
	
→Land use changes, 
shifts from property to 
national parks
	
→Top soil loss
	
→Wildlife loss from changing 
conditions 
	
→Compounding hazard and 
disaster events
	
→Increased fauna loss 
through road strikes.
Resilience to drought is therefore not just about water, it stretches beyond the farm gate, across industries, 
services and the community. Groups across our community can be affected differently and require a mix of 
actions in recognition that a one-size-fits-all approach will not address everyone’s needs. The extent of the 
region also raises the need to recognise individual communities, with their own challenges and opportunities. 
What is pressing for some in Broken Hill is unlikely to be the highest priority in Wilcannia, or be the focus in 
Tibooburra.
24
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought history
No two droughts are ever the same, and the impacts are not the same. Conditions are different, our 
circumstances are different, and the climate and weather factors are different. Major droughts in Australian 
history have affected the Far West, characterised by protracted periods of low rainfall, leading to low soil 
moisture. 
While these time periods are used to describe national droughts, the effects are not necessarily limited to 
these years as some drought impacts are experienced locally earlier and can last for many years following the 
droughts formal end date. These significant drought periods identified by the Bureau of Meteorology include: 
	
→1895 to 1902 (Federation Drought) 
	
→1914 to 1915 
	
→1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
	
→1965 to 1968 
	
→1982 to 1983 
	
→1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
	
→2017 to 2019.
The below timeline illustrates the more localised impacts during the identified major drought periods. A 
comprehensive history of drought is located at Appendix A and within the Resilience Assessment. This data 
was drawn from historical climate records and weather events, as well as analysis from a variety of news 
sources that provided commentary on drought at the time. These events demonstrate that droughts and the 
history of the area are effectively intertwined.
	
› In 1897, it was reported that 
tens of thousands of sheep 
and cattle around Broken Hill 
were perishing, with several 
stations sending sheep to 
Queensland to save them. A 
huge percentage were left 
dead on the road
	
› Based on cattle and sheep 
deaths, it was the worst 
drought in Australia’s history. 
	
› 1940 had the lowest rainfall 
across the entire region
	
› By 1944, practically all water 
reserves had dried up, with 
no agricultural properties 
deemed in a good condition
	
› By mid 1944, stock losses 
had become so severe, 
increased fodder costs in 
the region compounded 
economic woes.
	
› 1982 resulted in significantly 
low rainfall across much of 
the Far West region
	
› During the whole drought 
period, White Cliffs had only 
recorded 78mm of rain.
	
› Following a wet 
2016, a significant dry 
period followed.
	
› Except for two short, low 
flows in early 2018, one 
reaching Wilcannia and 
the other just making it to 
Menindee, no water had 
flowed into the Darling River 
for an 18 month period
	
› Drought conditions became 
evident in 1913 in the Far 
West with no real reprieve 
until 1917.
1914-1915
1895-1902
1982-1983
1937-1945
	
› For the Far West, impacts of 
this drought were not fully 
felt until 2001, followed by a 
significant dry spell in 2002.
	
› In 2008, severe water 
restrictions were 
implemented in Central 
Darling Shire, disrupting crop 
and livestock production
	
› Severe impacts to tourism 
were felt across the region.
1997-2009
	
› In 1965, farmers were forced 
to move stock to greener 
areas or pay for dry feed at 
increased costs. 
	
› By 1967, it was estimated 
that drought recovery for the 
region would take 4 years.
1965-1968
2017-2019
Figure 4 — Drought timeline, regional impacts of note for each drought period
25
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Figure 5 — Annual precipitation average across areas. Major historical droughts coincide with period of lower than average rainfall
Figure 6 — Soil moisture across each area. Major historical droughts align with lower soil moisture levels
26
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Past records for the region demonstrate a year-to-year fluctuation in precipitation and soil moisture across 
the region. The mid-1970s and 2010-2011 feature significant rain, whereas 1926, 1940, 2017-2019 represent 
periods of unusual dryness. 
The timing of rain is important in the region. The region already receives low average annual rainfall. When it 
falls is critical. A comprehensive synthesis of historic drought climate data specific to the Far West is included 
at Appendix A. 
In addition to low average rainfall, there is significant year-to-year variability in rainfall amounts, and dry years. 
Reduced streamflow and cease to flow periods in the Barwon-Darling system has a profound impact. Drought 
conditions are often accompanied by more frequent and intense heat extremes and bushfire weather was 
experienced across much of NSW in the 2017-2019 drought, with 2018 and 2019 recording the lowest annual 
rainfall totalled across the region.
A focus on the 2017-2019 drought 
The impacts of the 2017-2019 drought on the region were unprecedented on many fronts.
Environmentally, the recent ‘Tinderbox’ Drought posed observable impacts. The Menindee fish kill event of 
2018/19 was well documented as one of the more profound national scale impacts of the drought. In response, 
an investigation into the cause was launched by the Australian Government. The review found that, especially 
during the drought, the Baaka River has been subject to a series of consecutive ‘cease to flow’ days, as 
displayed in Figure 7 below. What can be observed is that, particularly during the Millenium Drought between 
2005-2009, the majority of these years were ‘cease to flow’ days in Wilcannia. These no flow days increase 
the risk of blue-green algal blooms and fish kills. 
Figure 7 — Historical cease to flow days in Wilcannia (Source: Australian Academy of Science, 2019)
Despite the criticality of understanding rainfall across the rangelands, there remains a gap in the rainfall / 
forecasting system. The need for a new weather radar including doppler capability is identified locally, and 
across a large number of stakeholders, as a priority for infilling the radar coverage in central east Australia. 
Such a radar seeks to improve forecasting and monitoring of rainfall in an area of increasing popularity for 
tourism, with obvious public safety and other agricultural benefits.
27
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Future drought projections
The value of agricultural commodities as part of 
the Far West economy is significant, particularly 
in livestock which dominates gross value product 
of the industry. Drought impacts the livestock 
industry across the inputs and values through the 
drought cycle, and ongoing decisions on stock 
management. Beyond agricultural production, 
drought impacts local business, workers, families 
and the community more broadly as discussed 
throughout this plan. Because of this, it is important 
to consider the projected impact of future climate 
change, to help us plan now for the impacts. 
The further in advance we plan, build awareness 
and put in place redundancy measures, the more 
options we will likely have available to address 
issues down the track.
Future climate scenarios
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) reporting, under all 
emissions scenarios considered, global surface 
temperatures will continue to increase until at 
least the mid-century. Increasing temperatures and 
energy within the climate system are projected 
to result in widespread changes to weather and 
climate patterns including all elements of the water 
cycle, including drought.
For Central Darling Shire, Broken Hill and the 
Unincorporated Area, key drought related metrics 
have been calculated from the regional climate 
model projections for two scenarios, with data 
presented below. These climate scenarios are 
based on the IPCC representative concentration 
pathways (RCPs) and are designed to explore a 
range of possible futures relating to greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, land use, and air pollution. 
The analysis is focused on projections to the near-
term (2050) and mid-range (2070); with change 
shown relative to present day climate. 
The highest GHG scenario is RCP8.5 and 
represents a high emissions scenario where GHG 
emissions continue to increase, and global mean 
temperature increase exceeds 4ºC. RCP4.5 is a 
moderate GHG emissions scenario where some 
mitigation of GHG emissions occurs, and global 
mean temperature increase is between 2-3ºC. 
RCP4.5 is currently considered by the IPCC to be 
our most likely scenario.
Current climate models do not account for global 
climate tipping points. This means that the effects 
of tipping points are typically not included in climate 
projections and impact assessments. Breaching 
global climate tipping points represents significant 
risks on top of the changes typically described 
in climate assessments. The effects of breaching 
certain tipping points may include abrupt changes 
to the El Niño Southern Oscillation, rainfall patterns, 
and rainfall variability that are not represented in 
climate model projections. 
Drought climate indicators:
Summary: 
droplet	
A small increase in rainfall 
under lower emissions, while 
a small decrease under high 
emissions scenarios
temperature-arrow-down	
Decrease in root zone 
soil moisture
temperature-sun	
Increasing temperatures are 
likely to be the primary driver 
of increased frequency and 
severity of evapotranspiration 
and drought conditions 
fire-smoke	
Other climate and weather-
driven events like heatwaves 
and bushfires / grass fire may 
compound broader impacts 
from drought events. 
On average, annual precipitation is projected to 
have a small increase under both near-term and 
mid-range timeframes for the RCP 4.5 scenarios, 
while an annual decrease of around 6-9mm could 
be expected under the RCP 8.5 scenarios into 
2050 and 2070. 
Under the moderate emissions scenario, rainfall 
increases are expected in the far north, the 
east, and the far south of the region. Across all 
scenarios, soil moisture is expected to decrease 
on average. However, in the medium term, root 
zone soil moisture will increase in the northern 
and eastern extent. Come 2070, these areas of 
increase become more isolated and shift westward. 
Decreasing soil moisture is also projected to be 
exacerbated in the far north-west of the region.
This small trend of an increase in rainfall for the 
28
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

region is not shared with other parts of NSW which will see much larger shifts and decreasing availability. With 
already limited rainfall, variation in the region presents a challenge particularly when linked with the timing of 
rains. 
Frequency of hot days (>35ºC) and frequency of high fire danger days (FFDI > 25)4 do not directly describe 
drought however, they are climate hazards which typically occur in conjunction with drought. Both extreme 
heat and bushfire weather risk are projected to increase by 2070 compared to the present day. This will 
increase the likelihood of compound events such as severe drought occurring in conjunction with heatwaves 
and bushfire/grassfire. Given the weak trends in rainfall, the increase in drought severity will likely be driven by 
increased evapotranspiration due to increasing temperatures.
Broken Hill
2050 (change)
2070 (change)
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
8.56%#
↓ 0.004 
mm^
0.000 
mm^
↓ 0.005 
mm^
↓ 0.004 
mm^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
271.43 mm
↓ 1.01 
mm/year
↓ 3.32 
mm/year
↑ 2.18 
mm/year
↑ 1.20 
mm/year
Days above 35ºC
38 days
56 days +18
62 days +24
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
80 days
98 days +18
102 days +22
Central Darling
2050 (change)
2070 (change)
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
8.63%#
↓ 0.002 
mm^
↓ 0.001 
mm^
0.000 
mm^
↓ 0.004 
mm^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
274.62 mm
↑ 4.14 
mm/year
↓ 0.80 
mm/year
↑ 5.95 
mm/year
↓ 3.32 
mm/year
Days above 35ºC
62 days
83 days +21
90 days +28
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
113 days
130 days +17
137 days +24
Unincorporated NSW (Far West)
2050 (change)
2070 (change)
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
6.82%#
↓ 0.001 
mm/year^
↓ 0.002 
mm^
↓ 0.002 
mm^
↓ 0.004 
mm^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
274.62 mm
↑ 1.69 
mm/year
↓ 5.84 
mm/year
↑ 0.89 
mm/year
↓ 8.63 
mm/year
Days above 35ºC
66 days
90 days +24
96 days +30 
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI above 25
126 days
143 days +17
150 days +24
# Mean water content as a percentage of capacity

^ Change in relative soil water content of the 1976-2005 reference period’s relative soil water holding capacity.
4 Forest Fire Danger Index
29
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Annual Precipitation 
The following figures show the precipitation across 
the region using the reference period of 1976-2005 
and then to two timescales 2036 to 2065 and 2056 
to 2085. The region is coloured to represent annual 
precipitation changes from dark brown (reduced) to 
dark green (increase).
Figure 8 — Annual precipitation, reference period
Figure 9 — Annual precipitation RCP 4.5 (top 2050, bottom 2070)
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-100+
Climate-adjusted precipitation changes 
(mm/year)
-50
-25
-10
-5
5
10
25
50
100+
-100+
Climate-adjusted precipitation changes 
(mm/year)
-50
-25
-10
-5
5
10
25
50
100+
30
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Root zone soil moisture 
Root zone soil moisture is presented as a 
percentage of total capacity during the baseline 
reference period and as a change of millimetres per 
year of the climate adjusted scenarios. 
During the reference period, both Broken Hill 
and Central Darling had a root zone soil moisture 
capacity of just over 8.5%, while Unincorporated 
NSW (Far West) was sitting lower with 6.8%. This 
moisture indicator is projected to decrease (i.e. 
worsen) annually into the future, with the magnitude 
of decrease to grow to the end of the century. 
These soil moisture reductions will be more severe 
in Broken Hill come 2050 and 2070, compared to 
Central Darling and Unincorporated NSW
Figure 10 — Root zone soil moisture, reference period 1976-
2005.
Figure 11 — Root zone soil moisture RCP4.5 (top 2050, 
bottom 2070)
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
0
Root zone soil moisture reference 
period (%)
10
25
50
60
70
80
85
90
100
31
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

What does the climate data tell us?
Broken Hill City, Central Darling Shire, and Unincorporated Area will continue to be susceptible to the impact 
of drought. Major historical droughts over the past 120 years have occurred in conjunction with low values of 
commonly used drought indicators including rainfall and soil moisture percentiles. Droughts can be protracted 
events spanning more than 10 years, such as the Millennial drought, or relatively shorter time periods, such as 
the recent drought.
Climate projections indicate an increase in drought risk by 2070 and beyond under both RCP4.5 and 
RCP8.5 scenarios with increasingly hot weather. There are the drivers of increased frequency and severity 
of drought conditions, especially towards the latter part of this century. This is largely driven by temperature, 
evapotranspiration and reduced soil moisture.
Recent events, and historical trends in rainfall patterns show sharp extremes with dry years followed by 
significant rainfall.
Our resilience to future drought impacts requires early planning and early intervention, which is the focus 
of this regional drought resilience plan. This will help us stand in good stead to deal with the impacts of a 
changing climate.
What are the likely regional climate implications? 
water-arrow-down
Expected increase 
in ‘cease to flow’ 
days of the Baaka 
(Darling River) 
in Wilcannia
sun-plant-wilt
Anticipated 
decrease of average 
root soil zone 
moisture across 
the region
people-arrows
Decreasing soil 
moisture in the 
far north-west of 
the region
temperature-sun
An expected 
increase of 20 
‘hot days’ (days 
above 35 degrees) 
per year
fire-smoke
Higher frequency 
of high fire danger 
days (FFDI > 25)
raindrops
Greater variability 
of rainfall
feather
Decrease of 
waterbird and fauna 
diversity around the 
Menindee Lakes
tree-deciduous
Exacerbation of 
vegetation loss and 
soil erosion
clouds
Increase of 
dust storms and 
poor air quality
32
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Far West drought resilience 
Drought resilience can be considered against three macro indicators:
coin 	
Economic 
resilience	
tree	 
Environmental 
resilience
family	 
Social 
resilience
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences’ (ABARES) Community 
Vulnerability and Resilience to Drought Index is the first stage of a comprehensive body of work to measure 
the potential impact of drought on communities. 
ABARES has prepared a national index that ranks remote, rural or regional agriculturally dependent 
communities (at the LGA level) according to their potential to be adversely affected by drought. These 
indicators account for both agriculture industry exposure and sensitivity and community sensitivity, using ABS 
Census of Population and Housing 2021 data to represent the level of community dependence on agriculture. 
It is important to note the data comprises data variables and indicators which have been combined and 
ranked. Scores are not necessarily representative of the magnitude of impact, rather it positions the sensitivity 
with respect to other LGAs. There is a strong link to employment in agricultural production, particularly for 
community sensitivity which may not be representative of broader community sensitivity detailed throughout 
this plan.
ABARES CVRDI scores for the Far West
(measured from 0 [lowest] to 1[highest])
Area
Farm
sensitivity
Community
sensitivity
Economic 
diversity
Potential 
drought impact
Broken Hill
0.1
0.02
0.6
0.01
Central Darling
0.25
0.53
0.52
0.16
Unincorporated
0.55
0.56
0.16
0.75
The ABARES CVRDI scores indicate for the Far West region:
	
→A range from low to moderate level of farm-based exposure and sensitivity to drought, which is linked to 
both exposure to climate variability, and the effects that has on farm outcomes
	
→A moderate level of community dependence on agricultural activity in terms of employment. Noting that 
Broken Hill as a regional city has additional major employment industries (however local business is still 
linked to strong agricultural performance) 
	
→A low to moderate level of economic diversity
	
→A low to moderate level of overall potential drought impact for townships which grows to high for the 
Unincorporated Area (while potential drought impact measures farm sensitivity and community sensitivity, 
whether there is lasting loss or harm depends on community’s adaptive capacity) 
Future additions to the ABARES CVRDI framework will provide more granular detail to help measure 
vulnerability and resilience to drought at the local level.
33
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The Australian Disaster Resilience Index, developed by the former Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative 
Research Centre, now Natural Hazards Research Australia, considers broad measures of community coping 
capacity and adaptive capacity. It identifies a complementary mix between region’s resilience strengths in 
Broken Hill and across Central Darling Shire and the Unincorporated Area and include its social character, 
community capital and community and social engagement. 
While areas are susceptible to future drought impact, when considered as a region there are a mix of resilient 
strengths which work to support managing risks. The region’s levels of community connection and social 
capital, along with emerging economic development opportunities, offer key opportunities to aid immediate as 
well as long-term drought resilience.
Importantly, the Far West regional drought resilience plan identifies that resilience needs and outcomes are 
different across different parts of the region and for different groups who work and live in the region. 
Image supplied by RDA Far West
34
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

CASE STUDY 
Transforming Umberumberka Recreation Reserve  
Located in the Unincorporated area, 27km north west of Broken Hill and 9km north of Silverton, the 
Umberumberka Reservoir is historic asset for the region. Its construction began in 1911 to supply 
water to the Silver City of Broken Hill, its own construction an engineering marvel. As the reservoir no 
longer supplies water to Broken Hill an opportunity exists to transform the now disused water supply 
infrastructure into a multifaceted tourist attraction, and recreational space for the local community.
Umberumberka Reservoir is part of the Far West community fabric, with generations of families 
utilising the reservoir and surrounding facilities, Penrose Park and Silverton. The reservoir, fed by 
Umberumberka Creek and Star Creek, covers a large catchment and is located near the Mundi Mundi 
festival site. Flanked by a River Red Gum community and surrounded by Chenopod and Acacia 
shrublands, the Umberumberka Reservoir already plays a role in supporting community liveability, 
providing a space to gather, play and socialise. Business cases and concepts for an upgrade to the 
Umberumberka Reservoir have been undertaken, which outline a number of benefits with direct 
alignment to drought resilience needs established through this plan. 
Rationale for investment in the project addresses a key focus on community liveability, linked to 
population growth and retention, as well as supporting visitor economy potential in the region by 
providing an additional asset to attract tourists. The proposal reflects similar successful outcomes 
interstate for community use reservoir transformations, while also preserving a significant engineering 
feat which also played a role in the industrial and social development history for Broken Hill.
Transforming the Umberumberka Recreation Reserve would entail upgrades to access roads, car 
parking, tourist infrastructure and facilities and additions to recreational bike and walking tracks, 
all components that provide an experience for those visiting the site.  While the vastness of the 
Far West can be a draw for many, a focus on enhancing liveability remains paramount. Upgrading 
Umberumberka Recreation Reserve demonstrates alignment across government strategies and 
presents a readymade option to address a multitude of drought resilience needs in the Far West.
Image: Umberumberka Reservoir, supplied by RDA Far West
35
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought 
resilience 
strengths and 
opportunities 
SILVERTON
	
→Umberumberka reservoir
	
→Unique tourism and film industry foundations
	
→Strong community determination and investment in 
local facilities
	
→Strong relevance to early Australian history
BROKEN HILL
	
→Economic diversity
	
→Hub for services access for the Far West
	
→Wentworth to Broken Hill pipeline
	
→Investment in smart water devices for public 
spaces and assets, including sports fields
	
→Australia’s first heritage listed city
	
→Australia longest lived mining community
	
→The largest and richest ore body of its kind in 
the world
MENINDEE
	
→Menindee Lakes a major tourism driver
	
→Community volunteerism and identity
	
→Environmental values and cultural connection
	
→The first town established on the Darling 
(Baaka) River
	
→Significant in the ill-fated Burke and 
Wills expedition
	
→Emergent cultural tourism
MILPARINKA
	
→Iconic heritage, once a gold mining town
	
→Captain Charles Sturt expedition to find the 
inland sea was stranded in Milparinka for an 
extended time
	
→Milparinka is positioning itself to tell the story and 
attract significant tourism
Silverton
PAROO RIVER
BAAKA
(DARLING)
RIVER
MENINDEE
LAKES
IVANHOE
	
→Service centre for broader area
	
→Accessible to Broken Hill, Mildura, Hay, Cobar 
and Griffith
WHITE CLIFFS
	
→Healthy events calendar for 
community connection
	
→Unique underground homes to cater for the 
harsh environment
	
→Australia’s oldest commercial opal field and 
one of the only places in the world where 
white opal is found
TILPA
	
→Installation of potable water supply
	
→Increase the village weir supply
	
→Development of camping facilities
	
→Sealed road to / from Cobar
	
→Boating facilities in the existing town weir
	
→Harry Harbord ‘Breaker Morant’ worked in 
the area
PACKSADDLE
	
→Packsaddle Roadhouse as key community 
and tourist point
	
→Healthy events calendar for community 
connection and economic sustainability 
(many travel across the country to attend 
the gymkhanas)
TIBOOBURRA
	
→Community run water supply
	
→Capital of corner country, including 
access to Sturt National Park, cultural and 
pioneering history
	
→Iconic New Year’s eve gymkhana / bikekhana 
/ rodeo that attracts large numbers
	
→October long-weekend gymkhana
WILCANNIA
	
→Unified community position on need for 
Wilcannia weir replacement
	
→Access to key transport routes for freight 
and tourism
	
→Emergent cultural tourism facilities
	
→Darling (Baaka) River drive from Wentworth to 
Bourk via Menindee, Wilcannia and Tilpa
	
→Construction of boating facilities, boat ramp 
and mooring required
	
→Upgrade to town potable water reticulation 
system required
36
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The action plan
There are many different approaches and 
opportunities that can help us continue to build and 
evolve our drought preparedness, in the short and 
long term. This includes both on-farm and off-farm.
What’s worked well?
Key areas for continued advancement of individual 
drought resilience and adaptive capacity on-
farm include:
	
→Continuous development of financial literacy 
and business acumen
	
→Investing in farm maintenance and water 
infrastructure during good times
	
→Investment in feed storage and augers to avoid 
being beholden to feed prices
	
→Diversified investments off-farm or in 
other geographies
	
→Multiple on-property income streams
	
→Including drought cycle monitoring and decision 
triggers in business plans that are integrated 
against current market conditions
	
→Understanding the implications of 
business decisions
	
→A focus on animal nutrition
	
→Sustainable land management practices.
Broader community, economic and environmental 
approaches that have worked well in the 
region include:
	
→A focus on community development 
opportunities to bring people together such as 
the RAMHP butcher days and community and 
family / child days, field days and small motor 
mechanic course days
	
→Peer mental health support programs, such 
as the ‘We’ve Got Your Back’ and ‘How’s Your 
Mate’ initiative
	
→Buy local programs which support 
local spending
	
→Incentivising value-add and supply chain 
industries 
	
→Continued environmental monitoring for 
example, the Barkandji Ranger Program water 
quality monitoring support at Menindee Lakes.
Whilst the Far West already has in place a number 
of programs and initiatives that work well at 
different scales, there are further opportunities to 
build upon these, sustain their implementation and 
look for more transformative options to support 
drought preparedness and mitigation. 
Argent Street, image supplied by RDA Far West
37
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Priority activities
Key priority areas identified by this regional drought resilience plan to support 
community development, economic and environmental opportunities include: 
van-shuttle
Infrastructure
	
→Advocate to revise the proposed 
design change to the Wilcannia Weir 
Replacement Project
	
→Provide static water supply options for 
sports fields and other water saving and 
efficiency options
	
→Advocate for, invest in and implement a 
new radar installation north of Broken Hill 
with doppler capability
	
→Advocate for enhanced telecommunications 
infrastructure to enable data innovation, 
access to markets and access to tele 
services such as tele health
	
→Development of the Umberumberka 
Reservoir, which presents an opportunity to 
improve community liveability and support 
local tourism
computer-classic
Business enterprise
	
→Promote access to drought preparedness 
tools and resources to support business 
decision-making processes and 
trigger points
	
→Invest in feed storage options on-property
	
→Invest in succession planning processes 
for enterprise, land ownership, and the 
development of trained succession 
professionals in-region
	
→Invest in continued exclusion fencing 
around on-property dams.
water-ladder
Community development
	
→Roll-out mental health first aid programs 
through community and industry groups 
across the Far West
	
→Expansion of RFDSSE positive health and 
wellbeing programs, including the ‘We’ve 
Got Your Back Program’, including program 
coordination funding
	
→Continue the roll-out of Contact Inc 
community and family days in locations 
across the Far West, including ‘community 
gate-keepers’ program 
	
→Investment in field days and skills 
development across the Far West, including 
the support of RAMHP related work and 
associated activities
	
→Provide resources and support for the 
continuation of traditional practices using 
cultural water, including funding for on-
Country initiatives and cultural programs
	
→Youth and school-based Landcare programs
	
→Mobilise the ‘Kiila Shed’ Wilcannia 
Community Wellbeing Hub project
school
Governance
	
→Integrate the relevant pathways and 
actions of this regional drought resilience 
plan into Council Integrated Planning and 
Reporting Frameworks
	
→Build local emergency management 
capability through resourcing at the local 
level, supported through state government 
funding allocation
38
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Pathways and actions 
Key themes highlighted through the consultation and engagement process where further opportunities lie are 
represented by the plan’s outcomes and action pathways.
The impacts of drought across these themes, as well as their experience by different cohorts of the community 
in the Far West, provides the basis for action as part of this foundational regional drought resilience plan for 
the Far West. 
Advancing and continuously improving upon drought resilience, and our capacity to adapt, can involve 
absorbing known effects to the degree possible, adapting to changing conditions and transforming to meet 
new or escalating challenges. Many of these actions are reliant upon funding and/or resourcing. 
This action plan provides a suite of opportunities which in combination, provide implementable pathways 
toward enhanced drought outcomes for the Far West.
This plan is a ten-year plan, to be reviewed after five years.
Overview
image-landscape
Resilient
landscapes
Healthy Country and 
waters to sustain 
people and culture, 
environmental and 
industry needs
water
Resilient 
water
Water availability 
that can sustain 
the region, used 
efficiently to share 
and maximise 
its benefit
Plan outcomes
Action pathways
Implementation (monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) performance measures
group-arrows-rotate
Resilient
communities
Connected people, 
families and 
communities that 
are supported by 
coordinated and 
resourced services
money-check-dollar
Resilient
business 
and economy
Innovative 
and adaptable 
enterprises which 
leverage changes in 
climate and market 
conditions 
Wilcannia 
Weir Replacement
Water Security
Water quality
Greening, open space & 
recreation management
Weather intelligence
Community connection 
& wellbeing
Support for youth
Sustainable 
communities
Governance 
& collaboration
Advocacy
Rural business planning
Local business 
value adding 
opportunities
Infrastructure to 
support competitive 
market access
Biosecurity
Rangelands 
management
39
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

These plan outcomes and action pathways are supplemented by the detailed action plan and implementation framework that follow.
Action plan
diamond-turn-right 
Theme 1 – Resilient Water
PATHWAY
ACTIONS
MEL 
PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES
Wilcannia 
Weir
Replacement 
Project
Transform
	
→Advocate to revise the proposed design change to the Wilcannia Weir Replacement Project to revert back to the original design. The original design was the subject of significant 
community consultation and unanimous community support, to provide necessary drought storage for the Wilcannia community through improved water security, enhanced social 
gathering and cultural practices, support for on-property water supply for other parts of the Central Darling Shire by carting from Wilcannia, and contribute to better Murray-Darling Basin 
Plan outcomes for the population of Wilcannia and Central Darling Shire.
1, 2, 11
Water
security
Absorb
	
→Explore a groundwater modelling program for the region to build a greater understanding of groundwater resources and associated considerations
	
→Undertake a study to investigate water cost saving options for potable water across the region. 
Adapt
	
→Invest in continued exclusion fencing around on-property dams, with the aim to fence at least 10m back from the high water mark of the dam to decrease livestock bogging, increase 
productivity and improved biodiversity and biosecurity outcomes
	
→Implement a betterment arrangement for potable water infrastructure from Broken Hill to Silverton and for the wastewater treatment facility in Tibooburra 
	
→Explore water security options for Packsaddle, which exhibits water security vulnerability having run out of water during the previous drought
	
→Undertake a business case for an increased capacity water treatment plant in Wilcannia to support improved supply to rural properties in the Central Darling Shire, to coincide with the 
Wilcannia Weir Replacement Project
	
→Advocate for the recognition and protection of water rights of First Nations people already identified by government water management arrangements, ensuring fair and equitable 
access to water resources
	
→Invest in community potable water points / tanks in locations across the region where residents can pay a nominal fee to access potable water and cart it for person / household use.
Transform
	
→Installation of potable water supply for Tilpa and increase the village’s weir supply.
	
→Upgrade Wilcannia’s township potable water reticulation system to improve water security alongside weir replacement.
1, 2, 7, 9, 11
Water
efficiency
Absorb
	
→Promote education and awareness programs on water conservation and sustainable practices within the broader community
	
→Maintain reserve water supplies for firefighting during drought periods
Adapt
	
→Implement community-led water conservation projects such as rainwater harvesting and greywater recycling to improve water availability and efficiency
	
→Consider investment in property-based desalination plants.
2, 10, 11
40
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

PATHWAY
ACTIONS
MEL 
PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES
Water quality
Absorb
	
→Continue to undertake water monitoring at Menindee Lakes to better anticipate future fish kills, collection of data
	
→Maintain and enhance existing fish kill response processes and plans in the event of future fish kills at Menindee Lakes
	
→In accordance with provisions outlined in the Murray-Darling Basin Plan, water management plans and Western Region Water Strategy, ensure streamflow in the Darling (Baaka) River 
and other measures are implemented to effectively mitigate blue green algae outbreaks.
9, 10, 11
Greening, 
open space 
management 
and recreation
Adapt
	
→Provide static water supply options for sports fields and other water saving and efficiency options to maintain turf and playing surfaces for as long as possible. Ability to continue to play 
and watch local sports has a profound impact on wellbeing during drought 
	
→Invest in sustainable water infrastructure to ensure reliable access and maintain green spaces, which are crucial for community and recreational activities
	
→Promote option for drought-resilient landscaping which avoids use of turf, instead involving stones, succulents and other materials, along with sustainable gardening practices. 
Transform
	
→Develop the Umberumberka Reservoir, which presents an opportunity to improve community liveability and support local tourism for both Silverton and Broken Hill. This project 
leverages the Broken Hill pipeline investment, demonstrating options for re-use of infrastructure.
	
→Construction of boating facilities, boat ramp and mooring facilities at Wilcannia and Tilpa.
2, 3
41
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right 
Theme 2 – Resilient communities
PATHWAY
ACTIONS
MEL 
PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES
Weather
intelligence
Transform
	
→Advocate for, invest in and implement a new radar installation north of Broken Hill with doppler capability, rainfall and severe weather verification to increase weather radar coverage by 
closing a significant gap in the existing network for the Far West.
2, 6, 10
Community 
connection 
and wellbeing
Adapt 
	
→Support and advocate for delivery of different styles of mental health support that cater for different cohorts and needs of the community
	
→Roll-out mental health first aid programs through community and industry groups across the Far West
	
→Ensure support for service providers is available, maximising service availability and managing fatigue and mental fitness of those who support others
	
→Continued support for and expanded roll-out of RFDSSE positive health and wellbeing programs, and support delivery of its outreach (fly-in, fly-out, drive-in, drive-out) mental health and 
alcohol and other drug services, as well as its outreach (both face-to-face and telehealth) primary health clinics to remote communities.
	
→Continued roll-out of Contact Inc. community and family days in locations across the Far West, including ‘community gate-keepers’ program 
	
→Continued investment in field days and skills development across the Far West, including RAMHP work and activities (e.g. Men’s butchering days), driver safety (increase wildlife strike 
during drought) or similar, grazing for profits, gymkhanas and sports events. This may potentially be in partnership with Royal Flying Doctor Service South Eastern Section
	
→Continued investment in and support of the Outback Mobile Resource Unit (Toy Library) 
	
→Introduce a ‘neighbour collective’ approach to get-togethers when pastoralists cannot travel far during drought times
	
→Provide resources and support for the continuation of traditional practices using cultural water, including funding for on-Country initiatives and cultural programs. This include enhancing 
the education of others on the importance of cultural water allocation
	
→Continue support for rural respite care services.
Transform
	
→Undertake a review of existing community facilities across the region to identify upgrade needs to enable their use for community events (i.e. kitchens, bathrooms, water tanks, 
air conditioning)
	
→Local governments, RDA Far West and others to transition community grant criteria during drought periods to ensure community grants and funding incorporates consideration of 
drought relief benefits / opportunities
	
→Work with NSW government agencies to enhance TAFE and other tertiary education opportunities in Broken Hill, with outreach programs delivered across the Far West.
2, 3, 4, 5
42
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

PATHWAY
ACTIONS
MEL 
PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES
Support for youth
Absorb
	
→Continue the delivery of holistic children’s mental health and well being services offered by RFDSSE, including child and family primary health care, children’s play therapy and other 
wellbeing services, and access to the RFDSSE’s Broken Hill Wellbeing Centre
	
→Invest in a swipe card access facility for the Silverton Municipal Chambers Building which serves as a community facility, to enable easier community access to support the areas youth 
and families 
	
→Increase support for families sending children to boarding schools, including financial assistance, mental health resources, and peer support networks
	
→Continue to support initiatives like the Country Universities Centre and promote scholarships for local training to retain young talent and provide career development opportunities
	
→Consider community-led opportunities to subsidise school excursion programs to nurture student wellbeing and advancement
	
→Seek continued investment in Allison House in Broken Hill to allow its service provision to continue, retaining children in region and supporting the region’s families.
Adapt
	
→Increase programs and support for late childhood / early teens on properties
	
→Consider opportunities to locate playgrounds with sports fields across the region, as an opportunity to enhance participation and social interaction of families during drought and include 
provision for games and sports that do not require grass (hopscotch, handball, etc.).
Transform
	
→Mobilise the ‘Kiila Shed’ project (‘Kiila’ meaning ‘grow’ in Barkandji language) Wilcannia Community Wellbeing Hub for disengaged youth, weekly Yarning Circle, Wilcannia Men’s Group 
and Women’s Group, and to deliver counselling
	
→Invest in delivery of Wilcannia Youth Camp project in Mutawindji National Park with a focus on food, fire and local knowledge, to support at-risk youth in the region, acknowledging these 
issues are exacerbated during drought.
2, 3, 4, 5
Sustainable 
communities
Adapt
	
→Advocate for and increase investment in Indigenous housing supply and maintenance of existing dwellings for Wilcannia, Menindee, Ivanhoe and in Broken Hill
	
→Enhance opportunities through facility and service investment in aged care and options for residents to age in place across the region
	
→Continue financial and other support for the domestic violence safe house in Wilcannia
	
→Leverage opportunities to increase defibrillator access on-properties across the Far West
	
→Advocate for isolated patients travel allowance to seek specialist medical support
	
→Introduce training programs and support for governesses, in addition to streamlining the recruitment process for families. Enhanced governess support is enhanced support for families 
and economic enterprise in the Far West
	
→Consider establishment of Far West Farm Sitter program to enable property owners and managers to travel for medical visits, holidays, personal needs, etc. Social media platforms 
may assist.
2, 3, 5, 8
Governance
and 
collaboration
Adapt
	
→Integrate the relevant pathways and actions of this regional drought resilience plan into Council Integrated Planning and Reporting Frameworks
	
→Build local emergency management capability through resourcing at the local level, supported through state government funding allocation
	
→Work with the Southern NSW Drought Innovation Hub extension officer embedded within Western Landcare to develop place-specific research and project needs as part of the Far West 
Drought Hub node
	
→Prepare plans for waste recycling in towns and villages across the Far West to maximise waste efficiencies and generate economic development opportunities when plastics used for 
water containers increases during drought periods
	
→Support the NSW government workforce pilot to attract and retain skilled workers, in contribution to limiting staff turnover and reducing loss of knowledge continuity over time
	
→Continue to implement actions from each community / district improvement plan.
10, 11
43
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right 
Theme 3 – Resilient business and economy
PATHWAY
ACTIONS
MEL 
PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES
Advocacy
Absorb
	
→Advocate for revision of the drought classification process exclusively for the Far West given the scale of the region to enable better access to assistance at the time it is needed.
Adapt 
	
→Advocate for a new contractor subsidy to maintain critical farm employees (including governesses) during drought, as an opportunity to stem a range of cascading on-farm and off-farm 
impacts from drought-driven employment downturn on properties
	
→Advocate for concessions on yearly light vehicle safety inspection reports (pink slips) during drought periods (limited to isolated properties), having regard to the cumulative cost and 
number of light vehicles operating on properties 
	
→Advocate for enhanced support for biosecurity activities on-property during drought, noting biosecurity costs increase during drought
	
→Advocate for assistance with equine costs during drought, including revision of minimum animal thresholds
	
→Advocate for the simplification and streamlining of application processes for drought relief.
10, 11
Rural 
business planning
Absorb
	
→Promote access to drought preparedness tools and resources to support business decision-making processes and trigger points
	
→Invest in feed storage options on-property
	
→Support farmers to implement evidence-based animal nutrition to strengthen livestock health and resilience.
Adapt
	
→Invest in comprehensive rural enterprise business and financial planning
	
→Invest in succession planning processes for enterprise, land ownership, and the development of trained succession professionals in-region to support farm businesses and 
financial counsellors.
6, 7, 8
Local business 
and value
adding 
opportunities
Adapt
	
→Continue to implement ‘spend local’ programs to support town-based businesses in Broken Hill
	
→Explore the use of land use planning, financial and other local government levers to support mix of uses within retail trade centres 
	
→Explore the options available to transition the Silverton Tramway corridor into a recreation / heritage asset and undertake business case
	
→Work with the film and television industry and mining sector to capture community benefit, create a value capture policy to direct funds to community development projects.
6, 7, 8
Infrastructure 
to support 
competitive 
market access
Transform
	
→Invest in regional road upgrades for multi-dimension benefits including drought, flood resilience, tourism and industry support, particularly the ability for stock movement 
	
→Advocate for the sealing of the Queensland section of the Silver City Highway (Warri Gate Road)
	
→Identify and implement a roadside bores program to assist with road maintenance before, during and after drought, ensuring water availability
	
→Advocate for enhanced telecommunications infrastructure to improve public safety and to enable data innovation, access to markets and access to tele-services such as telehealth 
which is critical for the Far West.
2
44
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right 
Theme 4 – Resilient landscapes
PATHWAY
ACTIONS
MEL 
PERFORMANCE 
MEASURES
Biosecurity
Absorb
	
→Continue to undertake water monitoring at Menindee Lakes to better anticipate future fish kills, collection of data
	
→Continue to focus on removal of carp from the Baaka and Menindee Lakes
	
→Maintain and enhance existing fish kill response processes and plans in the event of future fish kills at Menindee Lakes
	
→Continue to implement and maintain the NSW border wild dog fence program
	
→Work with Local Lands Services, Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development and Landcare to invest in weed and pest management on private lands during drought to 
supplement on-property incomes and improve environmental outcomes.
4, 9, 10, 11
Rangelands
management
Absorb
	
→Continue support to roll-out and expand the Junior Landcare and Youth Network program across the region.
Adapt
	
→Implement groundcover management initiatives to reduce top soil loss, alleviate impacts of dust storms and flow-on health effects and heatwave mitigation, both on-farm and in 
communities. In Broken Hill this is particularly important to manage exposure to lead dust.
	
→Support extended delivery of seed nurseries for seed stock across the region, promoting increased groundcovers, increased fodder, bee activity and improving soil water penetration
	
→Continue to fund and support the operation of the Barkandji Rangers program
	
→Support landholder investment in riparian corridor rehabilitation and fencing to reduce the impact of wild goats on waterway corridors, which results in significant waterway degradation, 
landscape change and impacts on fish populations.
	
→Support to roll-out the ‘Telling the Truth About the Western Division’ project
Transform
	
→Continue to grow the Far West Rangelands Rehydration Alliance, including further investment for an additional 20 properties to participate.
4, 9, 10, 11
45
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Implementation 
The Far West regional drought resilience plan relies 
on collaborative implementation approaches. 
The action plan for drought resilience spans 
different functions of government, and guides 
stakeholders with actions that can make a 
difference. This includes short, medium and long 
term opportunities. 
The action plan has been drawn together through 
community expression, existing initiatives and 
background data. It is noted that: 
list	 actions include unspecified 
timeframes and funding to 
acknowledge that delivery 
is dependent on a range 
of variables
coin	 implementation will occur 
through participation of all 
stakeholders over time as 
priorities, resources and 
funding arise 
people-group	 as a regional plan, the actions 
are collective and collaborative 
object-union	 roles and responsibilities are 
flexible, including for local 
government role: the plan is 
owned by the region, and any 
stakeholder can start an action 
within their capacity; and 
hand-holding-droplet	 some actions are indeed 
underway by various 
stakeholders, the purpose of 
maintaining them in the action 
plan, is that the community 
has advised that the action is 
integral to drought resilience. 
 ROLE DESCRIPTION 
An advocate actively supports a position, 
action or policy. The task is outside the 
advocate’s jurisdiction, capacity or resourcing 
and advocacy is required to engage with those 
parties with capacity to deliver. For example, 
telecommunications advocacy.
A partner joins others in a common cause 
or action where roles and responsibilities 
are shared across areas of expertise. Each 
partner brings an element to the action for 
joint delivery. For example, region-wide 
strategic initiatives.
A lead is in control of an action. The action 
may still involve partners or other roles, but 
the action is reliant upon a lead party due to 
their technical or other expertise. E.g. Health or 
counselling matters.
An owner is the only party that can undertake 
or permit the action. E.g. local government as 
public asset owners.
A supporter is united with others in the 
need or benefits of the action but potentially 
does not have a major role. The action is led 
or owned by others. E.g. A supporter may 
provide assistance in kind, technical advice or 
donations to action leaders.
A stakeholder is anyone who has an interest 
in the project, program or action. Stakeholders 
will have varying degrees of involvement from 
owner to advocate and all points between.
A deliverer is responsible for implementation 
and outcomes of an action or funded program. 
e.g. Community agency delivering social 
aid programs.
A funder provides the funding arrangements. 
The party is not involved with scoping, 
executing or delivering the program but may 
require some outcome reporting or evidence. 
e.g. the government agency providing grant 
funding for programs and projects. 
46
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Governance structure
Implementation of the regional drought resilience 
plan is to be driven by a collaborative and multi-
disciplined drought resilience project control group 
(PCG). Membership will be deliberately broad to 
provide an integrated and coordinated approach 
to drought resilience efforts. Representatives from 
across community and industry will form part of 
the PCG.
This will enable the PCG to adopt agile approaches 
and change priorities as needed depending on 
changing circumstances, and as opportunities arise. 
Despite this, all actions remain relevant in terms of 
maximising funding opportunities. 
A PCG Terms of Reference is to be prepared for 
its membership to guide its function. The Terms of 
Reference could include: 
	
→Role and purpose and connection to the RDRP 
	
→Stakeholder and membership lists 
	
→Meeting arrangements, (potentially quarterly) 
and responsibilities of attendees 
	
→The circumstances of a quorum and decision 
making protocols 
	
→The election or rotation of a chair person 
	
→An action plan for the first 60 days or 12 months 
including delivery of the priority actions with the 
implementation funding; and 
	
→A process for reflection and nominating next 
priority actions
A Memorandum of Understanding may also 
be required.
PCG meetings should be held in different localities 
across the region over time. 
Monitoring, evaluation and learning 
framework
Whilst the drought action plan incorporates a large 
suite of projects, activities and actions, some offer 
immediate opportunity, some are medium-term 
items and others are longer-term transformational 
opportunities. Not all actions can be focused on or 
delivered at once. The ‘absorb, adapt, transform’ 
framework will guide the PCG in terms of its 
implementation and coordination of activities and 
funding pursuits. This will enable a flexible and agile 
approach as drought conditions change, guiding 
the focus. 
Other stakeholders are able to use the plan to 
support funding and grant applications at any time, 
as desired. Opportunities for collaborative delivery 
partnerships, where two stakeholders may wish to 
provide similar projects, should be explored.
This system will:
	
→Provide regular opportunities to define when 
conditions are changing locally
	
→Catalyse a change in focus to respond to the 
needs of the changing conditions.
This ensures a level of agility is adopted with regard 
to the implementation approach.
As immediate efforts in response to the action plan 
are delivered, broader efforts across collaborators 
is guided in its approach, underpinned by this plan 
which enables stakeholders to work towards and 
contribute to regional drought resilience outcomes, 
including those at the local and property level.
The drought resilience action plan also requires 
that a ‘lessons learned’ posture is adopted, 
ensuring new information, knowledge, approaches 
and science is rolled into implementation delivery 
as a guiding principle. This will mean that over time, 
the drought resilience action plan may be adapted 
to reflect new learnings and the adjustment of 
intervention pathways as required. The PCG 
is responsible to conduct an annual lessons 
learned review, with changes to inform action 
moving forward.
The drought resilience action plan has been 
thoughtfully designed to not only guide collective 
effort and action but to enable adaptation through 
ongoing monitoring, evaluation and learning. 
The regional drought resilience plan is a ten-year 
plan, to be reviewed after five years.
An annual monitoring program to inform adaptive 
learning is outlined below. Addendums to this plan 
can be made, to reflect these learnings over time 
and ensure the document maintains pace with 
changing circumstances and maturation of drought 
preparedness activities.
Tracking progress and reporting
Action-based project tracking against the drought 
resilience action plan, the principles and objectives 
of the plan should be undertaken on an annual 
basis. This tracking and reporting shall be the 
responsibility of the implementation PCG chair, 
unless otherwise delegated.
Likewise, an annual evaluation process will be 
conducted by the PCG, guided by the evaluation 
questions that follow.
47
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Key evaluation questions
These key evaluation questions are high level 
questions designed to frame the analysis of 
progress and performance of the Far West 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan against the above 
framework. These key evaluation questions may 
help to structure annual tracking and reporting. 
Effectiveness and outcomes:
	
→What have been the outcomes (intended, 
unintended, positive and negative) of the plan 
implementation process and progress?
	
→To what extent has progress contributed to or 
furthered the principles and objectives of the 
regional drought resilience plan?
	
→Has the plan been used for or otherwise 
supported successful funding and 
grant applications?
	
→Have any barriers or challenges been identified 
throughout the implementation of plan, and what 
solutions to address these have been identified?
Drought resilience maturation:
	
→To what extent has efforts in implementing the 
plan contributed to: 
	
›
Creating stronger connectedness and 
greater social capital within our communities, 
contributing to well-being and security? 
	
›
Empowering our communities and 
businesses to implement activities that 
improve their resilience to drought? 
	
›
Supporting more primary producers and 
land managers to adopt whole-of-system 
approaches to natural resource management 
to improve the natural resource base, for 
long-term productivity and landscape health?
Ongoing stakeholder engagement:
	
→In what ways are the PCG and other 
stakeholders collaborating and collectively 
contributing to efforts outlined by the 
action plan?
	
→In what ways has the plan provided inclusive 
involvement across sectors, disciplines 
and communities?
	
→In what ways has the plan been able to support 
individual stakeholder goals, objectives and 
aspirations with regard to drought resilience?
The reporting may be undertaken using a range 
of tools to capture experiences and perspectives 
from across the PCG, allied stakeholders as well as 
the communities of Broken Hill City, Central Darling 
Shire and the Unincorporated Area more broadly. 
These tools may include:
	
→Meetings and event data capture
	
→Targeted meeting / interviews with stakeholders
	
→Survey data
	
→Case studies and data from the PCG
	
→Media, including social media
	
→Funding and grant applications.
Image: Umberumberka Reservoir, image supplied by RDA Far West
48
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Achieving the plans outcomes and performance measures
A further opportunity for the PCG to measure the contribution to or achievement of the plan’s outcomes is by 
using local data to assess specific outcomes. The data sources / indicators will need to be selected by the 
PCG, and can provide insights as to how the plan is tracking against the resilience theory of change. 
The evaluation process is required to consider available metrics and perform an assessment.
The measures to gauge achievement against the plan’s outcomes include:	
PLAN OUTCOMES
PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Resilient water
1	
Public health and safety and access to clean water prevents 
community health issues
2	
Community infrastructure is resilient and helps to 
reduce disruptions
Resilient communities
3	
Community connection and wellbeing is maintained
4	
Capacity and capability of community groups is strengthened
5	
General health services, including focus on mental health, are 
available and are accessible
Resilient businesses and economy
6	
Reduced decline of gross regional product relative to:
	
›
Non-drought periods
	
›
Previous drought periods
	
›
Other regions in NSW, Victoria and South Australia
7	
Agricultural productivity in the region is sustained
8	
Employment loss is avoided or minimised, ensuring livelihood 
are maintained
Resilient landscapes
9	
Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways is 
reduced throughout and emerging from drought
10	 Capacity to make informed decisions through access to data, 
intelligence and innovate tools is increased
11	 Long-term sustainability is supported
49
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Learning
Regular (annual) monitoring provides the ability for reflection and learning. The progress tracking and 
reporting methodology, using key evaluation questions, will present specific insights in terms of those 
opportunities to build in ‘lessons learned’ through engagement across stakeholders with a role in drought 
resilience. This can then be translated into opportunities for adaptive learning, as they arise.
These lessons should, on an annual basis, be contemplated with regard to the drought action plan to 
determine any relevant updates, new insights, intelligence and technologies that can be integrated to ensure 
the action plan keeps pace with a growing drought resilience maturation across systems and sectors.
This process will ensure the action plan remains a ‘live document’ that appropriately supports and services 
the needs of all stakeholders and importantly, those of the Broken Hill City, Central Darling Shire and the 
Unincorporated Area in preparation for, endurance of, and recovery from drought.
Concepts to guide adaptive learning as part of plan implementation are included at Appendix B. These items 
will help navigate maturation of this plan over time.
Silverton, image supplied by RDA Far West
50
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Appendix A – Drought history 
Precipitation and root zone soil moisture are considered as indicators of drought 
according to the Bureau of Meteorology’s Australian Water Resources Assessment 
Landscape (AWRA-L) service5. Root zone soil moisture is a calculation of the upper and 
lower soil layers in the AWRA-L, which represents the water-holding capacity of the 
top one metre of soil. Root zone soil moisture and precipitation rates are each useful 
indicators of future drought potential. 
5	 Bureau of Meteorology 2021, The Bureau of Meteorology Australian Water Outlook Service Data Collection, National Computational Infrastructure, 
Available at: https://dx.doi.org/10.25914/6130680dc5a51
Past records for the region demonstrate a year-to-
year fluctuation in precipitation and soil moisture 
across the region. The mid-1970s and 2010-2011 
feature significant rain, whereas 1926, 1940, 2017-
2019 are some of the periods of unusual dryness.
In all cases these drought events were 
characterised by protracted periods of low rainfall, 
leading to low soil moisture as illustrated below.
In the below figures, these droughts are considered 
against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022.
*Note that the data does not go back to the Federation drought 
of 1890-1902 
1895 – 1902
Federation 
Drought
1937 – 1945
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009
Millennium 
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
Figure 13 — Australian drought history timeline
Mundi Mundi Plains, image supplied by RDA Far West
51
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1914 to 1915
Nationally, this drought was short but notable, primarily due to the failed national wheat crop. This drought was 
driven by a strong El Nino, with drought conditions first becoming evident in 1913. For this region, it was not 
until 1916/1917 that there was any notable reprieve.
Figure 14 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1911 to 1918)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
Figure 15 — Change in conditions during historic drought period compared to baseline (2002-2022)
52
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
This drought period was characterised by several breaks but intense periods of dryness. For this region, 
reduced rainfall was present beforehand, in 1934 and 1935. Reduced rainfall again occurred in 1937 and 1938. 
1940 was the most notable year, with extremely low rainfall totals across the entire region.
Figure 16 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1934 to 1948)
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
Precipitation
Soil moisture
Figure 17 — Change in conditions during historic drought period compared to baseline (2002-2022)
53
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1965 to 1968
The 1960s was generally dry across the continent. Drought developed in 1964 in northern New South Wales 
and had extended across most of the country by the following year. This was evident across the region, with 
lower rainfall and soil moisture across much of the region.
Figure 18 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1962 to 1971)
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
Precipitation
Soil moisture
Figure 19 — Change in conditions during historic drought period compared to baseline (2002-2022)
54
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1982 to 1983
Despite only being a year long, this was one of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th century. A very 
strong El Nino led to these drought conditions. The region experienced widespread dryness, which was most 
significant in the eastern extent of Central Darling and Unincorporated Far West, as well as Broken Hill as 
a whole.
Figure 20 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1979 to 1986)
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
Precipitation
Soil moisture
Figure 21 — Change in conditions during historic drought period compared to baseline (2002-2022)
55
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Precipitation
Soil moisture
1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
The Millennium drought was a long-lasting period of dryness, most severe in densely populated areas of the 
south-east and south-west of the country. For the Far West region, the beginning of this period is relatively 
unimpactful based on rainfall and soil moisture figures. It is not until 2001 when there is a significant dry spell 
into 2002.
Figure 22 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1994 to 2012)
Editor’s note: Some discrepancy in maps below showing significant rainfall and higher soil moisture over this period are linked to the 
reference period used (2002 – 2022) and significant dryness in the latter half of that period. This result is compounded by the short-
lasting periods of rainfall decline during this long drought period (1997 – 2009)
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
Figure 23 — Change in conditions during historic drought period compared to baseline (2002-2022)
56
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

2017 to 2019
Following a wet 2016, dry conditions returned in 2017 across south and eastern Australia. This was a sustained 
multi-year period of dryness, unprecedented in recorded history . A strong Indian Ocean Dipoles was a 
significant contributor to dry conditions the second half of 2019, leading into significant 2019/2020 bushfire 
season. The region was similar affected during this period, with widespread low rainfall and low soil moisture.
Figure 24 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (2014 to 2022)
-0.2
Change in root zone soil moisture (mm)
-0.1
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-300+
Precipitation, change during drought period 
(mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
Precipitation
Soil moisture
Figure 25 — Change in conditions during historic drought period compared to baseline (2002-2022)
57
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Appendix B — Concepts to guide 
adaptive learning
This appendix provides key aspects for consideration as part of learning processes 
throughout implementation of this plan and guides further iterations and amendments 
to this RDRP. As drought resilience processes mature, the ability for further robust 
adaptation pathways to be implemented will emerge. 
The table below captures specific items identified for integration as part of future plan iterations. 
Table 1 - Key aspects of consideration to guide future plan iterations
NO.
ASPECT OF CONSIDERATION
Expansion of drought resilience relative to diverse stakeholder groups
1
Expand on what drought means to different segments of the region’s community and industries, 
and adaptation pathways to ‘absorb’, ‘adapt’ and / or ‘transform’ to grow drought resilience.
As implementation of this foundational RDRP occurs, and monitoring, evaluation and learning 
processes are undertaken, opportunity will arise to advance the concepts of resilience theory, 
and make more clear how the adaptation pathways are continuously improving and escalating to 
underpin drought resilience maturation.
2
Continue to engage with diverse community and industry groups to advance implementation of 
the plan.
Future plan updates could capitalise on the community’s desire to be engaged and involved in 
the plan’s delivery by acknowledging the role that key knowledge holders could play. Stakeholder 
engagement could be expanded to include direct participation of different drought vulnerable 
groups including gauging their capacity to participate and how best to engage with them moving 
forward. This information could be used to better target vulnerable residents and ensure adequate 
supports are in place to involve different community segments.
Expansion of resilience adaptation pathways
3
Use diverse quantitative and empirical evidence on the potential impact of the interaction of 
historical and projected drought with key economic and social variables over time, such as 
demographic changes, shifts in the diversity of businesses, and livelihoods and employment 
opportunities for different community segments, in emergent versus declining types of industries, 
and in labour mobility among different industry and sectors.
4
Further develop the theory of change to align the plan’s objectives and actions towards reaching 
its intended outcomes, including the degree to which the proposed actions contribute to 
adaptation and transformation.
5
Expand on the interrelationships between economic, social and environmental factors across 
existing and updated documents, plans and strategies, and describe how these relationships 
influence potential cascading impacts of drought.
58
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

6
Future plan updates could profile drought impacts for those non-agricultural sectors identified as 
key sectors in the community, such as mining, renewable energy, health care and social assistance 
and tourism sectors. Such a profile could include an exploration of how these sectors can build 
resilience or drive transformation through learning, preparedness and planning.
7
Future plan updates could develop a suite of plausible future scenarios through a participatory 
process and based on climate, drought and other drivers of change. The development of future 
scenarios could consider how trends, shocks or stresses (including drought) will interact with and 
likely affect the region’s economic, social and environmental characteristics, and the implications 
for diverse stakeholder groups. This exercise will also assist these stakeholders to explore 
and identify actions and pathways that assist with building resilience under different plausible 
future scenarios.
Resilience action planning
8
Establish resilience indicators for each of the plan’s ‘priority areas’, using baseline observations 
drawn from the MEL process within the initial years of plan implementation.
9
Future updates could provide more information to substantiate the assumed mechanisms by 
which its actions can be achieved, and to what extent they align with the broader objectives and 
outcomes of the plan.
Implementation
10
As implementation advances, expand the implementation content of the plan with respect to its 
governance arrangements and the function / operation of the PCG.
11
Future plan updates could provide more explicit descriptions of what external support is required 
for successful implementation.
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
12
Further develop structured approaches to capturing lessons from performance measures, linked 
with monitoring in addition to lessons from annual evaluations currently identified in the MEL. 
Integrate lessons learned from the plan’s existing evaluation questions back into the plan’s actions.
Continue to enhance and mature the plan’s MEL processes over time as the plan transitions from 
foundational into a performance posture.
13
Further develop performance indicators tied to actions in the plan’s MEL plan. This will improve 
accountability by showing the degree to which proposed priorities and actions contribute to 
the plan’s articulated vision and outcomes. This could include using quantitative and empirical 
evidence for key economic and social variables over time. This could include evidence that helps 
to track demographic shifts, changes in the diversity of businesses, livelihoods and employment 
opportunities for different community segments in emergent versus declining types of industries. It 
could further include evidence of labour mobility among different industry and sectors in order to 
assess actions focused on economic diversification.
59
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Resilience assessment
14
Ensure future iterations of the plan are qualified by a review of the Resilience Assessment 
components to identify key circumstantial changes which have occurred.
15
Continue to build upon and refine the program logic approach embedded within the Resilience 
Assessment that supported the development of the current plan, into a well-developed theory of 
change that provides a detailed and explicit causal mechanisms and valid assumptions by which 
the plan, through its implementation, will deliver the desired outcomes and impact. 
60
Far West Regional Drought Resilience Plan