GIPPSLAND 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN
A Framework  
To Guide Future  
Effort and Investment

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the 
lands and waters on which we live and work, and 
pay our respects to their Elders past, present and 
emerging. We acknowledge that the Gippsland 
region is on traditional lands, including those lands 
of the Gunaikurnai, Bunurong, Wurundjeri and 
Taungurung Nations, as well as other Traditional 
Owner groups who are not formally recognised.

1
Preface
Drought results in major financial, social and 
environmental impacts for primary producers, 
other businesses and the community.
The Gippsland region is committed to taking steps 
now to ensure good strategies are in place to 
prepare for and manage through future drought 
and dry seasonal conditions. 
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought resilience initiatives to help 
Australian farms and communities prepare for 
the impacts of drought. These are implemented 
through a suite of programs under five focus areas:
1.	Harnessing innovation
2.	Better risk management
3.	Better climate information
4.	More resilient communities 
5.	Better land management. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) 
Program of the Future Drought Fund is supporting 
the development of regional drought resilience 
plans throughout Australia over 2021 to 2024.
This Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan)  
aims to empower and enable communities to be 
better prepared for and able to manage future 
dry seasonal conditions and droughts. The Plan 
includes a collectively agreed framework for 
building economic, environmental and social 
resilience which can be used to guide future effort 
and investment.
The Plan builds on the regions historic and recent 
experiences of drought, existing drought-related 
strategies and programs, and other Future Drought 
Fund programs in Gippsland, most notably the:
•	Gippsland node of the Victorian Drought 
Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	Farm Business Resilience Program
•	Sowing the Gap Project, under the Natural 
Resource Management Drought Resilience 
Landscapes Stream.
This Plan has been developed using a consistent 
methodology across Victoria: 
•	Drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity and frequency of past, 
present and future drought impacts 
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify key 
insights and suggested priority areas for action 
to build drought resilience.
Agriculture Victoria partnered with the Gippsland 
Drought Resilience Plan Reference Group and 
many regional organisations and community 
groups to facilitate the development of this Plan, 
which was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future 
Drought Fund.
This Plan should be read in conjunction with  
the Drought in the Gippsland Region report.
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.

2

3
Contents
Preface	 	
	
1
Introduction	
4
Vision and Our Guiding Principles	
6
Gippsland Vision	
7
Guiding Principles	
7
Our Region and Communities	
8
Drought in Gippsland	
10
Gippsland’s recent experience of drought (2017–20)	
12
The impact of future droughts in Gippsland	
17
Resilience in Gippsland	
18
Definitions of Resilience	
19
Community Resilience	
20
Case Studies of Resilience in Gippsland	
21
Themes, Outcomes and Focus Areas	
30
Theme 1:	 Resilient, connected and empowered communities	
34
Theme 2:	Sustainable management and use of natural resources	
38
Theme 3:	Resilient local businesses and regional economies	
42
Theme 4:	Innovation, research, knowledge sharing and skills development	
46
Theme 5:	Key enablers essential to effective collaboration and collective action	
50
Conclusion	 	
54
Appendices		
56
Appendix 1:	 Stakeholders consulted during the development of the Plan	
56
Appendix 2:	Drought related strategies and programs	
59

Drought is a recurring feature in the Australian 
landscape. The Australian and Victorian 
Governments have partnered to support regional 
areas to ensure they are better prepared to 
manage and build resilience to future droughts, 
with an increasing focus on adaption and change. 
The Commonwealth Drought Response, Resilience 
and Preparedness Program’s vision is to have 
farm businesses and rural communities that are 
prepared for, and capable of managing, drought in 
pursuit of a prosperous and sustainable future.
Government, industry and community contributed to 
the development of this place-based, co-designed 
drought resilience plan. Stakeholders participating 
in these conversations are listed in Appendix 1.
This Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan for 
Gippsland (the Plan) seeks to facilitate a cohesive 
and coordinated approach to building community 
drought resilience. The Plan includes a collectively 
agreed framework (the Framework) for building:
•	economic resilience for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural sector
•	environmental resilience for sustainable and 
improved functioning of farming landscape
•	social resilience for resourceful and  
adaptable communities.
The long-term objectives of the Plan are to:
•	create stronger connectedness and greater 
social capital within Gippsland communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security
•	empower Gippsland communities to implement 
economically transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to drought
•	support more Gippsland landholders to adopt 
holistic management approaches to improve the 
natural resource base for long term productivity 
and landscape health.
For the purpose of this document, resilience is 
used to describe the ability to respond positively 
to the known impacts of drought and maintain 
business functions. It is about being able to adapt, 
thrive and take advantage of opportunities when 
encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent 
maintenance’ of the current situation, or being 
stoic, resilience includes the ability to adapt and 
be decisive during uncertainty and change.
Resilience is critically important in rural and 
regional communities because it assists each 
person and group to build the mindset, social 
network and business skill set required to navigate 
the risks encountered in challenging seasons.
This Plan was developed over seven months, 
drawing on conversations with community 
members and existing strategic planning. During 
community conversations, local stakeholders 
identified that drought is experienced differently 
across the region and that there are many 
pathways to resilience depending on individual 
circumstances. They observed the seasonal 
connection between drought, fire and floods, 
and that a more integrated approach to risk 
mitigation for the sequential impacts of multiple 
events was required. The community strongly 
believed that self-reliance and improved 
preparedness is essential to building improved 
social, environmental, and economic resilience, 
and that landholders have a responsibility to be 
well prepared to manage their land and business 
activities. Nothing is more critical to mitigating  
the impacts of drought than understanding the 
risks and being well prepared.
INTRODUCTION
4

Conversations with regional organisations and 
communities identified five themes critical to 
building resilience:
1.	Resilient, connected, and empowered 
communities
2.	Sustainable management and use of  
natural resources
3.	Resilient local businesses and  
regional economies
4.	Innovation, research, knowledge,  
and skills development
5.	Key enablers essential to effective  
collaboration and collective action.
Under each Theme, the community identified 
Outcomes and Focus Areas to focus effort and 
guide investment critical to building drought 
resilience in Gippsland.
The Themes capture the lived experience, local 
knowledge and solutions identified by the Gippsland 
community through seven months of conversations 
(November 2021 to May 2022). Some of the Focus 
Areas can be addressed directly by the Gippsland 
community, while others will require broader 
cooperation from governments, agencies and  
the private sector beyond Gippsland.
We propose that these Themes, Outcomes and 
Focus Areas provide a robust Framework for 
building regional drought resilience based on our 
current knowledge of the most effective way to 
prepare for drought.
The Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan Reference 
Group (the Reference Group) oversaw the 
consultation process and endorsed the Framework 
as representing a coherent and balanced view of 
the feedback received from local stakeholders. 
The Reference Group noted that the Framework:
•	Provides a ‘collectively agreed framework’  
to focus effort and guide future investment
•	Builds on and complements existing drought 
related strategies and plans developed by  
Local Government Authorities, not-for-profit  
organisations, industry, Government departments 
and community groups, as listed in Appendix 2
•	Captures knowledge of our recent drought 
experience in a form that can be used to improve 
preparedness and response
•	Is a useful resilience framework for Gippsland 
that may be relevant to other circumstances.
•	Provides a sound basis for ongoing 
conversations with community
•	Provides the basis to develop an implementation 
plan with specific actions and accountabilities.
The Reference Group acknowledge and thank 
the many organisations and individuals who 
contributed their time and expertise to shape this 
Plan. The Reference Group also acknowledges  
the need for further conversations with several 
groups including Traditional Owners and providers 
of community health and wellbeing services.
Ultimately, this document is a snapshot of the 
priorities of the Gippsland community at a point 
in time. Gippsland’s drought resilience story does 
not begin or end with this Plan. Rather, this Plan 
will advance as our understandings of drought, 
variable seasons, risk, and resilience improve.  
A detailed implementation plan with specific 
actions and accountabilities will be developed later.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

Image credit: Lyric Anderson, GAgG
VISION AND 
OUR GUIDING 
PRINCIPLES
6

Gippsland Vision
That Gippsland’s primary producers, other businesses and the community 
act now to be well prepared for, and be capable of managing, the known 
impacts of drought.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Guiding Principles
During community conversations, local stakeholders identified the 
following guiding principles that underpin building resilience:
	 	
Self-reliance and risk mitigation:  
Drought is not an exceptional circumstance, 
but a risk to be managed along with other 
business threats. Widespread community 
feedback was that primary producers and 
other small businesses will mitigate the 
impacts of drought by understanding risk  
and being well prepared.
	 	
Encourage preparedness:  
Investment should focus on encouraging 
preparedness in good years and support 
community connectedness and wellbeing  
in times of drought. 
 
	 	
Collaboration and co-design:  
Drought preparedness programs should 
be co-designed with Local Government 
Authorities and other relevant stakeholders 
to ensure they effectively address local 
community priorities. 
 
	 	
Improved decision making:  
Developing business skills and improved  
access to timely drought-related  
information is essential to support  
evidence-based decision-making for  
businesses and communities. 
 
	 	
Integration:  
Foster collaboration between organisations  
to deliver timely, place-based, integrated 
services which simplify user access and  
reduce stress. 
 
	 	
Leadership and community networks:  
Gippsland has a strong record of 
collaboration and community leadership. 
Drought programs should be designed 
and delivered in partnership with those 
established networks.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

OUR REGION AND 
COMMUNITIES
Gippsland covers the entire south-east of Victoria 
with a geographic footprint of 41,600 square 
kilometers and a population of approximately 
291,000 people. Gippsland is a diverse region 
comprising three areas with broadly distinct 
characteristics:
•	The western region, recognised as one of 
Victoria’s fastest growing communities, with 
strong maritime influences from Bass Strait, 
experiencing higher rainfall, a mild climate,  
and a warm, dry autumn (Baw Baw, Bass Coast  
and South Gippsland Local Government Areas). 
•	The central region (Latrobe and Wellington  
Local Government Areas) with a lower rainfall 
and a mild climate
•	The eastern region experiencing a semi-maritime 
climate with more variable rainfall. (East Gippsland 
Local Government Area)
The region’s townships have their own distinct 
character and community with a deep sense of 
connection to the land. The smaller townships 
are highly dependent on agriculture (Frontier 
Economics, 2022, Kiem & Austin, 2012). 
The major sectors in the region’s economy are 
mining, construction, health care and social 
assistance, agriculture, forestry and fishing 
and electricity, gas, water and waste services 
(Gippsland Regional Economic Development 
Strategy, 2022). The visitor economy is also a 
significant contributor to the regional economy, 
along with secondary and post-secondary 
education which leverages TAFE Gippsland and 
Federation University.
Agriculture is one of the sectors most susceptible 
to, and impacted by, drought.
In 2019 KPMG worked with Food & Fibre Gippsland 
and industry stakeholders across the region to  
set an aspirational growth target for the regional 
food and fibre industry. Their research found that:
•	Agriculture in Gippsland is based on dairying, 
broad acre grazing, horticulture, cropping, 
specialist intensive farming operations, forestry 
and fishing.
•	Gippsland’s reputation as a reliable supplier 
of clean, green safe food and fibre products 
contributes approximately $7 billion of the 
$16 billion Gross Regional Product (GRP) with 
an estimated 6,500 agriculture, fishing and 
forestry businesses contributing to over 250 
communities across the region.
•	The food and fibre supply chain includes another 
2,500 businesses employing a further 15,400 
employees (12 per cent of the region’s workforce) 
from inputs to consumer.
More detailed economic, environmental and social 
perspectives are described in existing Gippsland 
regional strategies and plans (listed in Appendix 2).
“In the last 20 years Gippsland 
has endured significant major 
emergencies including bushfire, 
storm, flood and drought  
making it one of the most  
major-emergency prone regions 
of Victoria. This has forged strong 
community strength and a history 
of resilience in Gippsland”.
Michael Owen Assistant Chief Fire Officer –  
Regional Commander Gippsland Emergency 
Management Region CFA South East Region.
8

POPULATION 
(2020)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2020)
TOP EMPLOYING SECTORS  
(2020)
291,000
$18
billion
Health care and 
social assistance
Retail trade
Construction
Agriculture,  
forestry and fishing
Education and 
training
Figure 1: The Gippsland region
Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions, 2022, 
Gippsland Regional Economic Development Strategy.
GIPPSLAND FARMS PRODUCE
28.6%
of Victoria’s  
dairy
23.4%
of Victoria’s  
beef
19.0%
of Victoria’s  
vegetables
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

Gippsland has experienced many significant  
dry periods over the last century, including: 
•	The Federation drought: 1895 to 1902
•	The World War I drought 1914 to 1915 drought
•	The World War II drought: 1937 to 1945
•	1965 to 1968
•	1982 to 1983
•	The Millennium drought: 1997 to 2009
•	The 2017 to 2020 drought.
An integrated assessment of the socio-economic 
and environmental impacts of past and future 
droughts is available in the supplementary report: 
Drought in the Gippsland Region; Information to 
support the Gippsland Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan. This assessment is based on an analytical 
framework that considers how drought affects 
farms and the wider community.
Central and East Gippsland recently experienced 
drought conditions that significantly altered 
agricultural production, which had flow on impacts 
on the community. The following section provides 
an overview of the conditions and the community’s 
experience. Lessons from this period have greatly 
influenced the development of this Plan.
DROUGHT  
IN GIPPSLAND
10

GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Gippsland’s recent  
experience of drought  
(2017–20)
In the twelve-month period leading up to 
December 2017, below average rainfall was 
experienced in the central and eastern areas while 
southern and western areas experienced average 
rainfall (see Figure 2).
Despite 2017 being an exceptionally dry year, 
the Gippsland Water Outlook (2018), reported 
that most of Gippsland’s towns were confident 
that their town water supplies remained secure 
for the coming summer season. Industrial water 
consumption declined over an eighteen-month 
period, due to the closure of Hazelwood Power 
Station. During 2018 the Gippsland Integrated 
Water Management (IWM) Forum was established 
with the intention of facilitating better and 
more collaborative planning between water 
corporations, local Councils, the West Gippsland 
Catchment Management Authority, and other 
stakeholders.
Rainfall during 2018 was very much below average, 
especially in the east. Figure 3 shows that rainfall 
across much of the region was around the first 
decile, meaning it was lower than in 90 per cent  
of all recorded years.
Figure 2: Victorian rainfall deciles  
1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017
Australian Bureau of Meteorology, Recent and 
historical rainfall maps, Australian Bureau of 
Meteorology (bom.gov.au)
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Highest  
on record
Very much 
above average
Above 
average
Average
Below  
average
Very much 
below average
Lowest  
on record
12

Figure 3: Victorian rainfall deciles  
1 January 2018 to 31 December 2018
Australian Bureau of Meteorology, Recent and 
historical rainfall maps, Australian Bureau of 
Meteorology (bom.gov.au)
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Highest  
on record
Very much 
above average
Above 
average
Average
Below  
average
Very much 
below average
Lowest  
on record
Image credit: Agriculture Victoria, Drought 
in Central and East Gippsland 2018–20
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

In 2019, there were highly variable conditions 
across the region (see Figure 4). Following a very 
dry Autumn and Winter, good Spring rainfall saw 
the western and central areas return to average 
conditions. By the end of the year parts of west 
had suffered numerous landslides and road 
closures due to heavy rain. In contrast, some areas 
in the central and eastern region continued to 
experience the lowest rainfall conditions on record.
Between October to December 2019 local 
newspapers in the east were reporting that:
•	Gippsland rivers had experienced a significant 
drop in stream flows
•	Local businesses were facing ‘dramatic impacts’, 
with less money circulating through the 
economy causing some stores and cafes to close
•	Farmers were pleading for targeted and 
streamlined assistance to manage long-term 
drought conditions 
•	Invasive pests were causing widespread damage
•	Communities were seeking easier access to 
mental health support
•	Families were running out of domestic and  
stock water 
•	Many areas were experiencing a ‘green drought’1
•	Many sporting teams were confronted with  
hard dry surfaces reducing their capacity  
to play safely
•	Community leaders were concerned about  
the psychological toll of watching crops fail  
for three consecutive years
•	Local governments were supporting farmers 
with water cartage
•	Water corporations were forecasting ongoing 
difficult seasonal conditions, putting significant 
pressure on water resources and water 
allocations.
Figure 4: Victorian rainfall deciles  
1 January 2018 to 31 December 2019
Australian Bureau of Meteorology, Recent and 
historical rainfall maps, Australian Bureau of 
Meteorology (bom.gov.au)
1 A ‘green drought’ is where there is just enough rain to make the countryside look green, 
but not enough to produce adequate stock feed
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Highest  
on record
Very much 
above average
Above 
average
Average
Below  
average
Very much 
below average
Lowest  
on record
14

Figure 5: Victorian rainfall deciles  
1 January 2020 to 31 December 2020
Australian Bureau of Meteorology, Recent and 
historical rainfall maps, Australian Bureau of 
Meteorology (bom.gov.au)
Bushfires burned out of control across Gippsland 
from December 2019 until February 2020 
impacting more than 1.1 million representing 56% 
of the East Gippsland shire. There were profound 
impacts on families, their local communities, 
ecosystems, businesses, the regional economy 
and infrastructure. Emergency services recognise 
the cyclical connection between drought, fire and 
floods, and the hazards these cause to public and 
private properties.
“Drought increases the risk of bushfires and 
their mitigation, as well as increasing the risk 
to remaining agriculture, economic assets and 
community livelihood due to drought. Drought 
also increases risks for emergency services, 
particularly Fire Services, due to availability of 
water and increased likelihood of fire”. Michael 
Owen Assistant Chief Fire Officer – Regional 
Commander Gippsland Emergency Management 
Region CFA South East Region.
In the twelve-month period to the end of December 
2020, the drought was finally broken in most areas 
with rainfall ranging from 80-120 per cent of the 
average across the region (see Figure 5).
Any social, economic, or environmental 
vulnerabilities that already exist in communities 
(e.g., supply of services, low commodity prices, 
high unemployment, reduced access to medical 
services or isolation) are amplified when drought 
occurs. Table 1 summaries the interconnected 
impact of drought, as described by the Gippsland 
community.
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Highest  
on record
Very much 
above average
Above 
average
Average
Below  
average
Very much 
below average
Lowest  
on record
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

Table 1: The interconnected impacts of drought in Gippsland
Economics impacts
•	Reduced on-farm production 
and income 
•	Decreased on-farm 
employment opportunities, 
which can increase local 
unemployment
•	Increased costs for  
on-farm inputs
•	Shortage of water for 
both domestic (home) use 
and stock water requiring 
purchase of water or carting 
water from Emergency Water 
Supply Points
•	Increased financial hardship 
for the families, businesses, 
and local communities 
•	Decrease in expenditure in 
the local supply chain 
•	Loss of clients, industry 
knowledge and skills from  
the region which can limit  
the ability of communities  
to recover
Social impacts
•	Increased fatigue, anxiety  
and depression
•	Reduced access to 
greenspace for recreation 
and exercise
•	Increased load on committed 
individuals and community 
leaders, which can lead to 
fatigue and burn out
•	Negative toll on family 
wellbeing due to the loss of 
on farm income or involuntary 
separation as farming families 
seek paid work off farm
•	Changed demographics as 
people migrate away from 
drought-affected areas and 
industries
•	Negative impact on some 
farmers’ confidence and 
self-worth when they have 
to destock, gain off farm 
employment or consider 
themselves not to be a  
‘good farmer’
•	Increased incidence of mental 
health issues and domestic 
violence 
•	Increased pressure on 
services, which can exacerbate 
existing challenges due to 
geographic or demographics
Environmental impacts
•	Increased frequency and 
intensity of fires, which 
negatively impacts community 
health and wellbeing impacts, 
native habitat, cultural values 
and water and land health
•	Loss of soil carbon, dropping 
of the water table and loss of 
shelter belt vegetation
•	Increased soil run-off into 
rivers and estuaries, leading 
to other detrimental problems 
such as Blue Green algae 
outbreaks and fish deaths
•	Increased predation on native 
species and increased grazing 
pressure onto farms from 
animals chasing food
•	Increase in invasive species 
such as weeds, deer, horses 
and eastern grey kangaroos 
which caused further damage 
to agricultural landscapes and 
limited the ability of pasture  
to recover from drought 
•	Increased pressure on remaining 
wetlands and stream beds
•	Increased soil erosion caused 
by reductions in ground cover
•	Increase in tree diseases, for  
example a decrease in snowline 
impacts alpine species
•	Increased animal welfare 
concerns for livestock and 
native species
16

2 Victoria’s changing climate (climatechange.vic.gov.au)
The impact of future droughts in Gippsland
The influence of variable weather and climate 
will continue to have a substantial effect on farm 
sector earnings. It is not possible to predict or 
determine when the next Gippsland drought will 
occur and there are uncertainties around climate 
change forecasts and projections. Despite the 
absence of ‘perfect’ information, the prevalence, 
severity, and impact of future droughts in 
Gippsland can be informed by climate change 
modelling.
Victoria’s 2019 Climate Science Report2 brings 
together the latest climate change science 
knowledge. The Gippsland Climate Projections are:
•	Maximum and minimum daily temperatures  
will continue to increase over this century  
(very high confidence) 
•	By the 2030’s, increases in daily maximum 
temperature of 0.9 to 1.8 °C (compared to the 
1990’s) are expected
•	Over the long-term rainfall is expected to 
continue to decline in winter and spring  
(medium to high confidence) and autumn  
(low to medium confidence)
•	Extreme rainfall events are expected to become 
more intense on average through the century 
(high confidence)
•	By the 2050’s, the climate of Traralgon could be 
more like the current climate of Bairnsdale, and 
Bairnsdale more like Cowra, New South Wales.
The vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness 
for drought differ depending on the resilience 
and socio-economic circumstances of each 
individual family, and social cohesion within the 
local community. Drought negatively impacts the 
health and wellbeing of all community members 
resulting in increased incidence of stress, burnout, 
mental illness, suicides, domestic violence, and 
relationship separations.
The impact of drought in rural and regional 
communities should be considered within the 
broader context of the numerous pressures 
confronting Gippsland families and small 
businesses.
The most vulnerable are those who have not 
prepared for drought or adapted to other 
challenges of a changing climate. Those who do 
not have the necessary business skills, are socially 
or geographically isolated, elderly or from lower 
socio-economic groups are particularly vulnerable 
to drought. Stakeholders observe that a sense 
of personal agency and control, together with 
an increased focus on individual and community 
‘preparedness’ is critical.
Image credit: Agriculture Victoria, Drought 
in Central and East Gippsland 2018–20
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

RESILIENCE 
IN GIPPSLAND
18

Definitions of Resilience
Walker (2020) defines resilience as 
the capacity of a system to absorb 
a disturbance and reorganise 
so as to keep functioning in the 
same kind of way. Rather than just 
‘bouncing back,’ resilience is all 
about changing and adapting to 
circumstances, rather than having 
them change you.
For the purpose of this document, resilience is 
used to describe the ability to respond positively 
to the known impacts of drought and maintain 
business functions. It is about being able to adapt, 
thrive and take advantage of opportunities when 
encountering change. Rather than ‘persistent 
maintenance’ of the current situation, or being 
stoic, resilience includes the ability to adapt and 
be decisive during uncertainty and change. 
Resilience is particularly important in rural and 
regional communities because it assist individuals 
and groups to build the mindset, social network 
and business skill set required to navigate the 
risks encountered in challenging seasons.
Resilient communities demonstrate some or  
all of the following characteristics:
•	Local leadership and initiative
•	Governance that embraces change
•	Connection through formal and informal 
networks.
Resilient communities: 
•	Work together in the pursuit of common goals
•	Foster self-responsibility
•	Are adaptable and learn lessons from change
•	Can anticipate issues and effectively manage risk
•	Consider different perspectives and options to 
solve complex problems.
Throughout the engagement process the term 
resilience elicited a broad range of responses 
from communities. In particular, stakeholders 
noted the compounding pressures of drought, 
fire, floods and Covid within a short time frame 
and the challenge to concurrently build resilience 
within Gippsland businesses, communities and 
individuals. For many, resilience in Gippsland, 
in the identity and community sense, is a 
commitment to stay and continue to be productive 
rural communities, doing whatever it takes to 
achieve that successfully.
Image credit: Wellington Shire Council
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

Community Resilience
The Victorian Community Resilience Framework 
for Emergency Management (2020) provides a 
coherent perspective on community resilience. 
Although Drought is not considered an emergency, 
it is closely aligned to the Guiding Principles of this 
document and offers a useful foundation on which 
to build a more resilient region. It is composed 
of seven resilience characteristics that leaders 
should strive to build and affirm in community life. 
These are:
1.		Safe and well
2.	Connected inclusive and empowered
3.	Culturally rich and vibrant
4.	Sustainable built and natural environment
5.	Dynamic and diverse local economy
6.	Reflective and aware
7.		Democratic and engaged. 
Building resilience includes a focus on the 
sustainability of community lifelines with the explicit 
objective of strengthening the liveability, viability, 
and wellbeing of both the people and the region.
Although there is no ‘one-size fits all’ solution, 
alignment with this community resilience 
perspective will support organisations to:
•	Encourage all to better understand and 
participate in achieving a shared vision of  
safer more resilient communities 
•	Align governance, policies and programs to 
strengthen community resilience 
•	Improve connection and collaboration within  
and between organisations 
•	Improve the capacity of all organisations  
to connect and support communities to take 
action before, during and after events
•	Plan and support resilience through  
connected networks to support wellbeing, 
liveability and sustainability
•	Utilise planning systems to mitigate risk.
20

Case Studies of Resilience in Gippsland
Adoption of new practices remains a challenge 
for many with limited time, finances, skills, or 
willingness to change. 
The following case studies provide examples of 
lived experience in the Gippsland community and 
are grouped according to the themes identified in 
the plan. They each highlight different aspects of 
building drought resilience including community 
leadership, health and wellbeing, sustainable  
land management, self-responsibility, inclusivity, 
and connectivity.
Storytelling has the power to impact and change 
lives. People experiencing fatigue, trauma, stress, 
or mental illness can often identify themselves 
in stories and find comfort in recognising that 
they are not alone if they reach out for support. 
Storytelling is a powerful tool to show how people 
and communities can grow in the face of the 
challenges brought on by drought. It allows us to 
break the experience down and make it real.
“There is no doubt about it, the people that can produce homegrown feed  
in quantities that are large enough to be able to sustain their business in dry 
times, have been the businesses that have been able to succeed quite well 
through recent droughts.”  —Trevor Caithness, Gippsland Agricultural Group.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

CASE STUDY 1 
People need people 
Farmers need other farmers. They speak the  
same language, understand the challenges  
and feel comfortable with one another.
Sallie Jones, co-founder of independent milk 
label Gippsland Jersey, is passionate about her 
community and committed to ensuring that 
farmers and farming families get the support  
they require. She created a calendar for farmers  
to honour her dad who died of suicide in 2016  
due to mental health conditions. A strong man  
with a huge capacity for work and a heart for 
fighting injustice, he silently battled depression 
and psychosis for over three years.
Relationships, social support, and a sense of 
belonging have been found to be key suicide 
protective factors. Each month in the annual 
calendar, ‘The Hand That Feeds You’, focuses  
on a brave farmer sharing their mental health 
journey. The calendars are distributed to over  
1000 Gippsland dairy farms annually.
The National Rural Health Alliance found that 
male farm owners and managers are dying from 
suicide at twice the rate of the national average for 
other males. Farming is recognised nationally as 
an industry with a high suicide risk. Social factors, 
isolation, a tumultuous climate, the daily grind 
of farm work, limited access to health services, 
increasing financial pressures and consolidation  
of the industry are all factors found to have had  
an impact on farmer’s mental health.
The stories contained within the calendar show 
the resourcefulness and resilience of Gippsland’s 
local farming families and how in tough times 
Australians come together as a community. 
People need people! Sallie believes many lessons 
were learnt from losing her dad, but none more 
significant than the kindness shown by others  
who cared enough to show up and be present in 
her family’s time of need.
This story was based from an article in the 2022  
Hand That Feeds You calendar. Image credit: Sallie Jones 
and Michelle Breaden.
Resilient, connected, and empowered 
communities
Improved community resilience and better preparedness and  
coordination will reduce the impact of drought on community.
22

CASE STUDY 3 
Improving community connections
There is an adage that farmers are far more likely 
to call a vet for their livestock than they are to call 
a doctor for themselves. A pilot health program 
currently being run in East Gippsland is making 
great inroads in changing that perception.
East Gippsland bush nurse, Sue Carroll is 
passionate about her community and observes 
that a lot of farmers do not ask for assistance, 
continue working hard and neglect getting advice 
for their medical conditions. Bush nurses look after 
the social and emotional needs of their clients, 
offering a wide range of services from being first 
responders, organising aged care assessments 
and preventative care for the elderly when they are 
struggling in their homes.
The Farmer Health Check program takes the 
health clinic to the farmer’s door. They aim to 
improve connections with remote farmers and 
promote the benefits of preventative health 
assessments such as skin, blood pressure, cervical 
screening, and wellbeing checks.
Mental health support is one of the most important 
components of the Bush Nursing program  
delivery. As part of the Farmer Health Check, 
nurses complete a K10 mental health assessment 
and if required refer clients on to a counsellor 
 
or psychologist. Farmers can also access  
‘The farmerHAT’ health self-assessment tool, 
which can be completed online to check and  
keep a record of how they are travelling.
The Bush Nursing program offers important 
preventative care for residents living in remote 
communities, improves social connections and 
achieves positive lifesaving outcomes.
This story was based on a podcast from the Agriculture 
Victoria Talk podcast series. Visit Smarter, Safer Farms  
for more information about the Bush Nursing in 
Gippsland pilot project. Image credit: Sue Carroll,  
Swifts Creek Bush Nursing Centre Inc.
CASE STUDY 2 
Healing Rural Minds
Leanne Jennings is a fifth-generation farmer, 
manager of the Bairnsdale Neighbourhood House 
and community leader who has an intimate 
understanding of the challenges confronting those 
who live and work in isolated communities. She talks 
proudly of the Bairnsdale Neighbourhood House’s 
work, in delivering the Rural Minds mental health 
workshops to small East Gippsland communities.
Rural Minds is an evidence-based program which 
offers comprehensive resources and training to 
facilitators and community leaders. The workshops 
aim to destigmatise mental health and provide 
information about mental health, wellbeing, and 
suicide prevention in a relaxed and local setting.
Leanne describes how bringing people together 
to connect socially, building trusting supportive 
relationships, and talking about mental health 
plays an important role in retaining the social 
fabric of rural communities. Communities and 
individuals are better able to recover from 
natural disasters if the local community is strong, 
connected, and well-supported.
The Bairnsdale Neighbourhood House story 
demonstrates the central role of community 
organisations as champions of place-based 
community led support and the integral role they 
continue to play in healing rural minds in the remote 
communities of East Gippsland. Through Leanne’s 
outstanding leadership, the Rural Minds program 
is building a strong and informed community.
This story was based on a case study from the  
VOCSS website. Contact Leanne Jennings at 
bairnsdalenh@ozemail.com.au.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

CASE STUDY 4 
How Communities of Practice can 
improve productivity, profitability 
and sustainability
The Gippsland Agricultural Group (GAgG) is driven 
by farmers who are passionate about agriculture 
and seeks solutions to local issues with a focus on 
livestock, grains, fodder, pastures, and soil health.
GAgG carries out research trials and demonstrations 
on fodder and grains crops, to investigate 
innovation in agriculture and the feasibility of 
implementation in arable dry land country. If proven 
viable, the knowledge gained from these trials 
and demonstrations are moved to satellite farms 
for large paddock scale research. The information 
gained is willingly shared through the farming 
community, with many applying the skills and 
knowledge on their own farms.
At no time is disadvantage more distinct or 
isolating than during crises such as droughts. 
GAgG is committed to establishing and maintaining 
an effective community group that supports 
the needs of its members. The group facilitates 
whole of community learning, whilst ensuring all 
members can participate by proactively working 
towards a common goal, promoting interaction 
amongst a network of peers, electing leaders that 
stand by the group’s values, supporting freedom  
of expression and effective communication, setting 
clear policies and obligations, and modelling 
robust decision-making processes.
This passionate group of farmers demonstrate it is 
possible to unlock the potential productive value 
of our soils and farming systems, creating a robust 
viable agricultural industry, and mitigating risk  
by setting up ‘Communities of Practice’ to improve 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability.
This story was written by Jen Smith for the Gippsland 
Agricultural Group. Image credit: Lyric Anderson, GAgG, 
Giffard West on-farm soil sampling during field day
Sustainable management  
and use of natural resources
Improved preparation and building resilience before drought is  
essential with a focus on demonstrating and implementing innovative 
climate-resilient farming systems.
24

CASE STUDY 6 
Sowing the Gap
The ‘Sowing the Gap’ project aims to build 
resilience in farming operations, and better 
prepare East Gippsland farmers with the 
knowledge, understanding and experience to fill 
seasonal feed gaps. The project is managed by the 
East Gippsland Catchment Management Authority, 
coordinated by GAgG and driven by farmers.
The extensive use of supplementary feed to fill 
the seasonal feed gap in pasture-based farming 
systems significantly limits profitability and 
creates additional workload. During the last 
drought, many farmers relied on purchasing 
supplementary feed to maintain breeding herds. 
For many this was a stressful and unprofitable 
undertaking and shed light on transport and 
distribution issues.
This project explores the operational procedures 
and economics of growing fodder to fill feed gaps, 
producing fodder reserves, and building the type 
of resilience into grazing systems that are required 
to navigate a drought.
The project is based at the Gippsland Agricultural 
Group’s Bengworden research farm, has six 
demonstration sites on commercial grazing farms. 
It draws on existing local networks including 
Agricultural Victoria’s ‘Better Beef’ network, the 
Top Soils network and Landcare. The project 
has seen the development of five case studies 
detailing appro aches that worked well in the 
recent drought with documentation of the project 
findings to inform future practices.
The Sowing the Gap project has provided peer 
to peer learning, on-ground demonstration of 
results and sound technical advice, assisting East 
Gippsland farmers to proactively fill seasonal feed 
gaps critical to building drought resilience.
This story was written by Jen Smith for the Gippsland 
Agricultural Group. Image credit: Lyric Anderson,  
GAgA – Sowing the Gap pasture trial.
CASE STUDY 5 
Strategies for dry land farming 
For over 40 years, Joan and Rob Liley have farmed at 
Mount Lavinia adjoining the beautiful Cape Liptrap 
Coastal Park in South Gippsland under principles 
of environmental sustainability and animal welfare. 
They currently fatten about 700 prime bullocks  
a year on about 450 hectares. This is regular 
rainfall, sandy loam, coastal heathland country 
with perennial ryegrass and clover pastures.
Twenty per cent of the farm is fenced out to 
creeks, drainage lines, and tree lanes that provide 
environmental and production benefits. Joan 
and Rob monitor their soils, continually replace 
elements, match pastures and stocking rates, and 
prioritise cattle wellbeing as they work towards 
net zero carbon emissions whilst maximising 
production. They highlight the importance of 
keeping high quality water. Rather than calling 
on local streams or using groundwater, their 
properties are wholly dependent upon dams 
big enough to conservatively sustain animal 
production in extreme dry seasons.
These decisions are underpinned by flexible 
financial budgeting that considers advice on the 
options available for each season. Joan and Rob 
actively manage risk, are decisive and make calls 
early. For example, in dry years Joan and Rob advise 
that fertiliser application and harvesting should be 
completed earlier and by increasing the fertiliser 
rates and that stock should be closely monitored, 
with the best steers given priority paddocks to 
ensure each animal can reach its maximum weight.
Joan and Rob believe that by keeping themselves 
informed and by being brave and decisive by 
‘calling it early’, it is possible to mitigate business 
risks in dry years without compromising on their 
conservation efforts.
This story was based on a podcast from the Agriculture 
Victoria Talk podcast series, Strategies for Dry Weather 
Farming in Gippsland.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

CASE STUDY 8 
Improving soil conditions and 
boosting farm profitability
Healthy soils are the foundation of a healthy, 
productive, and profitable farming enterprise. The Top 
Soils project focuses on developing local solutions 
for improving soil conditions and boosting farm 
profitability through farmer-driven focus groups.
Soils with low fertility limit fodder growth, and farm 
profitability. The need for the project was determined 
through Australian Bureau of Statistics data that 
showed that sustainable land management practices 
were not being widely adopted in the region.
The highly successful Top Soils 1 was developed 
in 2013 as a 5-year project with the objectives of 
improving and protecting the productive potential 
of agricultural land by improving soil health and 
the persistence and quality of ground cover.  
Top Soils 2 (2018 to 2023) continues with support 
from the East Gippsland Catchment Management 
Authority and funding from the Australian 
Government’s National Landcare Program.
The first few years saw partner agencies gather 
data to benchmark the current soil fertility and 
farming practices. Top Soils 2 has enabled some of 
these sites to be retested to determine the change 
over ten years. Following the collation of soil 
and plant data, five farmer-driven focus groups 
were established in separate geographical areas. 
Several research and demonstration sites have 
investigated the effects of nutrients and rotational 
grazing on weed loads in improved pasture 
systems and soil requirements, including micro 
and macro nutrients.
By supporting change towards best practice in 
soil health the Top Soils project has provided 
peer to peer learning, on farm demonstrations 
and technical advice, helping farmers to better 
understand and manage their land by looking for 
symptoms of unhealthy soils, providing a forum  
for discussion and practical local solutions.
This story was written by Nat Jenkins for Southern 
Farming Systems. Image credit: Natalie Jenkins, 
Southern Farming Systems and Top Soils Partners 
Far East Victoria Landcare, East Gippsland Landcare 
Network, Snowy River Interstate Landcare and 
Agriculture Victoria.
CASE STUDY 7 
Sustainable pastures 
Melissa and Justin Ainsworth bought their 
140-hectare grazing property, ‘Merriman Park’, 
near Stradbroke in Gippsland in 2005 during  
the Millennium drought. The property has a  
range of soil types, including a grey sandy loam 
and black soil. For the past twenty years, they  
have worked diligently to turn the nutrient poor 
soils and run-down pastures into a sustainable 
grazing business.
Key steps to the Ainsworth’s success include:
•	Lifting the soil nutrient levels: they switched 
from traditional fertilisers to chicken manure 
after observing successful local dairy systems. 
This has provided improvements in the soil health 
and biology which is crucial for plant health.
•	Managing pastures in new ways: they 
introduced ‘Savvy cocksfoot’, a resilient, 
high yielding pasture that is suited to lighter 
soils, disease resistant, bred to tolerate hard 
grazing and extremely palatable, in conjunction 
with rotational grazing, has been critical for 
successful pasture establishment providing 
better coverage with less weeds.
•	Connecting with local groups: they became 
involved with their local Landcare group and 
strategically established shelterbelts for 
biodiversity while providing shade and shelter 
for their stock. They have planted over 60,000 
trees and have come to believe that caring 
for the environment goes hand in hand with 
productive farming.
With nearly three years of home-grown feed in 
storage for their Angus breeding enterprise, the 
Ainsworth’s have built greater drought resilience 
through improving soil health, nurturing resilient 
high yielding pastures, and creating improved 
shelter belts to protect their stock.
26

CASE STUDY 9 
Holistic farm business planning
John Appleby and Francine Gilfedder, run two beef 
cattle farms in Wairewa in East Gippsland and have 
experienced a broad suite of seasonal conditions 
over many years. They have developed a diverse 
skillset from managing these conditions, backed 
with a growth mindset on how to build resilience 
and develop a sustainable farming landscape.
John outlines seven important pre-drought steps 
they use to guide their business decision making:
1.	Develop a holistic farm business plan
2.	Explore opportunities to reduce water loss
3.	Develop and nurture soils to build productivity
4.	Strategically plan and develop farm 
infrastructure
5.	Build financial and fodder reserves
6.	Do not over stock
7.		Set up well maintained firefighting 
infrastructure.
In addition, John has maintained a focus on 
farm sustainability grounded in nurturing their 
soils and pastures. However, following several 
years of severe drought, the Black Summer 
bushfires caused significant loss of pasture and 
infrastructure. Fortunately, their beautiful home 
and all livestock were saved. John believes that 
there is nothing more critical to mitigating the 
impacts of drought than by understanding risk  
and being well prepared.
A carefully laid out farm infrastructure plan  
has provided a platform for farm sustainability. 
The farm features well laid out paddocks that 
have been revegetated to improve soil quality, 
trees planted as wildlife corridors and, a bore and 
troughs to protect the natural waterways while 
keeping stock out of creeks. The construction 
of large deep dams and rotational grazing have 
also provided additional benefits in sustainably 
maintaining pastures, increasing soil fertility,  
less wastage and controlling grazing periods.
Holistic farm business planning, decisive decision 
making, and sustainable farming practices, have 
assisted John and Francine in maximising their 
farm’s potential and developing a sustainable 
farming landscape.
Image credit: John Appleby, Nowa Nowa.
Resilient local businesses and  
regional economies
Economic resilience can be enhanced by businesses accessing and 
utilising professional advice to build capability, strengthen business 
planning and improve decision making.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

Innovation, research, knowledge sharing 
and skills development
Innovation, research, knowledge, and skill development is essential  
to build drought resilience and adaption.
CASE STUDY 10 
Upskilling farmers in innovation
Food and Fibre Gippsland is the Gippsland node 
of the Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub, which is part of the Future Drought 
Fund. The Hub brings a network of universities and 
five highly respected farming/industry groups to 
connect farmers with regional agricultural experts 
and new practices. Food and Fibre Gippsland is 
focused on creating innovative local solutions for 
local problems. 
Food and Fibre Gippsland was formed in March 
2019, via the amalgamation of Agribusiness 
Gippsland and the East Gippsland Food Cluster. 
The collaborative organisation’s mission is to lead 
capacity building, innovation, and knowledge 
sharing for the greater good of the sector across 
the whole of Gippsland.
They currently have a number of activities 
underway including:
•	The future fodder project to build better 
preparation and storage of fodder
•	Training for mental health professionals  
to better support farmers in times of drought
•	Development of a regionally produced fertiliser 
specifically formulated to work efficiently in 
drought conditions
•	Greener dams to increase water storage
•	Improved Ag-Tech solutions for irrigated 
vegetables. 
By creating solutions for local problems Food and 
Fibre Gippsland are carrying out an important role  
in accelerating the adoption of innovative and 
adaptive farming systems.
This story was written by Ben Gebert for  
Food and Fibre Gippsland.
28

Key enablers essential to effective 
collaboration and collective action 
Building drought resilience will be enabled by a better understanding 
of drought impacts, clarifying shared responsibilities and regional 
governance, leveraging existing local networks and partnerships and 
improving digital connectivity.
CASE STUDY 11 
Advocating for local drought 
response, recovery and 
preparedness priorities 
The 2019 ‘Looking Ahead’ Drought Response 
proposal, was prepared by the East Gippsland and 
Wellington Shire Councils in May 2019, in the final 
stages of a severe multi year drought.
The proposal built on the Council’s existing 
initiatives to support businesses impacted by 
drought, including 1–1 assistance, community 
meetings and support programs. The process 
created an opportunity to reflect on the success  
or gaps in existing support programs and advocate 
for shared priorities. The Looking Ahead document 
proposed a three-tier approach to support manage 
through, recover from, and build preparedness  
for drought:
1.	Transition: Programs for those who either  
chose to or had no choice other than to 
transition away from agriculture.
2.	Recovery: Programs to help manage the 
impacts on farm and reduce off-farm impacts 
for the community.
3.	Adaption: Programs to help the community 
explore better pathways for agriculture in a 
changed climate.
The 2019 ‘Looking Ahead’ Drought Response 
proposal shows how Gippsland people pulled 
together through one of the worst droughts in 
our history, providing a strong legacy of how 
collaborative leadership can be harnessed  
to advocate for shared priorities and to build 
drought resilience.
This story was written by the Wellington and East Gippsland 
Shire Councils. Image credit: Wellington Shire Council.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

Thematic Framework 
The Themes, Outcomes and Focus 
Areas for action (the Framework) 
detailed below captures the lived 
experience and local knowledge 
of the Gippsland community and 
organisations through seven 
months of conversation and builds 
on other existing strategic plans 
and policy document. 
Some of the Focus Areas can be addressed 
directly by the Gippsland community,  
while others will require broader cooperation  
from governments, agencies, statutory  
bodies, not-for-profit organisations, and the  
private sector. 
A detailed implementation plan with  
specific actions and accountabilities will  
be developed later.
THEMES, OUTCOMES 
AND FOCUS AREAS
30

GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

The five Themes are:
Resilient, connected and 
empowered communities 
Improved community 
resilience and better 
preparedness and 
coordination will reduce  
the impact of drought  
on community. 
Sustainable management 
and use of natural resources 
Improved preparation and 
building resilience before 
drought is essential with  
a focus on demonstrating 
and implementing innovative 
climate-resilient farming 
systems. 
The five  
Themes are: 
32

Resilient local businesses 
and regional economies 
Economic resilience can  
be enhanced by businesses 
accessing and utilising 
professional advice to 
build capability, strengthen 
business planning and 
improve decision making.
Innovation, research, 
knowledge sharing  
and skills development 
Innovation, research, 
knowledge, and skill 
development is essential  
to build drought resilience 
and adaption. 
Key enablers essential  
to effective collaboration  
and collective action
Building drought resilience 
will be enabled by a better 
understanding of drought 
impacts, clarifying shared 
responsibilities and regional 
governance, leveraging 
existing local networks and 
partnerships and improving 
digital connectivity.
The following pages provide more detail for each of the 18 Outcomes including key 
insights and observations made by stakeholders and the proposed Focus Areas for action.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

RESILIENT, 
CONNECTED AND 
EMPOWERED 
COMMUNITIES
Improved community resilience and better preparedness and coordination 
will reduce the impact of drought on community.
Theme 1
34

1.1 Foster and support our community leaders 
Key insights and observations:
Leaders are essential to building and maintaining 
community resilience, local expertise, trusted 
advice and fostering open discussion. Community 
leadership is provided by a few committed 
individuals who bear a heavy leadership burden. 
We need to safeguard the wellbeing of these 
community leaders from burnout. There is also a 
need to build the capacity for inclusive community 
led resilience by fostering, supporting, and 
empowering new community leaders (including an 
increased focus on women, youth and traditional 
owners). Gippsland has a strong legacy of 
collaborative leadership that can be harnessed  
to build drought resilience.
Focus Areas for action
1.1.1
Foster a culture of collaborative leadership across Gippsland agencies, industry,  
emerging leaders and community groups. 
1.1.2
Build the capacity for community led drought resilience action.
1.1.3
Improve support for current community leaders. 
Image credit: Lyric Anderson, GAgG
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

1.2 Improve community health and wellbeing by raising awareness of, 
and access to, community health services
Key insights and observations:
Drought negatively impacts the health and 
wellbeing of all community members resulting 
in increased incidence of stress, burnout, 
mental illness, suicides, domestic violence and 
relationship separations. Rural communities 
require better access to local health services and 
support including specialist support for women, 
children and men. Rural communities prefer to 
use existing local trusted providers. Current 
services are often delivered by multiple providers 
which creates confusion. A more integrated 
‘place based’ approach to service delivery would 
improve awareness of, and access to, timely 
health services. Mental health services could 
also be offered more proactively once the early 
signs of drought are known. Better and earlier 
mental health management strategies will support 
stronger individuals, families and communities. 
It will be important to continue to implement 
recommendations from The Royal Commission into 
Victoria’s Mental Health System (2021). Recent 
progress has been made with the implementation 
of the Connect Well Partnership in East Gippsland 
and Wellington which focuses on working together 
to improve mental health and wellbeing outcomes 
for people in the region. We know that improving 
access to services and support for people works 
best if we work as a partnership.
Currently, with a nation-wide shortage of healthcare 
workers, and rural Australia experiencing an even 
keener shortage of access to services, achieving 
these outcomes will be extremely onerous. 
Improving community health and wellbeing 
outcomes will require considerable work to change 
current health behaviours for some cohorts, 
however, the wellbeing of rural communities will 
be enhanced by outreach programs that support 
social connection over the long term.
Focus Areas for action
1.2.1
Improve awareness of services by providing one information portal and one point of  
contact for multiple health services.
1.2.2
Improve collaboration and coordination between health services to optimise service delivery 
and improve the user experience (e.g., consider ‘one touch’ case management, develop 
memorandum of understandings between providers or develop operating guidelines).
1.2.3
Strengthen existing trusted local health services and co-design any new programs with 
them so that services best meet local needs.
1.2.4
Provide training and awareness programs for health service practitioners to better 
understand and respond to the impacts of drought (e.g., Victorian Drought Hub initiative).
36

1.3 Foster coordination and collaboration between  
not-for-profit organisations
Key insights and observations:
Charitable organisations play an important 
role in providing support to communities under 
stress. However, many landholders felt they 
were approached by multiple not-for-profit 
organisations in the last drought asking the same 
questions about their situation. Others noted 
that inequitable allocation of support created 
division within small communities. While the 
Victorian public donates generously and there are 
multiple dedicated not-for-profit providers, there 
are few mechanisms to coordinate effort. Other 
well-meaning support agencies (not based in the 
region) arrived unannounced and did not work in 
partnership with Local Government Authorities 
or local communities, which resulted in confusion 
and angst. A new approach is required to better 
match support services with community need. 
Key elements are to optimise the use of funds 
and avoid replication through clearer processes, 
improved collaboration and coordination and more 
timely and relevant support services.
Focus Areas for action
1.3.1
Improve information sharing with and among not-for-profit organisations through  
regional and municipal forums.
1.3.2
Increase community awareness of available support and services.
1.3.3
Continue to develop improved processes to ensure equitable and effective  
distribution of support.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

SUSTAINABLE 
MANAGEMENT AND 
USE OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES
Improved preparation and building resilience before drought is 
essential with a focus on demonstrating and implementing innovative 
climate-resilient farming systems.
Theme 2
38

2.1 Accelerate the adoption of innovative resilient and adaptive  
farming systems
Key insights and observations:
There are many pathways to resilience and 
individual circumstances influence what activities 
are important and useful for different businesses. 
Farmers need to proactively prepare for drought 
in a manner that best suits their local needs. 
Farmers can enhance their business continuity by 
preparing for drought with an absolute focus on 
implementing innovative, resilient and adaptive 
farm systems. There is increasing opportunity 
to benefit from farm systems which have 
environmental credentials, adopt regenerative 
agriculture principals, restore landscape function 
and utilise circular economy approaches to 
improvement management of waste and energy.
The recently renewed Regional Catchment 
Strategies, the Victorian Agriculture Strategy and 
most industry programs embed climate-adapted 
decision making into land and water management 
programs. Successful implementation of these 
improved farm systems requires sound technical 
advice, peer to peer learning and on-ground 
demonstration of results. The need to share 
experience and learnings of drought across the 
community is critical to improve preparedness  
and response.
Adoption of new practices remains a challenge for 
some businesses with limited time, finances, skills 
or willingness to change. Farmers need trusted 
mentors in business practices and innovative 
farming techniques. These are one on one personal 
relationships that can make a farming business a 
real success.
Focus Areas for action
2.1.1
Continue to document best practice, lessons of experience and case studies to build a 
strong body of evidence that can inform future drought mitigation processes, strategies 
and programs (e.g., the Sowing the Gap project funded by the Future Drought Fund, East 
Gippsland Catchment Management Authority and East Gippsland Shire Council.
2.1.2
Support and empower farmers to accelerate the adoption of innovative and resilient 
farming practices that best suit their needs and circumstances.
2.1.3
Better harness our collective knowledge and skills by strengthening fit for purpose 
collaboration between farmer networks.
2.1.4
Facilitate ‘collective’ whole farm planning where neighbouring land managers come 
together to identify shared objectives and co-benefits.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

2.2 Diversify water storage and supply options on farm  
and in communities
Key insights and observations:
Having a secure water supply is essential to rural 
communities. Securing and distributing water  
can be complex, particularly during drought.  
To improve the reliability of water supply and 
prevent water shortages primary producers  
should consider developing and implementing  
a water plan.
Focus Areas for action
2.2.1
Encourage primary producers to develop and implement a farm water management plan.
2.2.2
Water agencies and Local Government Authorities consider developing a governance 
framework to guide decision making and identify future water infrastructure investment 
opportunities (e.g., upgrade to Emergency Water Supply Points).
2.2.3
Organisations providing water management information to primary producers during 
drought collaborate more closely to coordinate technical advisory services and events; 
these organisations include Agriculture Victoria, Southern Rural Water, Catchment 
Management Authorities and the Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning.
2.2.4
Advocate for the streamlining of planning processes to facilitate the construction of  
on-farm dams, bores or other infrastructure designed to mitigate seasonal and climate risk.
40

2.3 Improve management of natural resources on public  
and private land.
Key insights and observations:
Drought impacts all aspects of the natural 
environment. In Gippsland, drought can lead 
to lower soil carbon, soil erosion, impacts on 
groundwater level and surface water quality, 
habitat loss, increased predation on native species, 
increased tree diseases and higher snowline 
(which impacts alpine species). Some primary 
producers are significantly impacted by over 
abundant wildlife which further damages drought 
affected pastures and native vegetation and limits 
the ability of farmers to recover from drought. 
Gippsland aquaculture businesses are also 
significantly impacted by water shortages during 
drought. Future water availability for multiple 
users and uses is a key issue for Gippsland that 
will be influenced by both rainfall variability 
and resolution of complex policy issues, such as 
Latrobe Valley mine rehabilitation.
Drought also directly impacts the frequency 
and intensity of resultant fires leading to high 
community health and wellbeing impacts, loss 
of habitat, cultural values and major impacts to 
neighbouring waters and lands. Most communities 
adjacent to forested land are deeply concerned 
by the compounding effects of drought and fuel 
management practice on future fires.
There is a strong demand for a more integrated 
regional approach to risk mitigation for drought 
and related climate events (e.g., fire, flood) and 
recognition of the cumulative impacts of those 
sequential events.
Focus Areas for action
2.3.1
Partner with Traditional Owners to implement Whole of Country Plans including natural 
resource management objectives.
2.3.2
The Department of Environmental, Land, Water and Planning and Parks Victoria will 
continue to implement current and emerging strategies to protect Victorian parks and 
forests from the worst impacts of drought.
2.3.3
Relevant agencies will implement the Gippsland Climate Change adaptation strategies 
including actions specifically relevant to agriculture.
2.3.4
Recognise and support the role Landcare networks have in building drought resilience  
at farm and landscape level.
2.3.5
Mitigate fire risk to the community by proactively reducing forest fuel loads with 
preventative burning in a timely manner.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

RESILIENT LOCAL 
BUSINESSES 
AND REGIONAL 
ECONOMIES
Economic resilience can be enhanced by businesses accessing and 
utilising professional advice to build capability, strengthen business 
planning and improve decision making.
Theme 3
42

3.1 Improve decision making enhanced by holistic business  
planning and business skill development
Key insights and observations:
Small business is a high-risk activity. Many small 
businesses spend most of the time focusing  
on the production aspects of their operations  
but limited time on business management 
planning and risk mitigation. Drought is not an 
exceptional circumstance, but a risk that needs 
to be managed along with other potential threats 
to their business (whether the result of shifting 
consumer demands, variable climate events,  
a pandemic or the impact of an accident or illness). 
The development and implementation of sound 
business plans is essential to manage profitability, 
mitigate risks, ensure wellbeing and smooth 
transition or succession. Professional holistic advice 
is essential, but many note it is difficult to find 
advisors that can provide the range of advice 
required and the Rural Financial Counselling Service 
report that smaller producers tend not to seek 
professional advice. Decision support tools that 
integrate financial management and production 
objectives also enhance business outcomes.
Focus Areas for action
3.1.1
Encourage and support primary producers and other small businesses to use  
professional advice to build capability and strengthen holistic business planning.
3.1.2
Actively promote ‘being prepared for drought’ messaging through established  
industry and community networks.
3.1.3
Provide guidance to small businesses in navigating and locating appropriate  
professional services.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

3.2 Encourage businesses to build resilience in good years  
and build greater adaptability to seasonal conditions
Key insights and observations:
Most existing services and programs focus 
on disaster and recovery rather than building 
preparedness and resilience. There needs to be 
an increased focus on preparation and building 
resilience before drought. There is now an 
expectation landholders will have undertaken 
drought preparation activities and that they will 
continue to improve their farm’s drought resilience. 
Some of the more proactive banks and farm 
advisors are starting to assess the vulnerability 
of farms and businesses to different climate 
conditions and ‘stress test’ different business 
options. For some, the culture of tax minimisation 
limits their ability to invest strategically for the 
future. We need to better promote the sound 
economics of building resilience.
3.3 Improve business continuity through succession plans  
and transition pathways
Key insights and observations:
Succession planning can be a challenging task for  
families and businesses. Professional advice makes 
succession planning easier and more effective. 
Transition pathways should be improved for  
those who are no longer commercially viable and 
either choose to, or have no choice other than,  
to exit from agriculture.
Focus Areas for action
3.2.1
Encourage businesses to take up the knowledge and skills to take adaptive action  
in variable seasons.
3.2.2
Collate existing data or, if unavailable, commission an assessment of the sound economic 
benefits of investing in resilience.
3.2.3
Promote clear messaging on the theme of self-reliance.
Focus Areas for action
3.3.1
Co-design solutions and support services to assist the respectful exit and transition  
of non-viable farmers and those who struggle with land management basics.
3.3.2
Encourage primary producers to seek professional advice well before exiting so they 
develop strategies that add value to their business.
3.3.3
Explore options to improve pathways and programs to attract and support young people  
to become world class food producers and land managers.
3.3.4
Explore options to strengthen programs to support and retain farm workers in their 
community during drought (either on country, alternate local employment, paid skill 
development or other education programs).
44

3.4 Promote diversification of local businesses and economies.
Key insights and observations:
Climate change may provide a competitive 
advantage for Gippsland resulting in new 
investors, new industries and an increasing role 
in Victoria’s food security. The Victorian Primary 
Production Climate Change Adaptation Plan 
identifies opportunities arising from climate 
change and adaptation. For primary producers 
and other small businesses, resilience might be 
enhanced through changing and diversifying the 
current enterprise (e.g., Agri-tourism, niche and 
artisanal products). At an industry and regional 
level resilience might be enhanced through 
tourism development, Aboriginal economic 
development, new agriculture industries, 
promotion of a Gippsland brand and identifying 
new market opportunities.
Regional and Municipal strategies for economic 
and agribusiness development, including rural land 
use strategies that protect the most productive 
agricultural land, are essential to support 
diversification of the food and fibre sector.
Focus Areas for action
3.4.1
Partner with Local Governments Authorities to support and expand diversified  
agricultural industries.
3.4.2
Partner with traditional owners to support implementation of the Gippsland  
Aboriginal Economic development strategy (including the development of new  
native food products and cultural experiences).
3.4.3
Implement key elements of the Destination Gippsland Strategic Plan.
3.4.4
Promote the credentials of Gippsland produce.
3.4.5
Promote ongoing industry development programs.
Image Credit: Wellington Shire Council
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

INNOVATION, RESEARCH, 
KNOWLEDGE SHARING  
AND SKILLS 
DEVELOPMENT
Innovation, research, knowledge, and skill development is essential 
to build drought resilience and adaption.
Theme 4
46

4.1 Farm systems innovation through information and technology 
targeted to the needs of Gippsland.
Key insights and observations:
There is an opportunity to build economic 
resilience and profitability using more innovative 
farm systems. Gippsland needs to accelerate 
the development of innovative ideas and their 
translation into commercial operation.
Focus Areas for action
4.1.1
Acknowledge and support the key role of existing farmer networks in peer-to-peer  
learning that foster system innovation and knowledge sharing (through case studies, 
demonstration sites and online information).
4.1.2
Increase the relevance and uptake of farm innovation practices by co-designing research 
and extension programs with local farming communities.
4.1.3
Strengthen programs to improve awareness, skill development and uptake of digital 
agriculture solutions most relevant to individual farm businesses.
Image credit: Natalie Jenkins, Southern Farming 
Systems and Top Soil partners Far East Victoria 
Landcare, East Gippsland Landcare Network, Snowy 
River Interstate Landcare and Agriculture Victoria.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

4.2 Industry innovation through collaborative research  
and knowledge sharing.
Key insights and observations:
The Gippsland region has specialised agricultural 
industries with productive dairy, meat and 
vegetable production that underpin fresh food 
exports and food manufacturing. Stakeholder 
feedback identified that the region could 
better leverage industry level collaboration and 
knowledge to improve drought preparedness  
and resilience. While Gippsland has specialist  
dairy research capability, for other sectors  
(e.g., horticulture, cropping and grazing) we need 
to draw on research capabilities from industry, 
universities, Food and Fibre Gippsland, CSIRO  
and other Agriculture Victoria research centres. 
Food and Fibre Gippsland is partnering with 
Latrobe Valley Authority and agricultural industry 
to identify knowledge sharing opportunities.
Focus Areas for action
4.2.1
Strengthen collaboration and knowledge sharing between industry and those  
undertaking research and innovation to improve drought resilience.
4.2.2
Share drought related research, development and extension knowledge and activities.
4.2.3
Explore opportunities for industry to identify priority research and development  
gaps and advocate for the Victorian Drought and Innovation Hub (Gippsland Node)  
or other research providers to address those issues.
4.2.4
Identify and promote opportunities that best contribute to drought resilience arising  
from Smart Specialisation, the Circular Economy, new and emerging technologies  
and high value products.
4.2.5
Invest in skill development and digital technology for the manufacturing sector  
to implement and commercialise new products.
48

4.3 Building regional capability through skill development pathways, 
recruitment and local employment opportunities.
Key insights and observations:
The Gippsland region is undergoing 
unprecedented societal change due to industry 
disruption, rapid advances in technology, the 
impacts of climate change, the Covid pandemic 
and changing global markets. There is a strong 
and unmet demand for more people with the 
skills required by future industries. Working with 
the education sector will ensure that the skills 
available to Gippsland businesses are future 
focused and aligned to changing marketplace 
expectations. There also needs to be an expansion 
of partnerships between all stakeholders to 
explore career pathways that will assist in 
boosting job creation and retention. The lack 
of affordable housing negatively impacts the 
region’s ability to attract and retain professionals 
and skilled workers (including mental health and 
agricultural workers).
Focus Areas for action
4.3.1
Improve the capability and capacity of our young farmers by developing and promoting 
educational opportunities and industry pathways.
4.3.2
Attract and foster skilled staff by promoting Gippsland job opportunities,  
career pathways and lifestyle.
4.3.3
Recognise the importance of structured approaches to identifying employment 
opportunities that provide off farm income and bring new skills to the local economy  
during drought.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
49

KEY ENABLERS 
ESSENTIAL TO EFFECTIVE 
COLLABORATION AND 
COLLECTIVE ACTION
Building drought resilience will be enabled by a better understanding 
of drought impacts, clarifying shared responsibilities and regional 
governance, leveraging existing local networks and partnerships,  
and improving digital connectivity.
Theme 5
50

5.1 Clarify drought accountabilities, shared responsibilities,  
regional governance and coordination (including service offering  
from various organisations)
Key insights and observations:
Stakeholders noted the need to clearly define 
drought accountabilities, shared responsibilities, 
governance and regional coordination 
arrangements and provide clearer information on  
drought preparedness, seasonal conditions and dry 
seasons support services. The proposed actions 
would support improved preparedness, cross 
sector collaboration and earlier decision making  
at an individual, industry, and community level.
Focus Areas for action
5.1.1
Improve awareness and understanding of the Victorian Drought Preparedness  
and Response Framework.
5.1.2
Develop clear regional drought governance and coordination arrangements  
with appropriate industry, community, not-for-profit and agency leaders  
(for example, consider the applicability of current regional Emergency Management  
or similar arrangement to utilise existing networks and support a structured approach  
to drought preparedness and response).
5.1.3
Develop, maintain and communicate an ‘all agencies’ perspective of drought  
preparedness and response services.
5.1.4
Establish a Gippsland Drought Information Hub which provides access to drought related 
data and knowledge required by landholders and the sector to improve decision making.
Image credit: Lyric Anderson, GAgG
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
51

5.2: Consult with community groups and other existing regional  
and local networks to inform drought resilience programs.
Key insights and observations:
Landholders, business professionals, service 
providers, Catchment Management Authorities, 
industry representative organisations, community 
and Traditional Owner groups are keen that their 
knowledge and lived experience informs future 
drought resilience programs to ensure they are:
•	flexible in response to business need
•	acknowledge multiple events and cumulative 
impacts impacting the one business
•	delivered as one integrated business  
support package
•	empowering communities and businesses  
to be self-reliant. 
Local Government Authorities have a specific 
charter and processes for community consultation 
and are well placed to coordinate input from 
many groups to inform future drought resilience 
programs. Many stakeholders note the pivotal role 
Local Government plays in drought preparedness 
with a focus on developing the capacity and 
resilience of their communities before, during and 
after drought.
An excellent example of this is the Gippsland 
drought response proposal – Looking Ahead 
(developed by the East Gippsland and Wellington 
Local Government Authorities, 2019) which 
identified options to support landholders through 
transition, recovery and adaptation. The Victorian 
Government acknowledged this placed-based 
community-led strategy and funded some of its 
recommendations (e.g., the establishment of the 
Gippsland Agricultural Group demonstration site 
at Bengworden).
Traditional Owners have a holistic view of country 
(as described in Whole of Country Plans) and have 
a deep understanding of the impacts of major 
events on the natural environment, culture, cultural 
assets, economic independence, and community 
health and wellbeing.
Focus Areas for action
5.2.1
Partner with Local Government Agencies and existing community leaders to genuinely 
consult and co-design drought resilience programs.
5.2.2
Partner with Traditional Owners to implement Whole of Country Plans.
5.2.3
Each agency and organisation to consider drought preparedness and incorporate  
mitigation actions into relevant strategies and plans.
5.2.4
Explore options and governance arrangements that empower communities  
to directly manage and allocate funding to address local investment priorities.
52

5.3 Improve digital connectivity  
to support community connection
Key insights and observations:
Digital connectivity and skills are critical to small 
business and the agriculture and manufacturing 
sector to support business innovation and access 
to new and existing markets.
Digital connectivity and skills are also essential 
to support flexible working arrangements, more 
inclusive access to services, and community 
wellbeing and connection.
Focus Areas for action
5.3.1
Implement the recommendations of the Gippsland Regional Digital Plan.
5.3.2
Promote other options to improve data and communication connectivity.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
53

This Plan provides a Framework for focusing 
future effort and guiding investment decisions to 
further build drought resilience in Gippsland.
This framework is the first step in identifying 
Gippsland drought resilience needs and priorities 
and recognises that continued collective and 
deliberate action is necessary for these needs  
to be met.
This Plan has been drafted for, and with input from, 
community members and organisations who have 
an important part to play in realising its vision for a 
more drought resilient region.
This Plan can be used by the Gippsland community, 
organisations, industry, the not-for-profit sector, 
and all levels of government to:
•	coordinate investment 
•	collaborate for shared outcomes
•	inform future drought resilience priorities
•	develop drought resilience programs
•	monitor resilience to future droughts.
Some of the Focus Areas identified can be 
addressed directly by the Gippsland community, 
while others will require broader cooperation  
from governments, agencies, statutory bodies, 
not-for-profit organisations, and the private sector. 
The Plan contains unfunded activities, and some 
Focus Areas can only be addressed with further 
investment.
In addition, the Focus Areas identified are a 
snapshot in time. The Plan will need to evolve  
in response to:
•	Further conversations with community groups 
(particularly with additional Traditional Owner 
groups and community health services).
•	Learnings and insights from other regional 
drought resilience plans (including the adjacent 
Ovens Murray and South-east New South Wales 
regional plans when they are developed).
Conclusion
“THE BEST TIME TO 
PLANT A TREE WAS 
50 YEARS AGO,  
THE SECOND-BEST 
TIME IS NOW.”
54

A process to continue to review the content of 
the Plan and implement actions that address the 
Focus Areas are yet to be determined, however 
they are likely to be influenced by conversations 
with regional organisations that agree to oversee 
the Plan in the long-term.
Next steps to support the implementation of the 
Plan could include: 
•	Identifying an ongoing custodian for the  
Plan to facilitate ongoing conversations with 
community and oversee the development of  
a detailed implementation plan
•	Establishing a fit-for-purpose Gippsland Drought 
Resilience Group with appropriate leaders 
from community, industry, not-for-profit and 
government agencies to ensure the effective 
governance, coordination and collaboration 
necessary to implement the Plan.
This approach will support Gippsland communities 
to be better prepared for, and capable of 
managing, drought in pursuit of a prosperous  
and sustainable future.
The Plan is an important step in building regional 
drought resilience. A supplementary document 
‘Regional monitoring, evaluation and learning’ is 
provided to guide how progress towards regional 
outcomes is measured and communicated.
The Reference Group acknowledge the 
experience, knowledge and generosity of 
organisations and individuals who contributed  
to the development of this Plan.
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
55

Community and not-for-profit organisations
Australian Red Cross  
(State-wide and regional programs) 
Bairnsdale Neighbourhood House 
Gippsland Emergency Relief Fund
Lions (Heyfield)
Lions Need for Feed (Victoria)
Salvation Army
Victorian Council of Churches (VCC) Gippsland  
Traditional Owner Organisations 
Gunaikurnai Land and Waters Aboriginal 
Corporation
Community Health Organisations 
National Centre for Farmer Health
Bush Nursing Centre
Community leaders from across Gippsland
Baw Baw
East Gippsland 
South Gippsland 
Wellington
Bass Coast
Local Government Authorities
Bass Coast Shire Council 
Baw Baw Shire Council 
East Gippsland Shire Council 
Latrobe Shire Council
South Gippsland Shire Council
Wellington Shire Council
APPENDICES
Appendix 1. 
Stakeholders consulted during  
the development of the plan
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan was based 
on in-depth conversations with the organisations 
and individuals listed below.
The Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan Reference 
Group was established to oversee engagement 
and to ensure that the identified Outcomes and 
Focus Areas for Action represented a coherent  
and balanced view of stakeholder feedback.
We acknowledge and appreciate everyone's 
experience, insights and support.
We also acknowledge that there needs to be 
further conversations with community groups 
particularly with other Traditional Owner groups 
and more community health services.
56

Education and capability building 
Federation University  
(Future Regions Research Centre)
TAFE Gippsland (Rural Science programs) 
Natural resource management organisations
East Gippsland Catchment Management Authority
Gippsland Water
Landcare networks:
•	Bass Coast network
•	East Gippsland Landcare Network
•	West Gippsland Network
•	Maffra Landcare Group
•	Clydebank Landcare Group 
Parks Victoria 
Southern Rural Water
West Gippsland Catchment Management Authority
Regional development organisations
Destination Gippsland 
Food & Fibre Gippsland 
Small business organisations
Orbost & District Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Small Business Victoria
Agricultural industry and farm business services
Agriculture industry representatives 
Farm business service representatives including:
•	Agriculture consultants
•	Stock Agents
•	Banking & Finance 
Farmer groups & local business leaders, including:
•	Gippsland Agricultural Group 
•	Gippsland Jersey
•	Municipal agriculture sector advisory groups
Rural Financial Counselling Service, Gippsland
Small Business Mentoring Service
Major farmer, industry and community events
East Gippsland Field Days (Bairnsdale, April 2022) 
East Gippsland Red Meat Conference  
(Bairnsdale, February 2022)
Farm world (Lardner Park, March 2022)
Farming for Success (Sale, March 2022)
National Recovery and Resilience Agency 
community events (Buchan, Omeo, Nowa Nowa, 
Mallacoota; February 2022) 
Other Future Drought Fund program leaders
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption  
and Innovation Hub - Gippsland Node  
(Food & Fibre Gippsland)
Sowing the Gap (East Gippsland CMA)
Leadership development program  
(Australian Rural Leadership Foundation)
Farm resilience planning program  
(Agriculture Victoria)
Regional Drought Resilience Plans – Goulburn and 
Wimmera Southern Mallee (Agriculture Victoria)
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
57

Gippsland Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Reference Group organisations
Agriculture Victoria
Australian Red Cross
Baw Baw Shire Council
Department of Environment, Land, Water  
and Planning*
East Gippsland Shire Council
Emergency Recovery Victoria 
Food & Fibre Gippsland (Drought Hub Node)
Regional Development Victoria 
Rural Financial Counselling Service - Gippsland 
South Gippsland Shire Council
Southern Rural Water
Wellington Shire Council
West Gippsland Catchment Management Authority 
Government Agencies and Statutory Authorities
Country Fire Authority 
Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions:*
•	Agriculture Victoria 
•	Latrobe Valley Authority
•	Cross Border Commissioner
•	Regional Development Victoria
•	Rural Assistance Commissioner
•	Small Business Victoria 
Department of Justice & Community Services:
•	Emergency Recovery Victoria  
(formerly Bushfire Recovery Victoria)
Department of Environment, Land, Water  
and Planning:*
•	Climate Change Adaptation,  
Community & Partnership Programs
•	Fire & Forest Operations
Department of Family, Fairness and Housing 
Emergency Management Victoria
Gippsland Regional Emergency Management 
Team (REMT)
National Recovery and Resilience Agency
Victoria Police
*As of 1 January 2023 the Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning and the Department of Jobs, 
Precincts and Regions were abolished. Some agencies within these departments were transfered to the 
newly established Department of Energy, Environment and Climate Action while others were transfered to 
the Department of Jobs, Skills, Industry and Regions. 
58

Community resilience and health perspectives:
East Gippsland Building Community Resilience 
(Centre for Rural Communities and East Gippsland 
Network of Neighbourhood Houses, 2015).
From inside the farm gate: rural women’s  
stories of surviving and thriving  
(National Centre for Farmer Health, 2021). 
Gippslands-Future-Health-and-Community-
Services-Workforce.pdf (lva.vic.gov.au)
National Centre for Farmer Health summary  
of the Royal Commission into Victoria’s mental 
health system. (2021).
Review of needs of drought affected  
farming communities in Gippsland  
(Australian Red Cross, 2019).
Traditional Owner perspectives
Aboriginal Economic Development Strategy for 
Gippsland (Gunaikurnai Land & Water Aboriginal 
Corporation, 2021).
East Gippsland Culture & healing recovery sub-plan 
(East Gippsland Shire Council, 2020) – the first 
Victorian recovery plan to explicitly consider  
first nations perspectives.
Whole of Country Plans  
(e.g., Gunaikurnai Land & Water Aboriginal 
Corporation, Whole of country plan , 2015).
Appendix 2. 
Drought related strategies  
and programs
This Appendix acknowledges the existing 
strategies and programs that support, or are 
relevant to, building drought resilience  
in Gippsland. It is intended to be used as  
a resource document.
Government Policy perspectives
Australian Government Drought Program 
(Department of Agriculture, Water & Environment) 
including:
•	Drought Policy, 
•	Drought & Rural Support programs,
•	Future Drought Fund Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning Program Framework  
(2021, DAWE).
•	National Drought Response, Resilience  
& Preparedness Plan (2019),
•	National guidelines for drought accountabilities 
(In development, 2022).
•	Productivity Commission (2009), Government 
Drought Support
Victorian Government agriculture, climate 
adaptation and drought programs including:
•	A strategy for Victorian Agriculture (2021)
•	Victorian drought preparedness and  
response framework
•	The Victorian Climate Change strategy, 
agriculture sector pledge and primary 
production adaption action plan, (2021)
•	Primary Production Climate Change  
Adaptation Action Plan 2022-2026.pdf
•	Gippsland Climate Change Adaptation strategy 
(DELWP, 2021) 
•	Previous and future impacts of drought  
in Victoria - gap analysis report.  
(May 2022, Frontier Economics).
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
59

Municipal (local, integrated, place-based) 
perspectives
Community Development Plans
Community Health & Wellbeing Plans
Emergency Management Plans 
East Gippsland Bushfire Recovery Plan (East 
Gippsland Local Government Authority, 2020)
Economic Development Plans including:
•	Agribusiness development strategies
•	Rural land use strategies
•	Business concierge and entrepreneur  
facilitation programs
•	Public Health Plans (in development)
•	Farmer surveys and small business data
Gippsland drought response proposal –  
Looking Ahead (East Gippsland & Wellington  
Local Government Authorities, 2019).
Regional resilience perspectives
Community resilience framework for emergency 
management. 2017. Emergency management 
Victoria.
Goulburn Murray Resilience Strategy –  
Adapt Transform, Thrive (2020). 
New Possibilities. (2020) Central West Regional 
Resilience Strategy. Championing resilience and 
prosperity across Central West Queensland. 
Ramjan. R. (2012) Combining social capital and 
technology for drought resilience in agriculture. 
Macquarie university, Australia.
Productivity Commission 2003, Social Capital: 
Reviewing the Concept and its Policy. Implications, 
Research Paper, AusInfo, Canberra.
Walker, B. (2020). Resilience: what it is and is not. 
Ecology and Society.
Wilhite, D.A.; and M.H. Glantz (1985). 
Understanding the Drought Phenomenon:  
The Role of Definitions. Water International.
Natural resource management perspectives:
Central & Gippsland Sustainable Water Strategy 
(DELWP, in development, 2022)
Climate Adaptation Plan (CAP), Growing Southern 
Gippsland project
Gippsland Plains and Strzelecki Ranges 
Conservation Action Plan. (Parks Victoria).
Gippsland Water Urban Water Strategy (2017)
Improving domestic and stock access  
(Southern Rural Water, 2020)
Jenkins, N. and Coleman, K. (2022) What is my 
paddock telling me? A guide to identifying 
paddock problems in East Gippsland.  
East Gippsland Landcare Network, Victoria.
Lake Wellington Land and Water Management 
Plan; A plan for sustainable irrigation in  
the Lake Wellington Catchment 2018-2028.
Managing extreme water shortages in Victoria: 
lessons from the Millennium drought (DELWP, 2016)
Nature Conservation Strategy (Parks Victoria, 2021)
South Gippsland Water Urban Water Strategy (2017)
Regional Catchment Strategies for East Gippsland, 
West Gippsland and Port Phillip & Westernport 
Catchment Management Authorities (2022).
Weir, E. and Coleman, K. (2020) East Gippsland 
Pastures: A glovebox guide to identifying pasture 
plants of East Gippsland. East Gippsland Landcare 
Network, Victoria.
Emergency management perspectives
Bushfire recovery consultation report (Victorian 
Council of Social Services, 2020)
Community Resilience Framework for Emergency 
Management (EMV, 2020)
Gippsland Regional Emergency Management Plan 
(REMT, 2021)
60

Economic development perspectives
Aboriginal Economic Development Strategy for 
Gippsland (Gunaikurnai Land & Water Aboriginal 
Corporation, 2021) 
Accelerating growth in the Gippsland Food  
& Fibre sector (KPMG, 2019, commissioned  
by the Gippsland Regional Partnership).
Gippsland Future Direction – 2040  
(Committee for Gippsland, 2020)
Gippsland Regional Plan 2020-2025  
(Regional Development Australia, One Gippsland, 
Committee for Gippsland, and the Gippsland 
Regional Partnership, 2020).
Regional Economic Development Strategy 
(Regional Development Victoria, 2022)
Towards 2030 Gippsland Destination Management 
Plan (Destination Gippsland, 2022).
Regional Business and Economy Recovery Plan – 
Gippsland Bushfires (RDV, 2020) 
Visitor recovery & reform plan  
(Department of Jobs, Precincts & Regions, 2021)
Gippsland Regional Digital Plan. Regional 
Partnerships Gippsland. Committee for Gippsland.
Regional Digital Plans - Regional Development 
Victoria (rdv.vic.gov.au)
Digital Connectivity – Gaps and Priorities. Report on  
the lived experiences of communities, businesses  
and agencies across East Gippsland. Report provided 
for the East Gippsland Shire Council, September 2021. 
Agricultural perspectives
Adapting agricultural practice in Gippsland 
(Federation University, Reeves et al., 2021).
Climate Futures – Opportunities and Challenges: 
climate adaptation for dairy farming on the  
Alpine valleys.
Drought preparedness – More Beef from Pastures 
(Meat & Livestock Australia)
Farm decision making: The interaction of 
personality, farm business and risk to make  
more informed decisions (2015)
Future Drought Fund - Farm Resilience Planning 
Program (Agriculture Victoria)
Future Drought Fund – Sowing the Gap Project 
(East Gippsland CMA and East Gippsland  
Shire Council)
Victoria Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub (vicdroughthub.org.au)
Small business perspectives
Business Recovery Advisory Service monthly 
reports (Bushfire Recovery Victoria).
Disaster resilience for business toolkit  
(Small Business Mentoring Service, 2011)  
Are you ready: surviving small business disaster 
East Gippsland Agri Business Program,  
delivered by ION Group
Entrepreneurs’ Programme Growth Roadmap  
and Strengthening Business (AusIndustry)
Small Business Natural Disaster Preparedness and 
resilience review (Australian Small Business and 
Family Enterprise Ombudsman, in progress, 2022)
Knowledge, research & innovation perspectives
CSIRO Farm drought resilience research program
Ellinbank Dairy Smart Farm (Agriculture Victoria) 
Future Drought Fund Victorian drought  
resilience and innovation hub - Gippsland Node  
(Food & Fibre Gippsland)
Future Regions Research Centre  
(Federation University) 
Gippsland Agriculture Group Research Farm
Macalister demonstration farm
GIPPSLAND DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
61

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.awe.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the 
Gippsland Region
Information to support the Gippsland Regional Drought Resilience Plan | June 2022
This research was jointly funded by the Australian Government 
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.

Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund. 
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was a key factor to the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
This research was jointly funded by the Australian Government and 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socioeconomic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
Regional summary
The Gippsland region is diverse with beaches, snowfields and 
rainforests, with the region covering 33,000 square kilometres.. 
The region encompasses the local government areas (LGAs) 
of Bass Coast, Baw Baw, East Gippsland, La Trobe, Southern 
Gippsland and Wellington. The 2016 census reported a 
population of 271,266 people, with significant population growth 
in areas on the periphery of Melbourne. The 2016 census also 
reported a Gross Regional Product of $15.8bn. 
The Gippsland economy is diverse, with agriculture, forestry 
and fishing making up 9% of employment. The region also has a 
strong energy sector, with coal mining and electricity generation 
in the west and off-shore oil and gas production.
Gippsland is highly connected to Melbourne which offers a 
multitude of economic benefits for the region including access 
to the airport and the port, lower freight costs and increased 
tourism benefits. However, this is also driving population growth 
putting pressure on land use and the current services.
The region recently experienced drought conditions during the 
Millennium drought and 2017-2019.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may 
change in 
the future
The Gippsland 
region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness 
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls 
on surface or subsurface 
water supply
Campaspe
Goulburn
Gouldburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gippsland
East Gippsland
South Gippsland (S)
Wellington (S)
Latrobe (C)(Vic.)
Baw Baw (S)
Bass Coast (S)
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Gippsland region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific drought 
impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will be. Within 
the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, economic and 
environmental impacts, to develop a more complete understanding of 
how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how the analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
the consumption of farm inputs, and the production of farm outputs. 
These on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets (e.g. 
sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of drought on 
agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market impacts of drought. 
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural settings. 
Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low availability of 
water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water availability may mean 
community greenspace is reduced which will in turn reduce liveability 
benefits in the community and the amenity values from the green space. 
Furthermore, there are flow on effects if parks and sportsgrounds cannot 
be used including impact on community cohesiveness. A lack of water in 
lakes, rivers and dams could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a 
reduced ability to boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income 
and spending within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both past and 
future drought periods, with considerations from both agricultural and 
non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through to community 
outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions 
+
Changes in the Gippsland region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
+ 
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for 
ag farm services 
(but could increase 
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands 
and sportsgrounds
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from 
green space
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation 
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
Frontier Economics
3
Drought in the Gippsland region

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. The last 25 years has seen 
Gippsland suffer extensive drought periods, starting with the 
Millennium drought from 1997-2009 and more recently the dry 
conditions experienced from 2017-2019. Rainfall is particularly 
important in Gippsland, where the majority of farms are not 
connected to extensive irrigation networks as in Northern Victoria.
The Gippsland region is vast and diverse, and as such individual 
areas within the region may experience different meteorological 
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Agricultural production in the Gippsland region is dominated by 
livestock but also has significant vegetable production in the eastern 
part of the region.
Milk production in Eastern Victoria, which includes the Gippsland 
region, has remained relatively steady around 1.9 to 2 billion litres 
from 2000 to 2022, with neither the Millennium drought or the 2017-
2019 drought having a significant impact on production. In aggregate, 
the Gippsland region has buffers for maintaining dairy production 
during dry periods, including:
•	
the Maffra area having access to the Macalister Irrigation district 
•	
the ability for farms to bring in fodder to replace pasture and to 
transport fodder from the Macalister irrigation district to drier 
regions of Gippsland
•	
many dryland farms having on-farm dams to provide 
supplementary irrigation
•	
the ability to grow silage and forage crops as a buffer.
01
02
There was also a lack of rainfall during the Millennium drought, with 
only the years of 2001,2004 and 2007 receiving rainfall above the 
median. The average maximum temperature was also above the 
median for the entire period of the Millennium drought.
01
02
03
Past drought 
conditions 
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
in past drought
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
21.5
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
2020
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Year
East Sale
Annual
90th %ile
Median
conditions. The historical rainfall and temperature charts provide 
evidence of the severity of these recent drought events (Figure 3), 
however this data may not represent the conditions experienced 
by all parts of Gippsland. 
Low rainfall is exacerbated by high temperatures to create drought 
conditions. The period of 2017-2019 was particularly dry and hot, 
with the annual rainfall in Bairnsdale at or below the 10 percentile 
range for all 3 years. At the same time the average maximum 
temperature was well above the median. This 3 year drought was 
referred to as a ‘green drought’, when paddocks looked green but 
pasture growth struggled with low rain and weeds.
Recently experienced droughts in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2017-19
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Gippsland
Figure 4 Victorian rainfall decile ranges during 2017-2019
Source: Bureau of Meteorology
Frontier Economics
4
Drought in the Gippsland region
Frontier Economics
4

Furthermore, conditions vary greatly across the Gippsland region, 
which provides a buffer against dry periods. This means that some 
areas of the region that are less affected by drought can offset 
those areas that are highly impacted. For example, in 2017-18 and 
2018-19, the rainfall deficit (the difference between observed annual 
rainfall and the long-term average) was 15% and 19%, respectively. 
However some reference farms in the Victorian Dairy Farm Monitor 
Project reported deficits of up to 45% in 2017-18 and 33% in 2018-19, 
demonstrating how localised rainfall deficits can be. It was particularly 
severe for East Gippsland, which suffered poor growing conditions in 
both the 2017-18 and 2018-19 seasons.
This was consistent with the experience of livestock producers. 
The seasonal conditions in 2017-18 were challenging with lower 
pasture availability West and South Gippsland, and East Gippsland 
experienced poor growing conditions. For farms located in central 
and eastern parts of the region, dry conditions leading into 
spring 2018 reduced pasture growth and placed an increased 
dependence on purchased feed.
Large fires bring a different dynamic to drought impacts. Bushfire 
disrupt large sections of the community and leads to loss of land, 
stock and life. The areas affected by fire have differed between 
droughts (Figure 5).
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Milk production (Million Litres)
Year
Eastern Victoria
Northern Victoria
Western Victoria
During the Millennium drought it was central and eastern Gippsland 
that experienced widespread bushfires, while in 2019-2020 much of 
the damage occurred in East Gippsland.
Town water 
Water restrictions were required during the Millennium drought with 
some towns, such as Leongatha and Korumburra at stage 4 level 
restrictions. Water trading was used in the Latrobe river system to 
address water shortfalls and irrigators, Gippsland Water and the 
power generators were all net purchasers. 
Recreation and Tourism 
A significant percentage of tourism in the Gippsland region is reliant 
on coastal and natural landscapes which are mostly resilient to 
drought. The proximity of some areas of Gippsland to Melbourne 
delivers strong tourism outcomes. However low water levels in the 
Gippsland Lakes make it difficult to collect fresh bait and stagnant 
water causes blue green algae. This decreases the number of tourists 
to the area which in turn affects other types of local business which 
may rely on seasonal tourist influxes.
The bushfires in 2019-20 had a severe impact on tourism, and this 
was compounded by traffic disruption and road closures near the 
coast, and air quality issues.
Environment 
Gippsland has a number of ecologically and recreationally important 
wetlands including the Gippsland lakes and Corner Inlet, both of 
which are Ramsar listed wetlands. There were negative impacts on 
the Gippsland environment during the Millennium drought including 
soil erosion, wildlife overabundance and welfare and loss of habitat.
Figure 5: Bushfires in the Gippsland region
Source: Community 
Bushfire Connection
Source: Community 
Bushfire Connection
Figure 5 Victorian annual dairy production
Frontier Economics
5
Drought in the Gippsland region

As drought brings ongoing 
stresses to regional 
communities, and will likely 
be more prevalent in the 
future, a growing acceptance 
and use of counselling 
would be positive for 
communities
Community outcomes 
in past droughts

As a result of agricultural response to drought
•	
Farming communities are severely impacted during periods of 
drought, due to:
•	
Financial pressures resulting from reduced on-farm income and 
increased costs
•	
On-farm issues mostly relating to lack of water and feed for stock
•	
Pressures from invasive native and pest animals on farms
•	
Physical and mental health and wellbeing impacts on individuals 
and families
•	
Flow on financial pressures being experienced by supporting 
businesses in the community.
Agriculture is an important segment of the regional economy — 
contributing 12.5% of the ‘value add’ in south west Gippsland, 13.1% 
around Baw Baw, 12.9% in Wellington and 8.6% in East Gippsland. 
The direct impacts of drought on farm income will flow through to 
cause community impacts through reduced income and employment, 
especially on-farm labour and agricultural services. The impacts of 
drought would be expected to be limited in more densely populated 
and economically diverse parts of Gippsland — such as in and around 
major towns. In contrast, smaller communities heavily reliant on 
agriculture would be comparatively more impacted by drought.
From 2017-18 to 2018-19, the number of Rural Financial Counselling 
Service clients in Gippsland increased by 53%. This indicates a 
significant increase in the financial pressures of agricultural and non-
agricultural businesses due to drought and other industry pressures.
ABS Census data from 2006 to 2016 identified that the percentage 
of employment across the top 3 industries decreased across the 
Gippsland region (except for in the Baw Baw LGA), indicating a 
diversification of the region’s economy. The percentage of the 
community directly employed in the agricultural industry also 
decreased across the period. However, despite this diversification 
and spread of employment, Infrastructure Victoria notes that 
ongoing structural shifts, such as the reduction in the mining 
and electricity industries,  means that the region’s economy is 
becoming increasingly dependent on agriculture and associated 
food processing industries.
As drought brings ongoing stresses to regional communities, and will 
likely be more prevalent in the future, a growing acceptance and use 
of counselling would be positive for communities. Stressed people 
are more likely to make bad decisions, and as such counselling 
may assist individuals in responding to drought. The existing health 
services in regional centres have the potential to be expanded during 
times of drought to assist in alleviating the social impacts of drought 
on mental health and broader health problems related to low water 
flows, poor water quality and dust. For example, the Empowering Our 
Communities drought support program  was rolled out to the East 
Gippsland and Wellington Shires during the 2017-2019 drought. This 
program facilitated access to service and resource to address mental 
health and wellbeing needs.
03
Drought in the Gippsland region

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Gippsland region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Gippsland region with future droughts 
expected to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate 
projections in Figure 6 show that by 2050 the Gippsland region on 
average will be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number of 
fire danger days. Similar to the past, the region and sub-regions will 
continue to face variable conditions within and across seasons — 
however in the future this variability will be around a lower average 
rainfall and higher average temperature than previously experienced. 
This means that, compared to current conditions, it is likely that parts 
of Gippsland will face some seasons with rainfall significantly below 
and temperatures significantly above current averages.
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
In response to the future increase in the likelihood and severity of 
drought (given expected increasing temperatures and decreasing 
rainfall), agricultural production in dairy and livestock, and vegetable 
farming operations will continue to be exposed to drought impacts. 
The prevailing circumstances of a future drought — such as 
commodity prices, interest rates and fuel and fertiliser costs 
— will also play a role in resultant impacts.
The diversity of water sources in the Gippsland region will continue to 
create a buffer for some farmers to drought impacts. Those farmers 
that use water from rivers, creeks, lakes and groundwater are likely 
to experience impacts from reduced water availability during drought 
times. Farmers that have access to irrigation water are likely to be 
somewhat resilient to drought impacts at least in the shorter term. A 
reduction in water availability will impact all agriculture production in 
the Gippsland region.
Changes in the Gippsland region
Significant changes in the Gippsland region contribute to more 
diversified practices to assist in drought resilience, including:
•	
Planning and actions to improve water security
•	
Changes in livestock industries, with an observed shift from 
dairy cattle towards beef in East Gippsland
•	
Continuing recovery from successive disaster events — 
drought, floods and fires — all in the context of the Covid19 
pandemic
•	
Covid population changes.
01
02
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Figure 6 Projections of future climate in Gippsland
Average maximum temperatures are expected to 
increase by 1.8 to 2°C.
Number of days over 35°C in Bairnsdale are 
expected to increase from 6.2 days to 6-18 days
1.8 to 
2.0 °C 
Rainfall will continue to be very variable. 
Average rainfall expected to decrease 
by 5 to 9%
5-9%
32%
Number of very high fire 
danger days expected to 
increase by 5.8 days per year
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions 
+
Changes in the 
Gippsland region
Drought agricultural impacts and 
implications + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes 
in past drought
The low levels of irrigation throughout the region is likely to expose the 
region to the impacts of drought, even during short periods. Unlike 
highly irrigated regions which have continued access to water that 
can be drawn down during dry periods, dryland regions rely heavily 
on regular rainfall. As the climate gets hotter and drier this is likely to 
exacerbate the effects of drought for the areas of Gippsland that do 
not have access to irrigated networks.
Frontier Economics
7
Drought in the Gippsland region

Town water 
Town water security planning has improved building on lessons 
from drought. Likewise, Urban Water Strategies are now required 
to incorporate future impacts of climate change (including potential 
droughts). Since the Millennium drought, water corporations have 
undertaken works to increase town water security:
•	
Westernport Water has raised the dam wall at Candowie 
Reservoir to double the available storage and has established a 
connection to the pipeline linking the Victorian Desalination Plant 
to Cardinia Reservoir. 
•	
Gippsland Water has addressed vulnerabilities to Boolarra 
(connected to the central Latrobe Valley grid in 2012), Seaspray 
(augmented with a large storage that provides at least 6 months 
supply in 2013) and Thorpdale (with regular potable water supply 
by truck). Other boosts to water security include the purchase of 
additional water entitlement in Blue Rock Reservoir for Latrobe 
Valley towns and industries (2014), and interconnecting the 
Moe and Warragul potable networks in 2019. Looking forward, 
Coongulla will be connected to the Heyfield system supplied by 
the Thomson River, and it is proposed that increased access to 
Tarago Reservoir will be secured to supply the rapidly growing 
towns of Warragul and Drouin.
•	
East Gippsland Water has undertaken notable water storage 
upgrades benefiting customers in the Bairnsdale (Wy Yung), 
Paynesville, Eagle Point, Lakes Entrance and Mallacoota areas. 
Major new water storages and a water treatment plant have 
come online at Woodglen, benefiting some 24,000 people along 
the Mitchell River system, and an additional water storage basin 
has been constructed at Omeo.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism initiatives that are not dependent on water availability will 
continue to provide income to the Gippsland region. COVID-19 has 
provided a boost to regional travel and relocation. The continued 
development of Gippsland’s extensive coastline and lakes district will 
provide further drought diversification for the region.
Environment 
In land lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during 
times of drought which will impact the native biodiversity living in and 
relying on these water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food and 
drinking water for wild animals living in the national and state parks 
in the region. Additionally, the increased risk of wildfires will have 
significant environmental and economic impacts. Coastal areas in the 
Gippsland region are less likely to experience environmental impacts 
of drought.
Community outcomes 
in future droughts
The increased likelihood and severity of drought in 
the future will mean that the drought impacts on the community 
from agricultural consequences of drought are expected to be 
larger than have been historically observed. 
The diversity of the Gippsland region will continue to mean that 
some areas will be impacted by future droughts more than others. 
While it is not possible to predict which area within Gippsland will 
be more affected than others, smaller communities that are highly 
dependent on agriculture and more geographically isolated will be 
most exposed.
Economic modelling of a potential future 3 year drought across 
Gippsland estimated impacts differed between different parts 
of Gippsland with GDP in the subregions falling 3-7% and 
employment falling 3-4.5%. This flowed through the region 
reducing consumption/spending by 5-8%. Importantly, these 
average measures overly very diverse outcomes between different 
farms and areas of Gippsland.
Access to local mental health services will be vital as drought 
conditions become more prevalent. Not only are mental health 
services important during times of drought, but improved mental 
health increase a person’s ability to adapt. This can improve 
drought resilience by allowing people to effectively plan for drought 
conditions.
Greenspace and associated community sport are drivers of 
community spirit and liveability within local communities in 
the region. Water Corporations and Councils have a strong 
understanding of the importance of greenspace for their 
communities so water availability will have to be at high risk before 
community greenspace areas do not receive water. However, 
should town water supply not allow watering of gardens this will 
have a mental health toll on residents.
The Gippsland region is one of the most diverse regions in Victoria, 
with impacts from drought likely to be highly varied. Areas of 
Gippsland that have a high reliance on agricultural industries will 
experience significant community impacts from drought.
03
Drought in the Gippsland region
Frontier Economics
8

Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness 
Agriculture in Gippsland benefits from relatively reliable rainfall but 
the diversity of Gippsland means that the individual farm experience 
during a ‘drought’ can vary significantly.
Historically reliable rainfall means that production systems have not 
had to incorporate the same degree of adaptability as seen in other 
regions of Victoria — for example, the transformation in dairying 
in Northern Victoria to cope with the range of water and other 
pressures. Kiem and Austin in their paper Drought and the Future of 
Rural Communities, suggested there is value in shifting from notions 
of ‘drought as crisis’ towards acknowledging the variable availability of 
water and that multi-year droughts should not be unexpected, and 
may even become more frequent.
The region is also still recovering from recent, successive disaster 
events. If another drought occurs while the communities across 
the region are still re-establishing themselves, they may be more 
vulnerable and less able to adapt to the prevailing challenges.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. 
Towns throughout the Gippsland region have varying degrees of 
diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The main regional centres in the Gippsland Region include 
Traralgon, Bairnsdale, Sale Moe, Morwell, Warragul, and 
Drouin. These centres include several key health services, 
retail, construction and education services which provides 
diversification to the region. This assists in helping the region 
develop their drought resilience. Furthermore population growth 
is driving diversification in the region. These towns are likely to be 
relied upon by smaller towns during times of drought. Townships 
within an approximately 50 km radius of these centres provide 
people with the attraction of living in a smaller community, lower 
cost of housing but having employment opportunities in the 
larger centre. There may be a migration to these larger centres 
during times of drought as those employed in the agriculture 
sector seek a secondary income. The health services in these 
regional centres have the potential to be expanded during times 
of drought to assist in alleviating the social impacts of drought on 
mental health and broader health problems related to low water 
flows, and poor water quality.
•	
At the other end of the spectrum is East Gippsland which 
is relatively rural and generally populated with small towns 
surrounded by national parks. This is quite an isolating 
geography, and these smaller towns are likely to feel the impacts 
of drought more severely due to their reliance on agriculture and 
distance from regional centres. 
Responses to drought include a combination of on-farm management, 
town management and government policy. For example, the 
Gippsland region, until the past decade or so, had not had a severe 
stock feed issue. On-farm adaptations might include cultivating 
fodder crops and storage to ensure adequate feed during periods of 
drought. The difficulty with this is that if farms have not been set up in 
the past for on-farm storage, on-farm machinery may not suffice for a 
switch to grow, harvest and store fodder. Switches require investment, 
which farmers may not be able to fund.. Where farmers have been 
unable to maintain a buffer of funds or feed, they remain particularly 
vulnerable to the impacts of drought.
Frontier Economics
9
Drought in the Gippsland region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our 
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions and Visit Victoria.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from armonline and Dairy Australia.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
Disclaimer None of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd (including the directors and employees) make any representation or warranty as to the accuracy or 
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.