GOLDFIELDS-ESPERANCE REGIONAL 
DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
BUILDING RESILIENCE TO DROUGHT 
THROUGH WATER SECURITY
AUGUST 2025
The Drought Resilience Planning Program 
is jointly funded through the Australian 
Government’s Future Drought Fund and 
Western Australia’s Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development.
        Attachment 1

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
OF COUNTRY
The Goldfields-Esperance Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan) has 
been developed across the Goldfields-
Esperance region and recognises the 
many Aboriginal language groups and 
traditional custodians that have been 
caring for Country and its lands and 
waters for thousands of years. 
The Plan acknowledges the need to 
preserve and sustainably use water 
within the landscape to sustain healthy 
Country, cultural practices, values 
and determination. This Plan supports 
Aboriginal communities’ right to safe 
and secure water supplies and aims 
to enhance First Nations’ voices in 
decision-making and opportunities for 
economic development. 
The Goldfields-Esperance Development 
Commission acknowledges the 
Traditional Owners of Country across 
the Goldfields-Esperance region. 
We recognise the connection of 
Aboriginal peoples to the land, 
waters and community.
We pay our respects to Elders past 
and present and acknowledge 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples, communities and cultures 
living in the region.
Image: Salt Lake, Shire of Menzies
Credit: Shire of Menzies
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 2

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT IN 
ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES
MARTU WANGKA 
Ngurra lampaju kulinyila Nga Goldfields-
pa kamu Esperance-pa Development 
Commission-lu kulinyi ngurra waljajarra 
pararra Goldfieldspakamu Esperance wana 
nyuntutinyi kurnu parna kapi kamu ngurra 
walja. Ngayutinyipa kuntala kanyininyi 
parlparriku Martuku ngurra kamu kuruwarri 
kamu jilpi tuju juljujarnu kamu yungunku. 
CUNDEELEE WANGKA  
Parna-lipitja Kulira Watjarni. Kawultjarra-
ngurra Itjaparantja Tjanala Tjungungku 
Atatjurra-kulira Kanyintjakitja- nyinapayi, 
Kamitjantu panyangku Kamitjantu palya 
watjarni, wati minyma tjukurrpa kanyilpayinya 
tjananya, panya Kawultjarra-ngurra, 
Itjaparantala tjanala rawanguru nyinanyinara; 
parna, ngurra, kapimpa rawa nyina-nyinatja 
tjananya. Nganarna Kamitjantu, Arnanguku 
ngurrarra winki palya watjarni kaltja kurlu; 
munu Yirna-tjurta, irrititja-mpa kuwarritja 
kurlu-kurlu. 
NGADJU  
Ngadjungarra ngurra nguntu wamurti. 
Goldfields-Esperance Development 
Commission-nya ngadjungarra nguntu 
tartinyirri matayi wamurti pana katajala 
Goldfields-Esperance region mathulu 
tjukurrpa munjanguu pana, kapi and mathalu. 
Ngadjungarra nguntu tartiny matayi pana, 
tartiny ngaringin matayi yungarnkin matayi. 
WANGKATJA  
Yintaanku parna. Goldfields-Esperance 
Development Commission yintaa Yarnangu 
Goldfields-Esperance-ngku tjanaku tirtu 
kanyila parna, kapi ka ngurra. Ngalipaku kulila 
Yarnangu ka tjanaku Tjukurrpa; ka nalpa pirni 
wanka ka ngalpa pirniku warrkanu. 
PITJANTJATJARRA  
Wirrurl kanyilpai ngurra ka palu jana lintinyi. 
Anangu tjutaku kanima ngurra wirruku munu 
kapi, ngurra. Anangu tjuta wirru ngurra 
kanyilpai ka tjilpi tjuta irriti tjana pukalpa 
nyinapai. 
NYUNGAR  
Goldfields-Kepa Kurl djandjoo koorliny. 
Birdiya kaditjidjiny Noongar Moort boolarang 
Goldfields – Kepa Kurl boodjar wer baalabang 
ngadiny dandjoo yoodaniny Boodjar Kep wer 
Moort. Ngalak kadidjiny ngalang kootadjinong 
boola Moort-ak Ngalak kadidjiny ngalang 
koota-djinong boola moort-ak. 
NGAANYATJARRA  
Goldfields-Esperance Development 
Commission ninti ngurra kanyilpa Kawutjarra-
ngurra. GEDC ninti purlkanya manta lipi, 
kapi puru ngurra. Pirni kurnta yanangu, 
yanangu pirni-lu ngurra walykumunu 
kanyinma puru lurrtjurring. Pirn-lu kurtarriwa 
ngayuku kutjurlping katja puru ngula puru 
kuwarring katja. 
TJUPAN  
GEDC-tula yurrulykula yilta ngaarla parnajanu. 
Goldfields-Esperance region mantangkaya 
nyinanyi kapi, ngurra, parnaya kanyinyi. 
Respect-pala nintilku yiltajanalarti, Tjukurrpala 
janampa respect-amulku. Elders-tila respect 
nintilku, elders kuwarrija, elders-jaya yan 
wantingu nganananya.
MADUWONGGA  
Ruukulinu Ngurra Nangana The Goldfields-
Esperance Development Commission 
ruukulinu ngurra kapi nangana nurraku, 
nurrapirni ngurra yungkarra nyinannyinangku 
mirrirringku nurra jirtu tawarra nyinannyinan. 
Ngalipaka The Goldfields-Esperance 
Development Commission pukurlpa 
wangkatjapirni jirtu yamatjirrin nyalpapirni, 
kaparlipirni tana kuwarri nyinan, tana pawurtu. 
NGALIA  
Goldfields-Esperance Development 
Commission ruukulilku Wangkatja pini Malpa, 
Anang tjuta ngurrara Goldfields-Esperance 
regiontjanu. Tjanalu tirtu kanyira parnaku, 
kapiku, ngurraku, tjanalu kuturtu kurti 
kanyira. Goldfields-Esperance Development 
Commission kuntawiya kulilku, nyakula, 
pukurlpa piniku kuwarri nyinarra, pukurlpa 
nyalpa piniku tiwa nyinangu. Palunya. 
For thousands of years, Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander peoples have welcomed visitors to 
their Country as part of their cultural practices. 
The Welcome, which serves to give permission to the visitors to 
be on their Country, is delivered through spoken language, song, 
dance, and at times a smoking ceremony. Adopting the practice of 
a Welcome to Country by Traditional Owners or custodians of the 
land, or an Acknowledgement of Country by non-Aboriginal or 
non-custodians of the land, demonstrates our recognition of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the first peoples 
of this land and our commitment to culturally safe and inclusive 
ways of working. 
As a continuation of GEDC’s commitment to our 
reconciliation journey, we have our Acknowledgement to 
Country currently translated into ten of the 17 Aboriginal 
languages of our region. 
We thank the Goldfields Aboriginal Language Centre and the 
language custodians for their contribution to this resource. 
Locations of languages are approximate and may not be based 
on traditional locations.  
Page 3
Building resilience to drought through water security

ACRONYM
NAME
GEDC
Goldfields-Esperance Development 
Commission 
RDRP 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
GE-RDRP
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
DPIRD
Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development 
DAFF
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries
DVA
Drought Vulnerability Assessment
DWER
Department of Water and Environmental 
Regulation
FDF
Future Drought Fund 
ACRONYM
NAME
GEWSG 
Goldfields-Esperance Water Security 
Group (Project Advisory Group)
GVROC 
Goldfields Voluntary Regional 
Organisation of Councils
RCA 
Regional Climate Alliance (a sub-
committee of GVROC) 
ABARES
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and 
Resource Economics and Sciences 
GAWSS
Goldfields and Agricultural Region Water 
Supply Scheme
CWSP
Community Water Supplies Partnerships 
program
WDD
Water Deficiency Declaration
TERM
DEFINITION
Drought
A prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions that negatively impacts on water availability in a 
region and, consequently, affects the economy – including missed opportunities for growth – and 
environment of the region, and the health and well-being of its residents. 
Water Security 
Ensuring that needs for water – encompassing quantity, quality, and affordability and access – 
can be met, over time and under changing supply and demand profiles. And, that this is achieved 
by investment coordination and operations that are economically efficient, financially and 
environmentally sustainable, culturally appropriate, and resilient to shocks. 
Exposure
The degree to which a region and/or priority area/theme is affected 
Sensitivity
The degree to which a region and/or priority area/theme is harmed 
Impacts
Described as the consequence of exposure and sensitivity 
Adaptive Capacity 
The capability and capacity to adjust and manage impacts 
Vulnerability 
Summary risk assessment considering impacts (exposure & sensitivity) and adaptive capacity  
DEFINITIONS & ACRONYMS
Image: Malcolm Dam, Leonora
Credit: Jarrad Seng
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COUNTRY........................ 2
DEFINITIONS & ACRONYMS...................................... 4
FOREWORD................................................................6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY..............................................8
INTRODUCTION........................................................10
DROUGHT RESILIENCE IN 
GOLDFIELDS-ESPERANCE.................................12
OUR PLAN................................................................14
DEFINITIONS ......................................................15
CASE STUDY - SHIRE OF MENZIES.......................... 16
OBJECTIVES FOR THE PLAN .............................19
CONTEXT................................................................ 20
ABOUT THE REGION..........................................20
WATER IN THE GOLDFIELDS-ESPERANCE REGION ..22
CASE STUDY - SHIRE OF LAVERTON...................... 24
BUILDING THE PLAN............................................... 26
SCOPE .............................................................. 27
DEFINING BOUNDARIES....................................28
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT..........................29
CASE STUDY - WONGUNTHA CAPS........................ 30
DROUGHT VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT ........31
VULNERABILITY................................................32
CASE STUDY - SHIRE OF DUNDAS.......................... 34
CASE STUDY - TJIWARL PALYAKUWA................... 35
RESPONSE.............................................................. 36
VISION & THEMATIC OUTCOMES........................ 36
PRIORITY ACTIONS FOR DELIVERY ................... 37
CASE STUDY - SOUTH EAST PREMIUM WHEAT 
GROWERS ASSOCIATION ....................................... 38
ACTION STRUCTURE ........................................ 39
FOUNDATIONAL ACTIONS.................................40
QUICK WINS.......................................................42
FUTURE PATHWAYS FOR ACTION......................44
MONITORING, EVALUATION & 
LEARNING FRAMEWORK........................................ 46
APPROACH .......................................................46
MEL PROCESS ...................................................51
MEL ROLES & RESPONSIBILITIES . ....................51
RISKS & ASSUMPTIONS ....................................52
REFERENCES.......................................................... 53
APPENDICES. ......................................................... 55
Figures & Tables
Figure 1: Water Corporation owned assets across the 
Goldfields-Esperance region of Western Australia ........................22
Figure 2: Groundwater bores and resources across the 
Goldfields-Esperance region of Western Australia ........................23
Figure 3: Goldfields-Esperance RDRP area 
with sub-regions..........................................................................................28
Figure 4: A multi-phased stakeholder engagement 
process was undertaken to develop the GE-RDRP.........................29
Figure 5: Vision and thematic outcomes for the Plan....................36
Figure 6: Action areas of focus................................................................37
Figure 7: Priority actions will support the delivery 
of future action pathways........................................................................39
Figure 8: Conceptual MEL framework .................................................47
Figure 9: Program logic.............................................................................48
Figure 10: Overview of 12-month MEL cycle ....................................51 
Table 1: Summary of the Goldfields-Esperance regional 
drought vulnerability assessment by sector.....................................32
Table 2: Foundational actions that will 
establish pathways for the future..........................................................40
Table 3: Quick win actions identified by Stakeholders..................42
Table 4: Actions to inform future action pathways.........................44
Table 5: Indicators for tracking progress 
towards thematic outcomes...................................................................49
Table 6: Key evaluation questions ........................................................50
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page 5
Building resilience to drought through water security

FOREWORD
Economically and culturally diverse, the Goldfields-Esperance 
region covers a vast and remote landscape spanning a third 
of Western Australia. It is home to over 58,000 people and 
17 distinct Aboriginal language groups. Mining, agriculture 
and tourism drive strong local economies and support the 
livelihoods of our regional communities. 
Climate change and drought present new challenges to our 
communities, industries and landscapes, reshaping the way 
we live and work within the region. Planning how we prepare 
for future climates is central to ensuring continued economic 
and social prosperity.  
Regional and remote communities across the region have 
been forward thinking in their approach to climate change, 
resulting in significant work and collaboration to date. The 
Goldfields-Esperance 
Regional 
Drought 
Resilience 
Plan 
(the Plan) builds on this work and aims to be a foundational 
document to guide a long-term and coordinated approach to 
mitigating the impacts of climate change and drought.  
Kris Starcevich
Chief Executive Officer 
Goldfields-Esperance 
Development Commission
In a predominantly arid region, access to water underpins 
the economic diversity and liveability of our communities and 
is crucial to sustaining and protecting the landscapes that 
make our region unique. As such, achieving water security to 
build the region’s resilience in preparation for future climates 
is at the core of this Plan. 
The impacts of changing rainfall patterns, temperatures 
and 
extreme 
weather 
events 
will 
affect 
communities 
across the region in various ways and a coordinated, 
collaborative and regionally-led approach is essential to 
drive meaningful outcomes. 
The 
region 
is 
well 
prepared 
to 
work 
collaboratively 
to 
mitigate 
the 
risks 
and 
harness 
the 
opportunities 
presented by future climates with effective partnerships 
in place, such as the Goldfields Voluntary Regional Organisation 
of Councils, a strategic alliance of nine Goldfields-Esperance local 
governments committed to effecting positive change. 
This work has considered the vulnerabilities and opportunities 
of 
the 
region 
and 
is 
informed 
by 
the 
experiences, 
perspectives 
and 
expertise 
of 
First 
Nations 
groups, 
communities, industry, Local Governments, and other State 
government agencies, who have shared their priorities to 
build a more resilient region. 
These 
priorities 
focus 
on 
preparedness 
rather 
than 
reactive response, presenting actions that aim to place the 
region in a position to enable economic growth, protect 
social and cultural wellbeing, sustain healthy landscapes, 
harness emerging opportunities and respond dynamically 
to future climates.  
The 
Goldfields-Esperance 
Development 
Commission 
is 
grateful to the individuals and organisations who shared 
their knowledge in the development of the Plan. The GEDC 
is committed to delivering meaningful outcomes through 
the actions presented and looks forward to working with 
a concerted and collaborative approach towards a more 
resilient and prosperous future.
“In a predominantly arid 
region, access to water 
underpins the economic 
diversity and liveability 
of our communities and 
is crucial to sustaining 
and protecting the 
landscapes that make 
our region unique.”
Kris Starcevich
Chief Executive Officer 
Goldfields-Esperance Development Commission
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 6

Image: Wireless Hill Water Tank, Esperance
Page 7
Building resilience to drought through water security

The Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
provides a foundation to identify, inform and guide actions 
to achieve water security and drought resilience across the 
region.  
Jointly funded by the Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development (DPIRD) and the Federal government’s 
$5 billion Future Drought Fund (FDF), this Plan builds on 
the region’s aspiration to achieve water security through 
a shared vision. 
The Plan should be read in conjunction with the Drought 
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
(DVA) 
for 
the 
region, 
which 
provides evidence of likely future climate trends, and sectoral 
exposure, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. The DVA 
underpins the priorities and actions identified.
Approximately 170 individuals across 60 organisations were 
engaged through the development of this plan. During the 
consultation process, four clear thematic outcomes emerged 
that together support the objectives of the Plan and the 
priorities and aspirations of the region. 
These thematic outcomes are:
•	 Informed, Empowered Communities
•	 Positioned for Growth
•	 Efficient and Resilient Water
•	 Innovative Futures
Underpinning these thematic outcomes is the fundamental 
principle 
of 
Healthy 
Landscapes, 
which 
reflects 
the 
significance of conserving and restoring landscapes to 
sustain healthy water resources into the future. 
Throughout consultation, a strong focus emerged on future-
focused solutions that would achieve preparedness for a 
range of climate scenarios. Stakeholders and communities 
sought responses that enhanced their empowerment and 
authorship of solutions and almost universally identified 
collaboration as a mechanism to achieve this. 
This plan includes actions to achieve these aspirations 
by addressing key water security and drought resilience 
priorities across seven areas. These areas of action will 
help build understanding, foster relationships and increase 
capacity across the region to build more sustainable, resilient 
and thriving communities.
Water security is a significant economic enabler and key driver 
of regional liveability, including social well-being and cultural 
connection. As the region’s climate, water requirements and 
availability evolve, further work will be required to ensure 
the sustainability and prosperity of Goldfields-Esperance 
communities and industries. This Plan is intended to be a 
living document and will be reviewed and monitored over 
time to ensure it continues to meet the needs of the region.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 8

Co
ns
er
vi
ng
 a
nd
 re
st
ori
ng
 la
nd
sc
ap
es 
to 
su
st
ain
 h
ea
lth
y w
at
er 
re
so
ur
ce
s
HE
AL
T
H
Y 
L
A
ND
SC
A
PE
S
Investing in driving 
efficiencies to achieve fit 
for purpose, sustainable 
systems for the future
INFORMED, EMPOWERED 
COMMUNITIES
Building and enhancing localised, 
regionally relevant knowledge of water 
resources and policy to empower 
communities
POSITIONED 
FOR GROWTH
Ensuring sufficient capacity 
and agility to capture emerging 
opportunities and support growth
INNOVATIVE 
FUTURES
Harnessing innovation and 
research and development to 
create regionally-relevant 
solutions for future 
scenarios
EFFICIENT & 
RESILIENT WATER
Image: Greater Western Woodlands, near Norseman
Page 9
Building resilience to drought through water security

INTRODUCTION
Drought is an enduring feature of the Australian landscape. 
In 
Western 
Australia, 
climate 
change 
projections 
indicate that the state will experience drying conditions, 
with increasing variability of rainfall and longer periods 
of more severe droughts.
With terrain that stretches from the temperate coastal 
sandplains of the south-east to the arid interior, the 
Goldfields-Esperance region extends across a vast and 
remote landscape where dry conditions and climate variability 
are a recurring feature. 
To better prepare for, and respond to, these changing 
climates, 
the 
Australian 
Government 
is 
supporting 
communities and industries to implement actions that build 
regional Australia’s resilience to drought.
THE REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE PROGRAM 
The FDF is an Australian Government initiative to help 
regional communities become more prepared for, and 
resilient to, the impacts of drought. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) program 
is jointly funded by the FDF and DPIRD and brings together 
regional 
organisations, 
Local 
Governments, 
communities 
and industry to prepare for future drought risk and identify 
priority actions to build drought resilience (Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 2025 and Department of 
Primary Industries and Regional Development, 2024). 
These plans develop a coordinated, community-led and 
evidence-based 
approach 
to 
assess 
the 
historical 
and 
projected future impacts of drought, and identify the region’s 
vulnerabilities, priorities and adaptation pathways against a 
range of future climate scenarios. 
The 
Goldfields-Esperance Plan has a strong focus 
on 
achieving water security, which is recognised by the region 
as a key vulnerability and an enabler to building more drought 
resilient communities, landscapes and industries. 
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 10

Image: Fire impacted landscape, Shire of Dundas
Credit: Shire of Dundas
Page 11
Building resilience to drought through water security

For many Goldfields-Esperance communities, the pursuit 
of water security is deeply embedded in their sense of self. 
Historically, water has always been an economic enabler and 
a key driver of achieving and maintaining liveability outcomes. 
For Aboriginal peoples, waterways and places of water are 
integral to the ways in which they engage in cultural exchange, 
source food and navigate the landscape. Significant sites of 
storytelling they are also created by and the home of Spirit 
Beings (Curtin University & Umwelt 2023).
Both the region’s more arid interior and southern coastal 
stretches have a long history of lived experience with drought 
and dry conditions, however climate change is changing the 
region’s 
landscapes 
and 
communities’ 
experiences 
with 
Country. The visual impacts of a drying climate and declining 
availability of water resonated strongly with stakeholders, 
and many consulted for this plan noted concerns about lakes 
and waterbodies drying up, less native plants flowering and 
trees dying (GEDC 2024a). This in turn may impact certain 
cultural practices, including hunting and is also encouraging 
pest species, such as camels, to venture closer to remote 
communities, 
impacting 
the 
natural 
environment 
and 
damaging built infrastructure in their wake.
In a predominately arid region, the life-sustaining properties 
of water are often brought into sharp focus. Prior to the 
construction of the GAWSS, or Golden Pipeline, the 30,000 
inhabitants of the Goldfields region relied on insecure, 
inadequate surface and ground water. Essential not only for 
life, but for processing the precious minerals mined in the 
region, water was literally more expensive than whiskey. 
When the 566km long pipeline connecting freshwater from 
Mundaring Weir to Kalgoorlie was completed in 1903, it 
was the longest pipeline in the world. The secure provision 
of 
freshwater 
enabled 
economic 
activity 
and 
growth 
throughout many inland communities and its importance 
to the economic and social fabric of Western Australia was 
recognised by its inclusion on the National Heritage List 
(Water Corporation 2022). 
This acute focus on the necessity of water to sustain both 
life and industry, coupled with the region’s isolation, has 
led to a culture of practicality, innovation and problem-
solving, particularly for those peoples and communities 
not connected to the GAWSS. The adaptive capacity of the 
region, its communities and primary producers was reflected 
throughout the consultation process by the strong desire of 
communities to be agents of positive change in achieving 
water security (GEDC 2024a).
DROUGHT RESILIENCE IN 
GOLDFIELDS-ESPERANCE
Image: Livestock farm, Esperance
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 12

Despite the region’s willingness to adapt to change, the 
sheer isolation and low population base of Goldfields-
Esperance presents challenges for Local Governments and 
communities, making it difficult to deliver required services in 
an efficient manner. Local Governments are often positioned 
as a first responder during emergency events or natural 
disasters, such as bushfires. In the Shire of Dundas, which 
has a population of less than 800, the volunteer brigade is 
often a first responder for bushfires that occur across its 
more than 90,000km2 landmass.
The logistics of managing emergencies across these vast 
distances means that strategic planning to ensure adequate 
and appropriate resources are located across the region is 
both challenging and expensive (GEDC 2024a). This scenario 
is familiar to most of the communities across the region, 
particularly where poor access to fit-for-purpose water adds 
an increased layer of complexity.
Throughout consultations, geographic isolation was raised 
as a primary vulnerability for communities and Local 
Governments. For many communities, there is only one road 
in and out, meaning that any disruptions to road networks 
such as fire or flood, renders a community cut off. For those 
towns, such as Menzies, that are supplied water exclusively 
via trucks, road network disruptions leave towns and people 
without water (GEDC 2024a).
While 
climate 
change 
means 
many 
of 
the 
region’s 
communities will see a reduction in annual rainfall, drought 
is not the only expected impact. Increased extreme heat 
events, more intense fires, unpredictable rainfall timings 
and the impacts of flooding were also identified as key 
vulnerabilities (Aither, 2025). 
Across 
the 
pastoral 
landscapes, 
stakeholders 
identified 
that the relationship between prolonged drought periods and 
vegetation decline are having significant impact on runoff 
trends. With more frequent and intense rainfall events, a lack 
of vegetation is leading to increased flooding and contributing 
to landscape degradation (GEDC 2024a).
This highlights the intrinsic link between drought and other 
climate vulnerabilities. Communities have been clear that 
building resilience means considering these impacts as part 
of the broader climate change context and planning how to 
respond to these interconnected climate events is central to 
building their resilience (GEDC 2024a).
Page 13
Building resilience to drought through water security

Communities in the Goldfields-Esperance region have a long 
history of working collaboratively to forge solutions. This 
Plan builds on work undertaken by the region for the region 
by focusing on the key climate vulnerabilities identified by 
communities and stakeholders.
In 2007, GVROC a strategic alliance across nine Local 
Governments, was formed to work together to drive solutions 
to enhance and benefit the region. Recent work has focused 
on climate preparedness and through the WA Government’s 
Regional Climate Alliance Program, a Goldfields-Esperance 
Regional Climate Alliance was formed as a sub-committee of 
GVROC. As part of a Climate Risk Assessment and Adaption 
Plan for Goldfields-Esperance, completed in 2023 by GVROC 
with support from GEDC, stakeholders across the region 
identified water access and supply as the primary climate 
vulnerability (Ironbark Sustainability, 2023) (GVROC, 2023).
Access to fit-for-purpose water is increasingly becoming 
a barrier to economic development, diversification and 
liveability 
outcomes 
in 
the 
Goldfields-Esperance 
region. 
Insufficient infrastructure and supply in the region are 
disproportionally 
impacting 
socio-economic 
disadvantage 
and health inequality. This is expected to be exacerbated by 
the impacts of climate change (Ironbark Sustainability, 2023). 
In 
2023, 
a 
Goldfields-Esperance 
Water 
Security 
Group 
(GEWSG) was formed with endorsement from the then 
Minister for Water, the Hon. Simone McGurk MLA, comprised 
of members from GVROC, GEDC, Water Corporation and the 
Department of Water and Environmental Regulation (DWER). 
The group’s aim is to drive water security solutions and 
investigate actions to optimise the existing water resources 
to fit-for-purpose uses. The GEWSG is the Project Advisory 
Group 
for 
the 
Goldfields-Esperance 
Regional 
Drought 
Resilience Plan.
The region’s aspirations to achieve water security for their 
communities and industries has shaped the focus of this plan. 
A shared vision, regionally relevant definitions and agreed 
outcomes support this Plan by providing the foundation for 
practical, collaborative and achievable actions to build water 
security and a climate resilient region. 
OUR PLAN
Image: Regional water infrastructure, southern sub-region
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 14

Definitions 
Establishing 
a 
universal 
definition 
of 
drought 
that 
encompasses the impacts of drought for all people and 
landscapes is challenging. Therefore, the Plan presents a 
regionally specific definition of drought that highlights the 
experience of the Goldfields-Esperance region and will 
support the Plan in achieving the region’s vision. As drought 
and water are inextricably linked, a regionally specific 
definition of water security was also developed. 
These definitions are informed by other nationally accepted 
terminologies 
including 
the 
Australian 
Government’s 
definition of water security, the Bureau of Meteorology and 
the Defining Drought in Western Australia report, produced 
by Curtin University (Aither, 2023) (Bureau of Meteorology, 
2025) (Mastrantonis, 2022).  
The proposed definitions were tested with the GEWSG and 
GVROC to ensure the phrasing resonated with stakeholders’ 
lived experiences of drought and understanding of water 
security challenges. It was important the definitions aligned 
to and supported the vision, aspirations and objectives of the 
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan.   
Defining what drought and water security looks like for the 
region helps assess the region’s vulnerability and resilience 
to these events. Stakeholders were asked to reflect on what a 
resilient region looked like in the context of these definitions, 
and liveability and opportunities for growth were highlighted 
as key components of the region’s resilience.
DROUGHT
A prolonged period of 
abnormally dry conditions 
that negatively impacts on 
water availability in a region 
and, consequently, affects the 
economy – including missed 
opportunities for growth – and 
environment of the region, and 
the health and well-being of 
its residents.
WATER SECURITY 
Ensuring that needs for water 
– encompassing quantity, 
quality, and affordability and 
access – can be met, over time 
and under changing supply 
and demand profiles. And, that 
this is achieved by investment 
coordination and operations 
that are economically 
efficient, financially and 
environmentally sustainable, 
culturally appropriate, and 
resilient to shocks. 
Image: Regional water infrastructure, Esperance
Page 15
Building resilience to drought through water security

CASE STUDY - SHIRE OF MENZIES
ACCESS TO POTABLE WATER
With limited water resources and a reliance on a singular source of potable water, for many 
Goldfields-Esperance 
communities 
maintaining 
access 
to 
fit 
for 
purpose 
water 
is 
crucial 
 – particularly during emergency events. 
Every day, up to three trucks make the 260km round trip from 
Kalgoorlie to fill Menzies’ sole 200,000L tank with potable 
water supplied from the GAWSS. It’s the only source of 
water for the town’s 575 residents, with no access to suitable 
groundwater and limited ability to capture what rain does fall. 
But with only one sealed road in and out of the small mining 
and pastoral town, disruptions to the Goldfields Highway can 
literally leave Menzies without water. 
In late 2023, with multiple fires burning across the landscapes 
surrounding Menzies, the highway was closed for several 
days, stranding around 50 freight trucks. With water trucks 
unable to reach Menzies, the only potable water available to 
the town and its additional hundred stranded travellers, was 
the 200,000L tank. 
Shire President Paul Warner said the closures highlighted 
the precarious situation this limited storage capacity put 
the town in.
“It was very scary when those fires came through… we just 
don’t have a lot of options and that’s the only way water 
gets in,” he said. 
When the highway was eventually reopened, the Shire 
estimated only a foot of water remained in the tank. Water 
availability is front of mind for Menzies residents, and the 
water trucks travelling through town every day are a visual 
reminder of just how vulnerable the town’s supply is.
Mr Warner said a key priority is increasing the town’s 
water storage capacity to improve its ability to respond to 
unforeseen events and empower the community to unlock 
new opportunities. 
“It’s a big constraint to economic development, we’ve been 
told there’s no more development possible,” Mr Warner said. 
“It was very scary when those fires came through… we just 
don’t have a lot of options and that’s the only way water gets in”
Paul Warner 
Shire President, Shire of Menzies
Image: Niagara Dam, Menzies
Credit: Shire of Menzies
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 16

The Shire is working hard to make the most of every 
drop of water, installing guttering on public buildings 
and 
in 
collaboration 
with 
the 
Goldfields 
Voluntary 
Regional Organisation of Councils (GVROC) is pursuing 
the refurbishment of an old dam for non-potable use. 
Securing 
this 
resource 
will 
reduce 
the 
demand 
on 
potable water and enable the Shire to improve the 
town’s 
public 
amenity 
by 
planting 
native 
trees 
and 
increasing green spaces.  
Despite being an important centre for mining and exploration, 
and a key stop for travellers on the Goldfields Highway, 
Shire Acting Chief Executive Peter Bentley said small Local 
Governments like Menzies lacked the resources to make 
significant investments into water. 
“Commercially we’re up against it,” he said.
“We just don’t have the critical mass (of people) to be 
investing in big infrastructure.” 
However, the Shire is keeping a future focused approach, 
and believes opportunities for investment into alternative 
water solutions, such as wastewater recycling could be a 
viable option if the right partnerships emerge.  
Image: Town Hall, Menzies
Page 17
Building resilience to drought through water security

PLAN VISION
A vibrant region underpinned by sustainable access 
to diverse water sources that enhance regional 
resilience by managing risk and enabling growth
Image: Creek, Menzies
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 18

OBJECTIVES FOR THE PLAN 
The key objectives for the Plan were developed to support the region’s overall vision, outcomes and goals surrounding 
water security and drought resilience. The priorities and aspirations of the communities and organisations consulted 
shaped the development of the objectives, which were subsequently refined by the GEWSG (GEDC 2024a). The 
Plan and its actions were developed in a targeted approach to deliver on these objectives. 
To identify practical and investable 
actions and projects that can 
attract funding and are readily 
implementable. 
Promote and facilitate increased 
collaboration, communication 
and partnerships through 
the development of a shared 
understanding of the region’s 
drought vulnerabilities and 
water security priorities, and 
the delivery of regional and sub-
regional actions that can support 
multiple users’ priorities. 
Empower regional stakeholders 
to have authorship of their 
solutions and determination over 
the direction of their communities, 
industries or landscape’s future.
Page 19
Building resilience to drought through water security

CONTEXT
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 20
The Goldfields-Esperance 
region is located in the 
south-eastern corner of 
Western Australia.
The largest in WA, our region covers 
an expansive land area of over 
950,000km2. That equates to over 
148 Perth Metropolitan Areas!
Sources: REMPLAN 2021, *2024 ABS Estimated Resident Population
Esperance
14,558
people
Kalgoorlie-Bouder
30,991 people
 Coolgardie		
  3,779
 Dundas	
	
	
     723
 Esperance	 	
14,558
 Kalgoorlie-Boulder	 	
30,991
 Laverton	
	
	
  1,444
 Leonora	
	
	
  1,737
 Menzies	
	
	
     577
 Ngaanyatjarraku	
	
  1,482
 Ravensthorpe	
	
  2,280
 Wiluna	
	
	
     563
Population per Local Government Area*
About the Region
58,134*
People call our
region home
36 years
Median age
9.5%
Aboriginal and/
or Torres Strait 
Islander
Indigenous 
languages
and dialects 
17

Page 21
Building resilience to drought through water security 
Sources: REMPLAN 2024
A diverse landscape with distinct 
climates and unique ecosystems, 
including desert landscapes, spinifex 
grasslands, mulga woodlands and 
coastal heath and scrublands. The 
Great Victorian Desert is the largest 
dune desert system in Australia, 
while the Great Western Woodlands 
are the largest unfragmented 
temperate woodlands in the world, 
with 20% of Australia’s plant species. 
In the region’s south, the Fitzgerald 
Biosphere is a biodiversity hotspot 
with an incredibly high level of 
endemic species under threat. 
UNIQUE NATURAL 
ASSETS
One of the most significant mining 
regions in Australia, producing 
commodities including gold, nickel, 
copper, lithium, iron ore, rare earths 
and critical minerals. The mining 
sector contributes $27.7 billion in 
regional economic output. 
SIGNIFICANT 
MINING REGION
The Southern sub-region has a 
high value broadacre industry, 
with cropping, livestock, fisheries 
and forestry industries. The sector 
contributes $978 million in economic 
output and is a major employer of 
the Southern sub-region. Pastoral 
activities extend across the Central 
and Northern sub-regions. 
STRONG 
AGRICULTURAL 
SECTOR
TOP 10 INDUSTRY
Sectors by Economic Output
Mining
Manufacturing 
Construction 
Rental, Hiring & Real Estate  
Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing
Transport, Postal & Warehousing
Electricity, Gas, Water & Waste
Public Administration & Safety   
Healthcare & Social Assistance  
Education & Training
$27 billion 
$4.4 billion
$1.8 billion
$1.2 billion
$978 million 
$850 million 
$533 million 
$531 million
$490 million
$378 million
$40 billion
Economic Output
(2024-25)
$267,763
Per Capita
Gross Regional 
Product
$389,022
Per Worker
Gross Regional 
Product 
3.3%
Unemployment
Rate
(Dec 2024)
37,696
Jobs in the 
Region
KEY STATISTICS
Sources: REMPLAN 2025 and Department of Employment 
and Workplace Relations (DEWR), Small Area Labour 
Markets (SALM). (December Quarter 2024 data) 
Image: Lake Lefroy, Kambalda
Credit: Jarrad Seng

Water in the Goldfields-Esperance Region 
GROUNDWATER
Groundwater is the primary potable water supply for towns 
and industries outside of the Central Goldfields, including 
Ravensthorpe, Esperance, Leonora, Laverton, Wiluna and 
the communities across the Ngaanyatjarra Lands (Figure 2).
Groundwater 
is 
an 
important 
self-supplied 
water 
use 
for industry and is also the primary non-potable water 
source across the region. Of the 135 gigalitres per year of 
groundwater estimated to be abstracted in the region, more 
than 90% is for mining use and dewatering (Department of 
Water and Environmental Regulation, n.d.). Bores accessing 
shallow aquifers and deep paleochannels are common 
where towns, mines and pastoral stations are located and 
are often coupled with desalination or reverse osmosis units 
where groundwater is too saline (Aither, 2025).
THE GAWSS
The GAWSS sources water from Mundaring Weir in Perth 
and services customers across the Wheatbelt and central 
Goldfields, 
including 
Kalgoorlie-Boulder, 
Coolgardie, 
Menzies and Norseman (Figure 1). The GAWSS, operated 
by 
the 
Water 
Corporation, 
supplies 
approximately 
28GL/year 
of 
potable 
water 
across 
9,601km 
of 
water 
mains. The scheme supplies more than 100,000 residential 
customers (Water Corporation, n.d.).
The scheme is connected to Perth’s Integrated Water Supply 
System which can draw on groundwater and seawater 
desalination in addition to surface water in Mundaring 
Weir if needed (Department of Planning; WA Planning 
Commission 2015). The 2024-2025 state budget included 
an initial $15 million investment in upgrades to the GAWSS 
to increase water security, which leverages desalination 
investment in Perth (Government of Western Australia 2024). 
A further $543 million has been committed in the 2025-2026 
State Budget to increase the capacity and reliability of the 
GAWSS (Government of Western Australia 2025).
FIGURE 1
Water Corporation 
owned assets across the 
Goldfields-Esperance region 
of Western Australia. 
Sourced from Water Corporation
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 22
Water Corp - Water Bore
Water Corp - Water Pipe (planned)
Water Corp - Managed Water Pipes
Image: Esperance Borefields
Image: Rainwater tank

FIGURE 2
Groundwater bores and 
resources across the 
Goldfields-Esperance region 
of Western Australia. 
Sourced from the National 
Groundwater Information System. 
NON-POTABLE RESOURCES
Non-potable 
water 
supplies 
are 
highly 
dependent 
on 
local context across users and landscapes of the region 
(GEDC, 2024a). In the larger population centres, wastewater 
treatment and stormwater capture and reuse have been 
utilised for a number of years. Desalination in Esperance 
has also been identified as a potential source of water for 
industrial use, and potentially potable water and other future 
industries (GEDC, 2024a). 
Barriers to the adoption of non-potable water alternatives 
have 
left 
many 
communities 
and 
industries 
in 
the 
region reliant on potable water supplies for non-potable 
activities. 
The 
access 
to 
and 
use 
of 
non-potable 
water supplies are an important opportunity to increase 
water security in the region.  
SURFACE WATER
Surface water resources are scarcely utilised throughout 
much of the region, inhibited by inconsistent or low rainfall 
patterns and high evaporation rates particularly in the 
Central and Northern Goldfields. However, surface water 
assets, primarily captured in dams are an integral resource 
in the Esperance and Ravensthorpe Shires where broadacre 
enterprises and associated rural communities exist. 
The pastoral industry accesses a mix of surface and 
groundwater resources, informed by local conditions and 
resource availability (Aither, 2025).  
Page 23
Building resilience to drought through water security 
Commercial & Industrial
Exploration
Monitoring
Other 
Stock & Domestic 
Unknown 
Water Supply
Water Bore (NGIS)
Grant Group
Hampton Sandstone
Loongana Sandstone
Lower Tertiary Sediments
Nullarbor Limestone
Palaeovalley
Sedimentary Rocks
Surficial Sediments
Water Aquifer
Image: Recreational spaces require fit-for-purpose water supply to maintain regional livability.

CASE STUDY - SHIRE OF LAVERTON
ENHANCING NON-POTABLE WATER
Investing in alternative water supplies to reduce the use of potable water for non-potable uses is 
enabling Local Governments to unlock economic potential and improve liveability.
Over the next few years, thousands of trees will be planted 
around the town of Laverton as the Shire enacts plans 
to make the northern Goldfields town greener, cooler and 
more liveable. 
More than 400 mature trees have already been planted 
across Laverton and artificial turf is gradually being replaced 
with real grass. The aim is to activate spaces in the town’s 
centre, providing cool public places for the community, while 
improving amenity. 
The project is possible due to collaboration between Water 
Corporation and the Shire to identify alternative, non-potable 
water supplies that reduce the pressure on the town’s 
drinking water supply. 
Until recently, the Shire only had access to potable water 
provided by the Water Corporation’s managed borefields 
for the purposes of irrigation. Shire CEO Phil Marshall said 
this had meant the Shire was using precious potable water 
to green the town’s sports oval. Limited water supplies also 
meant the Shire was constrained in its ability to maintain 
parks and streetscapes. 
“It came through very 
clearly when we started 
looking at this that Shire 
could actually work with 
Water Corporation to 
achieve localised solutions 
that suit our community” 
Phil Marshall 
Chief Executive Officer, Shire of Laverton
Image: Laverton’s arid landscape
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 24

In partnership with Water Corporation, three additional bores 
were identified as suitable to supply non-potable water and 
seed funding from Water Corporation allowed two bores to 
become operational. The Shire has now allocated additional 
funds to equip a third bore. 
Building 
an 
effective 
working 
relationship 
with 
Water 
Corporation 
was 
pivotal 
to 
the 
project’s 
success 
and 
allowed the Shire to undertake some of the works required 
to achieve efficiencies. 
“It came through very clearly when we started looking at this 
that the Shire could actually work with Water Corporation 
to achieve localised solutions that suit our community,” 
Mr Marshall said. 
“That required flexibility and an understanding of each other, 
but we can certainly see the benefit of working together and 
building that relationship.”
It’s a project that is also positioning the town for future 
climates and an anticipated increase in extreme heat days. 
Thousands of trees will be planted in Laverton over coming 
years as part of GVROC’s Urban Greening program, which 
is aimed at increasing urban canopy and biodiversity 
to 
help 
build 
more 
resilient 
communities 
across 
the 
Goldfields-Esperance region. 
Mr Marshall said the greening of the town had been a priority 
for the community for many years and was already building 
morale amongst residents.  
“You can’t underestimate the importance of this to the 
community. We’re on the edge of the desert, but people 
can see the changes happening and there is such a positive 
feeling about it,” Mr Marshall said. 
The additional water supply and town greening project 
also enables the Goldfields town to capitalise on increased 
tourism opportunities emerging from the sealing of the 
Outback Way, a 2700km road connecting Laverton to Winton 
in Queensland. 
“If we can encourage people to stop in Laverton for half 
a day or even overnight then that’s great for the town,” 
Mr Marshall said.
Image: Discover the Outback Way
Page 25
Building resilience to drought through water security

This Plan presents a coordinated approach to building drought resilience in the region focused on water security. It has been 
informed by both empirical and anecdotal evidence to ensure this approach is not only underpinned by a robust evidence base 
but tested against and reflective of the region’s lived experience.  
BUILDING THE PLAN
The Plan has three foundational elements:
DROUGHT VULNERABILITY 
ASSESSMENT (DVA)
Developed through the vulnerability 
assessment framework established 
during the WA pilot Regional 
Drought Resilience Planning 
program (Aither, 2025). 
COMMUNITY CONSULTATION 
PROGRAM
Designed to capture the priorities and 
needs of stakeholders representing 
varying industries, communities, and 
interests from across the region to 
ensure the plan is community-led and 
regionally specific (GEDC, 2024a).  
ACTION PLAN
Captured in the response section of 
this Plan, presenting the priorities, 
actions, and implementation pathways 
across a range of future climate 
scenarios to build water security and 
address drought resilience. 
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 26

Scope 
The resilience planning landscape is increasingly active as 
communities, industries and governments recognise the 
need for better preparedness, response and recovery from 
changing climates.
This Plan aims to address gaps in the region’s resilience 
planning landscape to deliver practical and meaningful 
actions, 
focused 
on 
community, 
sub-regional 
or 
regional scale initiatives that address water scarcity and 
accessibility, impacts of fires and floods and extreme heat 
conditions. 
The Plan seeks to align and promote other efforts being 
delivered that are focused at an individual or private 
benefit level. The Plan’s actions will also support several 
significant resilience projects being delivered across the 
region, including GVROC’s Urban Greening and Adapting 
Community Assets for Climate Change programs.
A list of these and other related programs addressing 
areas of climate and drought resilience are included in 
Appendix A. 
Page 27
Building resilience to drought through water security 
Image: Pink Lake near Lake Rebecca, Kalgoorlie 
Credit: Martine Perret, Tourism WA

FIGURE 3
Goldfields-Esperance RDRP area 
with sub-regions
Defining Boundaries
Due to the vastness, complexity and diversity of the region, the Plan approaches drought resilience at a regional, 
sub-regional and community scale. Sub-regional boundaries were developed collaboratively with the GEWSG and GVROC 
and are determined by the status of potable water supply, perceived climate trends and dominant industry presence at a Local 
Government level. Sub-regions for the purpose of this Plan are:
NORTHERN SUB-REGION
Includes the Shires of Wiluna, Ngaanyatjarraku, Laverton 
and Leonora. Potable water supply is mostly sourced from 
bores and the dominant industries are mining and pastoral. 
Climate trends involve long periods of dry conditions broken 
by short-lived, intense rainfall events. 
CENTRAL SUB-REGION
Includes the Shires of Menzies, Coolgardie, Dundas and the 
City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder. The primary potable water supply 
is the GAWSS, with a strong presence of mining and pastoral 
industries. Climate trends involve more distinct patterns on 
a local level. 
SOUTHERN SUB-REGION 
Includes 
the 
Shires 
of 
Esperance 
and 
Ravensthorpe. 
Primary potable water supply is from bores, and the 
dominant industry is broadacre agriculture, with 
some mining presence. Climate trends involve 
shorter, more intense cycles between 
wet and dry conditions.
NGAANYATJARRAKU
WILUNA
LEONORA
LAVERTON
COOLGARDIE
MENZIES
KALGOORLIE-BOULDER
ESPERANCE
RAVENSTHORPE
DUNDAS
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 28

Stakeholder Engagement
The Plan was developed through a community-led process to ensure the Plan was regionally relevant, aligned to lived 
experiences and could deliver positive outcomes for the communities, industries and landscapes of the region. 
Engagements aimed to share the intent of the Plan and provide the opportunity for stakeholder’s perspectives and priorities to 
be captured and inform the development and direction of the Plan.  
Throughout the development of the Plan, approximately 170 individuals across 60 organisations were engaged in an ongoing 
process, outlined in Figure 4 below.  
FIGURE 4
A multi-phased stakeholder engagement process was undertaken to develop the GE-RDRP
Scoping 
GE-RDRP
Engage with 
the Goldfields-
Esperance Water 
Security Group
Prior work done 
by the region 
identifies water 
security as key 
climate threat
Final GE-RDRP
Ongoing engagement, governance and refinement from GVROC and the GEWSG
Multi-phased 
Community 
Consultation
Stakeholder 
engagement to 
understand lived 
experiences, 
vulnerabilities, 
priorities and 
opportunities
Drought 
Vulnerability 
Assessment
Stakeholder 
Engagement to 
test & refine
Desktop 
assessment 
of sectoral 
vulnerability and 
resilience
Consolidate 
Actions
Stakeholder 
engagement, 
targeted 
workshops 
technical review 
from CSIRO and 
DPIRD
Test & Refine 
Vision, Themes 
& Actions
One on one 
stakeholder 
engagements
Final Draft 
available for 
Public Comment
Stakeholder 
and broader 
community 
feedback
Images: Regional Drought Resilience Plan Consultation Road Trip
Page 29
Building resilience to drought through water security

An innovative trial to unlock alternative water supplies is securing a sustainable resource for a 
rural school and delivering added benefits for on farm irrigation and emergency water supplies. 
The Wongutha CAPS training farm near Esperance is trialling 
innovative technology to unlock alternative water supplies by 
testing a small-scale, solar-driven, Brackish Water Reverse 
Osmosis (BWRO) desalination system. 
The school caters for Year 11 and 12 Aboriginal students, 
predominantly 
from 
remote 
towns 
and 
communities 
throughout Western Australia, with up to 76 students 
boarding and 10-12 staff living onsite.
Wongutha Facilities Manager Kris Nostrini said when the 
site 
was 
at 
capacity, 
the 
school 
consumed 
around 
30,000 litres per day. 
The school was previously supplied by rain capture from roofs 
and poor-quality groundwater, which was under increasing 
pressure to balance the water demands of training facilities 
and farm operations. 
“In the last five years the water quality had reduced 
dramatically due to an increase in salinity, and the ageing 
infrastructure struggled to supply the volume needed,” 
Mr Nostrini said. 
“We were in dire need of finding an alternative source - 
trucking in water was the most likely option.”
The small-scale desalinisation unit has proven to be effective 
in a decentralised, rural, small-system setting and has been 
designed to produce 7.3ML of fresh water per annum. 
“The small scale off grid desalination unit has revolutionised 
our water supply onsite. The system is able to supply up 
to 30,000 litres a day which can offset our complete onsite 
usage,” Mr Nostrini said.  
This has led to added benefits for Wongutha school and 
provided additional water resources for on farm irrigation and 
emergency response supplies. 
“Our rainwater supplies last longer and can be dedicated to 
higher quality needs.”
“The 
brine 
produced 
by 
the 
desalination 
process 
is 
being used to irrigate salt bush and salt tolerant plants. 
We have seen a fantastic response to the extra water available 
for the plants.” 
“We also have the ability to supply quality water to 
surrounding landholders in time of drought or for emergency 
needs such as bushfires.”
Part of the WaterSmart Farms program, the project has 
been a collaborative partnership between the School, the 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development 
(DPIRD), Water Corporation, Murdoch University and the 
National Water Grid Authority. 
Through innovation and collaboration this project has enabled 
Wongutha Caps to establish a secure and sustainable 
water supply, improve its use of fit for purpose higher 
quality resources and unlock new opportunities to support 
the broader landscape and rural community to respond to 
drought and fire events.
CASE STUDY - WONGUTHA CAPS
WATERSMART FARMS TRIAL
“The brine produced by the desalination process is being used 
to irrigate salt bush and salt tolerant plants. We have seen a 
fantastic response to the extra water available for the plants.” 
Kris Nostrini 
Wongutha Facilities Manager
Image: Saltbush at Wongutha CAPS
Credit: Kris Nostrini
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 30

Drought Vulnerability Assessment 
The DVA reviews the historic and likely future drought related impacts, water resources, availability and scarcity across the 
region. It also includes anecdotal evidence gathered during consultations that identify the region’s lived experience with 
drought. 
The DVA provides an assessment of key vulnerabilities by sector, which are used to highlight the varying exposures, sensitivities 
and adaptive capacities of different water users across the region. In addition, this enables inter-sector relationships and the 
influence of drought and water security on these relationships to be identified.  
THE SECTORS EXPLORED WITHIN THIS ASSESSMENT ARE DEFINED AS: 
Mining 
Remote 
Communities 
Community 
Water Supply 
Conservation 
& Land 
Management 
Pastoral 
Broadacre
The region itself was found to be highly vulnerable to changing climate conditions, with each sub-region facing unique 
challenges. Vulnerability by sector is highly  variable and the relationships between sectors will influence individual water 
users’ resilience. This assessment has served to pinpoint important gaps in the region’s resilience and provides direction on 
where efforts of the plan should be focused and how. 
The DVA serves as a robust evidence base that underpins the priorities and actions captured in the plan, detailed below. It is 
summarised below.
Image: Crop Stubble, Hopetoun
Page 31
Building resilience to drought through water security

Exposure 
The DVA analysed 50th percentile scenarios of climate projections to 2050 to understand the likely rainfall, temperature and 
drought severity each sub-region will be exposed to in the future. While the southern sub-region is likely to experience the 
greatest decline in average annual rainfall, conversely the north-east of the region will see an increase up to 20% (Aither, 2025). 
Changes in drought severity are closely linked to rainfall projections and the Southern sub-region will likely suffer the greatest 
increase in severity of drought events. However, across the whole Goldfields-Esperance region, temperatures are expected to 
rise by 1-2 degrees consistently. The frequency of extreme heat days will be a greater concern to communities and industries 
in the northern parts of the region, which already experience maximum temperatures that are on average higher than southern 
areas (Aither, 2025).
Vulnerability
TABLE 1
Summary of the Goldfields-Esperance regional drought vulnerability assessment by sector
EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY 
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
VULNERABILITY
MINING
Mines in the central sub-
region will be exposed to 
declining annual average 
rainfall, with opportunistic 
summer rainfall. 
Mines in the northern 
sub-region are likely to 
experience longer extended 
dry periods broken by short 
intense rainfall events.
Most water dependent sources 
used for mining activities (deep 
and extensive paleochannels) are 
not sensitive to changes in rainfall, 
temperature, or potential drought 
occurrences.
As water security is generally 
dealt with up front through the 
identification of secure water there 
is little need for ongoing capacity 
to address changes in 
water supply. 
Drought periods are unlikely to 
significantly impact the mining 
industry directly. 
There are other water security 
vulnerabilities that stem from 
drought which require mines 
to manage the degree to which 
mining water use interacts or 
is perceived to interact with 
other water sources or water 
dependent values.
CONSERVATION AND LAND MANAGEMENT
There are large areas of 
conservation reserves, 
indigenous protected and/
or managed areas and 
Unallocated Crown Land 
(UCLs) across the region 
that are naturally adapted to 
drought, but climate change 
may mean significant 
changes to these asset’s 
condition.
More prolonged and severe droughts 
can impact fire regimes, particularly in 
the central and southern sub-region, 
and demonstrate a dependency on 
sufficient water access to maintain 
and protect critical infrastructure, and 
environmental and cultural assets.
Increasing severity of large rainfall 
events in the northern and central 
sub-regions can impact runoff 
and recharge cycles and may 
contribute to erosion and landscape 
degradation. 
Water insecurity and landscape 
degradation in culturally significant 
areas impact Aboriginal communities’ 
ability to maintain traditional 
land management practices and 
connection to Country. 
Adaptive land management is key 
to building landscape resilience.
Managing long-term climate 
variability is important for 
sustainability across land areas 
during drought and as climate 
changes.
PASTORAL
Pastoralists in the west 
of the central sub-region 
(Nullarbor) and the northern 
sub-region are likely to be 
exposed to more severe 
droughts and reductions in 
long-term average rainfall.  
Severe droughts and extreme heat 
will affect pastoralists’ ability to 
meet stock watering requirements, 
particularly if they have limited 
groundwater resources or rely on 
shallow aquifers. 
Access to emergency water 
resources and adaptive farm 
management strategies are limited 
by pastoralists’ remoteness and 
capacity.
Greater drought exposure 
will limit grazing availability 
and increase the vulnerability 
of pastoral land to long-term 
degradation. 
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 32

EXPOSURE
SENSITIVITY 
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
VULNERABILITY
REMOTE COMMUNITIES
Remote communities 
are already exposed to 
significant water related 
risks. In the arid north region 
where these communities 
are located, climate change 
is expected to lead to 
increased rainfall and 
decreased drought severity. 
However, it is unclear what 
affect this will have on 
the groundwater supplies 
these communities depend 
on. Increased rainfall may 
also lead to flood impacts, 
including risks to critical 
transport infrastructure
Remote communities have a high 
sensitivity to water-related stress, 
compounded by other sensitivities 
including poor health outcomes, 
social connectivity and local 
economic opportunities. 
Remote communities 
are some of the most 
socio-economically disadvantaged 
in the Goldfields-Esperance 
Region - climate risks are likely to 
compound these disadvantages 
and have a negative impact 
on liveability.
Water Corporation’s Aboriginal 
Community Water Supply Program 
is supporting adaptive capacity 
through the provision of water 
services to remote Aboriginal 
communities and progressing 
infrastructure upgrades to deliver 
safer and more reliable water 
services.
Infrastructure uplift is critical 
to address water quality 
issues from contaminants and 
salinity issues and improve 
the condition and suitability 
of existing infrastructure. 
Significant investment and 
planning are required to 
improve infrastructure.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY
Towns will experience 
increased supply pressure 
from a hotter, drier climate 
as well as increased 
demand in line with 
projected population and 
economic activity growth.  
This presents a key risk 
to water supply in the 
Esperance area, driving 
reduced groundwater 
recharge and saline 
intrusion risks to coastal 
aquifers and putting 
pressure on treated 
wastewater to supply 
economic activity, parks, 
gardens and schools.  
A hotter, drier climate will increase 
water supply and quality issues in 
small communities in the southern 
sub-region with limited groundwater 
and high reliance on rainfall. The 
Esperance area also remains 
vulnerable to these climatic effects.
Water supply and quality is a 
challenge for multiple small towns 
dependent on local groundwater 
and with limited freshwater sources, 
sporadic recharge, and declines 
in the availability of high-quality 
groundwater. Water carting is 
already required to supply potable 
water to some of these communities 
on a regular basis.  
Significant infrastructure 
investment is needed to increase 
adaptive capacity to drought. 
Improvements to sewerage 
and wastewater infrastructure 
are needed to increase use of 
recycled water and stormwater.
Town water supply 
arrangements have been 
developed to manage some 
drought, high temperature and 
variable rainfall conditions. 
However, infrastructure uplift 
is necessary to adapt to future, 
increasing and sustained 
variable rainfall and high 
temperatures.
More frequent, extended 
and severe droughts will put 
demand pressure on the key 
supply schemes of GAWSS and 
Esperance, and on wastewater 
and storm water supplies used 
for non-potable uses as other 
availability of other climate 
sensitive sources is reduced.
BROADACRE
Broadacre farming in the 
southern sub-region will be 
highly exposed to reducing 
average rainfall and 
increasing drought severity.
Farmers in the far north of the southern 
sub-region near Salmon Gums and in 
the far west near Ravensthorpe will be 
the most sensitive to increased drought 
risk. 
These areas already receive relatively 
low rainfall and have lower yield potential 
than farming areas in higher rainfall 
zones closer to the coast. 
Livestock producers in the low rainfall 
areas will be more sensitive to reduced 
rainfall with increased demand for 
fodder and water for animal welfare. 
Broadacre producers generally 
have high adaptive capacity with a 
range of opportunities to improve 
the water efficiency and resilience. 
Prioritisation of and investment 
in adaptive capacity measures is 
impacted by a range of factors 
including availability of capital.
Broadacre is highly susceptible 
to drought with seasonal 
reliance on rainfall to achieve 
seasonal crop yields and 
maintain healthy stock.
Farmers in the north and west 
of the southern sub-region are 
expected to be particularly 
vulnerable to future droughts 
due to high exposure, high 
sensitivity and reliance on 
external emergency water 
resources.
Page 33
Building resilience to drought through water security

Isolation, vast land areas and limited resources are challenges faced by remote Goldfields-
Esperance Local Governments, who are often positioned as the first responder to emergency 
events that occur across expansive tracts of Western Australia. 
The Shire of Dundas covers an enormous area of 93,000km2 
– which includes a significant amount of Unallocated Crown 
Land (UCL), Reserves and Pastoral Leases. More than 700km 
of the Eyre Highway, the major freight and transport route 
connecting WA and South Australia, traverses the Shire. 
However, with a small population, including around 380 rate 
payers and a volunteer fire brigade made up of six members, 
the Shire has limited capacity to plan for and respond to the 
increasing frequency of bushfire emergencies.
The sheer size of the region, and the need to protect significant 
infrastructure assets including the Eyre Highway, interstate 
rail, telecommunications and the digital fibre network, makes 
mitigation and response efforts incredibly important, but 
comparatively expensive. 
Dundas Shire Chief Executive Officer Peter Fitchat describes 
the risks faced by the Eyre Highway corridor as national in 
scale but local in responsibility. He said historically the Shire 
has spent significant amounts of their operating budget on 
fire-fighting efforts, but the low revenue base of the Shire had 
meant that this has flow-on impacts to other areas of their 
budget.
The Shire is well positioned to respond to emergencies in 
a coordinated and strategic manner thereby increasing the 
efficiency of effort, but on its own, lacks the resources to 
undertake the planning required for mitigation and response 
efforts.
“We don’t have the funding to map the area and show the 
access points, turn around points and water points so in an 
emergency we know where we are able to go. Access tracks 
could be closed, or not maintained. This is a concern from a 
workplace Health and Safety aspect… it’s dangerous to go 
into firefighting mode,” Mr Fitchat said.
Some areas of the Shire require a 360km round trip with a 
tanker to reach the nearest water point and where no water is 
available, the Shire must use potable water from the GAWSS. 
The Shire is seeking support to enhance existing and develop 
new water access points for emergencies, but recognises 
that greater strategic planning and collaboration across 
agencies would help to maximise cost efficiencies, improve 
coordination and enhance local preparedness.
“We would love to have the resources and a team geared 
up to properly address this, and to maintain those strategic 
access points, because the community sees it as vital to 
looking after significant State infrastructure and those natural 
assets like the Great Western Woodlands,” Mr Fitchat said.
CASE STUDY - SHIRE OF DUNDAS
BUSHFIRE EMERGENCY RESPONSE  
“We don’t have the 
funding to map the area
and show the access 
points, turn around 
points and water points 
so in an emergency 
we know where we are 
able to go.”
Peter Fitchat 
Chief Executive Officer, Shire of Dundas
Image: Bushfires in the Shire of Dundas
Credit: Shire of Dundas
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 34

CASE STUDY - TJIWARL PALYAKUWA
WATER LICENSING AGREEMENTS
The Tjiwarl People, whose land lies in the Northern 
sub-region, have a spiritual relationship to water and the value 
that wetlands, rivers, springs, bushland and caves bring, 
including their cultural significance and the ecosystem 
benefits they provide (Department of the Premier and 
Cabinet, 2024). Tjiwarl land has been subject to a systematic 
process of granting rights to conduct mineral exploration, 
prospect and mine myriad mineral types, and rights to 
use Tjiwarl waters for mineral exploitation. As a result, 
Tjiwarl People were restricted from accessing resources 
traditionally used, and alterations occurred to the cultural 
landscape that were once part of Tjiwarl lands (Department 
of the Premier and Cabinet, 2023). 
The Government of Western Australia entered into the Tjiwarl 
Palyakuwa (Agreement) as a result of three compensation 
claims that were filed by the Tjiwarl People against the State in 
2020. The Agreement is a historical native title compensation 
settlement between the WA Government and the Tjiwarl 
Aboriginal Corporation and provides the Tjiwarl People with a 
package of benefits that compensate them for historical acts 
by the State that have impaired or extinguished their native 
title. The process undertaken is consistent with the WA 
Government’s commitment to negotiated agreements in the 
state’s Aboriginal Empowerment Strategy for 2021 to 2029. 
“Water is life to Tjiwarl people and we have a responsibility to 
look after it. The Tjiwarl Agreement has given us a much better 
say in how mining companies manage water resources, and 
we hope that the productive relationships we are building 
with them means that this will continue into the future,” 
Greg 
Ryan-Gadsden, 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer, 
Tjiwarl 
Aboriginal Corporation said.
The package of benefits includes the following important 
water related actions:
•	 An agreement to undertake a Tjiwarl Water Study to 
identify locations of water resources on Tjiwarl Country 
and 
their 
associated 
cultural, 
environmental 
and 
economic values. Following the Tjiwarl Water Study, a 
Tjiwarl Water Plan will be jointly developed.
•	 More access to water information relating to licenses 
and permits granted under the Rights in Water Irrigation 
Act 1914 (WA)
•	 A Tjiwarl specific process for the grant of water licenses 
under the Rights in Water and Irrigation Act 1914 
(WA) has been agreed in the Agreement. This gives 
Tjiwarl Native Title Holders the opportunity for earlier 
engagement with licence applicants and both formal and 
structured involvement in the licensing process beyond 
that typically provided for. 
•	 A Water Working Group to oversee and implement 
commitments and processes made with respect to water 
in Tjiwarl Country. 
With the drought conditions of recent years, the Tjiwarl 
People’s concerns for water resources and the impacts of 
mining have been heightened. The Agreement and water-
related actions above provide Tjiwarl with a strong and 
transparent foundation for protecting the water resources of 
the region that support cultural and environmental values. 
Although most of this will come from having a more meaningful 
say in water licence applications that are being assessed 
by DWER, other benefits, such as the accessibility of water 
information, will also come from the more open relationships 
that are being established with mining companies and the 
Department as a result of the Agreement.
This package of works represents a significant step forward 
in ensuring that Tjiwarl People can continue to sustainably 
manage natural resources on Tjiwarl Country and is a 
demonstrated benefit of communities moving forward with 
negotiated agreements with the WA Government. However, 
even without an agreement in place, the water licensing 
provisions included in the Tjiwarl Agreement, could be used 
as a guide for other Native Title groups in the Goldfields 
Region to reach similar outcomes.
Image: Lake Miranda, Tjiwarl Country
Credit: Tjiwarl Aboriginal Corporation
“Water is life to Tjiwarl people and we have 
a responsibility to look after it. ”
Greg Ryan-Gadsden
Chief Executive Officer, Tjiwarl Aboriginal Corporation
Page 35
Building resilience to drought through water security

Vision & Thematic Outcomes
The Goldfields-Esperance region, across its industries and 
communities, has a long history of harnessing innovation to 
adapt to changing climates and scenarios and driving place-
based change.
Almost universally, consultations revealed communities did 
not want to be passive recipients of water-focused responses. 
Instead, communities wanted to be empowered to seek the 
solutions required to build long term sustainability for their 
landscapes, communities and economic fabric. 
A strong focus on building knowledge and understanding, 
partnerships 
and 
collaboration 
emerged 
during 
the 
conversations 
held 
throughout 
the 
RDRP 
process. 
As stakeholders began to connect with each other through 
the lens of the RDRP, early steps towards building strategic 
relationships 
and 
developing 
collaborative 
projects 
emerged. Mitigating against the vulnerabilities presented 
by 
isolation 
and 
remoteness 
were 
key 
considerations 
(GEDC 2024a). Collaboration was identified by all stakeholders 
as a mechanism to achieve the Plan’s objectives and features 
across many of the identified actions. 
Stakeholders clearly wanted to ensure the RDRP’s actions 
would build resilience and focus on preparedness rather 
than reactive response. Solutions were required to be 
future-focused, 
enable 
economic 
growth 
and 
place 
communities in a position to harness emerging opportunities 
in a dynamic manner. 
Four key themes have been identified that will support the 
delivery of aspirations identified by stakeholders and the 
vision for the Plan (Figure 5). These themes are underpinned 
by healthy landscapes and the conservation and restoration 
of natural assets to sustain healthy water resources. The 
themes are represented as outcomes that together will 
support the objectives of the Plan and the priorities and 
aspirations of the region. 
FIGURE 5
Vision and thematic 
outcomes for the Plan
RESPONSE
Co
ns
er
vin
g a
nd
 re
st
ori
ng
 la
nd
sc
ap
es 
to
 su
sta
in 
he
alt
hy
 w
ate
r r
es
ou
rce
s
HE
AL
TH
Y 
LA
ND
SC
AP
ES
Investing in driving efficiencies 
to achieve fit for purpose, 
sustainable systems for 
the future
INFORMED, EMPOWERED 
COMMUNITIES
Building and enhancing 
localised, regionally 
relevant knowledge of 
water resources and 
policy to empower 
communities
POSITIONED 
FOR GROWTH
Ensuring sufficient capacity 
and agility to capture 
emerging opportunities 
and support growth
INNOVATIVE 
FUTURES
Harnessing innovation and 
research and development to 
create regionally-relevant 
solutions for future scenarios
EFFICIENT & 
RESILIENT WATER
T
H
E
M
E
 
1
A 
vibrant region 
underpinned by 
sustainable access to 
diverse water sources 
that enhance regional 
resilience by managing 
risk and enabling 
growth
T
H
E
M
E
 
4
T
H
E
M
E
 
3
T
H
E
M
E
 
2
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 36

Priority actions for delivery 
Underpinning the vision and thematic outcomes are actions. 
The actions have been informed and shaped by the Drought 
Vulnerability Assessment and consultation program.
Actions have been identified and characterised to support 
an understanding of responsibility, scale and how they will 
support future progress and delivery against the thematic 
outcomes. Actions are grouped into areas of focus (Figure 6), 
and identified against the local, sub-regional or regional level 
as well as relevant thematic outcomes. 
ALTERNATIVE WATER SOLUTIONS: Assess desalination and other options for alternative 
water access and storage, including disused assets.
INDUSTRY RELATIONSHIPS: Secure public water-related benefits from 
industry activities where practical
LANDSCAPES: Improved landscape management practices to manage 
risk and support growth
POLICY & KNOWLEDGE BUILDING: Develop policies and levers that reflect the 
regional context, and build capacity and knowledge for effective advocacy
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES: Provide support for Primary Industries to 
continue to adapt and grow
STORAGE EFFICIENCY: Assess feasibility and suitability of dam refurbishment 
and tank storage facilities
WASTEWATER: Secure alternative water supply by maximising opportunities 
for wastewater usage
FIGURE 6
Action areas of focus
Page 37
Building resilience to drought through water security

A 
collaborative 
demonstration 
trial 
is 
helping 
growers 
find 
cost 
effective 
options 
to 
adapt 
on farm and community water assets to a changing climate, increasing rural water security 
and drought resilience. 
For small agricultural communities dependent on annual 
rainfall capture, secure water resources are essential to the 
viability of their broadacre production systems. 
However, shifting rainfall patterns in areas such as the 
northern mallee in Esperance have seen a reduction in winter 
rainfall, and importantly a reduction in runoff generating 
rainfall events. In the last ten years Salmon Gums and Grass 
Patch have been declared water deficient multiple times. 
Identifying a need for innovative solutions to maximise rainfall 
capture and storage, the industry is working together to 
improve the efficiency of their existing dams and catchments. 
Together with local farmers, the South East Premium 
Wheatgrowers 
Association 
(SEPWA) 
has 
delivered 
an 
innovative demonstration trial focused on increasing on-farm 
capture potential by lining traditional roaded catchments with 
used tarps sourced from CBH grain bins. 
The trial results show the tarps can effectively produce 
runoff after a 1.5mm rainfall event, where traditional well 
maintained roaded catchments require around 10mm before 
generating any runoff.  
“This significant increase in rainfall capture is vital to the 
ongoing viability of farming enterprises given the importance 
of access to water, particularly during summer, for stock 
and bushfire control. It is also key to summer weed control 
which is proving essential to continuous cropping farming 
and producing more grain from less growing season rainfall,” 
Michelle Handley, Chief Executive Officer of SEPWA said. 
In areas like Salmon Gums, generating run off on sub 5mm 
events is critical. Rainfall data from the Salmon Gums tarp 
trial site showed the area only received three rainfall events 
greater than 10mm over the 12 month period following 
installation of the tarps. 
Without the tarps, the Salmon Gums site would only have 
generated runoff three times in an entire year. 
The learnings from the project, including how to install 
the tarps, how effective they are at harvesting water from 
rainfall events and how long they will last, will support the 
sector to make more informed decisions based on locally 
relevant outcomes.
“There are hundreds of dams in the region that were built 
for 
different 
rainfall 
conditions 
and 
cost 
effective 
improvements in their performance have the potential to yield 
big gains,” Ms Handley said. 
Other communities across the Goldfields-Esperance region 
may be able to adapt the learnings of this trial to other local 
contexts to maximise water capture in a drying climate.
The project is led by SEPWA in collaboration with the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) and the Department of Water 
and Environmental Regulation (DWER) with funding from the Community Water Supply Program. Delivered in consultation with ASHEEP & BEEF, the Shire of 
Esperance, CBH, the University of Western Australia (UWA) and growers.
CASE STUDY - SOUTH EAST PREMIUM WHEATGROWERS ASSOCIATION 
INNOVATIVE BROADACRE COMMUNITIES 
Image: Lined catchment at the Salmon Gums trial site
Credit: SEPWA
“This significant increase in rainfall capture is vital to 
the ongoing viability of farming enterprises” 
Michelle Handley
Chief Executive Officer, South East Premium Wheatgrowers Association
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 38

FIGURE 7
Priority actions will support the delivery of future action pathways
Action Structure 
Actions are planned to take place in a targeted manner to ensure they build on and adapt in response to emerging information 
and data. This is particularly important for the response in this Plan due to the need to enhance understanding of supply and 
demand dynamics before implementing solutions. To achieve this objective, a review of all actions was undertaken to identify 
the immediate priorities for delivery. There are two types of priority actions: foundational actions (Table 2) and ‘quick wins’ 
(Table 3). The delivery of the priority actions will support future action pathways (Table 4) to be developed (Figure 7).
FUTURE PATHWAYS
Actions to support the delivery of future pathways and 
long-term resilience
Should be reviewed and reprioritised after 12 months 
Will be updated to include any new priority actions that 
emerge in the first 12 months of RDRP implementation
QUICK WINS
Targeted actions addressing specific challenges or 
opportunities within the control of Stakeholders
Delivery of these actions will further support a shared 
understanding to enable future pathways
FOUNDATIONAL ACTIONS
Delivered in the next 12 months
Focused on gaining an improved understanding 
of the system 
Enable subsequent actions to be taken in an informed 
and targeted way
Image: Catchments in the Fitzgerald Biosphere, Hopetoun
Page 39
Building resilience to drought through water security

TABLE 2: Foundational actions that will establish pathways for the future
ACTION
REGION
THEMES
NEXT STEP
POLICY & KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
F1.1	 Advocate for increased input and 
collaboration into Water Corporation 
water supply planning processes
Regional
Identify and build out engagement pathway 
with GEWSG.
Initial target is to hold an information session 
with Water Corporation, and DWER
Identify high priority water supply planning 
processes for input and engagement
F1.2	 Enhance knowledge sharing 
opportunities on water resource 
regulatory arrangements between 
DWER and regional industry
Regional 
Identify and build out engagement pathway 
with GEWSG
Initial target is to hold an information session 
with DWER
F1.3	 Undertake a review of water demands, 
including the regional non-potable 
water demands
Regional 
Develop a scope of work to prioritise the areas 
of focus for the review with input from GVROC. 
All LGAs must be able to provide clear 
water demand figures for what they have 
the ability to control (e.g. POS, fire water, 
future development)
F1.4	 Conduct a Northern Goldfields 
Paleochannel status report - advocate for 
funding to complete
Northern 
Identify and build out engagement 
pathway with GEWSG
F1.5	 Formalise opportunities to work 
collaboratively with Water Corporation 
to administer the rollout of the 
Aboriginal Communities Water Services 
Program, including the identification 
of fit-for-purpose infrastructure 
development that support remote 
communities to remain on Country
Northern
Central
Identify and build out engagement 
pathway with GEWSG and relevant 
remote communities
F1.6	 Review progress on the implementation 
of Tjiwarl Palyakuwa (Agreement) and 
lessons that can be shared with other 
Prescribed Bodies Corporates
Regional 
GEDC to identify and build out 
engagement pathway with Tjiwarl Aboriginal 
Corporation
F1.7	 Leverage Waterwise and other relevant 
programs to enhance community 
knowledge and understanding of 
efficient water use and changing 
hydroclimatic conditions across the 
region.
Regional
Identify and build out engagement pathway 
with GEWSG.
WASTEWATER
F2.1	 Undertake a desktop review 
of policy and frameworks to 
enhance LGA knowledge when 
investigating wastewater opportunities
Regional
Develop a scope of work to prioritise the 
areas of focus for the review with input from 
GVROC
Consideration of Shire of Dundas as a partner 
in review/case study
STORAGE EFFICIENCY
F3.1	 Coordinate review of dam refurbishment 
potential across the sub-regions and 
build on findings from WaterSmart 
Dams program
Regional
Develop a scope of work to prioritise 
the areas of focus for the review with 
input from GVROC and other relevant users/
stakeholders (e.g. agricultural industry groups)
Foundational Actions
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 40

ACTION
REGION
THEMES
NEXT STEP
INDUSTRY RELATIONSHIPS
F4.1	 Enhance knowledge on the pathways 
for LGAs to leverage outcomes 
from mining proponents (planning 
mechanisms, water and environmental 
approvals, social license)
Regional
Identify and build out engagement pathway 
with GEWSG
F4.2	 Enhance knowledge on pathways to 
engage and optimise benefits from 
water asset development associated 
with the Outback Way
Northern
Central
Identify and build out engagement pathway 
with MainRoads
LANDSCAPES
F5.1	 Map emergency response capacity of 
the region including capabilities, and 
strategic assets/location to support a 
community-led, sub-regional strategic 
fire management plan 
Regional
Develop a scope of work to prioritise the 
areas of focus with input from GVROC 
and southern and central sub-regional 
stakeholders (e.g. agricultural, Prescribed  
Body Corporate)
F5.2	 Investigate best-practice flood 
mitigation measures that are locally 
relevant for local government, with a 
lens on major transport routes and 
infrastructure, and pathways/processes 
to implement
Regional
GVROC to work with DWER to update 
floodplain mapping in consideration of 
climate change, including mitigation options. 
GEWSG to identify and build out engagement 
pathway to collaborate with MainRoads and 
Rangelands NRM to share knowledge of 
assets, roads and landscapes, including link 
to Outback Way
F5.3	 Support traditional owner-led land 
management practices for fire 
mitigation including cultural burning and 
restoration of natural ecosystems
Regional
Identify and build engagement pathway 
with GEWSG and relevant Traditional 
Owner groups
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
F6.1	 Align to and promote programs 
delivering knowledge and capacity 
building for best practice forage and 
feed budgeting, soil testing, stocking 
rates and nutritional 
needs assessments
Regional  
Work to encapsulate Southern Rangelands 
Revitalisation Program and the SW WA 
Drought Hub Southern Rangelands 
Situational Analysis into program of works 
F6.2	 Align to and build on the outcomes 
from WaterSmart Farms including 
understanding of feasibility of different 
activities for the Goldfields-Esperance 
region and consider opportunities 
to apply learnings across 
Goldfields communities
Regional 
Work with DPIRD to identify 
implementation pathways
F6.3	 Align to and promote programs 
delivering best practice water 
use efficiency knoweldge and 
capacity building for broadacre 
production settings
Southern
Work with DPIRD to identify appropriate 
programs providing best practice approaches
Page 41
Building resilience to drought through water security

TABLE 3: Quick win actions identified by Stakeholders
ACTION
REGION
THEMES
NEXT STEP
POLICY & KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
Q1.1	 Improve uptake and grow Waterwise 
programs to enhance community 
awareness and water use efficiency
Regional 
GVROC to support LGAs and work with 
Water Corporation to develop regionally 
specific and appropriate programs with 
Water Corporation, and DWER at a LGA or 
sub-regional level
WASTEWATER
Q2.1	 Wastewater Treatment Plant 
upgrades and associated expansion 
of the re-use scheme
Southern
Shire of Esperance to work with DWER and 
Water Corporation to progress the re-use 
scheme
Q2.2	 Water Bank project under the 
National Water Grid
Central
City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder to continue 
existing delivery pathway
STORAGE EFFICIENCY
Q3.1	 Develop strategic investment 
pre-feasibility assessment to 
provide clear, structured and 
shared understanding of cost/
benefits and feasibility of Cordingup 
dam refurbishment
Southern 
Shire of Ravensthorpe with Water 
Corporation consultation to commence 
development of scope of work 
Q3.2	 Strategic water supply points and 
improvement projects to support 
community water supply, 
firefighting and emergency stock
Southern
Shire of Esperance
Q3.3	 Dam refurbishment to reduce need 
for water carting
Northern
Central 
GVROC to continue co-development of 
Community Water Supplies Partnerships 
funding applications with Shire of Menzies, 
Wiluna and Dundas 
Q3.4	 Investigate levers to support 
adoption of residential and 
commercial tanks and gutters 
to enhance community 
and LGA supply
Regional
GVROC to work with DWER to explore 
opportunities to develop regional roll out of 
tanks and gutters on LGA buildings
Quick Wins
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 42

ACTION
REGION
THEMES
NEXT STEP
ALTERNATIVE WATER SOLUTIONS
Q4.1	 Research into innovative technology 
to use waste products from 
desalinisation as inputs into 
community or broadacre settings
Regional
Research to reuse brine in mining industry 
currently being delivered by Curtin 
University – extend learnings beyond 
mining industry
Q4.2	 Confirm partnership arrangements 
with Curtin University School 
of Mines to investigate opportunities 
for nano-technology in 
regional context
Central
City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder to continue 
engagement with Curtin University to 
finalise partnership and research delivery 
arrangements and timing
LANDSCAPES
Q5.1	 Develop water management plan for 
Kartjdijanup including identification 
of assets and infrastructure 
required to ensure secure water 
supply for Land Management and 
conservation programs
Southern
Esperance Tjaltjraak Native Title Aboriginal 
Corporation (ETNTAC) to identify and 
implement preferred development pathway
Image: Wastewater Treatment Facility, Esperance

TABLE 4: Actions to inform future action pathways
ACTION
REGION
THEMES
POLICY & KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
P1.1	 Assessment of pathways for funding allocated to central 
support programs to be diverted into preparedness activities 
at a local level 
Regional
P1.2	 Ensure LGA involvement and collaboration in GAWSS 
upgrade planning
Central 
P1.3	 Ensure technical work (demand, storage, evaporation, 
reliability) is done in preparation for grants
Regional
P1.4	 Work with Water Corporation on policy levers to 
ensure industrial water supply aligns with economic 
growth opportunities
Regional
Kalgoorlie-Boulder
P1.5	 Work with DWER to optimise water carting efficiencies to 
rural communities
Southern 
P1.6	 Investigate Traditional Owners interest in sharing cultural 
knowledge for water and drought resilience and map 
pathways for bilateral knowledge sharing
Regional
WASTEWATER
P2.1	 Enhance regulatory environment and facilitation of treated 
wastewater opportunities
All regions
P2.2	 Advocate for streamlining of approvals and red tape 
reduction to unlock wastewater use opportunities
All regions
P2.3	 Conduct feasibility assessment of wastewater potential and 
opportunities for Northern Goldfields communities
Northern 
STORAGE EFFICIENCY
P3.1	 Assess efficacy of WaterSmart Dams findings in 
Northern and Central sub-regional environments
Northern, Central 
P3.2	 Cost-benefit analysis for evaporation control to inform 
cost-effective practical control solutions for local 
governments and broadacre agriculture
All regions
P3.3	 Dam refurbishment for fire management
Shire of Dundas
The priority actions identified will support the development of future action pathways (Table 4). It is intended that these additional 
actions will be reviewed and prioritised after the initial 12 months of RDRP implementation, including any new priority actions 
that emerge. This is a fundamental aspect of the Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework.
Stakeholders identified that the actions identified here will remain priorities as they support the long-term resilience of 
communities and the region. However, the prioritisation of future actions has the potential to change in response to emerging 
trigger points, including major new mine or industrial development proposals that lead to efforts to target how stakeholders 
can work with proponents to optimise community outcomes. 
Future pathways for action
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 44

ACTION
REGION
THEMES
ALTERNATIVE WATER SOLUTIONS
P4.1	 Evaluate feasibility and cost/benefit analysis of new and 
existing technologies under different regional conditions 
and usage patterns
Regional
P4.2	 Identify degraded or abandoned assets that could be 
reinstated for alternative use (ie community storage) and 
map steps required to reinstate and divest
Regional
P4.3	 Work with government and other stakeholders to support the 
development of alternative, fit for purpose water supply for 
industrial use and other potential industries
Southern, Central
P4.4	 Investigate stormwater capture and storage opportunities 
for town water supply
Regional
INDUSTRY RELATIONSHIPS
P5.1	 Establish partnerships with industry to explore water 
synergies for public benefit 
Northern, Central 
P5.2	 Information sharing on post mine closure procedures 
and rehabilitation opportunities for community and local 
Aboriginal organisations or businesses
Northern, Central 
P5.3	 Establish framework that facilitates increased transparency 
and accessibility of information between community, 
government and mining
Northern, Central 
P5.4	 Look at water-related mine closure opportunities and 
partner with research at the CRC for Transformation in 
Mining Economies
Northern, Central 
LANDSCAPES
P6.1	 Develop community-led, sub-regional strategic fire 
management plans that are aligned to DFES regional 
plans and can be used to prioritise emergency response 
infrastructure investment
Regional
P6.2	 Advocate for best practice road design that supports 
recharge and mitigates erosion and flooding
Regional
P6.3	 Increase monitoring capacity across the region for climate, 
water or other factors (i.e. soil moisture)
Regional
P6.4	 Landscape remediation and rehydration to mitigate flood 
and erosion risk, promote sustained vegetation cover and 
support recharge
Regional
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
P7.1	 Research and development to improve reliability of forecasts 
and models for broadacre and other industries 
Regional  
P7.2	 Continued research and demonstration to shift broadacre 
industry to more drought tolerant systems 
Southern
Page 45
Building resilience to drought through water security

The Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) framework 
outlines 
an 
agreed 
approach 
for 
monitoring 
progress 
and 
performance 
against 
the 
actions 
and 
outcomes 
identified within the Plan. It establishes mechanisms for 
identifying and sharing learnings for future improvements 
and 
facilitates 
transparency, 
adaptive 
management 
and 
effective program delivery.
The MEL framework aligns with Plan implementation and 
includes consideration of the delivery of the foundational 
and ‘quick win’ actions outlined in the previous section 
and their influence on setting future pathways for action. 
The MEL framework sets the requirements for monitoring 
the delivery of the foundational and ‘quick win’ actions and 
provides a check-in point every 12-months to review, refine 
and inform ongoing implementation of the future action 
pathways in line with thematic outcomes. This approach 
ensures flexibility and continuous improvement of Plan 
implementation into the future. 
Approach 
The MEL framework sets out a practical and fit-for-purpose 
approach with four key components based on best-practice MEL: 
PROGRAM LOGIC 
A common approach to strategic planning which provides a 
consistent basis upon which to monitor and evaluate and to 
drive learning and continuous improvement. 
MONITORING
The regular, systematic collection of data or information to 
track delivery and give an indication of progress towards 
achieving intended outcomes.
EVALUATION
The periodic collection and analysis of data or information to 
assess the value of a program and the extent to which it is 
achieving, or has achieved, intended results. 
LEARNING
Structured 
mechanisms 
for 
embedding 
lessons 
from 
implementation to support continuous improvement and 
adaptively manage towards intended outcomes. 
These four components are shown conceptually in Figure 8. 
MONITORING, EVALUATION 
& LEARNING FRAMEWORK
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 46

FIGURE 8
Conceptual MEL framework 
VISION
PROBLEM / OPPORTUNITY
DELIVERY
THEMATIC OUTCOMES
•	 Articulates why the initiative is important (problem/objective), what 
change it is seeking to achieve over time (outcome themes), and how 
this will be achieved (delivery) to reach desired future state (aspirations)
•	 Provides the basis for measuring progress and evaluating 
success over time
PROGRAM LOGIC
INDICATORS
•	 Regular or ongoing data collection 
•	 Indicators provide a signal that actions are collectively supporting progress toward the achievement of outcomes
•	 Monitoring allows early identification of trends and risks and supports adaptive management
MONITORING
KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS
EVALUATION
•	 Periodic collection and analysis of data
•	 Uses a consistent set of key evaluation questions to evaluate delivery and the achievement of outcomes, as well 
as to identify areas for improvement
LEARNING
LEARNING & CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
•	 Sharing findings to support decision-making, accountability and continuous improvement 
•	 Tailored information to meet audience needs and support stakeholders to fulfil their roles and responsibilities 
Image: Senna notabilis Northern Native Seed Industry Development Initiative
Credit: Pilbara Development Commission
Page 47
Building resilience to drought through water security

Program logic 
A program logic approach has been used to capture the desired outcomes for the Plan and support outcomes-based monitoring 
and evaluation. The program logic articulates the desired change that the Plan is expected to deliver over time. 
Although demonstrable progress towards outcomes is expected within the first 12 months of Plan implementation, the program 
logic recognises that this period will also help build the foundations of future work to support long-term outcome achievement. 
This reflects the importance of the Plan’s foundational actions and how they will lead to future actions. 
The program logic is provided below (Figure 9).
FIGURE 9
Program logic
Monitoring indicators 
The MEL framework uses indicators to track progress towards the four thematic outcomes the Plan actions collectively aim to 
deliver. The monitoring approach acknowledges that these actions will build change over time, with the first 12 months focused 
on foundational and quick win actions to build the knowledge and relationships needed to deliver future actions to improve the 
conditions underpinning regional water security. 
The monitoring approach therefore sets indicators for foundational actions which are expected to occur within the first 12 
months, providing an indication that actions are collectively on track. It also outlines anticipated future indicators for the 12-36 
month implementation period which will be reviewed at the 12-month mark (as outlined in following sections).
Indicators for tracking progress towards thematic indicators are provided below (Table 5).
VISION
A VIBRANT REGION UNDERPINNED BY SUSTAINABLE ACCESS TO DIVERSE WATER SOURCES 
THAT ENHANCE REGIONAL RESILIENCE BY MANAGING RISK AND ENABLING GROWTH. 
PROBLEM / OPPORTUNITY
The Goldfields-Esperance 
Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan provides a coordinated 
community-led and 
evidence-based approach 
to support regional 
communities to become 
more prepared for and 
resilient to, the 
impacts of drought.
ACTION AREAS
Wastewater
Storage Efficiency
Alternative Water Sources
Industry Relationships
Policy & Knowledge
Landscapes
Primary Industries 
THEMATIC OUTCOMES
Informed, Empowered 
Communities
Positioned for Growth
Efficient & Resilient Water
Innovative Futures
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 48

FOUNDATIONAL INDICATOR 
(WITHIN 12 MONTHS)
ANTICIPATED FUTURE 
INDICATOR (12-36 MONTHS) 
ASSESSMENT APPROACH
INFORMED, EMPOWERED COMMUNITIES
Increased engagement activities and 
participation from community and 
industries as part of water supply and 
water resource planning processes 
Clear and consistent method to 
ongoing engagement and participation 
Documentation and reporting from 
GEWSG, Water Corporation and 
DWER, DPIRD, Main Roads
Plans and scopes of work for priority 
research and information sharing 
pathways complete 
Priority research complete and 
communicated  
Documentation and reporting from 
GRVOC, Water Corporation and DWER
Increased expression of interest from 
LGAs, Traditional Owners, community 
and industry with water security 
related initiatives and opportunities  
Increased level of interest, 
engagement and investment in 
programs and initiatives from LGAs, 
Traditional Owners, community and 
industry 
Data on applications, attendance and 
number of initiatives activated 
POSITIONED FOR GROWTH
External investment, projects and 
engagement pathways are identified 
and initiated
Increased external investment into 
drought resilience and water security 
building initiatives
Data on scale of external investment 
into drought resilience and water 
security building initiatives
Priority water management and asset 
planning complete 
EFFICIENT AND RESILIENT WATER
Targeted investment projects by 
stakeholders in ’quick wins’ are funded 
and outcomes communicated
Increased level of interest, 
engagement and investment in 
applications for funding from 
stakeholders
Documentation and reporting from 
stakeholders 
Scope of work to undertake research 
to support and prioritise future funding 
applications complete
Feasibility assessment of priority 
projects commenced 
Documentation and reporting from 
stakeholders 
INNOVATIVE FUTURES
Engagement with key industry 
and academic partners to finalise 
partnership and research delivery 
arrangements and timing
Partnership arrangements developed 
and implemented
Documentation and reporting from 
GRVOC, industry and academic 
partners
Priority knowledge sharing 
opportunities identified and 
communication planning complete
Communication of lessons from 
projects, engagement and other 
activities complete
Documentation and reporting from 
GRVOC, industry and academic 
partners
TABLE 5 
Indicators for tracking progress towards thematic outcomes
A VIBRANT REGION UNDERPINNED BY SUSTAINABLE ACCESS TO DIVERSE WATER SOURCES THAT 
ENHANCE REGIONAL RESILIENCE BY MANAGING RISK AND ENABLING GROWTH. 
Page 49
Building resilience to drought through water security

Key evaluation questions
Periodic evaluation will be guided by key evaluation questions (KEQs) to guide information gathering and analysis and to 
identify insights into achievements and lessons. The KEQs explore the main elements of the program logic and will be used as 
part of the evaluation process every 12 months.
TABLE 6
Key evaluation questions 
KEY EVALUATION QUESTIONS 
DATA SOURCES
1
Is the rationale and intent of the Plan still relevant? Consider:
•	 Have there been any changes in the operating environment since the start of 
the Plan, such as major changes in water demand, technology, management 
practices, planning or policy settings?
•	 What implications does this have on the intent of the overall Plan or specific 
actions? 
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
•	 Empirical evidence resulting 
from the delivery of 
foundational actions
2
Have actions been implemented as intended? Consider: 
•	 What actions and outputs have been progressed or completed?
•	 Was progress influenced by external factors? If so, how?
•	 Was the program implemented within the expected timeframes?
•	 Review of milestone 
achievement and action 
implementation reporting
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
3
Are there any barriers to future actions? If so, how can these barriers be 
addressed? Consider: 
•	 Was implementation constrained in any way by resources, information 
availability, partner or stakeholder participation? 
•	 Was implementation influenced by any unanticipated external factors, such as 
policy changes, economic factors or environmental conditions? 
•	 Is there anything that could be done differently or better? 
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
4
What have been the Plan’s achievements against intended outcomes to date? 
Consider: 
•	 What are the results and trends against outcome indicators? 
•	 Monitoring data
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
5
To what extent did activities support the achievement of outcomes? Consider: 
•	 Were activities targeted effectively towards achieving outcomes? 
•	 Have any additional actions necessary to support outcomes been identified in 
the course of implementation?
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
•	 Monitoring data
6
What unintended outcomes (positive or negative) have arisen, if any? Consider: 
•	 Have partners or stakeholders experienced any unintended consequences? 
•	 Were any adjustments to program implementation required to ensure 
achievement of outputs or outcomes? Why were adjustments required? 
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
•	 Monitoring data
7
What improvements could be made to Plan implementation in the future, if any? 
•	 What changes to scientific, industry, technical and management knowledge 
and understanding should be considered in future Plan implementation? 
•	 Are resources, governance and management appropriate to support future 
implementation? 
•	 Qualitative insights from 
Stakeholder representatives
•	 Review of milestone 
achievement and action 
implementation reporting
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 50

MEL process 
The MEL framework sets out a 12-month cycle aligned with Plan implementation and foundational and future actions. This 
timing provides a check-in point to review progress to date and adjust delivery as needed to ensure implementation remains 
focused on key priorities and outcome achievement. 
The key steps within the 12-month cycle are outlined below (Figure 10).
FIGURE 10
Overview of 12-month MEL cycle 
MEL Roles & Responsibilities 
Clear, fit-for-purpose governance arrangements are critical 
to using MEL to support successful Plan implementation 
and 
outcomes. 
The 
Plan 
has 
overarching 
governance 
arrangements 
which 
will 
be 
used 
to 
implement 
the 
MEL framework, ensuring roles and responsibilities are 
clear and sit with the most appropriate stakeholders and 
decision-makers. 
Roles and responsibilities to implement the MEL framework 
should follow principles for good governance, including: 
CLARITY OF PURPOSE
Ensuring that all stakeholders understand their roles and the 
contribution they are making to the MEL framework and to 
the Plan and have clear accountabilities. This ensures key 
steps, such as information collection and updating actions to 
reflect lessons, are executed efficiently and effectively.
OPERATIONAL AUTONOMY
Empowering and trusting stakeholders to exercise their 
responsibilities and to make the decisions required to deliver 
the outcomes that they are accountable for. This supports 
efficient MEL and empowers effective decision-making to 
implement lessons.
EFFECTIVE PERFORMANCE MONITORING:
Consistent, fit-for-purpose and transparent monitoring of 
performance of assigned roles and responsibilities. This 
supports accountability and helps identify what changes 
may be required to achieve success.
COLLECT INFORMATION & DATA
•	 Gather evidence against outcome indicators and KEQs
ASSESS DELIVERY & ACHIEVEMENTS
•	 Assess indicator performance and KEQ results
•	 Capture findings, lessons and insights
SHARE FINDINGS
•	 Identify stakeholder interest in key findings
•	 Target communication of key findings to relevant stakeholders
REVIEW PLAN & UPDATE MEL
•	 Confirm vision and thematic outcomes
•	 Refresh actions and priorities 
•	 Update indicators
EMBED LESSONS IN CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
Page 51
Building resilience to drought through water security

Risks & Assumptions 
Foundational and quick win actions were identified by 
stakeholders as the priority actions to be implemented in 
the next stages of the Plan’s delivery. However, stakeholders 
clearly identified the risks posed by major trigger events that 
may alter the state of water demand or supply opportunities 
in the region and therefore, require a review of the priority 
actions. Such events may include either a substantive new 
mine is identified for immediate investment or, a major 
new industrial water use (e.g. industrial precinct) or supply 
opportunity (e.g. recycled water from an industrial precinct). 
These events can cause substantive short-term risks to the 
delivery of the intended outcomes of the Plan if not managed. 
Ongoing monitoring and reporting on these risks are part of 
the ongoing monitoring arrangements for the implementation 
of the Plan.
More broadly, Plan actions are based on assumptions 
about the context and settings for water management in the 
Goldfields-Esperance 
region. 
This 
includes 
assumptions 
about 
economic 
and 
industry 
performance, 
community 
profiles, 
related 
policy 
and 
investments, 
ecological 
conditions, and stakeholder engagement and participation. 
A key example includes Sector Adaptation Planning by the 
government that is occurring in Western Australia. This is 
expected to include specific actions and pathways that 
will intersect with those outlined in the Plan. Any material 
changes to these underlying assumptions may impact Plan 
implementation and outcomes. Risks and assumptions, and 
any changes needed to account for them, are considered 
through the KEQs and MEL process.
Image: Munglinup Dam, Shire of Ravensthorpe
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 52

References
Aither, 2025. Drought Vulnerability Assessment of the Goldfields-Esperance Region. Prepared for the Goldfields Esperance 
Development Commission.   
Aither, 2023. Town and city water security; Definition and reporting framework. Prepared for the Department of Climate Change, 
Energy, the Environment and Water. Sourced, https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/town-and-city-water-
security-definition-reporting-framework.pdf  
Bureau of Meteorology, 2025. Understanding Drought. Drought Centre of Knowledge. Sourced, http://www.bom.gov.au/
climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml 
City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder, 2025. Kalgoorlie-Boulder Water Bank Project. Sourced,  https://yoursay.ckb.wa.gov.au/kalgoorlie-
boulder-water-bank-project   
Curtin University & Umwelt, 2023. Northern Goldfields Water Resources Situational Analysis, Prepared for BHP Nickel West. 
Sourced, 
https://www.bhp.com/-/media/project/bhp1ip/bhp-com-en/documents/sustainability/environment/water/230428_
niw_wrsa.pdf 
Curtin University, (n.d). Goldfields Fit-For-Purpose Industrial Water Supply Research, Milestone 14 – Final Report. Curtin 
University WA School of Mines. 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (DAFF), 2025. Regional Drought Resilience Planning. Future Drought Fund. 
Sourced, Regional Drought Resilience Planning - DAFF (agriculture.gov.au) 
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW), 2025. Priority Places, Fitz-Stirlings; Threatened 
Species 
& 
ecological 
communities. 
Sourced, 
https://www.dcceew.gov.au/environment/biodiversity/threatened/strategy/
priority-places/fitz-stirlings#toc_1 
Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage. 2019. Aboriginal communities in the Goldfields district of Western Australia. 
Sourced, https://www.wa.gov.au/system/files/2021-06/ABL-.
Department of Planning; WA Planning Commission. (2015). Goldfields-Esperance Regional Planning and Infrastructure 
Framework, Part A: Regional Strategic Planning. Western Australian Planning Commission. Sourced, https://www.wa.gov.au/
system/files/2021-07/GFE_Goldfields-Esperance_Framework_PartA_June2015.pdf 
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (DPC). 2024. Tjiwarl Palyakuwa (Agreement) Indigenous Land Use Agreement - Tjiwarl 
Palyakuwa. 
Tiiwa 
kuwarri 
yampa 
ngula. 
Sourced, 
https://www.wa.gov.au/organisation/department-of-the-premier-and-
cabinet/tjiwarl-palyakuwa-agreement-indigenous-land-use-agreement-tjiwarl-palyakuwa-tiiwa-kuwarri-yampa-ngula.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (DPC). 2023. Tjiwarl Palyakuwa (Agreement) Indigenous Land Use Agreement 
documents. 
Sourced, 
https://www.wa.gov.au/government/document-collections/tjiwarl-palyakuwa-agreement-indigenous-
land-use-agreement-documents
Department 
of 
Primary 
Industries 
and 
Regional 
Development 
(DPIRD), 
2025. 
Southern 
Rangelands 
Revitalisation 
Program. 
Agriculture 
and 
Food. 
Sourced, 
https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/southernrangelands#:~:text=The%20Southern%20
Rangelands%20Revitalisation%20Program%20aims%20to%20support,productivity%20and%20livestock%20manageme­
nt%20in%20WA%E2%80%99s%20southern%20rangelands. 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD), 2024. Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program. 
Agriculture and Food. Sourced, https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/regional-drought-resilience-planning 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD), 2021. Regional Snapshots: Goldfields-Esperance 
(Esperance Port Zone). Western Australian Broadacre Agriculture Regional Snapshots. Sourced, https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/
sites/gateway/files/DPIRD%20Regional%20snapshot%20brochure%20GoldfieldsEsperance.pdf 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD), 2025. WaterSmart Farms – Water Security and Resilience 
in a Drying Climate. Agriculture and Food. Sourced, https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/watersmart-farms 
Department of Water and Environmental Regulation, 2025. Community Water Supplies Partnerships program. Water Supply. 
Sourced, 
https://www.wa.gov.au/service/building-utilities-and-essential-services/water-supply/community-water-supplies-
partnerships-program 
Page 53
Building resilience to drought through water security

References Cont.
Department of Water and Environmental Regulation, 2025. Strategic community water supply plans and water deficiency 
arrangements. 
Water 
Supply. 
Sourced, 
https://www.wa.gov.au/service/building-utilities-and-essential-services/water-supply/
strategic-community-water-supply-plans-and-water-deficiency-arrangements 
Goldfields-Esperance Development Commission. 2024a. Emerging Themes of the Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan: Regional and sub-regional emerging trends in vulnerabilities and priorities. GEDC. 
Goldfields-Esperance Development Commission. 2024b. Annual Report 2023-24, GEDC. Sourced, https://www.gedc.wa.gov.
au/our-commission/publications/ 
Goldfields-Esperance Voluntary Regional Organisation of Councils (GVROC), 2023. Goldfields Esperance Water Security 
Action Plan. GVROC Regional Climate Alliance. 
Government of Western Australia. 2024. “Improved water security for Goldfields and Wheatbelt in the pipeline.” Government 
of Western Australia. 11 April. Accessed November 14, 2024. https://www.wa.gov.au/government/media-statements/Cook-
Labor-Government/Improved-water-security-for-Goldfields-and-Wheatbelt-in-the-pipeline-20240410.
Government of Western Australia. 2025. “Major budget boost to water supply for Goldfields and Wheatbelt.” Government 
of Western Australia. 11 June. Accessed July 28 2025. https://www.wa.gov.au/government/media-statements/Cook%20
Labor%20Government/Major-budget-boost-to-water-supply-for-Goldfields-and-Wheatbelt--20250611 
Great Victorian Desert Biodiversity Trust, 2024. Our Region, The Great Victorian Desert. Sourced, www.gvdbiodiversitytrust.
org.au 
Grower Group Alliance, 2022. Southern Rangelands Drought Resilience Situational Analysis. South-West WA Drought Resilience 
and 
Innovation 
Hub. 
Sourced, 
https://www.gga.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/20220902-Southern-Rangelands-SW-
WA-Hub-Situational-Analysis-DRAFT.pdf 
Grower Group Alliance, 2025. WaterSmart Dams – Making Dams Work Again. South-West WA Drought Resilience and 
Innovation Hub. Sourced, https://www.gga.org.au/activity/watersmart-dams/ 
Grower Group Alliance, 2022. Wheatbelt Drought Resilience Situational Analysis. South-West WA Drought Resilience 
and 
Innovation 
Hub. 
Sourced, 
https://www.gga.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/20220902-Wheatbelt-SW-WA-Hub-
Situational-Analysis-DRAFT.pdf  
Ironbark Sustainability. 2023. Climate Risk Assessment and Adaption Plan for Goldfields-Esperance, GVROC. Sourced, https://
www.gvroc.com/_files/ugd/13930a_bd434721b1514088bfbd4194e6676c1f.pdf
Mastrantonis, S. 2022. Defining Drought in Western Australia. Centre for Crop and Disease management, School of Molecular 
and Life Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA
Outback Highway Development Council (OHCD), 2025. The Outback Way; Australia’s Longest Shortcut. Sourced, https://www.
outbackway.org.au/ 
Pringle, H. et al., 2019. Managing Outback Roads, let it go, let it flow; water your landscapes, not your roads. Rangelands 
Natural Resource Management. 
Thackway and Cresswell. 1995. “An Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia: a framework for establishing the national 
system of reserves.” Sourced, Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. https://www.dcceew.
gov.au/environment/land/nrs/science/ibra#:~:text=Download%20Australia%27s%20bioregion%20map%20%28PDF%20
2.77%20MB%29%20The,climate%2C%20geology%2C%20landform%2C%20native%20vegetation%20and%20species%20
information.
Water Corporation, 2025. Aboriginal Communities Water Services. Ongoing Works. Sourced, https://www.watercorporation.
com.au/Outages-and-works/Ongoing-Works/Aboriginal-Communities-Water-Services 
Water Corporation, 2025. Waterwise Council Program. Waterwise programs. Sourced, https://www.watercorporation.com.au/
Waterwise/Waterwise-programs/Waterwise-Council-Program 
Water Corporation. 2022. Preserving the iconic Golden Pipeline. Sourced, https://www.watercorporation.com.au/About-us/
Latest-updates/October-2022/Preserving-the-iconic-Golden-Pipeline 
Water 
Corporation. 
(n.d.). 
Goldfields 
& 
Agricultural. 
Sourced, 
https://www.watercorporation.com.au/Our-water/Climate-
change-and-WA/Climate-and-Goldfields-and-Agricultural/Goldfields-and-Agricultural. 
Wilderness 
Society. 
2025. 
Great 
Western 
Woodlands. 
Sourced 
https://www.wilderness.org.au/iconic-places/great-western-
woodlands
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 54

Appendix A: Drought Resilience Planning Alignment in the 
Goldfields-Esperance Region 
TABLE A1
State and national resilience planning initiatives
PROGRAM 
DESCRIPTION 
ALIGNMENT 
DAFF Future 
Drought Fund
The Future Drought Fund (FDF) aims to boost drought 
and climate resilience.
The GE-RDRP and associated actions 
support the FDF’s objectives, including:
•	 Partnering for local solutions
•	 Building knowledge, skills and 
capability
•	 Innovating for transformation
•	 First Nations initiatives
•	 Measuring progress and sharing 
knowledge
Other RDRPs 
The state approach to delivering RDRPs has 
developed a framework for collaboration and 
knowledge sharing between regions during plan 
development and implementation. 
Alignment between regional plans to be 
identified. 
DPIRD Southern 
Rangelands 
Revitalisation 
Program 
Capacity building to support pastoralists to develop 
revitalisation plans that support improved rangelands 
condition and livestock profitability.
Landscape management & flood 
mitigation priorities identified in the GE-
RDRP. 
DPIRD WaterSmart 
programs (Farms, 
Dams and Industries) 
Trials to improve knowledge of best practice dam and 
catchment design and test novel solutions including 
lined dams and desalinisation units for broadacre 
systems.
R&D priorities identified by the 
broadacre sector, opportunities to apply 
learnings to other contexts.  
South West WA 
Drought Hub 
Situational Analyses 
Maps drought related agricultural initiatives occurring 
within the regions and gaps or opportunities for future 
work to address drought risks on farm.
Support individual or industry led 
actions at the local scale.
Kep Katitjin – Gabi 
Kaadadjan Waterwise 
action plan 3 
(2024–27)
State Government’s cross-government approach to 
a coordinated, long-term approach to managing the 
Perth and Peel regions’ water and creating climate-
resilient waterwise communities.
Knowledge-sharing opportunities with 
regional communities and opportunities 
to expand learnings in the Goldfields-
Esperance region.
Waterwise Councils 
Program 
Supports local governments to improve water 
efficiency and adopt waterwise practices in their 
operations and communities.
Provides pathway for GE local 
governments to implement actions 
under Theme 3. 
Strategic Community 
Water Supplies 
Partnerships 
program (DWER)
Encourage the planning and establishment of reliable 
non-potable water supplies to meet emergency 
farmland and firefighting water needs and reduce 
scheme water use.
Pathway for local governments and 
communities to develop projects to 
increase water security and emergency 
response capacity. 
APPENDICES
Page 55
Building resilience to drought through water security

TABLE A2 
Regionally-led resilience planning initiatives and related work 
PROGRAM 
DESCRIPTION 
ALIGNMENT 
Aboriginal 
Community Water 
Services Program 
(Water Corporation) 
Program to manage the provision of water services 
to Remote Aboriginal communities and progress 
infrastructure upgrades to deliver safer and more 
reliable water services.
Working to improve water security of 
remote Aboriginal communities in the 
region. 
WA Climate 
Adaptation Strategy
The state approach to climate adaptation which 
establishes the need for Sector Adaptation Plans 
(SAPs) to be developed for key sectors in Western 
Australia, including water and primary production.
Will provide key support and direction 
for action in the region, including cross-
cutting actions. 
Climate Science 
Initiative WA
The state will work with partners to deliver several 
key actions, such as detailed climate projections and 
establishing a climate adaptation research hub.
Provide knowledge and key data at a 
local level to support the delivery of 
actions in the region. 
Diversify WA
State’s economic development framework and 
outlines the Western Australian Government’s vision 
for a strong and diversified economy. 
Supports actions that relate to economic 
diversification in key sectors, including 
tourism, mining and agriculture.
State Infrastructure 
Strategy
Outlines the State's significant infrastructure needs 
and priorities including in response to climate change. 
Supports actions that address/relate to 
infrastructure to increase water security, 
healthy landscapes and regional 
resilience.
State Aboriginal 
Empowerment 
Strategy 2021 - 2029.
The Strategy directs the State Government efforts 
towards a future in which all Aboriginal people, 
families and communities are empowered to live good 
lives and choose their own futures from a secure 
foundation.
The Plan supports Aboriginal 
communities’ right to safe and secure 
water supplies and aims to enhance 
First nations’ voices in decision-
making and opportunities for economic 
development.
PROGRAM 
DESCRIPTION 
ALIGNMENT 
GVROC Regional 
Climate Alliance 
Adapting Community 
Assets for Climate 
Change
Framework to support local governments to identify 
most beneficial climate change adaptation pathways 
for local infrastructure assets. 
Addressing vulnerabilities outside of 
water security and drought and supports 
resilience building initiatives at the local 
level beyond the scope of water security 
and drought for the region’s climate 
adaption efforts. 
GVROC Regional 
Climate Alliance 
Goldfields Esperance 
Urban Forrest and 
Biodiversity Program
Tree and shrub planting program in town centres 
between 2025 – 2027 using native and drought 
tolerant species, to reduce impacts of extreme heat 
days and improve livability and amenity. 
Addressing related drought impacts, 
extreme heat days and healthy 
landscapes, aligned with the Plan. 
GEDC Strategic Plan 
2022-2024
Outlines the approach to the delivery of regional 
development outcomes, as well as key initiatives and 
strategies to drive economic and social development 
for the Goldfields-Esperance region
The GE-RDRP aligns with and supports 
the initiatives identified within the 
Strategic Plan. 
Curtin University 
Goldfields Fit-For-
Purpose Industrial 
Water Supply 
Research
Investigating water treatment options for Fit-For-
Purpose Industrial Water Supply in the Goldfields, 
including use of Nano-filtration technology 
Identifying alternative water supplies 
and fit-for-purpose water for industry, 
themes 2,3 & 4. 
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 56

CONSULTATION & ENGAGEMENT
Stakeholder 
engagement 
was 
a 
key 
element 
in 
the 
development of the GE-RDRP. Between March 2024 – April 
2025, approximately 170 individuals across 60 organisations 
were engaged in consultations or briefings, including one on 
one or small group discussions and meetings, targeted small 
group workshops, online surveys and phone conversations, 
delivered both in person and online. 
Engagements aimed to share the intent and development 
of the Plan and provide the opportunity for stakeholders’ 
perspectives and priorities to be captured and inform the 
development and direction of the Plan. 
Discussions sought to understand the lived experience of 
drought and water insecurity for stakeholders including their 
perceived climate impacts and vulnerabilities, their priorities 
for action and potential opportunities for future development. 
Some of the questions explored during these discussions 
include: 
•	 What are the impacts of drought or water insecurity on 
your region? What communities, landscapes or industries 
are the most vulnerable to these impacts? 
•	 What 
actions 
could 
be 
taken 
to 
address 
these 
vulnerabilities and build resilience? Are there any barriers 
that would need to be overcome? 
•	 What are the top priorities for your region to become 
more resilient and build water security? 
•	 What economic or social opportunities could be realised 
if the region was not vulnerable to drought and water 
security? 
Appendix B: Consultation and Engagement for the GE-RDRP 
TABLE B1 
Consultation agenda shared with Stakeholders to facilitate discussion around 
the key questions listed above
Session 1
Climate Experiences: Exploring climate impacts throughout history as well as what threats are impacting 
you now. It will also explore future trends and your major concerns. 
Session 2
Capacity: Understanding capacity to adapt, absorb or mitigate current and future climate impacts, with a 
key focus on assessing water assets and fit-for-purpose infrastructure.
Session 3
Vulnerabilities: Identifying the most vulnerable places, communities or industries in your region. 
Session 4
Solutions: Opportunities and barriers that currently exist to address vulnerabilities and build resilience.
TABLE B2
Organisations engaged throughout the development of the GE-RDRP
STAKEHOLDER GROUP
ORGANISATIONS 
Local Government
•	 The Goldfields Voluntary Regional Organisation of Councils (GVROC) and the 
GVROC Regional Climate Alliance
•	 The City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder and the Shires of Ravensthorpe, Esperance, 
Coolgardie, Dundas, Menzies, Laverton, Leonora, Wiluna and Ngaanyatjarrraku
Service Providers
•	 Main Roads 
•	 Telstra 
•	 Fortescue Future Industries 
•	 Water Corporation 
•	 Western Power 
•	 Water haulage providers (Desert Sands Cartage, Hamptons Transport & other)
Page 57
Building resilience to drought through water security

STAKEHOLDER GROUP
ORGANISATIONS 
Primary Industries 
•	 The South-West WA Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
•	 Dept. Primary Industries and Regional Development programs: 
	- Southern Rangelands Revitalisation Program
	- Climate Resilience Taskforce Natural Capital Investment
	- Water Smart Dams, Farms & Industries
•	 South East Premium Wheatgrowers Association 
•	 ASHEEP & BEEF 
•	 Ravensthorpe Agricultural Initiative Network
•	 North Mallee Farm Improvement Group 
•	 Esperance Zone Innovation Group 
•	 Southern Rangelands Pastoral Alliance 
•	 Goldfields Nullarbor Rangelands Biosecurity Association 
•	 South Coast Natural Resource Management 
•	 Rangelands Natural Resource Management 
•	 Individual broadacre and pastoral businesses 
Prescribed Body Corporates, 
Native Title Body Holders and 
Aboriginal Corporations and 
Services 
•	 Esperance Tjaltjraak Native Title Corporation 
•	 Ngaanyatjarra Council Aboriginal Corporation 
•	 Paakanu Aboriginal Corporation 
•	 Native Title Services Goldfields
•	 Pila Nguru (WTAC) Aboriginal Corporation 
•	 Kultju Aboriginal Corporation 
•	 Ngadju Aboriginal Corporation 
•	 Warnpurru Aboriginal Corporation
•	 Upurli Upurli Nguratja Aboriginal Corporation
•	 Tjiwarl Aboriginal Corporation 
•	 Kakarra Aboriginal Corporation 
Community Organisations 
and Representatives
•	 Ravensthorpe & Hopetoun Community Resource Centers 
•	 Regional Arts WA
•	 Other interested individuals
Mining
•	 The Chamber of Minerals and Energy 
•	 Lynas 
•	 BHP 
•	 Genesis Minerals 
•	 Brightstar Resources 
•	 First Quantum Minerals 
•	 Goldfields Australia
Tertiary Institutes
•	 Curtin University, WA School of Mines 
•	 UWA, School of Agriculture and Environment
State Departments
•	 Department of Water and Environmental Regulation 
•	 Department of Jobs, Tourism, Science and Innovation 
•	 Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions 
•	 Workforce Australia 
•	 Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development 
Goldfields-Esperance Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Page 58

Governance 
Figure B1 outlines the governance framework for the development phase of the GE-RDRP outlining the role of the GEDC, 
GVROC and the GEWSG as well as the State and Federal Department funding providers that provided strategic input, technical 
expertise and State-wide alignment to support the robustness and effectiveness of the final Plan. 
FIGURE B1
Conceptual framework outlining the organisations that formed the governance 
framework for the development of the Plan and their indicative relationships.
CSIRO
Provide independent technical 
review and expert feedback on 
the regional plans to support the 
robustness and integrity of plans 
across Australia.
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
COMMISSION WORKING GROUP
DPIRD and participating Regional 
Development Commissions. 
Two-way knowledge sharing and 
program delivery oversight.
DEPARTMENT OF 
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY & 
FISHERIES
Administer the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning Program 
through the Future Drought Fund
DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY 
INDUSTRIES & REGIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT
Administer the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning Program with 
matched co-contribution across 
Western Australia 
GOLDFIELDS-ESPERANCE 
DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Delivers the Goldfields-Esperance 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
GOLDFIELDS-ESPERANCE 
WATER SECURITY GROUP
Act as the Project Advisory Group 
for the GE-RDRP
Representatives from Local 
Government, Water Corporation 
and DWER
GOLDFIELDS VOLUNTARY 
REGIONAL ORGANISATION 
OF COUNCILS (GVROC) 
& REGIONAL CLIMATE 
ALLIANCE
Act as the GE-RDRP regional 
consortia and provide oversight for 
the GE-RDRP. Two-way knowledge 
sharing and collaboration between 
GVROC initiatives and the RDRP.
Page 59
Building resilience to drought through water security

GOLDFIELDS- ESPERANCE DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
KALGOORLIE OFFICE
Viskovich House
377 Hannan Street
Kalgoorlie WA 6430
(08) 9080 5000 
ESPERANCE OFFICE
Suite 26c Dutton Arcade
91 Dempster Street
Esperance WA 6450
(08) 9083 2222 
info@gedc.wa.gov.au
gedc.wa.gov.au
LinkedIn: Goldfields Esperance Development Commission
@GoldfieldsEsperanceDevelopmentCommission