1  
  
                        
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Gwydir and Inverell Shire’s Regional Drought Resilience Plan   
 
Final report  
Ver 2.0   
April 2024  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program is co-funded by the Australian 
Government’s Future Drought Fund and the NSW Government.

2  
  
Table of Contents  
Table of Contents 
2 
Executive Summary 
3 
Introduction 
8 
Glossary of terms 
10 
Methodology 
11 
Phase 1 — Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment 
12 
Phase 2 — Consultation, co-design and assessment of community ideas 
21 
Phase 3 — Identifying drought resilience themes and projects 
28 
Projects recommended for Gwydir and Inverell Shires 
35 
Further technical studies 
41 
Attachments 
41

3  
  
Executive Summary  
Drought is a defining feature of the Australian landscape. Even in wetter regions, very dry 
years disrupt normal activities and lead to fodder and water shortages. Of most concern is 
that extreme climate events and droughts are anticipated to become more frequent and 
severe across the country because of the changing climate.  
The Gwydir and Inverell Shires were selected by the NSW Government as regions for pilot 
projects to understand how to strengthen drought resilience. In turn, the Councils sought 
support from the University of New England (UNE) to engage with the Gwydir and Inverell 
Shire communities to co-design beneficial projects to increase resilience to drought.  
This project, the Gwydir and Inverell Shires’ Regional Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan), 
was jointly funded through the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund and the NSW 
Government’s Regional Growth Fund. The Plan was developed drawing on local knowledge 
and the experience of those who live and work in the region.  
The purpose of this Plan is to:  
• 
Create stronger connections and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to well-being and security.  
• 
Empower communities to implement adaptive and transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to drought.  
• 
Support farmers to understand their assets and resources, to adopt whole-of-
system approaches to improve sustainability and utilise information, data and tools 
combined with forward planning to prepare for and to make decisions during 
drought.  
The Gwydir and Inverell Shire’s Regional Drought Resilience Planning project was 
undertaken in three phases.   
1. 
Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment based on the literature  
2. 
Consultation, co-design, and assessment of community ideas  
3. 
Ideas, themes, program logics and recommended projects for Gwydir and 
Inverell Shires.  
The final activity was the preparation of a summary booklet for distribution to the 
community.  
Phase 1 - Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment   
Resilience is defined as the ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise to 
maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacks. This definition contemplates the 
community we live in as a system. Resilience comes in different forms across economic, 
environmental, and social resilience pillars.  
The response of individuals and groups to environmental and socioeconomic changes 
caused by drought is described through three key capacities.  No adaptation or change in 
behaviour is known as absorptive capacity. The ability of individuals and groups to adjust 
and respond to environmental and socioeconomic changes is known as adaptive capacity. 
Beyond adaptation is transformative capacity. These classifications were used to assess 
resilience impact in Phase 3 of this project.  
Resilience assessment based on desk-top analysis  
Gwydir and Inverell communities’ level of resilience during drought was considered in 
terms of economic, social, and environmental effects with economic output, during

4  
  
drought, impacted predominantly through the agricultural sector. Whilst environmental 
effects are observed every day during prolonged drought, there were a lack of data to 
quantify accumulated loss of natural resources in the Gwydir and Inverell Shires.   
Regional NSW identified three priority regions consisting of two Local Government Areas 
(LGAs) each using agricultural employment as a proxy for the vulnerability of local 
economies to drought, alongside other relevant criteria such as water security and 
alignment of related initiatives under the Future Ready Regions Strategy. There are 128 
LGAs in NSW and this criteria places Inverell and Gwydir in the most vulnerable 5%. 
Relative to other Australian regions, Gwydir and Inverell were assessed as having low 
resilience typical of rural and regional areas.  
The status of the Shires was also considered in terms of disaster resilience. The Gwydir – 
Inverell region was classified, using the Australian Disaster Resilience Index, as a Group 3 
region. Strengths of Group 3 regions are social character, community capital, and social 
and community engagement. Barriers to disaster resilience in Group 3 regions are:  
● Economic capital  
● Planning and the built environment  
● Emergency services  
● Information access  
● Governance and leadership.  
Although drought is not considered to be a natural disaster, based on the results generated 
using the disaster resilience tool, the level of disaster resilience for Inverell East community 
and Inverell West (which overlays Gwydir Shire) was low.   
A community is like a living creature having interdependent elements that represent 
specialised functions – it is a system in which people can recognise and resolve problems 
and enhance its well-being. Gwydir-Inverell resilience baseline reflects access to water, 
education, health services, governance and public services, employment opportunities and 
transport. When any one of these is altered, it can create ripple effects throughout the 
broader community and system.   
Because of the relatively small population and agricultural dependency, the Gwydir-Inverell 
region is inherently exposed to challenges and changes, as a result of drought, of a scale 
that are simply not experienced in urban and metropolitan communities. This heightened 
sensitivity means that the economy and service provision is affected in circumstances 
unlikely to have impact in more densely populated regions. Implications for the 
GwydirInverell region are an increasing need to diversify the economy to reduce shock from 
drought. This includes the need for more off-farm income earning opportunities - preferably 
in employment not highly exposed to weather events and agricultural supply chains.   
Climate variability   
As climate change impacts take greater hold, the region is expected to experience:  
● Increased occurrence of heatwaves, hot days and fire risk  
● Potential for increases in seasonal extremes, particularly rainfall events and 
droughts  
● An increase in maximum temperatures in the near future (2020-2039) by 0.4ºC and 
in the far future (2060-2079) by 2.2ºC to 2.5ºC  
Strategies to address drought resilience

5  
  
There is considerable alignment of government strategies to strengthen drought resilience 
in regional NSW. Governments can best facilitate regional transition and development by 
ensuring that their policies and regulations do not necessarily impede the forces of 
progress and change. This particularly applies to planning, promoting mobility, such as in 
the agricultural workforce, and enabling business owners to develop or adopt new products 
and services.  
Of the three tiers of government, local government has the greatest on-ground 
understanding of what communities need and has a key influential role in supporting and 
sustaining them during prolonged drought. In reality, regional and rural councils in NSW 
have just sufficient resources to carry out business-as-usual activities providing services 
for the community and must rely on external income for significant strategic projects.  
Phase 2 – Consultation, co-design, and assessment of community ideas  
The Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan used a community and stakeholder 
codesign approach to gather input and ideas. A list of fifty-two (52) ideas were gathered 
from the consultation phase.   
The community consultations focused on the most recent 2017-20 drought and the key 
lines of inquiry were:  
• Drought or lived experience during the last drought  
• Communication and support mechanisms during the drought  
• Ideas for increasing drought resilience in the future.  
A range of groups and organisations participated in the consultation with twelve (12) 
community events hosted over the two Shires. The ideas were ranked using assessment 
criteria that qualitatively assessed impact and value (size and level of benefit), complexity 
to implement and future focus.   
The last drought was widely described as ‘very hard’. The slow nature of the developing 
drought masked the realisation of the impending crisis. This was a crisis by stealth and 
many farmers, in hindsight, ended up being slow to respond. Every section of the 
community was affected, directly or indirectly. Throughout the consultation process, 
communities, business owners, farming enterprises and service providers described the 
suffering and stress of this major climatic event.  
Businesses, whether directly or indirectly related to agriculture suffered. Income reductions 
up to 75% were reported. Jobs were lost, working hours reduced and people and families 
left the Shires.   
An outside observer, not experiencing the daily effects of the drought, might understand 
that the drought was devastating, but might take a simplistic view that the impacts could 
be endured (absorbed) with some basic management processes. However, the regional 
community was dealing with a complex and confusing range of factors, many of which 
they had limited control over.   
There were many stories of uplifting community actions. Community groups, local 
governments and individuals rallied together to provide much needed support in the form 
of informal gatherings, professional advice, support and information for navigating 
government and not for profit support (income support, low interest loans, fodder and 
freight subsidies, charitable provisions of fodder donations and care packages).   
A common theme throughout the consultation was the importance of seeing the region 
itself as an interconnected system and that changes in one part, influence other elements 
of the region. Likewise, businesses in towns are inextricably linked to the rhythms of the

6  
  
surrounding farms. Community and government networks are the lifeblood within and 
across the region and are important components if drought resilience projects are to be 
successful and sustainable.  
Another key insight from the consultation meetings was the heavy reliance on financial and 
physical support (government and not for profit) to endure the drought and an expectation 
that these programs will be ongoing, perhaps inadvertently negating the need for personal 
responsibility or preparedness for the future.  
There was no single effective method by which communities, organisations, farmers and 
businesses communicated and connected during the last drought, so a mix of channels is 
necessary.  
Phase 3 - Identifying the drought resilience themes and projects  
Five community drought resilient characteristics were identified and they highlight the 
need to take a systems and program approach to addressing drought resilience planning. 
They are:  
• 
Networked community  
• 
Collaboration between community system actors  
• 
Communication  
• 
Underpinning policy and regulation  
• 
Prepared businesses and community.  
Drought resilience themes that address these characteristics were developed by 
assessment against three criteria:  
• 
Impact across the economic, environmental and social pillars  
• 
Application to the Drought Preparation, In Drought Management or Recovering from 
Drought phases  
• 
Whether the outcomes may be Absorptive, Adaptive or Transformational.  
Based on these factors the following drought resilience themes were identified:  
• 
Prepared businesses (Farming as well as non-farming)  
• 
Community leadership/ Networked community  
• 
Community wellbeing support/ Collaborative community  
• 
Council Drought Support Coordination  
• 
Prepared infrastructure – Water.  
A sixth theme related to government policy advocacy was identified and included in the 
suggested technical studies.  
Program Logic for each theme  
A program logic was developed for each theme:  
• 
Program Logic 1 - Prepared businesses and community (Theme 1 - Prepared 
businesses and Theme 5 - Prepared infrastructure – Water)  
• 
Program Logic 2 - Networked community (Theme 2 - Community leadership/ 
Networked community)

7  
  
• 
Program Logic 3 - Collaborative community (Theme 3 - Community wellbeing 
support/ Collaborative community)  
• 
Program Logic 4 – Communication (Theme 4 - Council Drought Support 
Coordination).  
Projects recommended for Gwydir and Inverell Shires  
Five recommended projects were identified from this process. For each project a summary 
of outputs, timelines, assumptions, and possible pathways to adoption are provided. They 
are:  
• 
Develop and deliver climate resilient whole farm plans using a range of pathways to 
connect with farmers in the region and a capacity building program for non-farm 
businesses  
• 
Establish a Community Leaders Network  
• 
Enable community connectivity through hosting regular events that include informal 
interaction with professional services  
• 
Drought preparedness coordinators for Gwydir and Inverell Shires  
• 
Additional water standpipes for Gwydir and Inverell to enable continued 
maintenance during drought and community access to domestic water supplies.  
Further technical studies  
A number of technical studies have been suggested to support the recommended projects 
as well as systemic improvement to deliver lasting impact.

8  
  
Introduction  
Drought is a defining feature of the Australian landscape. Even in wetter regions, very dry 
years disrupt normal activities and lead to fodder and water shortages (BOM, 2004). Of 
most concern is that extreme climate events and droughts are anticipated to become more 
frequent and severe across the country because of the changing climate.  
The Gwydir and Inverell Shires were selected by the NSW Government as regions for pilot 
projects to understand how to strengthen drought resilience. In turn, the Councils sought 
support from the University of New England (UNE) to engage with the Gwydir and Inverell 
Shire communities to co-design beneficial projects to increase resilience to drought.  
This project, the Gwydir and Inverell Shires’ Regional Drought Resilience Plan (the Plan), is 
jointly funded through the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund and the NSW 
Government’s Regional Growth Fund. The Plan is designed to support people in the region 
to plan for and implement activities that increase resilience to the impacts of drought over 
time. It has been developed drawing on local knowledge and the experience of those who 
live and work in the region.  
The purpose of this Plan is to:  
• 
Create stronger connections and greater social capital within communities, 
contributing to well-being and security.  
• 
Empower communities to implement adaptive and transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to drought.  
• 
Support farmers to understand their assets and resources, to adopt whole-of-
system approaches to improve sustainability and utilise information, data and tools 
combined with forward planning to prepare for and to make decisions during 
drought.  
A key output of developing the Plan is a list of recommended projects fitting within 
prescribed budgetary constraints that, when implemented, will help strengthen drought 
resilience in the Gwydir and Inverell Shires.  
Numerous other reports and studies associated with drought and drought resilience have 
been reviewed in preparation of this plan. These include:  
• 
Gwydir Shire Council community Strategic Plan 2017–2027  
• 
Draft Inverell Shire Local Strategic Planning Statement 2036  
• 
Goondiwindi Regional Council Drought Resilience Plan  
• 
Report prepared for the Queensland Government in 2020 - Central West Regional 
Resilience Strategy  
• 
NSW Government: Upper North West Regional Economic Development Strategy 
2018–2022  
• 
NSW Government’s Future Ready Regions Strategy  
• 
NSW Government February 2021: A 20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW  
• 
Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan  
• 
Australian Government National Climate Resilience and Adaptation Strategy 2021– 
2025  
• 
Report prepared for the National Farmers Federation 2020 Future-Proofing Farming 
Collaborating to Manage Risk and Build Resilience

9  
  
• 
Report for Regional Australia Institute - Building Resilience in Rural Communities: 
Toolkit.  
The full desktop review is provided as Attachment A to this report. An executive summary 
of the review is provided in this main report.

10  
  
Glossary of terms  
The following terms are used or are relevant in this report.   
Absorptive 
capacity  
The ability of individuals and groups to continue without adapting or changing their 
behaviour in response to environmental and socio-economic changes (Béné et al.,  
2012 https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-3D-Resilience-Framework-Source- 
Bene-et-al-2012_fig4_341161308 )  
Adaptation  
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual 
or expected shocks and stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or 
exploit beneficial opportunities (CSIRO, 2022  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Di 
hub )  
Adaptive 
capacity 
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and 
socioeconomic changes (CSIRO, 2022  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Di 
hub )  
Co-design  
The process of partnership to develop and formulate project delivery and agreed 
objectives and needs, using participatory methods. A process of working together 
utilising generative and explorative processes.  
Drought  
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, 
abnormally dry period when the amount of available water is insufficient to meet 
our 
normal 
use 
(BoM, 
2022 
http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledgecentre/understanding.shtml 
)  
Economic  
resilience  
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors 
without changing the economic status or outcomes (CSIRO, 2022 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Di 
hub )  
Environmental 
resilience  
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and 
stressors while maintaining natural processes and ecosystem services (CSIRO,  
2022  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Di 
hub)  
Governance  
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and 
agencies in a society share power and make decisions. It can be formally 
institutionalised, or informal (CSIRO, 2022 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Di 
hub).  
Local 
knowledge  
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporate elements of lived 
experience within a landscape, bearing witness to the operation of systems. It 
includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people interact with 
surroundings and as part of communities and processes.

11  
  
Project Control 
Group   
The Project Control Group (PCG) is the group of representatives from the Inverell 
and Gwydir Shire Councils and NSW Government that governed the development 
of this Plan.  
Resilience  
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to maintain 
the existing functions, structure and feedbacks (Walker et al., 2004 
https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/ ).  
Risk  
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, 
recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated with such systems 
(IPCC, 2020 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2021/02/Risk-
guidanceFINAL-5October2020.pdf ).  
Shock  
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples include major 
storms, floods, bush fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism and 
cyberattacks’ (Resilient Sydney, 2018 (https://www.cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au › 
resilient-city  
).  
Social resilience The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and 
stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions (CSIRO, 2022 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Dih 
ub).  
Stressor  
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect, e.g., 
drought (CSIRO, 2022 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096321001236?via%3Dih 
ub).  
Systems  
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a complex 
‘whole’.  
Trends  
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and are 
expected to shape change into the future (Taylor et al., 2017).  
Transform  
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, 
functions, 
feedbacks 
and 
identity 
(Folke 
et 
al., 
2010 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258374985_Resilience_Thinking_Integra 
ting_Resilience_Adaptability_and_Transformability ).  
  
  
Methodology  
The Gwydir and Inverell Shire’s Regional Drought Resilience Planning project was 
undertaken in three phases.   
1. 
Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment based on the literature 
(Attachment A)  
2. 
Consultation, co-design, and assessment of community ideas (Attachment B)   
3. 
Ideas, themes, program logics and recommended projects for Gwydir and 
Inverell Shires.

12  
  
Phase 1: Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment (based on the literature) 
Phase 1 includes:  
• Key features and indicators of resilience for the Shires  
• A summary of relevant strategic visions and plans  
• Assessment of the impact of the recent drought (2017–2020) on the local 
community and economy.  
The desktop review was used to inform and design consultation and co-design with the 
local community, including an assessment of constraints and opportunities for local 
government as drought resilience actors.  
Phase 2: Consultation, co-design, and assessment of community ideas 
Phase 2 includes:  
• The Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan  
• Preparation and facilitation of twelve (12) resilience consultation workshops with 
the community  
• Workshops with Councils  
• One on one interviews  
• Fifty-five (55) community members consulted  
• Ranking of community ideas.  
Phase 3: Ideas, themes and recommended drought resilience projects for Gwydir and 
Inverell Shires   
In Phase 3 community ideas were assessed and the ten (10) ideas with the highest impact 
ranking were grouped into project themes with an associated program logic. The final step 
was the description of five (5) potential projects that fit within the themes and of a scale 
and budget suitable for Regional Drought Resilience Plans as per the project guidelines.  
The final activity was the preparation of a summary booklet for distribution to the 
community.  
  
  
Phase 1 — Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment   
Introduction  
This section summarises the desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment (based 
on the literature). The full review is provided in Attachment A.  
Background  
Drought can, and has, reaped devastation in Australia both historically and recently. Future 
droughts are inevitable. Preparing for drought considers not only the productivity of land 
and resources but also, importantly, personal and family emotional wellbeing.   
Resilience is defined as the ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise to 
maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacks1.This definition contemplates the 
community we live in as a system.  
 
1 https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/

13  
  
Major contributing factors to deliver higher levels of resilience in rural communities 
include:   
● Robust social networks and support  
● Learning experiences  
● Positive environment and lifestyle factors ● Existing infrastructure and support 
services, ● A sense of purpose, and strong leadership2..  
Resilience comes in different forms across economic, environmental, and social resilience 
pillars. They are defined as:  
● Economic resilience - the ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of 
shocks and stressors without changing the economic status or outcomes   
● Environmental resilience - the ability of the natural environment to cope with a 
diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural processes and 
ecosystem services  
● Social resilience - the ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of 
shocks and stressors while maintaining existing social and community functions3.  
Adaptive capacity relates to a complex set of factors influencing the capacity of regions to 
be resilient. These factors include the skills and education of regional workforces, access 
to infrastructure and services, availability of natural resources, financial resources 
available to businesses and individuals, and industry diversity.  
Three concepts relating to the way drought impact is expressed are the ability of 
individuals and groups to continue without adapting or changing their behaviour in 
response to environmental and socioeconomic changes – known as absorptive capacity4 
and the ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and 
socioeconomic changes – adaptive capacity5. This spectrum is depicted in Figure 1:  
  
 
2 https://positivepsychology.com/3-resilience-scales/   
3 Maru et al. (2022) Regional Drought Resilience Plans Assessment Guidelines. CSIRO, Australia.    
4 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x   
5 Maru et al. (2022) Regional Drought Resilience Plans Assessment Guidelines. CSIRO, Australia

14  
  
 
Source: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x Accessed June 2022.  
In addition to absorptive and adaptive capacity, there is transformative capacity. Each 
capacity leads to different outcomes: persistence, incremental adjustment, or 
transformational responses. These classifications were used to assess resilience impact in 
Phase 3 of this project.  
Resilience assessment based on desk-top analysis  
Gwydir and Inverell communities’ level of resilience during drought was considered in 
terms of economic, social and environmental effects. Economic output for Gwydir and 
Inverell, during drought, is impacted predominantly through the agricultural sector, by 
changes in cash flow, levels of debt, financial losses due to selling stock in poor condition 
and inability to invest to re-stock once the drought eased. A downturn in agriculture 
reduces money able to be spent, rippling through the community and businesses. There is 
also the impact of deferring projects that then limit the ability to grow or recover rapidly 
post-drought, for example when farm improvements have been delayed. This is not 
immediately evident in Gross Regional Product (GRP) of the region (Table A1 and Figure 
A16 in Attachment A), however it may be that GRP was trending upward from 2015 but 
drought then dampened that growth to give flat GRP.    
Whilst environmental effects are observed every day during prolonged drought, there is a 
lack of data to quantify accumulated loss of natural resources in the Gwydir and Inverell 
Shires. Without this benchmark in place, it is difficult to communicate objective 
information to others about the impacts of drought on the foundational resources of the 
Shires.   
Typical information used to assess how vulnerable a community is to drought includes 
understanding the region’s geography, its current and historic socioeconomic status, 
economy and climate. Information about these aspects is in the section ‘About Our Region’ 
(Page 16 of Attachment A). Having established this understanding, vulnerability factors of 
exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity are considered to arrive at an indicative level of 
resilience for a community.   
Regional NSW has identified three priority regions consisting of two Local Government 
Areas (LGAs) each using agricultural employment as a proxy for the vulnerability of local 
economies to drought, alongside other relevant criteria such as water security and 
alignment of related initiatives under the Future Ready Regions Strategy. There are 128 LGAs 
in NSW and this criteria places Inverell and Gwydir in the most vulnerable 5%.  
  
Figure  1 .  The resilience 3D framewor k

15  
  
Data and interpretation useful for assessing the resilience status for the Gwydir and 
Inverell Shires is contained in Attachment A. In summary, the two Shires have some base 
level of resilience, as indicated through ability to continue to pay property rates on time. 
Relative to other Australian regions, Gwydir and Inverell are however assessed as having 
low resilience typical of rural and regional areas. Social indicators during the drought years 
do point to a rise in inequality in Gwydir Shire.   
The status of the Shires has also been considered in terms of disaster resilience. The 
Gwydir – Inverell region is classified, in the Australian Disaster Resilience Index6, as a 
Group 3 region. Strengths of Group 3 regions are social character, community capital, and 
social and community engagement. Barriers to disaster resilience in Group 3 regions are:  
● Economic capital  
● Planning and the built environment  
● Emergency services  
● Information access  
● Governance and leadership.  
Although drought is not considered to be a natural disaster7, because it is not considered 
to be a short and sharp shock, factors for disaster resilience and drought resilience 
overlap. Based on the results generated using the disaster resilience tool, the level of 
disaster resilience for Inverell East community is classified as low (score of 0.3664). 
Inverell West, which overlays Gwydir Shire, has a slightly higher resilience score of 0.3817, 
but is still classified as having low disaster resilience. In contrast, Armidale North region 
(slightly to the east of Inverell and Gwydir shires and more heavily populated) has a higher 
resilience score of 0.4508.   
Gwydir and Inverell Shires deliver significant economic output from agriculture, particularly 
dryland farming. The Northern Inland economy has higher employment generated by 
agriculture compared to the average employment in that sector in NSW. Northern Inland is 
weaker in areas like finance, accounting, and IT - sectors that support businesses.  
What is known about increasing resilience to drought?  
As described in the section ‘How does resilience connect with drought and our community?’ 
(Page 3 Attachment A), resilience emerges as the result of three capacities: absorptive, 
adaptive and transformative, each of them leading to different outcomes: persistence, 
incremental adjustment, or transformational responses.   
Typically, when there is a shock that results in a crisis, the initial response is resistance, to 
cope with the stress. Once absorptive (coping) capacity is exceeded, then individuals must 
rely on their adaptive resilience, which refers to incremental changes that people make to 
keep functioning without major changes. These incremental adjustments can take many 
forms (for example in adopting new farming techniques, change in farming practices, and 
engaging in new social networks).  
Eventually, if the change required is so large that it overwhelms the adaptive capacity of 
the household, community or (eco)system, transformation will have to occur. In this case, 
changes are not incremental but are transformative, resulting in alterations in the 
individual or community’s primary structure and function. These transformational changes 
 
6 https://www.adri.bnhcrc.com.au/#!/resilienceFactors   
7 https://recovery.gov.au/sites/default/files/national-strategy-disaster-resilience.pdf

16  
  
often involve shifts in the nature of the system, the introduction of new state variables and 
possibly the loss of others, such as when a household adopts a new direction in earning a 
living or when a region moves from an agrarian to a resource extraction economy. It can be 
a deliberate process, initiated by the people involved, or it can be forced on them by 
changing environmental or socioeconomic conditions.  
  
The main challenges associated with transformation are not all technical in nature. These 
shifts may include a combination of technological innovations, institutional reforms, 
behavioural shifts and cultural changes; they often involve the questioning of values, the 
challenging of assumptions, and the capacity to closely examine fixed beliefs, identities 
and stereotypes. In other words, they challenge the status quo8.  
System considerations  
A community is like a living creature having interdependent elements that represent 
specialised functions, activities, or interests, each operating within specific boundaries to 
meet community needs – it is a system in which people can recognise and resolve 
problems and enhance its well-being. Gwydir-Inverell’s resilience baseline reflects access 
to water, education, health services, governance and public services; employment 
opportunities and transport910. When any one of these is altered, it can create ripple effects 
throughout the broader community and system. A significant factor for the region is the 
disparate nature of its community – an estimated 22,193 people live in an area of 18,059 
square kilometres10 (there is just one town centre – Inverell - with a population of greater 
than 10,000). The ‘system’ for Gwydir-Inverell reflects the interaction of these components 
in the unique setting of the region and is depicted in Figure 2.   
 
8 https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0309132511425767   
9 https://www.qra.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020- 
03/0516_Central%20West%20Regional%20Resilience%20Strategy_January2020_LR.pdf   
10 estimate based on 2016 ABS census data

17

18  
  
 
Figure 2. Elements of community that are integral in the community resilience system 
https://conceptdraw.com/a374c4/preview and http://srdc.msstate.edu Accessed June 2022.  
Because of the relatively small population, the Gwydir-Inverell region is inherently exposed 
to challenges and changes of a scale that are simply not experienced in urban and 
metropolitan communities. This heightened sensitivity means that the economy and 
potentially service provision is affected in circumstances unlikely to have impact in more 
densely populated regions11. Implications for the Gwydir-Inverell region are an increasing 
need to diversify the economy to reduce shock from drought. This includes the need for 
more off-farm income earning opportunities12 - preferably in employment not highly 
exposed to weather events and agricultural supply chains.   
Trends typically associated with regional and rural Australia are provided in Attachment A. 
A few of the most impactful trends for Gwydir and Inverell are:  
● Small town decline/ within region population aggregation to major centres  
 
11 https://www.qra.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020- 
03/0516_Central%20West%20Regional%20Resilience%20Strategy_January2020_LR.pdf   
12 https://www.pottinger.com/agriculture.html  
13 https://www.pottinger.com/agriculture.html   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Federal Government   
NSW Government   
Productive landscapes  –   
agriculture (cropping, fine wool,  
beef cattle)  
Stewardship (Anaiwan, Ashford  
& Toomelah LALCs)  
Strong economic  centres  –   
Inverell, Ashford, Gilgai,  
Yetman, Tingha, Bonshaw,  
Delungra  
Innovative new industries  –   
gems, renewable energy,  
tourism e.g. Copeton Dam  
Global access and  
competitiveness  –   beef  
processing, emerging  
manufacturin g  
Inverell  Shire   
population  
esti mated to  
grow to 17,000  
by 2036  
Ageing  
demographic  
Education and training  is   the 5 th  largest  
employing sector in Inverell  Shire  
Health care  
and social  
assistance is  
the primary  
employment  
sector

19  
  
● Increasing volatility in the agricultural sector on a baseline that is already the most 
volatile of any major exporting nation13  
● Increased competition for limited water  
  
● Increasing cost of energy, particularly fuel  
● Growing inequality (Table A1 Appendix A)  
● Ageing population – population is stable, but ageing is growing13 (median age in 
2021 was 50 years for Gwydir, up from 48 in 2016; median age in 2021 was 43 years 
for Inverell, up from 41 in 2016 – all NSW in 2021 median age was 43 years)14   
● Digital divide is increasing although the number of internet connections is growing 
(50% in 2015, 60.5% in 2020) – country people generally use the Internet less even 
when they do have reliable Internet access.  
A key factor for the regions are the forces or influencing factors that drive work to be 
centralising and are driven by:  
● Improvements in transport  
● Improvements in telecommunications  
● Technology innovation (for example computerised banking) ● Rationalisation of 
services as efficiencies are found.  
While improvements in technology, transport and telecommunications are necessary to 
survive in the global competitive environment, smaller centres are less able to capture the 
benefits of these advances. They struggle to remain viable as services and employment 
opportunities are rationalised into regional centres, resulting in a pull of people out of rural 
areas and challenging the ability of a rural community to retain and attract residents and 
future investment. As services are withdrawn, the quality of life, measured in terms of 
access to essential and higher value goods and services, declines15.  
Some potential implications from these trends for the Gwydir-Inverell Councils are, given 
there are strong forces at work causing population to aggregate to regional centres, to view 
opportunities of moving with this trend and to strengthen existing business within Inverell 
as well as design outreach services from key regional centres.  
Climate variability   
As climate change impacts take greater hold, the Inverell region is expected to 
experience16:  
● Increased occurrence of heatwaves, hot days and fire risk  
● Potential for increases in seasonal extremes, particularly rainfall events and 
droughts  
 
13 https://dbr.abs.gov.au/region.html?lyr=lga&rgn=14220  
14 https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2016/SSC11981   
15 http://www.regional.org.au/au/countrytowns/global/collits.htm   
16 https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Plans-and-policies/new-england-north-west-
finalregional-plan-2017-09.pdf

20  
  
● Increased autumn rainfall and decreased winter rainfall in both the near and far 
future, with rainfall patterns to vary across the region  
● Increased short and intense rainfall events, resulting in increased localised flooding 
from smaller urban streams and urban drainage systems  
● An increase in maximum temperatures in the near future (2020-2039) by 0.4ºC and 
in the far future (2060-2079) by 2.2ºC to 2.5ºC  
● An increase in minimum temperatures in the near future by 0.7ºC and in the far 
future by 2.3ºC.  
  
  
  
Strategies to address drought resilience  
There is considerable alignment of strategies to strengthen drought resilience in regional 
NSW, typified in the NSW government’s report Future Ready Regions Strategy, which 
includes the following strategies:  
● Clear and consistent policy responses must be developed, agreed to and 
communicated to industry early to provide certainty at each stage of drought   
● Where government assistance is provided, there must be accessible and 
streamlined processes and guidelines   
● Access to expertise, data and tools support early decisions and improved resilience   
● Investment in R&D across the agricultural sector is critical to managing, preparing 
for and recovering from drought   
● Farm business resilience is enhanced through improved business literacy, social 
structures and wellbeing support   
● When food and water resources are under pressure, it is even more critical to make 
timely decisions to prevent animal welfare issues   
● Regular evaluation of policies and programs should be undertaken   
● Investment in on-farm infrastructure supports resilience and preparedness.  
What role can local government have in strengthening resilience?  
Governments can best facilitate regional transition and development by ensuring that their 
policies and regulations do not impede the forces of progress and change. This particularly 
applies to planning, promoting mobility, such as in the agricultural workforce, and enabling 
business owners to develop or adopt new products and services.  
Of the three tiers of government, local government has the greatest on-ground 
understanding of what communities need and has a key influential role in supporting and 
sustaining them during prolonged drought. Local government also has an important role as 
a significant employer and partnering with state governments and the Australian 
Government to secure town water, provide local leadership, build social capital, maintain 
employment to support the local economy and advocate for the needs of the community. 
Local government works in context with global market forces, which are particularly 
apparent in regional and rural areas of Australia.  
In reality, regional and rural councils in NSW have just sufficient resources to carry out 
business-as-usual activities providing services for the community and must rely on

21  
  
external income for significant strategic projects17. This means that the councils may not 
have the freedom to direct funds as they see necessary and councils with smaller 
populations may also be excluded from some state support programs.  
Globally there is an increasing demand from the public and private sectors to reduce risk 
associated with disasters and climate change. Funding for disaster risk reduction, climate 
adaptation, and building resilience cannot be met by governments alone. Increasingly there 
will be expectations for private sector investment into infrastructure and other major  
projects that deliver both a financial return to investors and create community and 
economic resilience18.  
  
  
Phase 2 — Consultation, co-design and assessment of community 
ideas  
The Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan (Attachment B) describes the structure, 
approach and processes for engaging with community and gathering input and ideas. The 
list of fifty-two (52) ideas gathered are detailed and ranked in Attachment B using the 
impact assessment criteria. The most highly ranked ten (10) community ideas are provided 
in Table  
1.  
Table 1. Top 10 ideas following qualitative assessment  
1  
Develop and deliver business planning and financial strategy linked to education and 
adopting improved farm practices (farm decision points that align to financial 
plan/budget) (may involve rural financial counselors).  
2  
Collaborate/partner with Bindaree Beef to develop and conduct engagement and training 
to their farmer supplier network (4,000 farms) to deliver ‘a drought plan on every dinner 
table’.  
3  
Coordinate the establishment of a network of ‘local leaders’ to enable them to initiate 
drought projects and activities, minimise red tape and bureaucracy, as a cohort that 
shares and problem solves. This would include a coordination role (part time).  
4  
Stockpile fodder in good times and build more sheds.  
5  
Establish a coordination function in each Council for access to all relevant grants, 
information, advice for all phases of drought.  
 
17 https://www.yourcouncil.nsw.gov.au/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php  
18 O’Connell et al. (2021) Towards visions, options and pathways for an adaptive future in Bega Valley: Building 
national capability for Enabling Resilience Investment. Report prepared by CSIRO, Value Advisory Partners and 
University of Adelaide. CSIRO, Australia

22  
  
6  
Establish regular events and hubs to develop community connections combined with 
access to professional services and education (build this momentum and culture prior to 
the next drought).  
7  
Establish/appoint more Rural Financial Counselors to be available in good times so 
farmers can build a relationship with them and prepare for drought.   
8  
Engage local radio to strengthen this as a key information channel.  
9  
Develop a water mapping resource to improve predictability and success of drilling (bores) 
for water.  
10  
Include farm practices in science curriculum for senior (secondary) students.  
   
  
  
Learnings from community engagement  
The community consultations focused on the most recent 2017–20 drought (noting that 
participants’ perception of the duration of this drought differs across the region). The key 
lines of inquiry were:  
• 
Drought or lived experience during the last drought  
• 
Communication and support mechanisms during the drought  
• 
Ideas for increasing drought resilience in the future.  
The following groups and organisations participated in the consultations:  
• 
Vision 2020  
• 
Landcare – Northern Slopes, GLENRAC Inc and Gwymac Inc  
• 
Country Women’s Association (CWA)  
• 
Primary Schools & Secondary schools  
• 
NSW Farmers Association  
• 
Farmers and agribusinesses  
• 
Accountants  
• 
Community leaders & members  
• 
Gwydir and Inverell Shires  
• 
First Nations representatives and Tingha Aboriginal Land Council  
• 
Health and wellbeing service providers – state and federal – NSW Health,  
Healthwise, Rural Adversity Mental Health Program, National Recovery and 
Disaster Agency

23  
  
• 
Business Chambers and small and medium businesses (manufacturing, rural 
supplies, retailers)  
• 
Rural Aid  
• 
St Vincent de Paul  
• 
NSW Irrigators Council.  
Of the twelve (12) community events hosted over the two Shires, three (3) events were well 
attended, and the planned workshop process could be implemented. Other locations were 
poorly attended and the team pursued a less formal approach of one on one discussions 
with targeted individuals (phone and face to face) and ad hoc conversations in each town 
and village. In total, approximately fifty-five (55) individuals were consulted. A specific 
workshop was also conducted with Gwydir Shire staff and senior Inverell Shire managers 
were interviewed.  
Feedback from community suggested several reasons for the low attendance at 
consultation sessions;  
• 
Letterbox drop material was not received in all villages  
• 
Farmers were busy with planting after a recent wet period  
• 
People with multiple jobs were time poor  
• 
Reluctance to attend what might be perceived as being ‘formal consultation’ and 
the expectations this might raise  
• 
A general perception by the community that there have been too many 
consultation events (low or poor attendance is common and not specific to this 
consultation activity).  
The communities’ felt experience of drought  
The last drought (2017–2020) was widely described as ‘very hard’. The slow nature of the 
developing drought masked the realisation of the impending crisis. This was a crisis by 
stealth and many farmers, in hindsight, ended up being slow to respond. Every section of 
the community was affected, directly or indirectly, whether it was from an economic, social 
or environmental perspective. Throughout the consultation process, community, non-farm 
business owners, farming enterprises and service providers described the suffering and 
stress of this major climatic event.  
Participants described the great Australian trait of stoicism which made it hard to:  
• 
Connect people, especially male farmers  
• 
Bring people and communities together to share experiences and information  
• 
Encourage people to take respite  
• 
Learn about services, grants and support available.  
Community groups, local governments and individuals did however, rally together and 
provided much needed support in the form of informal gatherings, professional advice, 
support and information for navigating government and not for profit support (income 
support, low interest loans, fodder and freight subsidies, charitable provisions of fodder 
donations and care packages).   
Farmers described various levels of farm management plans and practices to manage the 
drought cycle. Some farmers, recognising what they have just been through, are now

24  
  
seeking education and training to improve their business and farming practices. The 
duration, severity and uncertainty created by the drought, resulted in a high stress 
environment for individuals and families. Some community members described 
experiencing high levels of stress, as differentiated from suffering from a longer-term 
mental illness. The need to differentiate between stress and suffering from a mental illness 
was recognised as an important distinction, and a barrier to seeking help. There were very 
sad and confronting stories of families and people who have lost their sense of hope for 
the future.  
Businesses, whether directly or indirectly related to agriculture suffered. Income reductions 
up to 75% were reported. Jobs were lost, working hours reduced and people and families 
left the Shires. The economic viability of non-farm businesses was sorely tested. Some 
adapted (changed product/service offerings), some closed and some simply ‘hung on’ with 
significant impacts on financial viability. There was a perception of inequity in government 
support for rural and regional non-farm businesses compared to the offering for farmers.   
The community fabric was stretched but amongst the stress, pain and uncertainty there 
were many stories of uplifting community actions such as:  
• 
Waiving of school fees  
• 
Making sure children had a ‘feed in their belly’  
• 
Community events (i.e. barbecue, concerts and some fun)  
• 
Reduction or straight out waiving of service fees  
• 
Council initiating projects which provided employment and off farm income  
• 
Council staff providing services and advice to people who struggled with 
‘government forms’  
• 
Community leaders who understood the importance of local networks and 
pursued every avenue to get the most vulnerable involved.  
An outside observer, not experiencing the daily effects of the drought, might understand 
that the drought was devastating, but might take a simplistic view that the impacts could 
be endured with some basic management processes. However, the regional community 
was dealing with a complex and confusing range of factors, many of which they had limited 
control over.   
These factors included:  
• 
Uncertainty about when the drought would break  
• 
Historical drought models that did not match the drought being endured. This 
meant all business, farm, family, and community decisions were highly stressful 
and deeply uncertain  
• 
Families were running out of income and some couldn’t pay for basics such as 
school fees or student excursion costs  
• 
The ability of community and professional support services to connect with 
those most vulnerable was limited by an unwillingness of these individuals to 
seek help  
• 
School aged children were doing the work of adults plus attending school. This 
was physically and emotionally complex and demanding

25  
  
• 
Navigating grant applications was time consuming, complex and at times 
personally embarrassing  
• 
Families and workers facing complete uncertainty were leaving the region. This 
was impacting schools, communities, and the economy  
• 
Farmers, deeply connected to their animals, were facing decisions around large 
feeding costs, sale, or euthanasia of stock. These actions and decisions were 
stressful and emotionally charged.  
Many residents have not yet recovered from the last drought and simple conversations at 
the consultations triggered emotional responses. Many recognised the reality of climate 
variability, which demands a change in mindset and business practice.   
A common theme was the need to see the region itself as an interconnected system and 
that changes in one part, influence other elements of the region. Likewise, businesses in 
towns are inextricably linked to the rhythms of the surrounding farms. Community and 
government networks are the lifeblood within and across the region and are important 
components if drought resilience projects are to be successful and sustainable.  
Another key insight from the consultation meetings was the heavy reliance on financial and 
physical support (government and not for profit) to endure the drought and an expectation 
that these programs will be ongoing, perhaps inadvertently negating the need for personal 
responsibility or preparedness for the future.  It was also noted that:  
• Attempts to improve water security during drought were either unsuccessful or 
very costly  
• Financial planning was predominantly reactive  
• Support services were welcome, but access was limited due to availability and 
knowledge of how to access, and impeded where service providers had not 
already built trust in their communities  
• Farming by its nature is solitary and during times of high stress (drought), males 
particularly did not recognise or were unwilling to recognise this stress and take 
proactive action. A mindset that someone else is doing it harder than me was 
common. This made it more difficult for support services to connect with farmers  
• The high workload of providing feed and water during drought kept farmers time 
poor, further hampering their access to social support  
• Training and education are regarded as a critical success pathway to improve 
drought resilience  
• Any facility (pub, cafe, greenspace) that acted as a community hub was critical in 
connecting people and sharing knowledge and providing well-being support  
• Visionary leadership came from people within communities and was critical in 
developing novel solutions that reflected local needs and priorities  
• Local councils and many charity and service agencies provided essential support 
but were hampered by limited resources and relevant skills. Overcoming mindsets 
and willingness for people to seek and accept help was also difficult  
• Accessible and timely education and training is important

26  
  
• Regular and active use of ‘community hubs’ prior to the next drought will help 
develop strong relationships that will reduce the risk of high stress events, provide 
timely support and improved sharing of key decision information  
• The coordination of various resilience systems and activities could be improved.  
Communication during drought  
The following summarises the ways that communities, organisations, farmers and 
businesses communicated and connected during the last drought:  
• Informal channels such as trusted friends, family and neighbours were an 
important source of information on topics such as grant availability, future events, 
access to support and general information. Informal channels included phone 
calls, community events and meeting in the street, local club or pub  
• Newspapers (only available monthly) were less preferred due to the time lag in 
publication schedules  
• Social media (particularly Facebook) was generally effective but had gaps due to 
connectivity and some demographic groups not having digital literacy  
• The Councils were proactive about distributing information but often under 
resourced  
• There was no single effective communication method, so a mix of channels is 
necessary  
• Communities need support to strengthen internal connections among neighbours 
and community members and external connections with service providers.  
Community validation  
It was agreed with the Project Control Group that a second round of consultation to elicit 
feedback on the recommended projects would be valuable. It was agreed that it was not 
necessary to replicate the initial program and that some targeted interviews would be 
sufficient to gather any final feedback. Invitations to a range of people from the region who 
represented a range of backgrounds were extended. They covered:  
o Shire - Councillor  
o Primary Industry – Farming and related industries   
o Landcare o Financial services.  
The recommended projects and the process to arrive at those projects was described and 
the participants were asked to provide any feedback. The feedback was positive and can 
be summarised as follows:  
o The initial consultation was very effective and covered a suitable diversity of 
community members  
o All aspects of drought resilience were effectively covered during the consultation o 
There is support for the recommended projects  
o The CEO and the Livestock Manager from Bindaree Beef have provided support for 
exploring a partnership arrangement for the design and delivery of Project 1  (see 
next section) and have agreed to further meetings to progress the thinking  
o Changing mindsets is a major hurdle to overcome, particularly with regard to 
adopting farm business plans and drought action plans  
o The recommended projects and the drought themes generated could equally be 
applied to other climate variability impacts such as flood and bushfire.

27  
  
The second round of consultation was valuable to validate the proposed projects.  
Conclusion  
The conversations across the villages and towns of the region, elicited consistent feedback 
in terms of lived experience of drought and consistent ideas for future drought resilience. 
These ideas and concepts provided a rich foundation for the development of the  
recommended projects for Gwydir and Inverell Shires.

28  
  
Phase 3 — Identifying drought resilience themes and projects  
This section describes the final stage of the drought resilience assessment to identify the 
recommended projects to the Shires.   
The top 10 ranked ideas (Table 1) from the community consultation and impact 
assessment process were further assessed and grouped into themes.  
Grouping the top community ideas into themes  
The methodology for grouping the 10 ideas into themes was adapted from We’re in this 
together: capacities and relationships to enable community resilience, Urban Research & 
Practice19.   
Using this approach, five community characteristics were identified that support the 
development of a drought resilient community and highlight the need to take a systems 
and program approach to addressing drought resilience planning. They are:  
• 
Networked community  
• 
Collaboration between community system actors  
• 
Communication  
• 
Underpinning policy and regulation  
• 
Prepared businesses and community.  
The themes (Table 2) that address these community characteristics, were then assessed 
against three further criteria:  
• 
Impact across the economic, environmental and social pillars  
• 
Application to the Drought Preparation, In Drought Management or Recovering from 
Drought phases  
• 
Whether the outcomes may be Absorptive, Adaptive or Transformational.  
 
19 https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Geertje- 
Slingerland/publication/358896706_We%27re_in_this_together_Capacities_and_relationships_to_enable_community_r
e silience/links/621cb868579f1c041720cf97/Were-in-this-together-Capacities-and-relationships-to-enable-
communityresilience.pdf?origin=publication_detail

29  
  
  
  
  
Table 2. Themes emerging from consultation with the Gwydir-Inverell communities  
No.  
Theme  
  
Description  
Pillars  
Economic,  
Social,  
Environmental  
Drought 
phase:  
Preparing (P)   
During (D)   
Recovery (R)  
Resilience effect 
1  
Prepared 
businesses 
(Farming as 
well as 
nonfarming)  
Work with farm and non-farm 
businesses to increase skills and 
capability to develop climate 
resilient enterprises and 
processes. Making better use of 
data, economic and climate 
forecasts and financial planning 
skills, to ensure suitable 
infrastructure, enterprise balance 
and adaptive/transformative 
capacity  
Social,  
Economic &  
Environmental  
P  
D  
R  
Adaptive and 
Transformative  
2  
Community 
leadership/ 
Networked 
community  
Build a network of ‘local leaders’ 
as a cohort that shares and 
solves problems. Enable them to 
initiate drought projects and 
activities through minimising red 
tape and bureaucracy  
Social,  
Economic &  
Environmental  
P  
D  
R  
Adaptive and 
Transformative

30  
  
3  
Community 
wellbeing 
support/ 
Collaborative 
community  
Community connections, support, 
and amenity help to stabilise 
community wellbeing, in good 
and bad seasons. A long-term  
support and capacity building  
initiative    
Economic &  
Social  
P  
D  
R  
Absorptive and 
Adaptive  
4  
Council  
Drought  
Support  
Coordination  
Develop and strengthen the 
concept of Council as a one stop 
shop for information, support and 
coordination on funding, grants 
and community programs  
Economic,  
Social &  
Environmental  
P  
D  
R  
Absorptive  
5  
Prepared 
infrastructure  
- Water   
Additional water standpipes for 
Gwydir and Inverell to enable 
continued dirt road maintenance 
during drought and access for 
stock and domestic use outside 
of town boundaries  
Economic &  
Social  
P  
D  
R  
Absorptive  
Program Logic for each theme  
For each of the themes in Table 2 a program logic was developed. The projects 
recommended to Gwydir and Inverell Shires are nested within this broader program logic to 
provide context and the broader range of activities and outcomes that are possible with a 
systems approach to investment. The program logics are:  
• 
Program Logic 1 - Prepared businesses and community (Themes 1 and 5)  
• 
Program Logic 2 - Networked community (Theme 2) •  
Program Logic 3 - 
Collaborative community (Theme 3)  
• 
Program Logic 4 – Communication (Theme 4).

31

32

33

34

35  
  
Projects recommended for Gwydir and Inverell Shires  
This section provides a high-level description of the recommended projects identified in 
the previous Program Logics section.  
Project 1 - Prepared Businesses and Community (Farm and non-farm) Outcome 
– 3-5 years  
• 
Farming businesses are prepared for drought, updating their drought plans 
regularly  
• 
Non-farming businesses are prepared for drought disruptions.  
Idea/ issue:   
The consultation illustrated how highly interdependent the success or otherwise of farms 
during drought are with the success of non-farming businesses that support the 
community.  
A major difficulty with dealing with drought is the uncertainty of when it starts and ends. 
Unlike floods and fires, a drought is the creeping culmination of a period of adverse 
weather and climatic conditions tied to insufficient preparation. Addressing climate 
resilience (rather than drought) by adopting systems thinking, in terms of supporting 
communities, avoids the problems of defining start and end dates, and the typical short-
term nature of support for an event that isn’t readily defined.   
Farmers  
Engaging with farm owners, to support climate resilience, needs to address social and 
financial aspects. Each farm is different, each farmer has different experiences, mindsets 
and education by which they make tactical and strategic decisions on managing their 
farms and livestock. The consistent feedback from the community consultation was that 
many, if not most, farmers do not have a drought action plan, and do not have a whole 
farm management plan that reflects the growing climate variability and extreme 
circumstances. For the purposes of this project we are defining a ‘whole farm plan’ as one 
that reflects financial, animal welfare, environmental and social aspects as well as climate 
variability (and hence drought). Implementing the whole farm plan relies on data and 
evidence gathering for decision making, benchmarking and setting strategy.  
Professional advice, education, peer support, individual commitment and motivation are 
required for development of climate resilient (drought) action plans. Farmers are often 
time poor and find it difficult to seek support. What is required is an effective extension 
channel to farmers that is familiar, and motivating, and can endure to provide scaled 
impact. The possibility of using Bindaree Beef, as an extension pathway, emerged during 
the consultation.  
Non-farming businesses  
We recognise that non-farm businesses would also benefit from a review of their business 
plans and their suitability to cope with climate variability, altered supply chains and 
customer needs. These businesses may need support to build resilient business plans, 
financial skills and consideration of diversification and scale. This activity with non-farm 
businesses should be scoped after the activities with farming businesses are established.  
Proposed Project Title:  
Develop and deliver climate resilient whole farm plans using a range of pathways to 
connect with farmers in the region and a capacity building program for non-farm 
businesses.

36  
  
Project Outputs:  
● By 30 November 2022 pathways for delivery of this farm business initiative have 
been confirmed  
● By 31 December 2022, a training partner or partners with the appropriate skills and 
capacity is on-boarded to work with identified channels and their farmer network to 
develop ‘drought plans’.  
● By March 2023, a pilot training program has been delivered with 2 delivery channels 
and 20 producers   
● By July 2023 the pilot training program has been evaluated and revised based on 
feedback  
● By 30 June 2024, 60 producers have completed the training program  
● By 30 June 2024, a capacity building program for non-farm businesses has been 
scoped, piloted and evaluated.  
Pathway to Adoption:  
● The potential to partner with Bindaree Beef for delivery was identified during the 
consultation  
● SQNNSW Innovation Hub  
● Training and education providers  
● Current farm business planning service providers.  
Assumptions:  
● Bindaree Beef agree to collaborate  
● SQNNSW Innovation Hub will support the project.  
Project 2 - Community Leadership Outcome 
– 3-5 years   
•  A high performing community leadership group is delivering positive community 
impact.  
Idea/ issue:  
The consultation identified people within Gwydir and Inverell Shire communities who are 
‘grassroots’ leaders. They seemed to possess the ideas, skills, resources, and networks to 
instigate projects and community events that can strengthen resilience to drought. Often 
these people don’t see themselves as leaders, they just have ideas and get them done. 
They can be typified as passionate about the region and their communities, have the 
vision to initiate ideas that deliver broader benefits not just to themselves but their 
community.   
Often these local leaders are disconnected from other leaders beyond their immediate 
communities. They are typically time poor, and often resistant to bureaucracy and 
process.   
Modelled on concepts such as startup and entrepreneurial programs, a network of these 
leaders could share and catalyse ideas, solve problems - essentially develop ideas 
between themselves to provide transformative change for their communities.

37  
  
For this to be efficient and effective and to have a chance of being successful, a part time 
network coordinator, with the right mindset, should be established by the Councils to 
manage logistics, planning and administrative support of the network.  
Proposed Project Title:  
Establish a Community Leaders Network.  
Project Outputs:  
● By 31 December 2022, a part time coordinator position is established by the Gwydir 
and Inverell Shires, and the role is filled by an appropriately skilled person  
● By 31 March 2023, an initial network meeting/event has been hosted with at least 6 
leaders from across the region participating, followed up by quarterly discussions 
or meetings  
● By 30 June 2023, 2 regional impact projects have been scoped with outputs 
defined and funding pathways identified.  
Pathway to Adoption:  
Principally through motivated and influential individuals. The network itself is the pathway.  
Assumptions:  
● A suitably experienced and knowledgeable coordinator can be recruited who 
understands the profiles and mindsets of the community leaders  
● Sufficient knowledge of potential leaders to be approached exist within council ● 
That these leaders are willing to give the network a go.  
Procurement considerations / potential partners:  
● ARLP as mentors  
● SQNNSW Innovation Hub.  
Project 3 – Community and regional wellbeing support 
Outcome – 3-5 years  
● A measurable increase in the number of community members that understand the 
impact of drought on mental health and well-being and are more open to 
discussions on the topic with peers and friends and have established trusting 
relationships with professional service providers.  
Idea/ issue:  
During the consultation there was consistent feedback of the impact that drought had on 
individual and community wellbeing. It was recognised that many individuals suffered 
from stress during the drought but were reluctant to seek help and risk being labelled as 
mentally ill. The importance of differentiating between managing stress and mental illness 
was highlighted regularly during the consultation. The complexity and stigma of mental 
illness as opposed to managing a significant stress event requires attention in any 
programs that are implemented.  
Identifying those at risk and their reluctance to accept help and a lack of awareness of 
how to access services were identified by communities as challenges during the last 
drought.   
A known factor in improving resilience and wellbeing is healthy relationships and 
community connections. There is a program of work that could assist people to build their

38  
  
capabilities and grow their connections both to other community members as well as to 
professional service providers before a drought or other challenge emerges.   
Community events during the last drought were identified as very important to the 
communities. They were seen as accessible, informal events that enabled all members of 
the community to participate. There was a consistent observation that these events 
should occur in the ‘good times’ and they should include participation by professional 
service organisations and personnel in a low-key approach to build positive relationships, 
awareness and trust. Establishing regular events and hubs to develop community and 
professional service connections was considered a high priority by the community.  
  
Proposed Project Title:  
Enabling community connectivity through hosting regular events that include informal 
interaction with professional services.  
Project Outputs:  
● By 31 March 2023, a pilot community events program has been designed in 
collaboration with the community and service providers covering health, mental 
health and financial counselling  
● By 30 June 2023, a promotional campaign has been delivered and impact 
assessment metrics have been designed to benchmark the pilot  
● By 31 December 2023, the community events pilot has been implemented and 
evaluated against the impact metrics  
● By 30 June 2024, a fully developed program, incorporating all the learnings from 
the pilot is resourced and becomes a recurrent program during all phases of 
drought.  
Pathway to Adoption:  
● Primary Health Network ● Rural financial counsellors  
● Mental health professionals.  
Assumptions:  
● The communities identify who will be responsible for organising events - initial 
coordination and logistics by Gwydir and Inverell Council staff  
● There are sufficient professionals to attend community events consistently  
● NSWDPI and DAWE engage with this project and support more Rural Financial 
Counsellors in Gwydir and Inverell Shires.  
Procurement considerations / potential partners:  
● Rural & Remote Mental Health https://rrmh.com.au/blog/   
● Foundation for Regional and Rural Renewal 
https://frrr.org.au/blog/2021/09/21/rural-mental-health-and-wellbeing-gets-
a200000-boost/   
● Federal Government’s National Recovery and Resilience Agency – Community 
Outreach Events https://recovery.gov.au/drought-community-outreach-program

39  
  
● SQNNSW Innovation Hub (Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub) 
https://www.unisq.edu.au/research/sqnnsw-hub   
• 
Primary Health Network Hunter, New England and Central Coast PHN  ● 
Community groups that have capacity to organise events.  
  
  
Project 4 – Council Drought Support Co-ordination Outcome 
– 3-5 years  
• 
Gwydir and Inverell residents and business owners are more confident on 
how to access and complete drought-related grants applications and access 
advice.  
Idea/ issue:  
Consistent frustration and a strong sense of vulnerability was regularly expressed during 
the consultation by community members attempting to navigate government processes, 
particularly grant applications and in-drought support services. There was also gratitude 
expressed for the efforts of Council staff during the last drought who assisted people to 
apply for government grants and assistance.   
The idea of establishing a coordination function or a one stop shop/service function, 
within each Council, to support and guide those seeking government support was a 
consistent theme. The coordination function could deliver greater benefit if it covered 
advice and support for community members during all phases of drought – preparing, 
during and recovering.   
Establishing on-going positions to support communities would enable trusted 
relationships to be developed which would alleviate some of the frustration, time wasted 
and more efficiently match applicants with the most suitable support. The coordinators 
would add particular value if there is a focus on proactive actions to prepare the 
community for drought, rather than in crisis support.  
Proposed Project Title:  
Drought preparedness coordinators for Gwydir and Inverell Shires.  
Project Outputs:  
• 
By 31 December 2022, Gwydir and Inverell Shires have agreed on a position 
description and the level of resource required to support the communities  
• 
By 31 March 2023, a Council-based grant and support coordinator is engaged for 
the two local government areas  
• 
By 31 December 2023, the coordinator will have established deep networks in the 
region and an extensive knowledge of government services and support. This will 
be linked in with the One-stop Shop for Drought Support in NSW run by National 
Recovery and Resilience Agency  
• 
By 31 December 2023, the coordinator will have had multiple engagements with 
individuals and community groups   
• 
By 30 June 2024, a review of the impact of the coordinator role will be completed 
and changes made if required  
• 
By 30 June 2024, over 500 people will have engaged with the coordinator

40  
  
• 
By 30 June 2024, the coordinators will have designed and validated a drought 
coordination action plan for the future.  
Pathway to Adoption:  
Councils to recruit and resource the position(s).  
Assumptions:  
● A fit for purpose promotional campaign will engage people and gain traction 
during good times, not just when people are in the grip of drought ● Ongoing 
training and support to coordinators.  
Procurement considerations / potential partners:  
● Internal recruitment process.  
Project 5 – Water Infrastructure Outcome 
– 3-5 years  
•  Council and community are more secure in their ability to access water to maintain 
roads and emergency water supplies during a drought.  
Idea/ issue:  
Regional and rural Shires must maintain extensive networks of gravel roads. As an 
example, Gwydir Shire has 1,400 kilometres of gravel road. During the last drought, road 
maintenance had to be suspended as water resources available through stand pipes were 
prioritised for domestic use. As a consequence, the gravel road maintenance program fell 
behind, affecting community access, safety and vehicle wear and tear.  
The installation of additional water standpipes (water access generally) was a consistent 
request during the community consultation and an issue raised by council.  
Proposed Project Title:  
Additional water standpipes for Gwydir and Inverell to enable continued gravel road 
maintenance during drought and community access to domestic water supplies.  
Project Outputs:  
• 
By 30 June 2023, a review of water standpipes is complete, identifying the 
feasibility and recommended number of additional standpipes will be installed   
• 
By 31 December 2023, funding secured to complete the capital works  
• 
By 31 December 2024 additional water standpipes have been installed across 
Gwydir and Inverell Shires.  
Pathway to Adoption:  
Gwydir and Inverell Councils.  
Assumptions:  
• 
Capital funding can be accessed.  
Procurement considerations / potential partners:  
• 
Suitable capital grants.

41  
  
Further technical studies  
A number of technical studies could be completed to support the program themes and 
recommended projects to deliver lasting impact.  
To sustain the momentum of the recommended projects the following studies could be 
completed:  
• 
Prepare a feasibility and more detailed project plan for each recommended project 
to facilitate funding applications and procurement processes  
• 
Conduct an environmental scan to map existing activities and projects against the 
recommended program themes and projects in this report to avoid overlap, 
encourage collaboration and coordination  
• 
Conduct an audit of the natural asset base that exists in the Shires to facilitate 
benchmarking drought impacts on the environment.  
The following potential studies emerged while preparing this report and would deliver 
systemic and sustained drought resilience impact:   
• 
Review rules and regulations for tax averaging schemes (e.g., Farm Management 
Deposits) as they apply to different business structures and regional businesses 
beyond direct primary production  
• 
Review farm water capture, capacity limits and distribution policies and the 
interaction between catchment plans and the imperative to make farms water 
secure  
• 
Review incentives for peri-urban and rural properties to optimise water security 
under future variable climate scenarios  
• 
Develop Federal and State based policies for continuously managing climate 
variability rather than specific Drought Policies  
• 
Review all Federal and State support programs with a view to incorporating an 
obligation to undertake training and capacity building in return for support 
measures  
• 
Develop data and resources to assist with sourcing ground water to increase 
security of farm stock and domestic water supplies. Ensure sustainable extraction 
of groundwater  
• 
Review the grant criteria and access channels for end users to simplify user 
interface requirements and criteria and implement a system that captures core end 
user/applicant criteria data as a single record or data set for applicants who make 
multiple applications.

42  
  
Monitoring progress and evaluating outcomes 
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan for the Inverell and Gwydir Shire regions acts as an 
important first step in building regional drought resilience. It establishes the local context 
of drought, identifies future impacts of drought and confirms the related risk management 
activities and requirements of drought. 
The Gwydir and Inverell – Monitoring, Evaluation and Review Plan (Attachment C), further 
defines appropriate risk assessment, management, recording, reporting, monitoring and 
review tasks needed to keep the plan current. Based on the Future Drought Fund 
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework indicators and the actions developed 
within this plan, the Monitoring, Evaluation and Review Plan establishes how to best 
monitor and evaluate the performance of the Regional Drought Resilience Plan pathways 
and actions, and also allows for the plan to be updated with community and 
implementation learnings as the plan matures. 
 
Attachments  
A: Phase 1 Desktop Review and Preliminary Resilience Assessment  
B: Phase 2 Consultation, codesign and ranking of community ideas.  
C: Gwydir and Inverell – Monitoring, Evaluation and Review Plan.

FINAL 
Page 1 of 51 
Attachment A – Phase 1 Desktop Review and Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment 
This attachment provides the Phase 1 Desktop Review and Preliminary Resilience 
Assessment. It establishes the context for Phase 2 (Stakeholder engagement and 
community consultation) and Phase 3 (Identifying the drought resilience themes, 
program logics and projects) of this project. 
This desktop review draws on multiple sources and references and is designed to draw 
on broader resilience experience and information, external to the Gwydir and Inverell 
Shires, to capture lessons and benefits from a cross section of sources.  
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan for Inverell and Gwydir Shire Regions designed for 
Inverell and Gwydir community reading contains extracts from this attachment.

FINAL 
Page 2 of 51 
Contents 
 
 
 
Introduction 
3 
Strategies to address drought resilience 
28 
Role of governments in strengthening resilience 
39 
Appendix 1 to Attachment A. Terms of Reference from Gwydir & 
Inverell Shire Councils to UNE 
43 
Bibliography 
46

FINAL 
Page 3 of 51 
Introduction 
What has Gwydir and Inverell Councils asked the University of New England to do? 
The Gwydir and Inverell Shires were selected by the NSW government as regions to 
complete a pilot project to identify projects that can strengthen drought resilience. This 
project includes consultation and codesign with the communities of Gwydir and Inverell. 
This pilot project, called the Regional Drought Resilience Planning program, was jointly 
funded by the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund and the NSW 
Government’s Regional Growth Fund. 
The Terms of Reference for this consultancy project are in Appendix 1. 
What is resilience? 
Resilience is defined as the ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise 
to maintain the existing functions, structure and feedbacksi.This definition 
contemplates the community we live in as a system. 
Major contributing factors to deliver higher levels of resilience in rural communities 
include:  
● Robust social networks and support 
● Learning experiences 
● Positive environment and lifestyle factors 
● Existing infrastructure and support services, 
● A sense of purpose, and strong leadershipii.  
Resilience comes in different forms across economic, environmental, and social 
resilience pillars. They are defined as: 
● Economic resilience - the ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact 
of shocks and stressors without changing the economic status or outcomes 
● Environmental resilience - the ability of the natural environment to cope with a 
diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural processes and 
ecosystem services 
● Social resilience - the ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of 
shocks and stressors while maintaining existing social and community 
functionsiii. 
These are not the only categories of resilience referred to in relevant literature: other 
categories include ‘transport resilience’ and ‘infrastructure resilience’. For the purposes 
of this project the focus is on the economic, environmental, and social pillars.

FINAL 
Page 4 of 51 
How does resilience connect with drought and our community? 
Drought can, and has, reaped devastation in Australia both historically and recently. 
Future droughts are inevitable. Preparing for drought considers not only the productivity 
of land and resources but also, importantly, personal and family emotional wellbeing.  
Two ways of expressing the impact of drought are at different ends of the emotional – 
tactical/ scientific spectrum. For example, drought is often presented back to 
communities as a disruptive power that is managed using ‘endurance, hope and 
ingenuity’. Drought can also be viewed objectively as a business risk that can be 
managed using rational planning skills and scientific knowledgeiv.  
Two concepts relating to the way drought impact is expressed are the ability of 
individuals and groups to continue without adapting or changing their behaviour in 
response to environmental and socioeconomic changes – known as absorptive 
capacityv and the ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to 
environmental and socioeconomic changes – adaptive capacityvi. This spectrum is 
depicted in Figure A1: 
 
Figure A1. The resilience 3D framework. 
Source: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x Accessed June 2022. 
In addition to absorptive and adaptive capacity, there is transformative capacity, each 
capacity leading to different outcomes: persistence, incremental adjustment, or 
transformational responses. These classifications are explored in more detail later in 
this Attachment and were used to assess resilience impact in Phase 3 of this project.  
How would you describe the level of resilience during the last drought? 
Gwydir and Inverell communities’ level of resilience during drought was considered in 
terms of economic, social and environmental effects. Essential services such as roads, 
power consistency, internet access and water are considered within the ‘environment’ 
pillar. 
Economic output for Gwydir and Inverell Shires during drought is impacted 
predominantly through the agricultural sector, through changes in cash flow, levels of 
debt, financial losses due to selling stock in poor condition and inability to invest to re-
stock once the drought eased. A downturn in agriculture reduces money able to be 
spent, rippling through the community and businesses. There is also the impact of 
deferring projects that then limit the ability to grow rapidly post-drought, for example 
when farm improvements have been delayed. This is not immediately evident in Gross

FINAL 
Page 5 of 51 
Regional Product (GRP) of the region (refer to Table 1 and Figure 16). One reason may 
be that GRP was trending upward from 2015 to early stages of the drought, and the 
drought impacted to reduce the growth. 
Negative social effects during the 2017–2019 drought were felt by individuals, families, 
and communities. These effects endured beyond the technical end of the drought. Even 
small businesses, not directly linked to the agricultural supply chain, were impacted as 
people reduced discretionary spending, and experienced distress and angst over the 
welfare of animals and water allocation decisions. Anecdotally people were less 
inclined to participate in community events leading to social withdrawal.  
Whilst environmental effects are observed every day during prolonged drought, there is 
a lack of data to quantify accumulated loss of natural resources in the Gwydir and 
Inverell Shires. Without this benchmark in place, it is difficult to communicate objective 
information to others about the impacts of drought on the foundational resources of the 
Shires.  
Under each of the effects described above, four components have been researched to 
attempt to find relevant data to map across the 2017–20 drought years. This is 
provided in Table A1. Generally, the available data are not sufficiently granular to 
provide specific information on the two Shires.  
Table A1. Useful indicators of regional disparities and decline applied to Gwydir and Inverell. 
 
Year 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020  
2021  
Economic 
Gross Regional 
Productvii (i.e., nominal 
net wealth generated) 
$ Billion 
Gwydir 
NA 
0.271  
0.308 
0.304 
0.301 
0.307 
Inverell 
NA 
0.984 
1.058 
1.080 
1.046 
1.069 
TOTAL 
NA 
1.255 
1.366 
1.384 
1.347 
1.366 
Farm profit 
Data not granular enough to look at Gwydir and Inverell Shire as a combined 
region separate to the rest of Australia. 
For a typical Australian cropping farm, profit decreases from around 
A$230,000 in a ‘typical year’ down to a loss of $125,000 in a dry year (a 1 in 10 
poor climate year). For a typical Australian beef farm, profit falls from $60,000 
in a ‘typical year’ down to a loss of $5,000 in a dry year.viii  
Farm debt levels  
Data not granular enough to look at Gwydir and Inverell Shires as a combined 
region separate to the rest of Australia. In general, smaller farms are less 
profitable on average, with lower rates of return. Small farms are much more 
likely to experience low cash income and negative profits during drought years. 
Wealth, income and 
skills levels 
Based on 2021 Census data, for Gwydir Shire the personal median weekly 
income was $541 paix and for Inverell Shire, $691, compared to NSW at $813x. 
The proportion of people with a university or other higher education was 4.3%, 
4.0%, & 15.3% for Gwydir, Inverell & NSW respectivelyxi (2021 Census).

FINAL 
Page 6 of 51 
 
Year 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020  
2021 
Social 
Socio-Economic 
Indexes for Areas 
(SEIFA)xii index  
(RDANI is Regional 
Development Australia 
Northern Inland, which 
includes Armidale) 
Gwydir 
941 
Data not available 
Data for 2021 
not available 
as at 27 July 
2022 
Inverell 
916 
TOTAL 
950 
(RDANI) 
Population (2021 from 
RemPlan). Note 
Census population 
figure for Gwydir is 
4,910 for 2021 
Gwydir 
5,326  
5,318  
5,344  
5,352  
5,299  
5,323  
Inverell 
17,815  
17,815 
17,801  
17,849 
17,781  
17,696  
TOTAL 
23,141 
23,133 
23,145 
23,201 
23,080 
23,019 
Unemployment levels 
(December of each 
year) (%) 
Gwydir 
6.2 
5.0 
4.9 
4.1 
4.6 
4.2 
Inverell 
9.9 
8.7 
8.1 
6.4 
6.7 
6.4 
Degree of dependence 
on social security 
[substituted in Gini 
coefficient (income 
inequality measure)] 
Gwydir 
0.466  
0.564 
0.583 
0.809 
NA 
NA 
Inverell 
0.466 
0.476 
0.480 
0.496 
NA 
NA 
Environmental 
Stock and domestic water security 
(independence from cartage) 
No longitudinal data found. Data for New England & North West on 
numerous water aspects for 2019–20 is availablexiii and could be 
used as a benchmark 
Soil health measures 
No data found 
Biodiversity measures against 
benchmarks 
No data found 
Access to new technologies 
No data found other than that for internet connections, which are 
increasing (regardless there’s still a digital divide)

FINAL 
Page 7 of 51 
Strengthening resilience 
The key to successfully strengthening resilience is the ability to change. Implicit in this 
ability is a knowledge of the assets and resources available and their application across 
the business, family, and individual spectrum. For example, change could manifest as 
more diligent planning to prepare for drought, more clearly defined decision points and 
active management in line with a drought plan. This could also be making greater use of 
weather and commodity price forecasts, adjusting crop area and inputs more actively, 
improved on-farm stock rotation systems including better use of sacrificial plots (i.e. 
containment areas) and in response to wider business environment considerations; 
holding increased grain and hay stocks for livestock, and knowing at what point to 
reduce herd/ flock size. Having farm businesses in different climatic regions can also 
be advantageous to mitigate climate change risk.  
Non-farm businesses also will be challenged by increased climate variability. The 
severity will relate to how closely their core drivers of value creation are linked to 
industries reliant on good growing seasons. Resilience may be built in these businesses 
through integration of climate change response into their strategies, focusing on 
understanding the risk, risk mitigation including diversificationxiv.  
Governments have provided relief to drought affected communities. This policy setting 
is complex: whilst welfare relieves immediate cash flow challenges for people 
negatively impacted by drought, policy implementation has tended to reward those who 
have done less planning and preparation. Drought handouts tend to slow industry 
structural adjustments and innovationxv. The Future Drought Fund aims to address this 
issue through programs promoting preparation for drought and improved productivity 
during good seasons when farmers and communities are receptive to ideas for change 
and are not in the throes of managing a drought. 
How vulnerable are the Gwydir and Inverell regions to impacts of drought? 
Recognising and understanding individual and shared vulnerability is a core aspect of 
strengthening resilience. A fundamental task for securing ongoing resilience and 
prosperity is to better understand these causes and effects on vulnerability in order to 
inform how to overcome themxvi.  
Regional NSW has identified three priority regions consisting of two Local Government 
Areas (LGAs) each using agricultural employment as a proxy for the vulnerability of 
local economies to drought, alongside other relevant criteria such as water security and 
alignment of related initiatives under the Future Ready Regions Strategy. There are 128 
LGAs in NSW and this criteria places Inverell and Gwydir in the most vulnerable 5% of 
LGAs in NSW. 
Typical information used to assess how vulnerable a community is to drought includes 
understanding the region’s geography, its current and historic socioeconomic status, 
economy and climate. Information about these aspects is in the section ‘About Our 
Region’ (refer to page 14 of this Attachment). Having established this understanding, 
vulnerability factors of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity are considered to 
arrive at an indicative level of resilience for a community. The connectivity between 
drought, impact, adaptive capacity and responses that either strengthen or undermine 
resilience is depicted in Figure A2.

FINAL 
Page 8 of 51 
 
Figure A2. Conceptual framework of drought, which starts through a lack of rainfall, with the extent of 
resulting socioeconomic impacts depending on the vulnerability factors of exposure, sensitivity and 
adaptive capacity. Subsequent socioeconomic impacts can be alleviated through responses that build 
resilience, or exacerbated by responses that undermine resilience within a feedback loop. 
Source: David Phelps and Dana Kelly, Overcoming drought vulnerability in rangeland communities: lessons from 
central-western Queensland CSIRO PUBLISHING The Rangeland Journal, 2019, 41, 251–270 
https://doi.org/10.1071/RJ18052 Accessed June 2022. 
The Gwydir – Inverell region is classified in the Australian Disaster Resilience Indexxvii 
as a Group 3 region. Strengths of Group 3 regions are social character, community 
Adaptive capacity 
drives resilience and 
includes: human 
capital; governance; 
livelihoods 
Exposure factors are 
extrinsic to a region 
or beyond the 
region’s influence 
and include: stress 
characteristics; 
proportion of 
population exposed 
to drought; economic 
activities; global 
market forces 
Drought starts through a lack of 
rainfall e.g. within 
the driest 10% of calendar years 
Sensitivity factors are 
within a region’s 
influence and include 
Technological 
characteristics; 
socioeconomic 
characteristics; 
characteristics of 
economic activities and 
industries 
Responses which 
undermine resilience 
and increase sensitivity 
e.g. 
dependence on 
reactionary aid; 
loss of decision making 
power; 
excessive population 
change, 
loss of social capital; 
failure to plan for 
climate variability; 
maladapted 
management systems 
Responses which 
Build resilience and 
reduce sensitivity e.g. 
improved infrastructure; 
economic diversification; 
enhanced political 
power/governance; 
enhanced social capital 
 
Socioeconomic impact, 
where a downturn in agriculture 
or other industries leads to a 
cash drought, layoffs, and 
outmigration

FINAL 
Page 9 of 51 
capital, and social and community engagement. Barriers to disaster resilience in Group 
3 regions are: 
● Economic capital 
● Planning and the built environment 
● Emergency services 
● Information access 
● Governance and leadership. 
Although drought is not considered to be a natural disasterxviii, because it is not 
considered to be a short and sharp shock, factors for disaster resilience and drought 
resilience overlap. Figure A3 describes the resilience characteristics for Group 3 
regions. 
 
Figure A3. Characteristics of the Inverell – Gwydir region and similar regions (Group 3) across Australia. 
Source: https://www.adri.bnhcrc.com.au The Australian Disaster Resilience Index (2020) Bushfire and 
Natural Hazards CRC website. Accessed 20 May 2022. 
Based on the results generated using the disaster resilience tool, the level of disaster 
resilience for Inverell East community is classified as low (score of 0.3664). Inverell 
West, which overlays Gwydir Shire, has a slightly higher resilience score of 0.3817, but is 
still classified as having low disaster resilience. In contrast, Armidale North region 
(slightly to the east of Inverell and Gwydir shires and more heavily populated) has a 
higher resilience score of 0.4508. Figure A4 illustrates the mapping of the disaster 
resilience factors and a Group 2 region is provided as a comparison. All three regions of 
Gwydir, Inverell and Armidale North have been assessed by the Productivity 
Commission as having below average adaptive capacity based on 2016 dataxix.

FINAL 
Page 10 of 51 
 
 
Figure A4. Comparison of Inverell Region East and Armidale Region – North as examples of Group 3 and 
Group 2 areas, with Group 2 regions being assessed as having greater disaster resilience compared to 
Group 3 regions. 
Communities in areas of low disaster resilience may be limited in their capacity to use 
available resources to cope with adverse events and are limited in their capacity to 
adjust to change through learning, adaptation, and transformation. Limitations to 
disaster resilience may be further entrenched by social and economic disadvantage, 
less access to or provision of resources and services, lower community cohesion and 
limited opportunities for adaptive learning and problem solvingxx. 
Gwydir and Inverell Shires have significant economic output from agriculture, 
particularly dryland farming. The Northern Inland economy has higher employment 
generated by agriculture compared to the average employment in that sector in NSW as 
a whole (refer Figure A5). Northern Inland is weaker in areas like finance, accounting 
and IT - sectors that support businesses. 
Whilst diversification is an approach to have economic output and jobs that are not 
directly linked to weather and commodity prices, it has proven difficult to achieve in 
regional areas. There is some indication from experience in the United States that the 
best option may be to support existing local businesses with the capacity for significant 
growthxxi.

FINAL 
Page 11 of 51 
 
Figure A5. Location Quotients for Namoi economy (2011). 
 https://www.rdani.org.au/our-region/current-regional-issues/the-northern-inland-economy.php  
Accessed June 2022. 
What is known about increasing resilience to drought? 
As described in the section ‘How does resilience connect with drought and our 
community?’ (page 2 of this Attachment), resilience emerges as the result of three 
capacities: absorptive, adaptive and transformative, each of them leading to different 
outcomes: persistence, incremental adjustment, or transformational responses.  
Typically, when there is a shock that results in a crisis, the initial response is resistance, 
to cope with the stress. Once absorptive (coping) capacity is exceeded, then individuals 
must rely on their adaptive resilience, which refers to incremental changes that people 
make to keep functioning without major changes. These incremental adjustments can 
take many forms (for example in adopting new farming techniques, change in farming 
practices, diversifying livelihood bases, and engaging in new social networks). 
Eventually, if the change required is so large that it overwhelms the adaptive capacity of 
the household, community or (eco)system, transformation will have to occur. In this 
case, changes are not incremental but are transformative, resulting in alterations in the 
individual or community’s primary structure and function. These transformational 
changes often involve shifts in the nature of the system, the introduction of new state 
variables and possibly the loss of others, such as when a household adopts a new 
direction in earning a living or when a region moves from an agrarian to a resource 
extraction economy. It can be a deliberate process, initiated by the people involved, or it 
can be forced on them by changing environmental or socioeconomic conditions.

FINAL 
Page 12 of 51 
The main challenges associated with transformation are not all technical in nature. 
These shifts may include a combination of technological innovations, institutional 
reforms, behavioural shifts and cultural changes; they often involve the questioning of 
values, the challenging of assumptions, and the capacity to closely examine fixed 
beliefs, identities and stereotypes. In other words, they challenge the status quoxxii. 
To be successful these transformational changes can typically require changes to 
entrenched systems maintained and protected by powerful interests. There are, 
consequently, enormous barriers to transformation, rooted in culture and cognition and 
expressed through economic and social policies, land-use legislation, resource 
management practices, and other institutions and social practices.  
A model used in health assessment that is useful when considering resilience 
improvement is the social ecological model. It models the interactions between the 
individual, the community and the physical, social and political environments. 
Interactions in the system are at four levels: the individual, interpersonal relationships, 
the community, and society itself (Figure A6). 
 
Figure A6. Four-levels of interaction that impact on health. 
Source: Courtesy of Centres for Disease Control and Prevention.  
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/communityengagement/pce_models.html Accessed 20 May 2022. 
The first level of the model (at the extreme right) includes individual biology and other 
personal characteristics, such as age, education, income, and health history. The 
second level, relationship, includes a person’s closest social circle, such as friends, 
partners, and family members, all of whom influence a person’s behaviour and 
contribute to their experiences. The third level, community, explores the settings in 
which people have social relationships, such as schools, workplaces, and 
neighbourhoods, and seeks to identify the characteristics of these settings that affect 
health. Finally, the fourth level looks at the broad societal factors that favour or impair 
health, for example cultural and social norms and health, economic, educational, and 
social policies that help to create, maintain, or lessen socioeconomic inequalities 
between groupsxxiii.  
How would you describe ‘our’ Gwydir and Inverell community system? 
A community is like a living creature having interdependent elements that represent 
specialised functions, activities, or interests, each operating within specific boundaries 
to meet community needs – it is a system. For the community to function well, each 
component needs to be effectively carrying out its role in relation to the whole system. 
A healthy community has well-connected sectors that share responsibility for 
recognising and resolving problems and enhancing its well-being. Successfully

FINAL 
Page 13 of 51 
addressing a community’s complex problems requires collaboration and coordination 
of resources from all partsxxiv.  
A community’s resilience baseline in a region such as Gwydir-Inverell reflects access to 
water, education, health services, governance, and public services; employment 
opportunities and transportxxv. When any one of these is altered, it can create ripple 
effects throughout the broader community and system.  
The ‘system’ for Gwydir-Inverell reflects the above interacting components in the unique 
setting of the region. A significant factor for the region is the disparate nature of its 
community – an estimated 22,193 people living in an area of 18,059 square 
kilometresxxvi (there is just one town centre – Inverell - with a population of greater than 
10,000). Building resilience can involve maintaining, modifying, or transforming parts, 
sectors, or whole systems in a regionxxvii. Community system components for the 
Inverell Local Government Area are overlaid on a generalised community system map in 
Figure A7.  
 
 
 
 
Figure A7. Elements of community that are integral in the community resilience system. 
https://conceptdraw.com/a374c4/preview and http://srdc.msstate.edu Accessed June 2022. 
Because of the relatively small population, the Gwydir-Inverell region is inherently 
exposed to challenges and changes of a scale that are simply not experienced in urban 
and metropolitan communities. This heightened sensitivity means that the economy 
and potentially service provision is affected in circumstances unlikely to have impact in 
more densely populated regionsxxviii. Implications for the Gwydir-Inverell region are an 
increasing need to diversify the economy to reduce shock from drought. This includes 
Federal Government 
NSW Government 
Inverell Shire Council 
Productive landscapes – 
agriculture (cropping, fine 
wool, beef cattle) 
Stewardship (Anaiwan, 
Ashford & Toomelah LALCs) 
Strong economic centres – 
Inverell, Ashford, Gilgai, 
Yetman, Tingha, Bonshaw, 
Delungra 
Innovative new industries – 
gems, renewable energy, 
tourism e.g. Copeton Dam 
Global access and 
competitiveness – beef 
processing emerging
Inverell Shire 
population 
estimated to 
grow to 
17,000 by 
2036 
Ageing 
Education and training is the 5th largest 
employing sector in Inverell Shire 
Health care 
and social 
assistance is 
the primary 
employment 
sector

FINAL 
Page 14 of 51 
the need for more off-farm income earning opportunitiesxxix - preferably in employment 
not highly exposed to weather events and agricultural supply chains. However, 
diversifying is easier said than done, as noted earlier.  
What trends are impacting our system? 
As international trade is integral to Australia’s economic and geopolitical system, it is 
worth considering global risks in general. These were collated in 2020 from the World 
Economic Forum Global Risks Perception Survey. The most concerning are presented in 
Table A2. It identifies that climate change is the most pressing risk to address. 
Table A2. Most concerning global risks in 2020. 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2021.pdf Accessed June 2022. 
 
Of note is that the failure to act on climate change was ranked the number one 
concerning global risk in 2020. The top risk by likelihood was extreme weather, and the 
second top risk by consequence was climate action failure (the top risk being infectious 
disease).  
In its July 2022 ‘Our Future World: Global megatrends impacting the way we live over coming 
decades’, CSIRO state that extreme and unprecedented weather events are increasing in their 
frequency and scale of impact. Current climate forecasts predict that we are likely to 
experience extreme weather conditions that exceed the bounds of historical norms and 
concurrent climate hazards are likely to compound the overall climate risk for sectors and 
regions. Adapting the healthcare system, critical infrastructure and settlement patterns to 
climate change and extreme weather conditions will become a growing reality for many 
countries in the years and decades to come. And this megatrend speaks to the new ways of 
operating that organisations and communities will need to adapt to in the face of a changing 
climatexxx. 
Figure A8 shows global emissions scenarios and their impact on global warming.

FINAL 
Page 15 of 51 
 
Figure A8. Global emissions scenarios and global warming. 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2021.pdf Accessed July 2022. 
Trends typically associated with regional and rural Australia are: 
● Poorer health outcomes compared with people living in metropolitan areasxxxi 
(shorter lives, higher levels of disease and injury, poorer access to and use of 
services) 
● Small town decline/ within region population aggregation to major centres 
● Post pandemic change – some growth in urban migration to regional areas 
● Increasing volatility in the agricultural sector on a baseline that is already the 
most volatile of any major exporting nationxxxii 
● Changing export demand for food is increasing soft commodity prices, 
translating to changes in the traditional market shares and destinations of 
Australia’s exports 
● Increased competition for limited water 
● Increasing cost of energy, particularly fuel 
● Growing inequality (refer to Table A1 on page 4 – Gini coefficient) 
● Ageing population – population is stable, but median age is growingxxxiii (median 
age in 2021 was 50 years for Gwydir, up from 48 in 2016; median age in 2021 
was 43 years for Inverell, up from 41 in 2016 – all NSW in 2021 median age was 
43 years)xxxiv  
● Net internal migration is growing (-68 in 2015, in 2020 it was -157 for Inverell-
Gwydir) 
● Changes in agricultural – cost of inputs, particularly fertiliser and energy, are 
increasing; poor access to and affordability of labour is driving further 
automation; rise of and application of artificial intelligence (AI) learning and 
robotisation

FINAL 
Page 16 of 51 
● Decrease in the number of employing businesses and increase in the number of 
non-employing businessesxxxv 
● Small business (that is 5 or less employees) exits are growing 
● Industries with increasing number of businesses are: finance and insurance; 
rental/real estate; professional, scientific and technical services; education and 
training; arts and recreation 
● Residential building approvals are decreasing; non-residential building is 
increasing 
● Number of working age people is decreasing (10,472 in 2015, 2020 in 10,297 
● Education – decrease in children enrolled in preschool; increase in year 12 
completion rate 
● Number of jobs in health care and social assistance is increasing 
● Digital divide is increasing although the number of Internet connections is 
growing (50% in 2015, in 2020 it was 60.5%) – country people generally use the 
Internet less even when they do have reliable Internet access. 
A key factor for the regions is the forces or influencing factors that drive work to be 
centralising and are driven by: 
● Improvements in transport 
● Improvements in telecommunications 
● Technology innovation (for example computerised banking) 
● Rationalisation of services as efficiencies are found. 
While improvements in technology, transport and telecommunications are necessary to 
survive in the global competitive environment, smaller centres are less able to capture 
the benefits of these advances. They struggle to remain viable as services and 
employment opportunities are rationalised into regional centres, resulting in a pull of 
people out of rural areas and challenging the ability of a rural community to retain and 
attract residents and future investment. As services are withdrawn, the quality of life, 
measured in terms of access to essential and higher value goods and services, 
declinesxxxvi. 
Some potential implications from these trends for the Gwydir-Inverell Councils are that, 
given there are strong forces at work causing population to aggregate to regional 
centres, to view opportunities of moving with this trend and to strengthen existing 
business within Inverell as well as design outreach services from key regional centres. 
Who are the key stakeholders in our system? 
Preliminary stakeholder mapping prior to community engagement and consultation has 
identified the core (client), direct and indirect stakeholders for the Gwydir-Inverell 
region. The relationship between these types of stakeholders is shown in Figure A9 and 
examples of direct and indirect stakeholders are listed in Table A3. Consultation 
approaches and feedback is captured in Attachment B (Phase 2 Consultation, codesign 
and ranking of community ideas).

FINAL 
Page 17 of 51 
 
Figure A9. Relationship of stakeholder types for the Regional Drought Resilience Plan for Inverell and 
Gwydir Shire Regions. 
Table A3. Direct and indirect stakeholders for the Regional Drought Resilience Plan for Inverell and Gwydir 
Shire Regions. 
Stakeholder 
Direct 
Indirect 
Gwydir Shire Council 
✓ 
 
Inverell Shire Council 
✓ 
 
NSW Government 
✓ 
 
Australian Government 
✓ 
 
All those responsible for land management (includes public as well as 
Indigenous lands) 
✓ 
 
Gwydir and Inverell communities 
✓ 
 
Aboriginal Land Councils 
 
✓ 
Landcare – Northern Slopes, GLENRAC Inc and Gwymac Inc 
 
✓ 
Country Women’s Association 
 
✓ 
Schools 
 
✓ 
NSW Farmers 
 
✓ 
Accountants 
 
✓ 
Professional financial advisors 
 
✓ 
Professional health services and their personnel 
 
✓ 
Businesses within the Shires 
 
✓ 
External businesses supplying key inputs to Shire business 
 
✓ 
Value chain partners 
 
✓ 
NGOs 
 
✓ 
Providers of services likely to be required to implement projects 
✓ 
 
Internal., 
primary and 
direct - Gwydir 
and Inverell 
Shire Councils 
and their staff
Public stakeholders 
External, secondary, 
indirect stakeholders 
External, primary, 
direct stakeholders

FINAL 
Page 18 of 51 
About the region 
Both the Gwydir and Inverell Shires are located in the New England North West region of 
NSW, with their northern most borders meeting the NSW QLD border. Both Shires are on 
the tablelands between Sydney and Brisbane and stretch to the west. The Shires’ 
location in relation to New England North West NSW is provided in Figure A10. 
 
Figure A10. Local government areas of the New England North West region of NSW, showing the 
geographic location of Gwydir and Inverell Shires. 
Source: Courtesy of NSW Government Planning and Environment publication New England North West Regional Plan 
2036  https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Images/DPE/Maps/new-england-north-west-goal-4-fig-10-local-
government-area-map2000x1922.jpg?la=en Accessed 19 May 2022. 
Within Gwydir Shire, the townships of Bingara and Warialda provide local retail, 
commercial and community services and a high quality of life for residents and visitors. 
Gravesend, Cobbadah, Upper Horton, Croppa Creek, North Star and Warialda fulfil local 
service needs and contribute to the unique local character of the areaxxxvii. 
Inverell LGA is nestled alongside the Macintyre River on the western slopes of New 
England. Inverell is the focal centre located on the Gwydir Highway and provides 
essential retail, commercial and community services to a range of local communities. 
Ashford, Gilgai, Yetman and Delungra fulfil local service needs and contribute to the 
unique local character of the areaxxxviii.

FINAL 
Page 19 of 51 
 
Figure A11. Main roads, agricultural areas and state forest in the New England North West region in 2017. 
Source: Courtesy of NSW Government Planning and Environment publication New England North West Regional Plan 
2036 https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Plans-and-policies/Plans-for-your-area/Regional-
plans/New-England-North-West---Final-regional-plan-2017-09.pdf  Accessed 19 May 2022. 
The Inverell Shire has interconnections with Tamworth and Armidale located 
approximately 200km south and 125km southeast and the regional centres of 
Gunnedah, Narrabri, Moree and Glen Innes. These centres in relation to Inverell and 
Gwydir Shires are shown in Figure A11.  
In all likelihood, Aboriginal peoples occupied the New England area up to 40,000 years 
ago, when sea levels were much lower than today and the Papuan Islands to the north 
of Australia to Tasmania in the south were a single continent. Nearly 20,000 years on, 
the Last Glacial Maximum began, with sea levels falling to about 130 metres to where 
they are now, temperatures falling dramatically on land and in the sea, and rainfalls 
declining sharply. Around 15,000 years ago, a warmer period (Holocene) began, and the 
Australian continent was separated from Papua and Tasmania as sea levels rose. Then 
came European occupation in the 1830’s, driven by demand for wool to feed the British 
growing textile industryxxxix. 
In New England, the European advance forced Aboriginal groups to the more remote 
and rugged country where horses could not easily penetrate. There, different Aboriginal 
groups came together to mount larger scale attacks on people and stock. Growing 
European settlement on the coast seems to have forced coastal Aborigines to the west 
where they joined with Tablelands’ groups including traditional enemies to mount large 
scale attacks. The patterns created are thought to last to this day but in reality, the 
exact patterns including regional linkages are poorly understood.  Figure A12 shows 
current day aboriginal Land Council areas.

FINAL 
Page 20 of 51 
 
Figure A12. New England Local Aboriginal Land Council boundaries and name. 
Source: https://alc.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/state-alc-2013.jpg Accessed 19 May 2022. 
The Local Aboriginal Land Councils are: 
• Ashford Local Aboriginal Land Council https://alc.org.au/land_council/ashford/ 
• Anaiwan Local Aboriginal Land Council https://alc.org.au/land_council/anaiwan/  
• Moombahlene Local Aboriginal Land Council 
https://alc.org.au/land_council/moombahlene/. 
Geography 
The Gwydir subregion is located within the Murray–Darling Basin in northern NSW. To 
the north, it is separated from the Maranoa-Balonne-Condamine subregion by the 
Dumaresq, Macintyre and Barwon rivers and to the south from the Namoi subregion by 
the Namoi river basin topographic divide. These boundaries correspond to those for the 
Border Rivers and Gwydir river basins in NSW, but the eastern, upland part of the Border 
Rivers and Gwydir river basins is not included within this subregion. The eastern 
boundary of the Gwydir subregion is defined as the extent of the coal-bearing geology. 
The southern areas of the Shire are hilly with pockets of highly fertile river flats along 
the Gwydir River and its main tributaries. Agriculture is the primary land use and 
economic activity, dominated in the southern and central areas of the Shire with 
livestock production. Broadacre cropping is undertaken in the northern part of the Shire, 
with the main crops being wheat, sorghum and barley. 
The Gwydir subregion spans an area of 28,109 km2, extending westward from the lower 
slopes of the New England Tablelands onto the low-lying riverine plains of the Barwon-
Darling system.

FINAL 
Page 21 of 51 
The main rivers draining the subregion are the Gwydir and Macintyre-Barwon rivers. The 
subregion’s most noteworthy water-dependent asset is the Ramsar-listed Gwydir 
Wetlands on the lower Gwydir and Gingham watercourses, and the Morella 
Watercourse, Boobera Lagoon and Pungbougal Lagoon on the Macintyre floodplains, 
which are listed in the Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia (Environment 
Australia, 2001). 
Inverell is located between Sydney and Brisbane. The Inverell Shire Council describes 
the region as having strong transport links to Newcastle and South East Queensland 
and being well positioned to access domestic and international markets. They go on to 
say that the “Shire boasts rich farm and grazing land, including large mineral deposits, 
particularly tin and sapphires, with the area producing the majority of the world’s 
sapphires. The Shire features diverse retail, manufacturing, professional services, 
construction and agricultural sectors which are all major contributors to the local 
economy. Tourism, in particular, is a growing industry in the Shire”xl. 
Resource base 
The Gwydir subregion is dominated by the Upper Darling Plains physiographic region 
which is characterised by alluvial sediments (>50%) with minimal saprolite (deeply 
weathered rock) (<20%). The dominance of one physiographic region in the Gwydir 
subregion is reflected in the relative uniformity of soil type, land cover and land use. 
● Forestry in the Gwydir is native timber dependent i.e. hardwood including 
ironbark and softwood including cypress pine. The industry is not impacted by 
drought, and additional water to the Gwydir Wetlands will not affect forestry in 
the regionxli.  
● Gwydir-based mining is focussed on quarrying, gem stones and tin mining. The 
industry may have experienced some limits on processing capacity associated 
with water shortages during drought10.  
● Competition for water allocation between different agricultural enterprises e.g. 
horticulture (pecans) and cotton. 
Climate 
Much of Gwydir Shire lies between the 29ºS and 30ºS latitudes, placing it mid-way in the 
realm of arable lands within the Southern Hemisphere. It has a temperate climate with 
warm to hot summers (25ºC–35ºC) and cool to mild winters (10ºC–20ºC). The average 
elevation across the Shire is approximately 350m above sea level. 
Inverell is also located in the temperate to cool temperate climate zone of NSW, which 
is characterised by warm summers, with uniform rainfall generally occurring in summer. 
Based on data from 1995–2012, the monthly mean maximum temperature averaged 
16.3ºC in July to 30.4ºC in January. Mean minimum temperatures vary from -0.3ºC in 
July to 15ºC in January. Average rainfall recorded over the past 17 years is 794 mm 
with the highest rain falling in the months of November and Decemberxlii.  
As climate change impacts takes greater hold, the Inverell region is expected to 
experiencexliii: 
● Increased occurrence of heatwaves, hot days and fire risk 
● Potential for increases in seasonal extremes, particularly rainfall events and 
droughts

FINAL 
Page 22 of 51 
● Increased autumn rainfall and decreased winter rainfall in both the near and far 
future, with rainfall patterns to vary across the region 
● Increased short and intense rainfall events, resulting in increased localised 
flooding from smaller urban streams and urban drainage systems 
● An increase in maximum temperatures in the near future (2020-2039) by 0.4ºC 
and in the far future (2060-2079) by 2.2ºC to 2.5ºC 
● An increase in minimum temperatures in the near future by 0.7ºC and in the far 
future by 2.3ºC. 
Key climate change data for Inverell (refer to Table A4) and for the broader North-West 
region (Figure A13) are below.  
Table A4: Average number of days a year greater than threshold daily maximum temperature values, in 
incremental 15-year blocks of time, recorded at Inverell Research Centre. 
Temperature greater than 
1966-80 
1981-95 
1996-2010 
2011-22 
30°C 
36.8 
45.2 
50.3 
60.9 
35°C 
2.2 
2.2 
4.6 
10.7 
40°C 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
Source: BoM Station Number 56018 
 
 
Figure A13. Predicted change in average temperature, annual rainfall and number of days with maximum 
temperature greater than 35°C, in the New England and North West for the time ranges 2020-39 and 
2060-79 (mean values of the predictions from 12 models are displayed. 
Source: Adapt NSW https://www.climatechange.environment.nsw.gov.au/projections-map Accessed 
June 2022.

FINAL 
Page 23 of 51 
Gwydir Shire at a glance  
Gwydir Shire has a 
population of just 
under 5,000 people 
who live in an area of 
9,000km2. Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait 
Islander people make 
up 5.8% of the 
population. 
The gross regional 
product of Gwydir 
Shire in 2021 was 
$230 million. 
Major employing 
industries are the 
education and 
training, agricultural, 
construction, 
healthcare and social 
services, retail and 
public administration 
sectors. 
The average annual 
wage is $40,000 
whilst the median 
annual wage is 
$41,000. Figure A14 
depicts major 
industries of 
employmentxliv. 
 
Figure A14. Gwydir Shire at a glancexlv.  
Reproduced with permission from Gwydir Shire Council. 
 
Inverell Shire at a glance  
Inverell has a strong and growing economy based on agriculture, particularly beef cattle 
and cropping. It is the operating centre for a large beef processing company, the largest 
employer in Inverell. Inverell is also a major contributor to Australia’s sapphire 
production and offers a tourist attraction in gem fossicking. 
Below in Figure A15 is data for Inverell Shire from 2016xlvi.

FINAL 
Page 24 of 51 
 
Figure A15. Inverell Shire at a glancexlvii.   
Reproduced with permission from Inverell Shire Council. 
 
Economic characteristics 
Figure A16 provides a quarterly depiction from March 2019 to March 2022 of 
unemployment for the Gwydir-Inverell regionxlviii and estimates that: 
● Economic output (real $) for Gwydir-Inverell region in 2021 was $1,325 million, 
agriculture accounting for $578 million of this output  
● Employment was 8,622 jobs (1,881 in Gwydir (871 in agriculture,196 in 
healthcare); 6,735 in Inverell (810 in agriculture, 962 in healthcare) - 2016 data 
● Unemployment rate in December 2021 was 4.0% for Gwydir and 6.5% in Inverell.

FINAL 
Page 25 of 51 
 
Figure A16. Quarterly depiction of unemployment for the Gwydir-Inverell region  
Source:https://app.remplan.com.au/northerninland/economy/summary?state=4Oa2UNWwVUmLK8zTZl
OLv0HWHASbdGeWRseZK Accessed June 2022. 
 
Real GDP (June 2020 prices), in the region, has flattened since 2018, as depicted in 
Figure A17. The flattening could be the effect of drought dampening what was set to be 
a trend of increasing growth in GDP from 2015. 
 
Figure A17. Real GDP of the Gwydir (top bar graph) and Inverell shire (bottom) regions across time. 
Source:https://app.remplan.com.au/northerninland/economy/trends/gross-regional-
product?state=PRV1CO!vO1pUj3DOF1RRYdhmy3YVtoTJHVp0IrHzHMVH0S0sRSoSVwy Accessed June 2022. 
The sourced dataset is not complete for Inverell shire region however the following 
observations have been made: 
● Investment between 2011-16: none recorded for Gwydir, Inverell 
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
7.0%
8.0%
9.0%
Unemplyment (%) by Quarter 
March 2019 - March 2022
RDA Northern Inland
Gwydir
Inverell

FINAL 
Page 26 of 51 
● Building approvals have risen from 2019-20 for both Shires, but off a low base, 
noting stable number of occupants per household for Gwydir and a slight 
decrease in occupants per household since 2011 for Inverellxlix 
● Drought sensitive services in the region include long haul road freight, rail 
transport, services to transport sector, and grain storage 
● Other drought sensitive business activities include machinery sales, farm inputs 
(fertiliser, fuel, chemicals) and motor vehicles (sales and parts) 
● Tourism is indirectly affected by drought as people are thought to be less likely 
to travel inland for holidays during drought and more likely to head to the coast 
● There were 38 and 213 jobs in tourism for Gwydir and Inverelll 
● Government administration, education, health and community services 
accounted for 27% of employment Gwydir, and 28% in Inverell 
● Differentials between Gwydir and Inverell Shires in business turnover – in Gwydir, 
some growth in turnover, particularly for the $50-$200K group, which may be 
larger business dropping back. For Inverell, there’s been a decline in business 
number turnover, although there is an increase in churn of the small businesses 
(Figure A18).

FINAL 
Page 27 of 51 
 
Figure A18. Business turnover Gwydir-Inverell region. Source: 
https://app.remplan.com.au/northerninland/community/trends/business-counts-
turnover?state=jJDgTD!e1DrIY4BNSD88OQC4JXDQTxUxuY3eSdumuKmVi9uAsWqXocEsezU93B Accessed July 2022. 
Infrastructure 
Copeton Dam: Copeton Dam is one of the largest inland dams in NSW with a capacity of 
1,364,000 megalitres of water. The construction of the dam was initiated to provide 
more reliable town water supplies and to boost agricultural production through the 
provision of river irrigation water in the Gwydir Valley. It provides reliable town water for 
Inverell via a pipeline and other towns downstream, including Bingara, Gravesend and 
Weemelah. Copeton Dam has an active release capacity of 11,000 megalitres per day 
but the spillway is designed to allow for 1,280,000 megalitres if requiredli. 
Inland Rail: Development of the Melbourne-Brisbane Inland Rail and intermodal freight 
terminals are making it easier for goods, services and people to move across the region 
and beyond and provides the opportunity for job creation during construction (about 
500 in the New England North West region) and once operationallii liii. The Narrabri to 
North Star section comprises 184 km of upgraded track and 2 km of new track. 
Mobile phone network coverage: A spin-off from the inland rail project is an 
improvement in mobile phone coverage. In a partnership between the Australian Rail 
Track Corporation (ARTC) and Telstra, new and upgraded mobile telecommunications 
infrastructure are being installed along the rail corridor of Narrabri to North Star. ARTC 
is taking the opportunity to extend local coverage as they implement 
telecommunications infrastructure during construction. The telecommunications works 
will include a new radio base station in North Star, a new small cell in Croppa Creek, an 
upgrade to the existing base station in Gurley and a new radio base station in Croobleliv. 
Renewable Energy Zone: Renewable Energy Zones (REZs) are modern-day power 
stations. They combine renewable energy generation such as wind and solar, storage 
such as batteries, and high-voltage poles and wires to deliver energy to homes, 
businesses and industries. By connecting multiple generators and storage in the same 
location, REZs capitalise on economies of scale to deliver cheap, reliable and clean

FINAL 
Page 28 of 51 
electricity for NSWlv. The New England REZ has been announced and will be developed 
in the area surrounding Armidale in the New England region of NSW. It will aim to 
support the development of up to 8,000 megawatts of renewable generation capacitylvi.  
Renewable energy does present some opportunity for farmers to be paid to host 
infrastructure on their land, with income typically unaffected by factors associated with 
drought. 
Strategies to address drought resilience 
This section explores drought resilience improvement actions and activities in other 
regions and maps them against existing drought resilience activities in the Gwydir-
Inverell region. 
What’s being suggested in other regions and in the social sciences to improve 
resilience? 
Key steps for individuals in developing resilience are: 
● Developing optimism (leading to positive expectations enabling a person to take 
positive action) 
● Acceptance of the situation 
● Focusing on potential solutions 
● Taking responsibility for one’s own life 
● Escaping from the role as a victim of circumstance 
● Building a support network 
● Planning a flexible strategy for dealing with future challenges. 
Feedback from Queensland Government’s drought and climate adaptation program 
from drought-affected farmers in a comparable region to Gwydir–Inverell provides 
some key learnings such as:  
● The need for producer-contributed resources to be available for other producers 
to draw upon  
● The positive value of networking with other producers. 
This program resulted in publishing key learnings for grazing businesses, for managing 
livestock, and for emotional well-being. Key learnings for emotional well-being for 
farmers includedlvii: 
● Having off-farm focuses within the community such as sporting clubs  
● Going on a holiday or at least plan one  
● Finding mechanisms that work for them to reduce stress  
● Looking out for themselves, their family and friends  
● Accepting that not every decision is going to be the right one. 
The NSW government’s report Future Ready Regions Strategy documents key learnings 
from the experience of the most recent droughtlviii. These are: 
● Clear and consistent policy responses must be developed, agreed to and 
communicated to industry early to provide certainty at each stage of drought

FINAL 
Page 29 of 51 
● Where government assistance is provided, there must be accessible and 
streamlined processes and guidelines  
● Access to expertise, data and tools support early decisions and improved 
resilience  
● Investment in R&D across the agricultural sector is critical to managing, 
preparing for and recovering from drought  
● Farm business resilience is enhanced through improved business literacy, social 
structures and wellbeing support  
● When food and water resources are under pressure, it is even more critical to 
make timely decisions to prevent animal welfare issues  
● Regular evaluation of policies and programs should be undertaken  
● Investment in on-farm infrastructure supports resilience and preparedness. 
There are many organisations that work directly and indirectly to improve adaptive 
capacity to drought. For example, the network of Rural Research and Development 
Corporations, often partnering with State Governments, have projects relevant to the 
Gwydir-Inverell region. There are multiple leadership programs aiming to build capacity 
within regional communities, such as the Australian Rural Leadership Foundation’s 
Future Drought Resilience Leaders Programlix and Building Resilient Regional Leaders 
Program.  
Many relevant reports of resilience to disasters and drought in regional Australia exist. 
The main themes for several of these reports, chosen due to their relevance for 
developing the Gwydir-Inverell Regional Drought Resilience Plan, have been mapped to 
the strategic priorities in Table A5. Broadly these reports align and emphasise the 
wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and remote communities and place less 
emphasis on natural capital.

FINAL 
Page 30 of 51 
 
Table A5. Key findings and/or recommendations from relevant reports mapped against strategic priorities. 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
Gwydir Shire 
Council 
community 
Strategic Plan 
2017 – 2027lx 
 
• Council’s Circular 
Economy initiative 
• An environmentally 
responsible Shire 
• Increase the level of 
disposable income in the 
Shire 
• Opening the Shire to 
migrants and refugees 
under the Federal and State 
Governments’ resettlement 
programs 
• Build capacity among 
people already working in 
each sector by involving 
them in the planning 
process 
• Aspirational target of 
• increasing the Shire’s 
population to 8,000 
residents by 2031 
• Renewable 
energy 
Draft Inverell 
Shire Local 
Strategic Planning 
Statement 2036lxi 
• Grow our agriculture, 
agribusiness and 
manufacturing sectors  
• Expand nature-based 
adventure and cultural 
tourism  
• Deliver diverse housing 
choice that reinforces our 
unique character  
• Manage and 
support 
renewable energy

FINAL 
Page 31 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
• Protect productive 
agricultural lands from 
land use conflict and 
fragmentation  
• Foster resilience and 
diversification  
• Encourage 
diversification of 
agriculture, 
horticulture, 
manufacturing and 
agri-business  
• Increase opportunities 
to move produce to 
domestic and 
international markets  
• Protect and celebrate 
our unique sense of 
place  
• Protect and enhance 
our natural 
environment  
• Promote business and 
lifestyle opportunities  
• Plan for climate change and 
risks such as bushfire and 
flooding  
• Support 
infrastructure 
that encourages 
new industries  
• Plan for 
integrated land 
use and transport 
New England 
North West 
Regional Plan 
2036lxii 
• A growing and 
diversified agricultural 
sector 
• Expand agribusiness 
and food processing 
sectors 
• Protected water 
environment and 
heritage 
• Sustainably manage 
and conserve water 
resources 
• Communities resilient to 
change with housing choice 
and services that meet 
shifting needs and lifestyles 
• Prosperous urban centres 
with job opportunities 
• A diverse 
economy through 
the management 
of mineral and 
energy resources 
including 
renewable energy 
generation

FINAL 
Page 32 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
• Build agricultural 
productivity  
• Protect and enhance 
productive agricultural 
lands  
• Protect areas of 
potential high 
environmental value  
• Protect areas of 
potential high 
environmental value  
• Collaborate with 
Aboriginal 
communities to 
respect and protect 
Aboriginal culture and 
heritage  
• Expand tourism and visitor 
opportunities 
• Strengthen community 
resilience 
• Expand emerging 
industries 
through freight 
and logistics 
connectivity  
Goondiwindi 
Regional Council 
Drought 
Resilience Planlxiii 
 
 
• Support local health 
services and support 
service providers to deliver 
mental health and 
community drought support 
programs  
• Support local events that 
promote community 
connectedness – arts & 
culture funding, event 
funding, venue hire 
• Water use 
efficiency by 
Council and by 
community 
• Increased water 
storage and 
improved 
management of 
allocation 
Report prepared 
for the 
Queensland 
Government in 
• Enhancing economic 
resilience through 
industry 
diversification, 
 
• Supporting a resilient 
society through community 
networks and an inherent 
• Enhancing 
infrastructure 
through 
pathways for

FINAL 
Page 33 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
2020 - Central 
West Regional 
Resilience 
Strategylxiv 
leveraging cascading 
economic opportunity, 
encouraging business 
diversity, focusing on 
collaboration and 
partnerships across 
public and private 
sectors 
ability to adapt to changing 
circumstances  
• Supporting community-led 
recovery opportunities and 
operations following 
[disaster] events  
• Improve funding certainty 
through proactive planning, 
prioritisation and 
coordination for collective 
benefit  
improved 
communications 
and transport 
linkages for 
societal and 
economic benefit  
NSW Government: 
Upper North West 
Regional 
Economic 
Development 
Strategy 2018-
2022lxv 
• Encourage investment, 
increased productivity 
and value adding 
 
• Invest in people, skills, 
community and lifestyle to 
address the region’s skill 
gaps 
• Improve freight 
efficiency 
• Diversify the 
economy through 
emerging 
industry sectors 
(tourism, 
renewable 
energy, coal 
seam gas 
NSW 
Government’s 
Future Ready 
• Stronger primary 
industries prepared for 
drought through five 
• Sustainable, secure 
and healthy water 
resources through six 
• Stronger communities and 
diverse regional economies 
through three actions

FINAL 
Page 34 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
Regions 
Strategylxvi 
 
actions for accelerated 
innovation, 
information systems 
and diversification 
actions for more 
efficient and 
coordinated water 
resources which 
support the NSW 
Water Strategy 
supporting community 
resilience, which includes 
developing the Regional 
Drought Resilience Plans 
NSW 
Government 
February 2021: A 
20-Year Economic 
Vision for 
Regional NSWlxvii 
 
• Manage vital energy 
and water resources 
sustainably to ensure 
supply will be meet 
long-term regional 
needs 
 
• $410 million for inland 
economies  
• Education & skills: provide 
clear skills pathways and 
connectivity for jobs in 
regions  
• Develop areas with tourism 
potential to attract 
domestic and international 
tourists  
• Special activation precincts 
to create more jobs 
• Common user 
infrastructure 
• Digital 
connectivity 
• Renewable 
energy zones 
• Fixing country 
roads and rail 
• Investing in the 
built environment 
• Fast track critical 
town water 
supply projects 
Australian 
Government 
Drought 
Response, 
• Long-term resilience 
and preparedness – 
building resilience and 
the ability to withstand 
 
• Immediate action for those 
in drought – focussed on 
measures to support 
farmers and communities

FINAL 
Page 35 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
Resilience and 
Preparedness 
Planlxviii 
droughts in the long 
term 
facing prolonged drought 
conditions to keep them 
going until drought breaks 
• Support for wider 
communities affected by 
drought – rural and regional 
communities depend on our 
farmers and are at the heart 
of Australia 
Australian 
Government 
National Climate 
Resilience and 
Adaptation 
Strategy 2021-
2025lxix 
• Improve climate 
information and 
services 
• Deliver enhanced 
information and 
services to more users 
•  Continue to deliver 
world class science 
that informs 
successful adaptation 
 
• Drive investment and action 
through collaboration  
• Provide enhanced national 
leadership & coordination 
• Partner with governments, 
businesses & communities 
to act and invest 
• Assess progress to improve 
over time 
 
Report prepared 
for the National 
Farmers 
Federation 2020 
Future-Proofing 
• Make existing 
datasets accessible in 
a more user-friendly 
manner and deliver 
new, higher quality, 
 
• Improve the overall impact 
and cost effectiveness of 
financial support provided 
to the agricultural sector, 
whilst encouraging farmers

FINAL 
Page 36 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
Farming 
Collaborating to 
manage risk and 
build resiliencelxx  
more granular 
datasets to support 
the agricultural and 
insurance industries 
• Foster information 
sharing and 
collaboration on a 
national basis, drawing 
together resources 
from private and 
public sectors, 
including from 
education providers, 
relevant government 
agencies, industry 
associations, R&D 
corporations, and 
commercial 
enterprises 
• Enhance the 
awareness and 
understanding of 
financial literacy and 
financial risk 
management tools 
across the 
and other participants in the 
agricultural value chain to 
invest in alternative 
pathways to manage 
inherent risks

FINAL 
Page 37 of 51 
Report 
Grow self-reliance and 
performance of the 
agricultural sector 
Improve natural capital 
of agricultural 
landscapes for better 
environmental outcomes 
Strengthen the wellbeing and 
social capital of rural, regional 
and remote communities 
Other (includes 
infrastructure) 
[agricultural] industry, 
and to improve 
agricultural and 
financial risk 
management product-
specific knowledge 
and awareness of 
farm advisors, so that 
their service adds 
greater value 
Report for 
Regional Australia 
Institute - Building 
Resilience in Rural 
Communities: 
Toolkitlxxi 
 
• Environment and 
lifestyle 
• Beliefs 
• Social networks and 
support 
• Positive outlook 
• Learning 
• Early experiences 
• Sense of purpose 
• Embracing differences 
• Beliefs 
• Leadership 
• Infrastructure 
and support 
services 
• Diverse and 
innovative 
economy

FINAL 
Page 38 of 51 
What models are there to guide responses to events such as drought? 
CSIRO purports that traditional approaches such as strategic planning, risk assessment 
and stakeholder engagement processes were not designed to cope with the 
unprecedented rapid rate of change, particularly climate change and its ramifications, 
we are now experiencing. Consequently, CSIRO has built upon prior research to develop 
a guide to designing, implementing and assessing interventions for sustainable futures 
– this guide is called Resilience Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach – 
RAPTAlxxii. The three processes that are integral to RAPTA are to: 
● Identify stakeholders, their roles and connections, and bring people together to 
set goals, imagine future change and participate in other RAPTA components 
● Describe and analyse the system, recognise values and perspectives of diverse 
stakeholders, explore future scenarios, and identify uncertainties, stresses and 
shocks to assess resilience, adaptation and transformation and key points of 
intervention 
● Identify intervention options and arrange them into a provisional order for 
implementation pathways. Estimate their qualitative and quantitative benefits 
and costs, assemble them into an implementation plan with triggers and 
alternative pathways, and take action.  
Figure A19 shows the interconnectedness of these relationships in the RAPTA model. 
The concepts in the RAPTA have been generally applied in this project and report. 
 
Figure A19. RAPTA processes and modules  
Source: Reproduced from the RDRP Report Template - CSIRO 2019 https://acfid.asn.au/sites/site.acfid/files/19-
00418_LW_REPORT_RAPTAGuide_WEB_190829.pdf Accessed July 2022.

FINAL 
Page 39 of 51 
Role of governments in strengthening resilience 
What role can local government have in strengthening resilience? 
Of the three tiers of government, local government has the greatest on-ground 
understanding of what their communities need and has an influential and self-serving 
role in sustaining them during prolonged drought. Local government also has an 
important role as a significant employer and partnering with state governments and the 
Australian Government to secure town water, provide local leadership, build social 
capital, maintain employment to support the local economy and advocate for the needs 
of the community. Local government works in context with global market forces, which 
are particularly apparent in regional and rural areas of Australia. 
In reality, regional and rural councils in NSW have just sufficient resources to carry out 
business-as-usual activities providing services for the community and must rely on 
external income for significant strategic projectslxxiii. This means that the Councils may 
not have the freedom to direct the grant funds as it sees necessary and councils with 
smaller populations may also be excluded from some state support programs. 
How land in NSW is developed and managed, including the process for making 
environmental plans, is set out in the NSW Environmental and Assessment Act 1979. 
Councils have specific developmental control plans. Given their level of resourcing in 
relation to legislative and regulatory compliance requirements, Councils may not be 
able to deftly approve initiatives that would have community benefits in strengthening 
resilience.  
Further challenges for local government in building resilience to drought is the 
nature of some rural communities - community dynamics - a difficult cultural 
issue to change. This is a quote from the Regional Institute:  
“Many towns face barriers such as that between people with 
imagination who strike obstacles in developing their ideas due to the 
lack of management skills, finance, risk taking or knowledge about 
the greater environment in which they are operating. People outside 
towns who do possess the management skills, finance and 
understanding of the greater environment encounter difficulties 
because they lack an understanding of the smaller towns, their 
obstacles and opportunitieslxxiv.” 
Globally there is an increasing demand from the public and private sectors to reduce 
risk associated with disasters and climate change. Funding for disaster risk reduction, 
climate adaptation, and building resilience cannot be met by governments alone. 
Increasingly there will be expectations for private sector investment into infrastructure 
and other major projects that deliver both a financial return to investors and create 
community and economic resiliencelxxv.  
To build the capabilities that enable governments, business, and the community to 
better understand and prioritise investments in resilience, disaster risk reduction, and 
adaptation, the current situation facing regional communities needs to be better 
understood. As chronic, periodic and acute stressors increase, accumulate and 
compound, exceeding the capacity of the system to cope, catastrophic disaster 
becomes more likely.

FINAL 
Page 40 of 51 
What has been the State and Federal Governments’ response to drought? 
Government intervention can encourage and support effective risk management. 
The schema below (Figure A20) illustrates the policy approach taken by the Australian 
Government Department of Agriculture Water and Environment to drought. This Drought 
Resilience Plan for Gwydir and Inverell is primarily focussed on the segment ‘Long-term 
resilience and preparedness’. 
 
Figure A20. Australian Government Department of Agriculture Water and Environment policy approach to 
drought. Source: Drought policy - DAWE Accessed July 2022. 
The Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Planlxxvi 
lists Australian Government measures and programs that support resilience and 
preparedness. In 2019, there were the following number of programs in place: 
● Immediate action for those in drought – 22 programs 
● Support for the wider communities affected by drought - 8 programs 
● Long-term resilience and preparedness – 9 programs including the Future 
Drought Fund. 
Many of these programs including the Rural Financial Counselling Service, Farm 
Household Allowance and Drought Communities Programme Extension have been 
formally reviewed. A common theme in these programs was that they did not promote 
behavioural change, which requires greater focus on capacity building in terms of 
knowledge and skills, using evidence to support decisions and collaborating. 
The Future Drought Fund (FDF) programs (18 have funding allocated to them as of July 
2022lxxvii) are focussed on capacity building. FDF strategic priorities are to: 
● Grow self-reliance and performance of the agricultural sector 
● Improve the natural capital of agricultural landscapes for better environmental 
outcomes 
● Strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of rural, regional and remote 
communities. 
Non-agricultural government portfolios also have programs supporting drought affected 
communities. One such program is the ‘Drought Communities One Stop Shop’. This is

FINAL 
Page 41 of 51 
organised and funded by the Federal Government’s National Recovery and Resilience 
Agency in partnership with Rotary Australia. The program aims to provide communities 
with appropriate information, advice and options to prepare and recover from drought, 
flood and bushfire. As part of the program, Rotary distributes $500 vouchers to drought-
affected households and conducts community well-being activities. It is unclear how 
welfare payments deliver on the FDF strategic priorities, particularly growing self-
reliance. 
The NSW government provides a publicly available drought monitoring tool that 
monitors seasonal conditions across NSW. It is called the Enhanced Drought 
Information System (EDIS). It is used across government and farming stakeholders to 
build drought risk awareness, emphasise drought preparedness and improve 
confidence in drought monitoring and early warning. A key feature of EDIS is the 
development of the NSWDPI Combined Drought Indicator (CDI). 
The CDI integrates a range of data and model outputs in a framework that is useful for 
decision makers. It combines meteorological, hydrological and agronomic definitions of 
drought (above) using indexes for rainfall, soil and water and plant growth. From these, 
a fourth index, drought direction (DDI), is developed. EDIS is undergoing redevelopment 
under the Future Ready Region strategy to provide farmers with world-leading weather 
and climate data to enable better business decisionslxxviii. Maybe ultimately climate 
forecasts rather than hindcasts are the gold standard for future decision-making for 
example tools such as Ag360lxxix. 
The NSW government also provides business support for a wide range of industries 
including performance data and insights as well as budget and cost tools. State-based 
grants include Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme, Disaster Recovery 
Grants and Community Grants Future Drought Fund. NSW Government provides 
financial relief and support services for eligible local councils, primary producers, small 
businesses, sport and recreational clubs, not-for-profit organisations, individuals, 
families and householdslxxx. DroughtHub, an online drought assistance and information 
portal for NSW primary producers, is a further support mechanism resourced by the 
NSW Government. A further support program called AdaptNSW has a broader target 
audience that includes communities, businesses, households and government itself.  
The Australian Government and NSW Government co-fund the Farm Business 
Resilience Programlxxxi. This program provides coaching for farmers, farm managers, 
and their employees, who are looking to upskill and learn about risk management, how 
to adapt to a changing climate, and improve the economic, environmental, and social 
resilience of their business. 
The relationship between the Australian Government Future Drought Fund and the NSW 
Government drought action is provided in Figure A21. This Plan is one of three 
programs forming drought actions.

FINAL 
Page 42 of 51 
 
Figure A21. Alignment of drought-related strategies and actions. Source: Reproduced from the RDRP Project 
Management Guide. 
While government and industry policy has espoused the need for farmers to take the 
primary role of managing risks, the ‘Future-Proofing Farming’ report prepared by 
Pottinger for the National Farmers Federation sees a key role for government to ensure 
all available risk management tools are readily available to farmers to manage volatile 
conditionslxxxii. It identifies the need for governments to have a role in:  
● A national data initiative to inform farmers on their decision-making; increase the 
availability 
● Ensuring granularity and comparability of data to foster the adoption of financial 
risk management products 
● Improving the development and pricing of new risk products 
● Elevating the risk management advice provided to farmers through a national 
curriculum on farm financial risk management, and an accreditation program for 
farm advisors  
● Improving price discovery and transparency, particularly in developing markets 
for futures contracts across all relevant commodities.

FINAL 
Page 43 of 51 
Appendix 1 to Attachment A. Terms of Reference from Gwydir & Inverell 
Shire Councils to UNE  
Scope: The project will be undertaken in three phases outlined below. 
1. Desktop review and preliminary resilience assessment 
Key deliverables 
1. Preliminary desktop review and initial resilience assessment of the region 
The successful consultant will first undertake a desktop review and preliminary 
resilience assessment of the LGAs. Consultants are required to use a structured 
resilience assessment process (be outlined in the response to this Tender) which is 
appropriate for the achieving the program’s objectives. Key components of the 
resilience assessment in the desktop review phase will include: 
● Key characteristics of the local community and economy (e.g. demographics, key 
economic drivers, resource base and geography) 
● Summary of relevant strategic visions and plans (e.g. 20-Year Economic Vision 
for Regional NSW, Regional Economic Development Strategies i.e. REDS, 
Community Strategic Plans, etc.) 
● Assessment of the impact of previous droughts on the local community and 
economy, including Government sponsored drought response measures.  
Councils / The Department of Regional NSW/ NSW Department of Planning and 
Environment/ NSW Department of Primary Industries and Resilience NSW and 
Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment will provide further documentation 
as necessary to assist with this process. The desktop review will be used to inform and 
design consultation and co-design with the local community, including an assessment 
of constraints and opportunities of local government as drought resilience actors 
(Phase 2). 
2. Consultation, co-design and updated resilience assessment 
Key deliverables 
2. Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan 
3. Preparation and facilitation of resilience assessment workshops. 
4. Finalisation of resilience assessment 
5. Identification of 4-6 drought resilience projects across economic, social and 
environmental pillars. 
The consultant will: 
● Work with the PCG to Create a Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan 
which identifies and engages private and public sector stakeholders which are 
interested in or impacted by drought. 
● Work with local stakeholders to refine and complete resilience assessments. 
Resilience assessments will then be used to inform an Investment Logic Map 
process (or similar) to identify and describe 4-6 drought resilience projects 
across economic, social and environmental resilience pillars. Examples of 
projects which may be identified through the co-design process include:

FINAL 
Page 44 of 51 
i.  Opportunities for inter-industry and intra-industry diversification 
ii.  Improving efficiency of water and energy, particularly where this is related 
to amenity or service provision by local government 
iii.  Indigenous land management knowledge sharing and development; or 
iv.  Developing and expanding local programs to build leadership and social 
capital 
v.  Opportunities for local government to run work programs countercyclically 
to the economic impact of drought. 
Consultants should plan on holding multiple workshops as part of the resilience 
assessment and Investment Logic Map process. Where possible under to COVID-19 
restrictions it would be preferable for as many of these to be conducted in-person as 
possible. A detailed stakeholder list will be developed in consultation with the PCG and 
will likely contain: 
● Industry and community groups (CWA, farmers, producer groups etc) 
● Regional and rural community leaders 
● Regional employers and business owners 
● Local council staff members 
● Joint Organisations of Councils (JOs) 
● Local Aboriginal Land Councils (LALC) 
● Business Chambers 
● Various NSW Government agencies (e.g. DRNSW, DPIE, DPI & Resilience NSW). 
3. Detailing Drought Resilience Projects and Final Drought Resilience Plan 
Key deliverables 
6. Drought Resilience Plan 
The consultant will prepare a Drought Resilience Plan (document form) which projects a 
clear vision and acts as a reference point for councils to improve and manage drought 
resilience over the next 20 years. The Drought Resilience Plan (not exceeding 60 pages 
in length) will contain. 
● A summary of conclusions from the desktop review, community consultation, 
resilience assessment and Investment Logic Map 
● A description of 4-6 drought resilience projects identified during the community 
consultation and co-design phase. Projects should be focused solely on 
improving drought resilience outcomes and not necessarily be constrained by 
current / temporal availability of funds 
● The output from a robust evaluation and prioritisation framework (including rapid 
Benefit-Cost Ratio appropriate) of identified priority projects 
● The production of. The purpose of this is to highlight the key outcomes of the 
study in a manner which is easily accessible to council staff, councillors and the 
local community

FINAL 
Page 45 of 51 
● Identification and scoping of further detailed technical studies to be undertaken 
within the remaining budget and either: 
a)  Represent the implementation of identified projects (e.g. water demand 
assessment to allow for better forecasting and management of water 
supplies); or 
b)  Can be leveraged by council to support applications for implementation 
funding to state and federal programs (e.g. technical study into upgrading 
the efficiency of council owned water infrastructure) 
● The consultant, in consultation with the PCG and local council will make a 
recommendation on projects which could implemented within a budget envelope 
in the order of $100,000-$300,000. 
To increase the accessibility of the plan to the local community and support the 
development of future plans in other regions, the consultant will also produce: 
● A succinct booklet (max. 5 pages) summarising resilience assessment 
outcomes and prioritised projects 
● A succinct summary (max. 4 pages) of key lessons in the project.

FINAL 
Page 46 of 51 
Bibliography 
 
i Walker, B., C. S. Holling, S. R. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig. 2004. Resilience, adaptability and 
transformability in social–ecological systems. Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/   
 
ii Ackerman, C. 2017. How to Measure Resilience with These 8 Resilience Scales. Positive 
Psychology. https://positivepsychology.com/3-resilience-scales/  
 
iii Maru et al. 2022. Regional Drought Resilience Plans Assessment Guidelines. CSIRO, Australia.   
 
iv Burdob, A. Dry Paddocks, Damp Policies: Drought assistance Strategies and their Effectiveness. 
Economics, Commerce and industrial Relations Group. 
https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Librar
y/pubs/rp/RP9596/96rp06 
 
v Bene et al. 2012. Resilience: New Utopia or New Tyranny? Reflection about the Potentials and 
limits of the Concept of Resilience in Relation to Vulnerability Reduction Programmes. Institute 
of Development studies (IDS) Working Paper 2012 Number 405. 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x  
 
vi Maru et al. 2022. Regional Drought Resilience Plans Assessment Guidelines. CSIRO, Australia.   
 
vii Regional Development Australian Northern Inland 
https://app.remplan.com.au/northerninland/economy/trends/gross-regional-
product?state=PRV1CO!vO1pUj3DOF1RRYdhmy3YVtoTJHVp0IrHzHMVH0S0sRSoSVwy  
 
viii Hughes et al. 2019. The Effects of Drought and Climate Variability on Australian Farms. ABARES 
Insights Issue 6. ABARES Insights: Analysis of the effects of drought and climate variability on 
Australian farms 
 
viii Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Gwydir, Census All persons QuickStats. 
https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA13660  
 
x Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Inverell, Census All persons QuickStats. 
https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA14220  
 
xi Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Gwydir, Census All persons QuickStats. 
https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA13660  
 
xii Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Socio-Economic Indexes (SEIFA) for Areas. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/seifa 
 
xiii Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021. Water use on Australian farms, Australia and state/ territory 
and ASGS (Statistical Area 4) regions - 2019-2020 Download xlsx [228.24 KB]  
 
xiv NSW Department of Industry. 2018. Prepare Your Business for Disasters in Five Simple Steps. 
https://www.industry.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/167831/Get-ready-disaster-
tool-brochure.pdf 
 
xv Hughs et al. 2019. Analysis of the effects of Drought and Climate Variability on Australian Farms. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics. ABARES Insights. Issue 6. 
https://www.awe.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/EffectsOfDroughtAndClimateVariabili
tyOnAustralianFarms_v1.0.0.pdf

FINAL 
Page 47 of 51 
 
xvi Australian Government, Department of Home Affairs. 2018. Profiling Australia’s Vulnerability: the 
interconnected Causes and Cascading Effects of Systemic Disaster Risk. 
https://www.aidr.org.au/media/6682/national-resilience-taskforce-profiling-australias-
vulnerability.pdf  
 
xvii Australian Disaster Resilience Index. 2022. Natural Hazards Research Australia and Bushfire and 
Natural Hazards CRC.  https://www.adri.bnhcrc.com.au/#!/resilienceFactors  
 
xviii Council of Australian Governments. 2011.National Strategy Disaster Resilience. 
https://recovery.gov.au/sites/default/files/national-strategy-disaster-resilience.pdf 
 
xix Australian Government, Productivity Commission. 2017. Transitioning Regional Economies, Study 
Report. https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/transitioning-
regions/report/transitioning-regions-report.pdf 
 
xx Australian Disaster Resilience Index. 2022. Natural Hazards Research Australia and Bushfire and 
Natural Hazards CRC.  https://www.adri.bnhcrc.com.au/#!/maps  
 
xxi United States Department of Agriculture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln. National Drought 
Mitigation Centre. Managing Drought Risk on the Rank: A Planning Guide for Great Plains 
Ranchers. https://www.preventionweb.net/publication/managing-drought-risk-ranch-planning-
guide-great-plains-ranchers 
 
xxii O’Brien, K. Global Environmental Change II: From Adaption to Deliberate Transformation. 
University of Oslo, Norway. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0309132511425767  
 
xxiii McCloskey et al. 2015. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Models and 
Frameworks for the Practice of Community Engagement. Principles of Community 
Engagement – second edition 2nd ed. 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/communityengagement/pce_models.html  
 
xxiv McCloskey et al. 2015. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Concepts of 
Community. Principles of Community Engagement – second edition 2nd ed. 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/communityengagement/pce_concepts.html  
 
xxv Queensland Reconstruction Authority. 2020. Central West Regional Resilience Strategy. 
https://www.qra.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-
03/0516_Central%20West%20Regional%20Resilience%20Strategy_January2020_LR.pdf  
 
xxvi 2018 estimate based on 2016 ABS Census data 
 
xxvii Maru et al. 2022 Regional Drought Resilience Plans Assessment Guidelines. CSIRO, Australia. 
 
xxviii Queensland Reconstruction Authority. 2020. Central West Regional Resilience Strategy. 
https://www.qra.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-
03/0516_Central%20West%20Regional%20Resilience%20Strategy_January2020_LR.pdf  
 
xxix Pottinger. 2020. Future-Proofing Farming: Collaborating to manage risk and build resilience. 
National Farmers Federation. https://www.pottinger.com/agriculture.html  
 
xxx Naughton, C. and Hajkowicz, S. et al. 2022. Our Future World: Global megatrends impacting the 
way we live over coming decades. Brisbane., Australia: CSIRO. 
https://www.csiro.au/en/research/technology-space/data/Our-Future-World

FINAL 
Page 48 of 51 
 
xxxi Australian Government. 2022. Social Determinants of Health. Australian Institute of Health and 
Welfare. https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-data/population-groups/rural-remote-
australians/overview   
 
xxxii Pottinger. 2020. Future-Proofing Farming: Collaborating to manage risk and build resilience. 
National Farmers Federation. https://www.pottinger.com/agriculture.html  
 
xxxiii Australian Bureau of Statistics Region Summary: Inverell (A). 
https://dbr.abs.gov.au/region.html?lyr=lga&rgn=14220 
 
xxxiv Australian Bureau of Statistics Region Summary: Inverell 2016 Census All persons QuickStats. 
https://abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2016/SSC11981  
 
xxxv Australian Bureau of Statistics Region Summary: Inverell (A). 
https://dbr.abs.gov.au/region.html?lyr=lga&rgn=14220 
 
xxxvi Collitis, P. 2000. Small Town Decline and Survival: Trends, Success Factors and Policy Issues. 
NSW Department of State and Regional Development. 
http://www.regional.org.au/au/countrytowns/global/collits.htm  
 
xxxvii NSW Government. 2017. New England North West Regional Plan 2036. 
https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Plans-for-your-area/Regional-Plans/New-England-North-
West/New-England-North-West-Regional-Plan/Local-Government-Narratives  
 
xxxviii NSW Government. 2017. New England North West Regional Plan 2036. 
https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Plans-for-your-area/Regional-Plans/New-England-North-
West/New-England-North-West-Regional-Plan/Local-Government-Narratives 
 
xxxix Clayton-Dixon, C. 2019. Surviving New England, Aniawan Language Revival Program, Armidale. 
Reprinted NEWARA Aboriginal Corporation, Armidale 2020 
http://newenglandhistory.blogspot.com  
 
xl NSW Government. 2019/20. Inverell: Your Council. https://www.yourcouncil.nsw.gov.au/council-
data/inverell-1632188804  
 
xli Clarke, M. AgEconPlus. 2007. Information Audit of Socio-Economic Activities in the Gwydir River 
Catchment prepared for Department of Environment and Climate Change (NSW). 
https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/-/media/OEH/Corporate-
Site/Documents/Research/Our-science-and-research/information-audit-socio-economic-
activities-gwydir-river-catchment-
report.pdf?la=en&hash=CB12790453E115D060E8C0E98E130884273FF895  
 
xlii Australian Government Bureau of Meteorology. Climate Statistics for Australian Locations – 
Inverell. http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/cw_056242.shtml 
 
xliii NSW Government. 2017. New England North West Regional Plan 2036. 
https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Plans-and-policies/new-england-north-
west-final-regional-plan-2017-09.pdf   
 
xliv Gwydir Shire Council Annual Report 2020/2021. 2020-2021 Annual Report (PDF, 4MB)  
 
xlv Gwydir Shire Council Annual Report 2020/2021. 2020-2021 Annual Report (PDF, 4MB)  
 
xlvi Regional Development Australia Northern Inland NSW. 2016. Inverell Shire Local Government Area. 
https://www.rdani.org.au/files/pages/projects/current/northern-inland-regional-investment-
profile/RDA164-Inverell-Module-LR.pdf

FINAL 
Page 49 of 51 
 
 
xlvii Regional Development Australia Northern Inland NSW. 2016. Inverell Shire Local Government 
Area. https://www.rdani.org.au/files/pages/projects/current/northern-inland-regional-
investment-profile/RDA164-Inverell-Module-LR.pdf  
 
xlviii REMPLAN. Regional Development Australia Northern Inland NSW. 
https://app.remplan.com.au/northerninland/community/trends/unemployment?state=jJDgTD!bY
D0hdxmVHw88n0SxZA5GC1U5uo7dCruVuLursRuXn8 
 
xlix Australian Bureau of Statistics Region Summary: Inverell 2011 Census All persons QuickStats. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2011/LGA14200  
 
l Australian Bureau of Statistics 2020/ 2021. Tourism Satellite Account. 
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/economy/national-accounts/australian-national-accounts-
tourism-satellite-account/latest-release  
 
li Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association – Copeton Dam. https://www.gvia.org.au/the-gwydir-
valley/copeton-dam/  
 
lii Gwydir Shire Council – Shire News. 2021. https://www.gwydir.nsw.gov.au/Council/Shire-
News/INLAND-RAIL-JOBS-ON-OFFER-IN-NORTH-WEST-NSW 
 
lii Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC). 2022. Inland Rail. 
https://1worpv3xudfc4dl40l1hi7fz-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/04/inland-rail-full-alignment-map-jan-22.pdf 
 
liv Australian Government Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, 
Communications and the Arts. Inland Rail. https://www.inlandrail.gov.au/media/news/inland-
rail-enhance-telecommunications-between-narrabri-north-star  
 
lv NSW Government Planning, Industry & Environment. 
https://www.energy.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-12/UpdatedFactsheet_202012.pdf  
 
lvi Infrastructure Partnerships Australia. Australia New Zealand Infrastructure Pipeline. NSW New 
England Renewable Energy Zone (REZ). https://infrastructurepipeline.org/project/new-england-
renewable-energy-zone  
 
lvii Nolan, A. 2020. GrazingFutures Project Case Study – Drought and Climate Adaption Program. 
Queensland Government. https://futurebeef.com.au/wp-
content/uploads/2017/11/GrazingFutures-Drought-Learnings-Case-Study.pdf  
 
lviii NSW Government. 2021. Future Ready Regions Strategy. 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-
06/Future%20Ready%20Regions%20Strategy%20.pdf  
 
lix Australian Rural Leadership Foundation - Latest News 4 August 2022. Leading Australian Resilient 
Communities. https://rural-leaders.org.au/programs/drought-resilience-leaders-program/   
 
lx Gwydir Shire Council Community Strategic Plan 2017-2027.  http://gwydirshire.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/1Community-Strategic-Plan-2017.pdf  
 
lxi Inverell Shire Council. Draft Inverell Shire Local Strategic Planning Statement 2036. 
https://inverell.nsw.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Draft-Local-Strategic-Planning-
Statement.pdf

FINAL 
Page 50 of 51 
 
lxii NSW Government. 2017. New England North West Regional Plan 2036.  
https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Plans-and-policies/new-england-north-
west-final-regional-plan-2017-09.pdf  
 
lxiii Goondiwindi Regional Council. 2020. Goondiwindi Regional Council Drought Resilience Plan. 
https://www.grc.qld.gov.au/downloads/file/1682/drought-resilience-plan  
 
lxiv Queensland Reconstruction Authority. 2020. Central West Regional Resilience Strategy. 
https://www.qra.qld.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-
03/0516_Central%20West%20Regional%20Resilience%20Strategy_January2020_LR.pdf 
 
lxv  NSW Government. Upper North West Regional Economic Development Strategy 2018-2022. 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-05/Upper%20North%20West%20REDS.pdf  
 
lxvi  NSW Government. 2021. Future Ready Regions Strategy.  
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-
06/Future%20Ready%20Regions%20Strategy%20.pdf  
 
lxvii NSW Government. 2021. A 20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW. 
https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-
02/20%20Year%20Vision%20for%20RNSW_0.pdf  
 
lxviii Department of Agriculture 2019, Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience and 
Preparedness Plan, Canberra, November.  
https://www.awe.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/aust-govt-drought-response-
plan_0.pdf  
 
lxix DAWE 2021, National Climate Resilience and Adaption Strategy 2021 to 2025: Positioning Australia 
to better anticipate, manage and adapt to our changing climate. Department of Agriculture, 
Water and Environment, Canberra. 
https://www.awe.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/national-climate-resilience-and-
adaptation-strategy.pdf 
 
lxx Pottinger. 2020. Future-Proofing Farming: Collaborating to manage risk and build resilience. 
National Farmers Federation. 
https://www.pottinger.com/uploads/1/9/5/1/19512909/nff_synthesis_report-future-
proofing_farming.pdf 
 
lxxi Hegney, D. et al. 2008. Building Resilience in Rural Communities: Toolkit. The University of 
Queensland and University of Southern Queensland. 
http://inform.regionalaustralia.org.au/process/managing-change/item/building-resilience-in-
rural-communities-toolkit  
 
lxxii O’Connell, D. et al. 2019. Resilience, Adaption Pathways and Transformation Approach. A guide for 
designing, implementing and assessing interventions for sustainable futures (version 2). CSIRO. 
https://acfid.asn.au/sites/site.acfid/files/19-
00418_LW_REPORT_RAPTAGuide_WEB_190829.pdf  
 
lxxiii NSW Government – Your Council. 2019-20 Your Council’s Data Sources and Definitions. 
https://www.yourcouncil.nsw.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Your-Council-2019-20-
Data-Definitions-and-Source.pdf  
 
lxxiv Collitis, P. 2000. Small Town Decline and Survival: Trends, Success Factors and Policy Issues. NSW 
Department of State and Regional Development.  
www.regional.org.au/au/countrytowns/global/collits.htm

FINAL 
Page 51 of 51 
 
 
lxxv O’Connell et al. 2021. Towards visions, options and pathways for an adaptive future in Bega 
Valley: Building national capability for Enabling Resilience Investment. Report prepared by 
CSIRO, Value Advisory Partners and University of Adelaide. CSIRO, Australia. 
https://research.csiro.au/enabling-resilience-investment/case-studies/case-study-bega-
valley/  
lxxvi Department of Agriculture. 2019. Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience and 
Preparedness Plan. Canberra. https://www.awe.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/aust-
govt-drought-response-plan_0.pdf  
lxxvii DAWE. 2021. Future Drought Fund Annual Report 2020–21, Department of Agriculture, Water and 
the Environment. Canberra. Future Drought Fund Annual Report 2020-21 
 
lxxviii NSW Government. Department of Primary Industries. Combined Drought Indicator. 
https://edis.dpi.nsw.gov.au/about  
 
lxxix University of New England. Ag360.  https://ag360.com.au/#/out  
 
lxxx NSW Government. 2022. Disaster relief and support for individuals and households.  
https://www.nsw.gov.au/disaster-recovery/disaster-relief-and-support/disaster-relief-and-
support-for-individuals-and-households 
 
lxxxi NSW Government. Department of Primary Industries. Farm Business Resilience Coaching 
Program for 2022/2023. https://www.droughthub.nsw.gov.au/programs/farm-business-
resilience-program  
 
lxxxii Pottinger. 2020. Future-Proofing Farming: Collaborating to manage risk and build resilience. 
National Farmers Federation.  
https://www.pottinger.com/uploads/1/9/5/1/19512909/nff_synthesis_report-future-
proofing_farming.pdf

FINAL 
 
Attachment B – Phase 2 Consultation, codesign and ranking of 
community ideas 
This attachment outlines: 
• 
Section A: the structure, process and stakeholder mapping for conducting the 
community consultation. It should be noted that the names and contact details in the 
stakeholder mapping section were generously provided by the two Shires. They cannot 
be copied or supplied to any other third party without the permission of the Shires and 
the individuals identified in the stakeholder map. 
• 
Section B: the format of the community consultation sessions. Where attendance was 
low an informal structure was introduced however the key areas of exploration were 
covered in all sessions. 
• 
Section C: The initial ranking of community consultation ideas. 
Section A: Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan 
This section outlines the approach of the stakeholder and community engagement plan used in 
the consultation phase of the project. 
Purpose 
The purpose of this plan was to describe the process, approach and delivery plan for the Gwydir 
and Inverell Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan that would inform the Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan for these shires. 
Principles 
The following design and engagement principles were applied during the delivery of this 
Stakeholder and Community Engagement Plan: 
● Place communities and stakeholders at the centre of our work 
● Respect past experiences and impact (understand the context) 
● Be outcome focussed and co-design in local partnership 
● Be inclusive 
● Listen actively. 
Objectives 
The objectives of this stakeholder and community engagement plan were: 
● Provide clarity to participants on the purpose of this plan 
● Provide clarity to participants on what resilience means 
● Be specific about what, how, who, and when 
● Encourage active participation 
● Gather information and project ideas 
● Prioritise these project ideas on the basis of an agreed framework 
● Inform and manage expectations.

2
Roles and Responsibilities 
The following are the roles and responsibilities of the organisations involved in the design and 
delivery of this stakeholder and community engagement plan: 
Activity 
Lead 
Prepare stakeholder and community invitation list 
Councils 
Organise logistics such as room bookings, access information, 
etc 
Councils 
Extend invitations 
Councils 
Complete letterbox drop 
Councils 
Prepare and release media release 
Council - Council 
point of contact 
for media 
interviews 
Provide a registration mechanism (by phone and registration 
portal). 
Maintain RSVP database and liaise with consultants to ensure 
efficient and effective sessions 
Councils 
Room setup, any materials, coffee/tea, etc 
Consultant 
Facilitation of sessions 
Consultant 
Record keeping and note taking 
Consultant 
Analysis/ prioritisation of project ideas 
Consultant 
Post session feedback 
Council

3
Activity 
Lead 
Preparation of stories 
Regional NSW 
Preparation of a survey (if required) 
Consultant 
Distribution of survey (electronic) 
Council 
Gathering and analysis of survey results 
Consultant 
Engagement Design and Approach 
The following four stages in engagement and consultation were applied based on codesign 
principles: 
● Engage - we will be empathetic, inclusive, enthusiastic, respectful and recognise and 
encourage diverse and representative views, interests and ideas  
● Listen - we will listen carefully, share past experiences, hear all voices, empower 
participants 
● Inform - we will be open, transparent and supportive 
● Discover - we will collaborate and be future focused. 
Stakeholder Map 
The following table outlines the key stakeholder groups the plan sought to consult. Every 
endeavour was made to meet or interview those listed below, time and resources permitting. 
It should be noted that the names and contact details in this stakeholder mapping section were 
generously provided by the two Shires. They cannot be copied or supplied to any other third 
party without the permission of the Shires and the individuals identified in the stakeholder map. 
Stakeholder mapping 
Group 
Community, Businesses and 
organisations 
North Star, Croppa Creek, Gravesend, Upper 
Horton, Bingara, Inverell, Yetman, Ashford, 
Delungra, Tingha, Coolatai, Warialda  
Government 
Gwydir Council 
Government 
Inverell Council

4
Stakeholder mapping 
Group 
Indigenous groups 
Local Aboriginal Land Councils 
● Ashford 
● Anaiwan 
● Moombahlene 
Key interest groups 
Drought Resilience Leaders Group for NW 
NSW  
Key interest groups 
NSW Farmers 
Key interest groups 
CWA 
Key interest groups 
NRM and Landcare Groups 
Key Interest groups 
Family and Youth Support 
Government 
NSW DPI 
Business groups 
Business chambers 
Business 
Bindaree Beef/ Myola Feedlot 
Business 
Boss Engineering, Warialda 
Local Government 
Inverell Shire 
Inverell Business /Farmers contacts 
 
Emergency and health organisations 
Rural Fire Service/SES 
Emergency and health organisations 
Rural Adversity Mental Health Program 
Coordinator (NSW Health)

5
Stakeholder mapping 
Group 
Key interest groups 
Local Land Services 
Key interest groups 
Rural Aid 
Key interest groups 
Gwydir Valley Irrigators Association 
Josh MacGregor 
CEO Macgregor Gourlay 
Sandy McNaughton 
Recovery Support Officer 
Inverell, Gwydir, et al 
Jackie Todd 
Principal Gravesend School 
Katie and Colin Dight 
Deputy Mayor - Inverell and farmer 
Simon Doolan 
The Vicarage Cafe North Star - co-owner 
and farmer 
James Harcastle 
The Vicarage Cafe North Star - co-owner 
and farmer 
Glenrac 
 
Phil Donnan 
St Vincent de Paul Society,  
Engagement Delivery & Sequence 
Engagement and consultation was a mix of face to face, virtual group sessions and some one 
on one interviews (likely to be virtual in most cases). A survey was considered if it was 
identified that further feedback was necessary. 
Engagement sessions were a mix of: 
● Small workshops 
● Group discussions 
● Targeted Q&A sessions

6
● Interviews 
● Unstructured discussions and conversations. 
The following table summarises the general approach that was taken with participants in the 
engagement and consultation phase of this project: 
Session 
Outcome 
Welcome & Introductions 
Gather background of participants  
Context and Session Outline 
● Outline the bigger picture 
● Discussion about what resilience 
means 
● Describe session process 
Lived experience 
Share experiences 
The next 3-5 years 
 
● Shared understanding of future  
drought and climate risk predictions 
● Create a resilience mindset  
Identify potential initiatives, ideas - reflect and 
refine 
Build an initial list of project ideas 
Present back ideas 
Share ideas and refine list 
Rank ideas 
Rank list based on participants feedback 
Discuss outcomes of rankings 
Capture further feedback on the rankings 
Discussion/Feedback 
Any additional 
considerations/inputs/feedback on the 
process of applying the resilience 
framework 
What happens from here 
Share and ensure an understanding of our 
limitations, clarity of steps and timelines

7
Consultation schedule 
The following was the planned schedule of face to face consultation and engagement. 
Shire specific consultation to be conducted with Inverell and Gwydir Shires on 8 June: 
● 9.30-11.30 - Committee Room, Inverell Shire Council Administration Centre, 144 Otho 
Street, Inverell 
● 1.30-3.30 - Roxy Conference Room Bingara. 
Community, business and key stakeholder sessions were planned to be held at the following 
locations and times: 
● North Star, Vicarage Café, 9-11 Edward Street, North Star, Tuesday 14 June 9-11am 
● Yetman, Yetman Hall, 82-84 Warialda Street, Yetman, Tuesday 14 June 1.30-3.30pm 
● Croppa Creek, Croppa Creek Bowling Club, 26 Aspley Drive, Croppa Creek, Wednesday 
15 June 9-11am 
● Gravesend, Gravesend Club, 59 Railway Parade, Gravesend, Wednesday 15 June 1.30-
3.30pm 
● Warialda, Warialda Soldiers Memorial Hall, 72 Hope Street Warialda, Thursday 16 June 
9-11am 
● Coolatai, Wallaroo Hotel, 15 Yetman Rd, Coolatai,Thursday 16 June 1.30-3.30pm  
● Bingara,The Living Classroom 1A Killarney Gap Rd, Bingara, Friday 17th June 9-11am 
● Upper Horton, , The Upper Horton Sports Club, 22 Cobbadah St, Upper Horton, Friday 
17th June 1.30-3.30pm 
● 
Tingha , Tingha Town Hall, 16 Ruby Street, Tingha, Monday 20th June 9-11am 
● 
Ashford, Ashford Bowling Club, 29 Bala Street, Ashford, Monday 20th June 1.30-3.30pm 
● 
Delungra , Delungra Multi Purpose Hall, 19 Railway Street, Delungra, Tuesday 21st June 
9-11am 
● 
Inverell, Inverell Town Hall Annexe, Corner Evans & Otho Street, Inverell, Tuesday 21st 
June 1.30-3.30pm 
A web based questionnaire was in place for any participants who could not attend a session. 
Open questions were used to elicit the widest possible feedback: 
1. In the past what has worked well in preparing for and responding to drought (projects, 
practices, initiatives, ideas) and are there activities or projects that did not work as well 
(and why) 
2. What could you suggest that could be changed or added in the future to improve 
preparation for and response to drought and to increase drought resilience (projects, 
ideas, practices, initiatives)? 
3. Any other feedback on drought preparation or recovery in your region.

8
Risk plan 
The following risks were identified with mitigation actions. 
Risk 
Risk level 
Mitigation action 
Attendance at community 
sessions is poor leading to 
insufficient information being 
gathered 
 
Medium  
● Letterbox drop to all 
residents 
● Social media 
promotion 
● Press release and 
engaging with 
journalists 
● Targeted interviews to 
engage key groups or 
representatives 
Covid impacts on ability to 
meet stakeholders or 
communities 
 
Low 
● Covid safe practices 
in place 
● Shift to virtual and one 
on one phone 
interviews

FINAL 
 
Section B: Community Consultation Process 
The following table is the agenda and process used during the consultation phase of the project. 
Mornings: 9.30-11.30am 
Afternoons: 1.30-3.30pm 
 
Time 
Topic 
Activity 
Target Outcome 
15 mins 
before 
Cuppa & registration 
Informal mingle 
 
● Ice breaker 
● List of attendees and their contact 
details 
● Covid safety 
● Set up butchers paper 
● Get people to fill out registration  
00:00 
(5 mins) 
Welcome & Introductions 
& Acknowledgement of 
Country 
Session outline 
● Round the room 
● Explain why we’re here 
● Walk through session process and 
anticipated outcomes 
 
00:10 
(20 mins) 
Lived experience 
● Personal experience in the last 
drought 
● What things went well in response 
to prepare for the drought? 
● Were there things you wished you’d 
done to be better prepared? 
● Share experiences 
● Talk from their seats 
● If large groups, breakouts and 
reporting back

2
Time 
Topic 
Activity 
Target Outcome 
00:30 
(15 mins) 
Identify potential 
initiatives, ideas 
● Write ideas/projects under headings Build a long list of ideas under headings 
00:45 
(10 mins) 
Cuppa/break 
● Break & chat 
 
00:55 
(15 mins) 
Add or change any 
potential initiatives, ideas 
● Revisit pre cuppa list 
● Anything more? 
● Anything different? 
Refined ideas list 
01:10 
(15 mins) 
Present/discuss ideas 
● Spokesperson or as a group 
● Share ideas 
● Identify any duplication and if any 
tidy/shorten list to remove duplication 
01:25 
(10 mins) 
Rank ideas 
● Using a voting system  
● Each participant gets 10 coloured 
dots, they vote, they can put all 10 
against one or allocate as they 
desire 
● Long list with rankings 
● The key to this is they must prioritise 
● Depending on number of ideas we may 
change the number of dots they have 
01:35 
(15 mins) 
Discuss outcomes of 
rankings 
Open forum 
Having contributed to session any other 
thoughts/feedback we should capture 
● Capture qualitative feedback on the 
rankings

3
Time 
Topic 
Activity 
Target Outcome 
01:50 
What happens from here 
and close 
Revisit our process, timelines, 
limitations 
Understanding of our role, clarity on steps 
and timelines 
 
The Council Drought Resilience Workshop followed a similar format.

1
Section 3: Community ideas and initial ranking 
Table 1 details the impact assessment criteria for ranking the community ideas. 
Table 1: Impact assessment criteria 
Impact criteria 
Description 
(Number represents weighting) 
A 
Impact/Value 
Will have a beneficial impact (employment, water security, food security, infrastructure, community 
morale, environment) for a large proportion of the community, business and region. Likely to 
attract broad support. Can be applied in a range of regional droughts settings 
(1) 
Will have some beneficial (employment, water security, food security, infrastructure, community 
morale, environment) impact to a smaller proportion of the community, business and region. Likely 
to receive mixed support. Possible to be applied in a range of regional droughts settings but may 
need more work in other settings 
(3) 
Will have some or minor beneficial (employment, water security, food security, infrastructure, 
community morale, environment) impact to a small proportion of the community, business and 
region. May face criticism or limited support. Less likely to be applied in a range of regional 
droughts settings 
(5) 
B 
Time to implement 
● < 3 years (1) 
● >3 years (5) 
Note: This criterion, while relevant to project management delivery, was given a zero weighting as

2
Impact criteria 
Description 
(Number represents weighting) 
it was not regarded as directly related to drought resilience impact. 
C 
Cost to implement  
● < $300k (1) 
● > $300k (5) 
Note: These criterion, while relevant to project management delivery, was given a zero weighting 
as it was not regarded as direct ley related to drought resilience impact. 
D 
Complexity to implement 
● Implementation complexity 
● Technical complexity 
● Project complexity 
● Stakeholder complexity 
Less complex, quick to commence and only require weeks of planning and preparation before 
commencing 
(1) 
Moderately complex, will take some months of planning and preparation before commencing 
(3) 
Very complex, will take many months of planning and preparation before commencing 
(5)

3
Impact criteria 
Description 
(Number represents weighting) 
E  
Forward Looking & Future Shock Resilience 
Forward looking - innovative and sustainable problem solving 
Future shocks - intensity and pattern of weather events, economic/political disruption, global 
supply chains reliability,  
Highly innovative, sustainable/enduring, place based, highly responsive to future shocks 
(transformative) 
(1) 
Some innovation, sustainable/enduring, place based, moderately responsive to future shocks 
(adaptive) 
(3) 
Low innovation, narrow or short term application, generic and not place based, limited benefit or 
vulnerable to future shocks (absorptive) 
(5) 
 
Output: Short list of ideas (initial ranking).  
Outcome: Gwydir and Inverell shire councils were delivered transparent and structured resilience assessment process. 
The top 10 ranked ideas were developed into themes and projects (Phase 3 of the methodology).

4
Table 2 lists the ideas generated by the community ranked according to the impact assessment criteria described above. The top 10 
ranked ideas are developed into themes and projects (Phase 3 of the methodology). 
Table 2: Ranked community ideas 
Ranking 
Idea 
1 
Develop and deliver business planning and financial strategy linked to education and adopting improved farm practices 
(farm decision points that align to financial plan/budget) (may involve rural financial counsellors) 
2 
Collaborate/partner with Bindaree Beef to develop and conduct engagement and training to their farmer supplier network 
(4,000 farms) to deliver ‘a drought plan on every dinner table’ 
3 
Coordinate the establishment of a network of ‘local leaders’ to enable them to initiate drought projects and activities, 
minimise red tape and bureaucracy, as a cohort that shares and problem solves. This would include a coordination role 
(part time) 
4 
Stockpile fodder in good times and build more sheds 
5 
Establish a coordination function in each Council for access to all relevant grants, information, advice for all phases of 
drought 
6 
Establish regular events and hubs to develop community connections combined with access to professional services and 
education (build this momentum and culture prior to the next drought). 
7 
Establish/appoint more Rural Financial Counsellors available in good times so farmers can build a relationship with them 
and prepare for drought 
8 
Engage local radio to strengthen this as a key information channel 
9 
Develop a water mapping resource to improve predictability and success of drilling (bores) for water

5
Ranking 
Idea 
10 
Include farm practices in science curriculum for senior (secondary) students 
11 
Find an expert with waste recycling to speak with likely investors (Business Chambers could organise attendance) about 
the possibilities for Inverell and linkage with MacIntyre High School (work experience). 
12 
Engage with Federal parliamentarians to lobby for ATO tax averaging changes 
13 
Encourage cash donations that are coordinated through Council or charity organisations to encourage buy local when 
distributing goods and services (care/food packages) 
14 
Spoke about opportunities through REZ and transmission lines but this appeared to not yet be well formed for Inverell 
Shire 
15 
Engage with Resource Consulting Services to review and reflect feedback on understanding an adoption of their farm 
management practices 
16 
Commission a project to identify relevant drought data sources and develop a data management and sharing system. This 
should include a clear definition of what decisions are made and need to be made to enable evidence based decisions. Key 
aid and charity organisations (such as Rural Aid, Rotary, CWA, RAA) should be involved so that the data gathered informs 
improved services 
17 
Develop an incentive (share funding) scheme to encourage tank installations prior to drought 
18 
Enhance or install more weather stations to improve local forecasts and engage BoM to develop education on working 
with and interpreting forecasts 
19 
Complete feasibility study (only) for third stage of Pindari Dam

6
Ranking 
Idea 
20 
Set up a Council fast track approval process for drought projects and initiatives 
21 
Encourage Councils to sponsor resilient garden demo sites 
22 
Host a regular (annual) conference with resilience representatives/leaders to share lessons, information, ideas and 
collaboration opportunities, reduce duplication, build and strengthen networks 
23 
Council to reserve some infrastructure projects to be completed during times of drought to offer displaced workers jobs 
24 
Engage with water regulators to ensure best practice water storage guidelines are responsive to drought 
25 
Engage Federal Government to review structure, eligibility and possible expansion of scheme to non-agricultural (but 
regional and related) businesses 
26 
Amend grant parameters to include mutual obligations 
27 
Develop training and awareness packages that combine case studies and farmer led experiences to improve farmers skills 
28 
Host a planning/coordination session with relevant health services providers to identify and improve coordination of 
support services for all phases of drought 
29 
Engaging kids to move beyond Mustering Growth 
30 
Encourage employment opportunities that are independent of drought impacts such as call centres and distribution 
centres 
31 
During drought employ more support staff at Council

7
Ranking 
Idea 
32 
Farming practices are European based - need to re-think for Australian conditions 
33 
We talked about the possibility of Boss employing farmers during times of drought, but this did not seem to work as they 
would probably slow down to 80% of capacity and look after their core workers first. Strategy is to build up stock during 
drought when sales might be reduced. 
34 
Develop a business case (at regional system level?) to examine the benefit case/feasibility of adopting a system approach 
to drought resilience 
35 
Engage UNE to explore ways to upskill graduates’ communication and people management skills 
36 
Build incentives and discipline to ensure course and training are completed and include mutual obligations to undertake 
training to develop skills 
37 
Funding for local hall (North Star) as a wellbeing hub (better amenity) 
38 
Develop a cost/benefit tool that can be used to engage individual farmers to adopt regenerative drought resilient 
agriculture practices 
39 
Use water from Copeton Dam for aquaculture/prawns 
40 
Living Classroom and Heavy Vehicle Training and Catering facility owned by council - Could be better utilised 
41 
Council needs to ensure that Inverell is an attractive place to live so that businesses like Boss and Bindaree can attract 
workers. Improvements to attract more tourism 
42 
Any manufacturing that has grain as a major input will work, Grain storage and processing. Grain storage and processing 
Any agricultural aligned service business. Any value adding to the beef industry

8
Ranking 
Idea 
43 
A business currently looking for more tradespeople across Asia to grow their business - job share/part time work 
possibilities (Not specific to drought) 
44 
Develop an awareness pack that educates grant designers about the on ground realities and implications of grant 
conditions/requirements (i.e. planting trees while still in drought) 
45 
Instal more water stand pipes in towns/locations 
46 
Branch line to extend rail from Moree to Inverell and on to Byron Bay to enable easy tourism and freight 
47 
Council coordination of drought angels that can farm sit and allow people to get away for a break e.g. 
48 
Locals need to keep control of the town bore supply, don't want council to take over control 
49 
Power outlets for campers and grey nomads at Coolatai 
50 
A pool at Yetman 
51 
Set up school student swaps with schools/families outside drought impacted areas 
52 
Could they purchase old motels and convert into worker accommodation? (note: not specific to drought - this is about 
general housing shortage)

Monitoring progress and evaluating outcomes 
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan for the Inverell and Gwydir Shire Regions acts as an important first step in building regional drought resilience. 
The following table is based on the relevant Future Drought Fund (FDF) Monitoring Evaluation and Learning Framework indicators and the actions 
developed in this Regional Drought Resilience Plan.  
The Plan includes a number of indicators against identified actions. 
 
FDF Standard Indicators 
Specific Regional Indicators 
Evaluation Approach 
FDF Impacts - 4+ years 
• 
Agricultural landscapes are functional 
and sustainable, with healthy natural 
capital (environmental resilience)  
• 
Agricultural businesses are self-reliant, 
productive, and profitable (economic 
resilience)  
• 
Agricultural communities are 
resourceful, adaptable, and thriving 
(social resilience)  
Work with farm and non-farm businesses 
to increase skills and capability to 
develop climate resilient enterprises and 
processes. Making better use of data, 
economic and climate forecasts and 
financial planning skills, to ensure 
suitable infrastructure, enterprise 
balance and adaptive/transformative 
capacity. (PL 1) 
• 
Farming businesses are prepared 
for drought, updating their 
drought plans regularly (PL 1) 
• 
Non-farming businesses are 
healthy and are prepared for 
drought, updating their drought 
plans regularly (PL 1) 
• 
Infrastructure connecting 
individuals, families, businesses 
and communities is resilient to 
These longer-term impacts will be captured at a national level 
by the federal Government through ABARES surveys and other 
national statistics based on a benchmark and taking into 
account climate, market and other influences impacting on this 
outcome. The Gwydir-Inverell region will use the statistics 
within this report to evaluate how their region is tracking in 
comparison to the benchmark.  
 
Critical to regional-level monitoring of, and improvement to, 
the Plan will be an on-going regional oversight group (ROG) 
comprising of the Plan ‘owner(s) and key stakeholder 
representatives. This group would have the role of initiating 
actions in line with the plan, reviewing progress against the plan 
objectives and making changes to the Plan as needed to 
maintain its relevance and usefulness.  
 
State Government reports such as the New England North West 
Regional Plan 2036 and Local Government reports such as the 
Gwydir Shire Council community Strategic Plan 2017 – 2027 and 
the Inverell Shire Local Strategic Planning Statement 2036 will

drought and can be maintained 
during drought (PL 1) 
• 
The conversations within 
communities about preparing for 
drought and responding to 
drought are frequent, open and 
embraced (PL 1) 
 
be used to evaluate economic and population growth of the 
regions. 
 
  
FDF Long-term Outcomes - 4+ years

• 
Stronger connectedness and greater 
social capital within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and security  
• 
Communities implement transformative 
activities that improve their resilience 
to drought 
• 
More primary producers preserve 
natural capital while also improving 
productivity and profitability 
As a predominantly agricultural regional 
community, people living in the Gwydir 
and Inverell Shires respond to drought 
cohesively and effectively, drawing in 
social capital, collective preparedness and 
inclusive networks (PL 2) 
• 
People actively work across the 
region to build relationships that 
are relied upon in times of need 
(PL 2) 
• 
Natural leaders who recognise a 
‘burning platform’ can leverage 
capacity of other leaders in the 
region (PL 2) 
• 
The region has a suit of people 
that recognise themselves as 
leaders with capabilities to 
positively contribute towards 
strengthening resilience (PL 2) 
Critical to regional-level monitoring of, and improvement to, 
the Plan will be an on-going regional oversight group (ROG) 
comprising of the Plan ‘owner(s) and key stakeholder 
representatives. This group would have the role of initiating 
actions in line with the plan, reviewing progress against the plan 
objectives and making changes to the Plan as needed to 
maintain its relevance and usefulness. 
 
• Monitoring and reporting of regional level indicators that are 
captured as part of Local Government surveillance, surveys and 
annual reporting, such as the Gwydir Shire Council community 
Strategic Plan 2017 – 2027 and the Inverell Shire Local Strategic 
Planning Statement 2036. 
 
• Monitoring and reporting of regional level indicators that are 
captured as part of State Government surveillance, surveys and 
annual reporting, such as the New England North West Regional 
Plan 2036, and the NSW Government Upper North West 
Regional Economic Development Strategy 2018-2022 
 
• Liaising with the regional Drought and Innovation Hub to 
ensure that key indicators for the region are captured and 
provided over time. 
 
• Recording case studies of changes made and benefits evident 
as a result of actions taken from the implementation of the 
Plan.

Success measures and intermediate outcomes – 2-4 years 
 There’s an increase in the number of 
agricultural regions that have drought 
resilience plans 
• 
Regional representatives have 
considered and planned incremental, 
transitional and transformational 
opportunities to strengthen resilience   
• 
Regional leaders are in a stronger 
position to implement strategic actions, 
adapt to change and take advantage of 
opportunities to build economic 
resilience as they arise   
• 
Actions, pathways and opportunities 
(including innovative and 
transformative) to improve regional 
drought resilience, mitigate risks and 
adapt to change are identified   
The Gwydir-Inverell community have 
multiple organisations, families and 
individuals that have aligned values, 
trusting relationships and they 
frequently work together to problem 
solve (PL 3) 
• 
People actively work across the 
region to build relationships that 
are relied upon in times of need 
(PL 3) 
• 
Trusting relationships built in 
good times serve the community 
well in times of drought (PL 3) 
• 
Data and qualitive feedback from 
the community demonstrates 
improvement in the wellbeing 
and mental health of the 
community (PL 3) 
• Recording of steps taken, actions initiated, and resources 
gained that have been triggered by the Plan framework, 
strategies and planned actions. 
 
• Annual reporting and review of plan implementation, 
engagement, participation, actions, barriers and opportunities 
to regional stakeholder organisations and government – and 
changes to the Plan made as needed to best meet regional 
needs. 
 
Should external evaluation be undertaken, as well as taking the 
national data, above information and annual review into 
account (against planned actions), a range of regional 
stakeholders should be interviewed / surveyed to gauge their 
understanding, engagement and actions they have taken as a 
result of Plan guidance and initiatives.

Plans have buy-in from key stakeholders in the 
region  
• 
Partnerships, networks and 
engagement are built between 
stakeholders managing natural 
resources   
• 
The number of, and participation in, 
local networks and programs to 
enhance drought resilience increases  
• 
Increased community understanding of 
the region’s current and future drought 
resilience, considering the region’s 
unique economic, environmental and 
social characteristics   
• 
Communities share knowledge, 
collaborate and partner with 
government more often to build 
drought resilience   
Individuals, families, and businesses in 
the Gwydir-Inverell Shire are well-
supported through communications 
occurring via multiple channels that 
effectively raise awareness and assists 
with desired behaviour change (PL 4) 
• 
Information providers 
understand the communities’ 
learning preferences, attitudes to 
information channels and how 
they are challenged by change 
(PL 4) 
• 
Demonstrations are used 
regularly to extend new 
knowledge and how it can be 
integrated (PL 4) 
• 
People feel less frustrated when 
navigating pathways to find 
support (PL 4) 
• 
People are confident in trusted 
relationships that can be relied 
upon in times of need (PL 4) 
• Recording of steps taken, actions initiated, and resources 
gained that have been triggered by the Plan framework, 
strategies and planned actions. 
 
• Annual reporting and review of plan implementation, 
engagement, participation, actions, barriers and opportunities 
to regional stakeholder organisations and government – and 
changes to the Plan made as needed to best meet regional 
needs. 
 
Should external evaluation be undertaken, as well as taking the 
national data, above information and annual review into 
account (against planned actions), a range of regional 
stakeholders should be interviewed / surveyed to gauge their 
understanding, engagement and actions they have taken as a 
result of Plan guidance and initiatives.

Plans are informed by relevant data, co-design 
and best practice approaches to resilience 
planning  
• 
Communities use relevant data and 
information to better understand their 
resilience to drought and plan for 
resilience to drought   
• 
Greater sharing of learnings related to 
drought resilience between 
communities  
Providers of information invest in 
understanding their audiences preferred 
learning styles and channels (PL 4) 
People gather their information from 
reputable providers (PL 4) 
Business share information to enable 
performance benchmarking (PL 4) 
People know where and who to approach 
for support (PL 4) 
People willingly share information and 
experiences with other community 
members (PL 4) 
• Recording of steps taken, actions initiated, and resources 
gained that have been triggered by the Plan framework, 
strategies and planned actions. 
 
• Annual reporting and review of plan implementation, 
engagement, participation, actions, barriers and opportunities 
to regional stakeholder organisations and government – and 
changes to the Plan made as needed to best meet regional 
needs. 
 
Should external evaluation be undertaken, as well as taking the 
national data, above information and annual review into 
account (against planned actions), a range of regional 
stakeholders should be interviewed / surveyed to gauge their 
understanding, engagement and actions they have taken as a 
result of Plan guidance and initiatives. 
 Plans are implemented 
• 
The majority of plans have had 
elements implemented   
• 
Primary producers and businesses 
supported to improve their 
sustainability and resilience    
• 
Natural resource management 
capability is improved across region   
Refer to Project Outputs Schedule  
in Gwydir and Inverell Shire’s Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan  
 
• Recording of steps taken, actions initiated, and resources 
gained that have been triggered by the Plan framework, 
strategies and planned actions. 
 
• Annual reporting and review of plan implementation, 
engagement, participation, actions, barriers and opportunities 
to regional stakeholder organisations and government – and 
changes to the Plan made as needed to best meet regional 
needs. 
 
Should external evaluation be undertaken, as well as taking the 
national data, above information and annual review into 
account (against planned actions), a range of regional 
stakeholders should be interviewed / surveyed to gauge their 
understanding, engagement and actions they have taken as a 
result of Plan guidance and initiatives. 
Short-term outcomes - 1– 2 Years

• 
Regions have a plan against which to 
monitor their drought resilience status 
• 
Regions have identified and planned for 
the impacts of drought on their region 
• 
Communities empowered to identify 
the impacts of drought  
• 
Communities given the opportunity to 
communicate regional drought 
resilience needs and priorities which 
may inform future investment  
• 
Regional level drought resilience 
planning leverages and aligns with 
planning at other scales   
• 
Drought resilience planning draws on a 
wide range of inputs, informed by 
effective partnerships within the region  
• 
Communities use relevant data and 
information to better understand their 
resilience to drought and make 
decisions   
• 
Communities share their learnings 
about drought resilience with other 
regions   
• 
Those responsible for managing 
land know what is important to 
sustain their business and natural 
resource base (PL 1) 
• 
Those responsible for directing 
and managing businesses know 
what is important to sustain their 
business (PL 1) 
• 
Drought critical infrastructure is 
prioritised as being necessary to 
maintain in all phases of drought 
(PL 1) 
• 
Multiple individual community 
members recognise the benefits 
of formal networking (PL 2) 
• 
Multiple individual community 
members recognise the benefits 
of informal networking (PL 2) 
• 
Community increasingly looks to 
themselves to lead and make the 
change (PL 2) 
• 
Capacity is built through 
community members 
participating in formal leadership 
programs (PL 2) #changed# 
• 
Gwydir-Inverell communities 
recognise their strength in 
community capital (PL 3) 
• 
Individuals and families ‘socialise’ 
regularly with professional 
service providers, and 
professional providers support 
Critical to regional-level monitoring of, and improvement to, 
the Plan will be an on-going regional oversight group (ROG) 
comprising of the Plan ‘owner(s) and key stakeholder 
representatives. This group would have the role of initiating 
actions in line with the plan, reviewing progress against the plan 
objectives and making changes to the Plan as needed to 
maintain its relevance and usefulness.

their personnel to participate in 
these informal events (PL 3) 
• 
Formal institutions and informal 
organisations and associations 
invest to build working 
relationships with each other (PL 
3) 
• 
Community has the knowledge 
and connections to self-organise 
(PL 3)