Kimberley and Pilbara 
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program is jointly funded through the Australian Government’s 
Future Drought Fund and the WA Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development.

The Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP) for the 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions is a locally led project 
that champions drought resilience and preparedness 
in both regions. The Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program is jointly funded through the 
Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund and the 
WA Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development (DPIRD).
The development of the Kimberley and Pilbara  
RDRP has been led by the Pilbara Development 
Commission working closely with the Kimberley 
Development Commission.
The Kimberley and Pilbara Development Commissions 
extend thanks to all members of the Project Advisory 
Group (PAG) for sharing their time and expertise 
to ensure the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP is 
reflective of both regions’ needs. The PAG comprises 
representatives from a diverse range of local 
organisations including: 
⊲	 Department of Biodiversity Conservation and 
Attractions (and representatives from the 
Aboriginal Rangers Program)
⊲	 Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development
⊲	 Department of Water and Environmental 
Regulation
⊲	 Kimberley Agriculture and Pastoral Company
⊲	 Kimberley Development Commission
⊲	 Kimberley Land Council
⊲	 Kimberley-Pilbara Cattlemen’s Association
⊲	 Kimberley and Pilbara representatives of the 
Northern WA/NT Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hub
⊲	 Pilbara Development Commission
⊲	 Pilbara Innovation Partnership
⊲	 Rangelands NRM
⊲	 RDA Kimberley
⊲	 RDA Pilbara
⊲	 City of Karratha
⊲	 Shire of Ashburton
⊲	 Shire of Broome
⊲	 Shire of Derby–West Kimberley
⊲	 Shire of East Pilbara
⊲	 Shire of Halls Creek
⊲	 Shire of Wyndham–East Kimberley
⊲	 Town of Port Hedland
⊲	 Water Corporation
⊲	 Yamatji Marlpa Aboriginal Corporation. 
We acknowledge all individuals and organisations  
who contributed rich insights and local knowledge to 
the development of this RDRP to drive our resilience 
going forward.
Acknowledgements 
Acknowledgement and Disclaimer
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan was initially developed by BlueSalt Consulting, drawing on stakeholder engagement, regional data, and 
the guidelines of the Future Drought Fund’s Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program. Subsequent revisions and additional content were 
developed by the Pilbara and Kimberley Development Commissions in collaboration with regional partners.
Version
Date
Prepared by
Approved by
0.1
19.09.2024
Rhiannon Bristow-Stagg, Anna Dixon
Anna Dixon
0.2
23.09.2024
Anna Dixon (minor edits)
Anna Dixon
0.3
01.10.2024
Rhiannon Bristow-Stagg
0.4
15.10.2024
Anna Dixon, Rhiannon Bristow-Stagg
0.5
18.11.2024
Anna Del Rio, Pilbara Development Commission
Trish Barron
0.6
28.04.2025
Anna Del Rio, Pilbara Development Commission
PAG
0.7
12.05.2025
Anna Del Rio, Pilbara Development Commission (minor edits)
Trish Barron
Acknowledgement of Country
We respectfully acknowledge the traditional custodians throughout the Kimberley and Pilbara regions and recognise 
their connection to land, waters and community. We pay our respects to the regions’ Traditional Owners, their elders 
past, present and emerging.
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   3
2   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025

Droughts are well-known in Australia with far-reaching 
impacts, affecting communities, agriculture, ecosystems 
and the national economy. In the future, more frequent 
and severe droughts are predicted for many parts of 
Australia, exacerbated by climate change. Australia is 
shifting its response from dealing with drought as a 
crisis to more proactive approaches to build long term 
drought preparedness and resilience.
Building resilience to drought is critical to the future 
success and sustainability of our communities, 
economies, and environments. The Kimberley and 
Pilbara regions of Western Australia may not fit the 
conventional image of drought-affected areas, but 
changing climatic conditions are impacting water 
availability, communities, natural ecosystems and 
agriculture. Increasing drought resilience is a vital 
priority to ensure the long-term prosperity and 
preparedness of our regions.
The Kimberley Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan (RDRP) was developed under the Regional 
Drought Resilience Program, which forms part 
of the Federal Government’s Future Drought 
Fund. Coordinated by the Kimberley and Pilbara 
Development Commissions, the aim of the Kimberley 
and Pilbara RDRP is to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify key strategies that 
strengthen resilience and address their needs to be 
better prepared for the challenges posed by drought 
and other climate-related stresses. 
The development of the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP 
was guided by the Project Advisory Group (PAG) 
chaired by the Pilbara Development Commission, 
with input from a broad range of stakeholders. The 
Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP reflects our shared vision 
of a resilient future for the Kimberley and Pilbara. We 
believe that by leveraging our regions’ strengths and 
working together, we can build a more sustainable, 
drought-resilient future for all.
Communities in the North West of Western Australia 
may experience different challenges to their southern 
counterparts, however there is common ground in the 
need for water stress and climate change knowledge 
and preparedness. Improved understanding and 
proactive planning are the key to resilience for current 
and future generations. 
We thank all the individuals and organisations whose 
contributions offered rich insight and local knowledge 
into drought impacts in the Kimberley and Pilbara 
regions. This, along with technical research and advice, 
has guided the development of a range of potential 
actions, that once implemented will help build our 
resilience going forward.
The Kimberley and Pilbara Development Commissions 
are committed to advocacy to enhance our community 
drought resilience capabilities by leveraging existing 
strengths and capitalising on new opportunities.
Foreword  
Michele Pucci
A/Chief Executive Officer
Kimberley Development 
Commission
Simon Taylor
Chief Executive Officer
Pilbara Development Commission
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   5
4   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025

Executive Summary...........................................................................8
Definitions............................................................................................10
Acronyms.............................................................................................10
How to Use This Plan...................................................................... 11
Introduction.........................................................................................12
	
Understanding Drought........................................................12
	
Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program.......13
	
Purpose.........................................................................................14
	
Governance.................................................................................14
	
Regional Snapshots.................................................................16
Vision and Outcomes.....................................................................18
	
Vision..............................................................................................18
	
Outcomes.....................................................................................18
	
Theory of Change....................................................................19
Strategic Context.............................................................................20
	
Global Strategies.....................................................................20
	
National Strategies...................................................................21
	
State Strategies........................................................................22
	
Regional Strategies.................................................................24
	
Connections and Opportunities.......................................26
Regional Context.............................................................................27
	
Water systems...........................................................................27
	
Community..................................................................................28
	
Agriculture...................................................................................29
	
Landscapes.................................................................................31
	
Economy......................................................................................32
	
Local government profiles..................................................33
Drought................................................................................................38
	
Conceptual Framework........................................................38
	
History of Drought...................................................................39
	
Impact of Drought....................................................................41
	
Climate and Future Drought Risk....................................43
	
Vulnerability and Resilience Assessment....................45
	
Scenario Planning...................................................................52
Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................54
	
First Nations Engagement...................................................55
	
Engagement Outcomes.......................................................56
Action Plan..........................................................................................58
	
Resilient Water Systems.......................................................60
	
Resilient Communities...........................................................62
	
Resilient Agriculture...............................................................64
	
Resilient Landscapes.............................................................66
	
Resilient Economy...................................................................70
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation......................72
	
Implementation and Investment Framework.............72
	
Monitoring and Evaluation.................................................. 74
Table of Figures................................................................................77
References.........................................................................................78
Appendix A: List of Stakeholder  
Engagement Participants............................................................82
Appendix B: Key Aspects for Consideration in  
Future Plan Iterations....................................................................85
Contents  
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   7
6   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025

The Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan (RDRP) is a community-led strategy developed 
under the Australian Government’s Future Drought 
Fund (FDF). This long-term investment aims to build 
drought resilience for farmers, allied industries, and 
regional communities and allocates funding annually to 
support drought resilience initiatives. 
In Western Australia (WA), the Regional Drought 
Resilience Program is delivered through a partnership 
with the Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development (DPIRD) and Regional Development 
Commissions. It addresses the core outcomes of 
economic, environmental and social resilience by 
empowering communities to co-develop  
evidence-based strategies that focus on climate 
adaptation, sustainable land management and 
community well-being. 
The unique and complex nature of drought in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions of northern WA has 
been important in the development of this RDRP. 
Drought in these regions can be characterised 
by extreme heat, unpredictable wet seasons, and 
water scarcity. Climate projections indicate both 
the Kimberley, and the Pilbara will experience 
more frequent hot droughts, increasing risks to 
infrastructure, communities, and local economies, 
especially for remote and Aboriginal communities.
This RDRP is a collaborative effort involving the 
Kimberley and Pilbara Development Commissions, 
local governments, Traditional Owners, community 
organisations, land managers and industry partners. 
It is guided by a regional Project Advisory Group 
and based on detailed Background and Context 
reports, Drought Vulnerability Assessments (DVAs) 
and extensive regional engagement. Through strong 
regional partnerships and extensive community 
consultation, the RDRP reflects an understanding 
of each region’s unique challenges and strengths, 
ensuring a solid foundation for ongoing resilience  
and support.
Strategic, community-driven actions aligned with 
national drought resilience objectives and local 
priorities have been identified. These actions are 
supported by an investment framework designed to 
promote long-term adaptation and sustainability. 
Five key focus areas form the 
foundation of the RDRP:
Resilient Water Systems: Focusing on 
supporting water security through cultural 
knowledge sharing, groundwater monitoring 
and improved infrastructure. 
Resilient Communities: Enhancing liveability 
and adaptive capacity through better access 
to services, housing, economic diversification 
and community engagement.
Resilient Agriculture: Supporting  
sustainable grazing, stewardship programs, 
and business planning for pastoralists and 
Aboriginal land managers.
Resilient Landscapes: Integrating  
Traditional fire and land management 
practices alongside regenerative  
approaches to restore ecosystems and 
reduce drought impacts.
Resilient Economy: Encouraging economic 
diversification, innovation, and investment in 
industries such as agritourism, conservation, 
and small business development.
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP provides a shared 
strategic foundation for building long-term drought 
resilience. It supports coordinated actions that are 
locally driven, culturally grounded, and informed 
by regional strengths and challenges. This RDRP 
will guide ongoing collaboration, innovation and 
resilience-building, enabling communities, industries 
and landscapes to adapt and thrive as they face future 
droughts and climate variability.
Executive Summary  
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   9
8   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025

FDF	
Future Drought Fund (Australian 
Government)
FIFO	
Fly-In-Fly-Out
KAPCO	
Kimberley Agriculture and Pastoral 
Company
KPCA	
Kimberley Pilbara Cattlemen’s Association
KDC	
Kimberley Development Commission
KLC	
Kimberley Land Council
LGA	
Local Government Area
NNSII	
Northern Native Seed Industry Initiative
NRM	
Natural Resource Management
OAG	
Office of the Auditor General
ORIA	
Ord River Irrigation Area
PAG	
Project Advisory Group
PBC	
Prescribed Bodies Corporate
PDC	
Pilbara Development Commission
PIP	
Pilbara Innovation Partnership
RDA	
Regional Development Australia
RDRP	
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
SME	
Small to Medium Enterprise
TEC	
Threatened Ecological Community
TOs	
Traditional Owners
WA	
Western Australia
WAITOC	
Western Australian Indigenous Tourism 
Operators Council
WONS	
Weeds of National Significance
YMAC	
Yamatji Marlpa Aboriginal Corporation
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP provides a strategic 
foundation for the Kimberley and Pilbara regions 
to define, prioritise and align its drought resilience 
priorities.  The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP is designed 
to be used by local communities, industries, all levels 
of government, not-for-profits and the private sector to:
⊲	 Coordinate investment in drought resilience 
projects.
⊲	 Facilitate collaboration to achieve shared regional 
outcomes.
⊲	 Guide future drought resilience projects.
⊲	 Inform funding applications.
⊲	 Monitor and adapt strategies to enhance drought 
resilience over time.
This RDRP summarises the information presented in 
detailed Background and Context Reports, Drought 
Vulnerability Assessments (DVAs), and the results of 
extensive stakeholder engagement. 
The Background and Context Reports for each region 
contain an initial map of key stakeholders involved in 
drought or drought related topics at a range of scales. 
They also set the context for stakeholder engagement 
by identifying alignment with key strategies and policies. 
DVAs for the Kimberley and Pilbara cover a range of 
data and statistics to measure and prioritise drought 
resilience and vulnerability, relative to the different 
climate types, production context and communities 
across the regions. 
The stakeholder engagement report summarises  
key issues and provides the full list of project ideas  
identified by stakeholders through stakeholder 
engagement interviews. 
It is recommended to read the Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP in conjunction with these informing documents 
which contain information on concepts referred to in 
the RDRP. These documents can be found on each 
Development Commissions’ website.
Pilbara Development Commission
https://www.pdc.wa.gov.au/our-focus/projects/the-
regional-drought-resilience-planning-rdrp-program.aspx
Kimberley Development Commission
https://www.kdc.wa.gov.au/our-focus/projects/regional-
drought-resilience-planning-program/ 
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP is intended to be 
a living document, developed at a point in time, but 
designed to evolve with the regions changing needs. 
Continuous monitoring, evaluation and knowledge 
sharing across the region is critical in ensure it remains 
a community owned resource and we encourage 
ongoing community commitment.
Definitions
Adaptive Capacity – The combined human, natural 
and physical capital, all of which influence the ability 
of the region’s systems and people to respond now 
and into the future. This considers the strengths 
(or potential advantage and resilience), weakness 
(or potential disadvantage and vulnerability), and 
opportunities in the region. 
Drought – As developed in Western Australia: “A 
prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions that 
impacts negatively on water availability and agricultural 
production in a region and, consequently, impacts 
negatively on the economy and environment of the 
region and the health and well-being of its residents.” 
(DPIRD Technical Working Group in Mastrantonis, 2022). 
This was used as a conceptual basis only in this RDRP.
Drought Impact – The degree of exposure to drought 
combined with the regions inherit sensitivity to  
drought conditions. 
Drought Resilience – As it relates to the Future 
Drought Fund Funding Plan, is defined as “the ability to 
adapt, reorganise or transform in response to changing 
temperature, increasing variability and scarcity 
of rainfall and/or changed seasonality of rainfall, 
for improved economic, environmental and social 
resilience” (Australian Government, 2024).
Hot Drought – “Temperatures exceeding the 9th 
decile threshold in the maturing season (August-
November) and growing season rainfall (April-October) 
falling below the 1st decile” (Mastrantonis, 2022). 
As discussed on page 24 this definition has been 
developed to suit the WA South West Land Division 
growing season and is not suited to use in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP due to differing climate 
zone and production types. However, the combination 
of meteorological drought and extreme temperatures 
was observed in the Kimberley and Pilbara regions in 
2019 (see Drought Vulnerability Assessment’s (DVAs) 
for each region).
IBRA7 – Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for 
Australia (IBRA) is a biogeographic regionalisation for 
Australia developed by the Australian government 
Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, 
Population, and Communities. It is a planning tool 
which classifies the land surface of Australia based on 
common climate, geology, landform, native  
vegetation and species information (DCCEEW, 2023). 
IBRA7 is the most current version, developed in 2012 
and divides Australia into 89 biogeographic regions 
and 419 subregions.
Theory of Change – Refers to theories, causal 
mechanisms and assumptions that explain how and 
why outcomes and impacts will be achieved through 
use, implementation and production of proposed 
inputs, activities, and outputs.
Threatened Ecological Communities – An ecological 
community (a naturally occurring assemblage of plants, 
animals or other organisms) that is at risk of being 
destroyed (‘collapsing’). ITEC listings are reviewed 
annually by the Department of Climate Change, 
Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) 
Threatened Ecological Communities Scientific 
Committee (TECSC).
Environmental Condition Score – This is a composite 
index ranging from 1 to 10 that expresses the relative 
state of the environment compared to previous years. 
It is designed to provide a summary measure of 
environmental conditions, for land-based ecosystems 
and agriculture, by integrating multiple environmental 
factors including inundation, streamflow, vegetation 
growth, leaf area, soil protection, tree cover and the 
number of hot days (TERN, 2023).
Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) – Index of 
Relative Socioeconomic Advantage and Disadvantage 
(IRSAD) has been used, which summarises information 
about the economic and social conditions of people 
and households within an area. A low score indicates 
relatively greater disadvantage and a lack of 
advantage in general. A high score indicates a relative 
lack of disadvantage and greater advantage in general.
Acronyms
ACCO	
Aboriginal Controlled Community 
Organisation
ACWS	
Aboriginal Communities Water Services 
Program
CSIRO	
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation
DCCEEW	
Department of Climate Change, Energy, 
the Environment and Water
DPIRD	
Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development
DVA	
Drought Vulnerability Assessment
DWER	
Department of Water and Environmental 
Regulation
EKMG	
East Kimberley Marketing Group
ESG	
Environment Social and Governance
How to Use This Plan 
10   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   11

Understanding Drought
There is no universally agreed definition of drought 
due to the complexities around its measurement, its 
relatively slow onset, the different types of droughts, 
and variable geographic contexts. However, the 
impacts of drought can be significant and serious, 
and have interconnected environmental, economic 
and social aspects. Environmental impacts are among 
the most noticeable effects of drought and can be 
widespread and long-lasting (Tozer and Leys, 2013). 
The environment can also be a major determinant of 
human health (AIHW, 2011).
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP adopts the definition 
of drought developed by the Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) 
Technical Working Group for other WA regions. This 
definition links meteorological and agricultural drought 
to broader community impacts.
“A prolonged period of abnormally dry conditions 
that impacts negatively on water availability 
and agricultural production in a region and, 
consequently, impacts negatively on the economy 
and environment of the region and the health and 
well-being of its residents” (Mastrantonis, 2022).
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP also draws on the 
Australian Drought Monitor developed by the Northern 
Australia Climate Program (NACP), a multi-index drought 
monitor that is relevant to the climate and production 
types in the two regions. Drought Vulnerability 
Assessments (DVA) specific to the Kimberley and Pilbara 
regions were also developed, taking into account the 
complex and interconnected aspects of resilience and 
vulnerability across each region. 
This Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP explores the impacts 
of three different types of resilience to drought: 
⊲	 Economic resilience refers to the region’s ability 
to sustain and diversify economic activity during 
and after drought. 
⊲	 Social resilience includes the capacity of 
individuals and communities to cope with and 
adapt to stressors, particularly in remote and 
vulnerable populations. 
⊲	 Environmental resilience refers to the capacity of 
natural systems to maintain essential functions 
and recover from drought-related impacts.
These definitions were informed by resilience science 
and aligned with stakeholder-identified priorities such 
as water access, liveability, land management, and 
economic diversification.
Regional Drought 
Resilience  
Planning Program
The Future Drought Fund (FDF), established by the 
Australian Government in 2019, represents a significant 
long-term investment aimed at enhancing drought 
preparedness and resilience across Australia. This 
fund provides consistent financial support for various 
drought resilience programs, with $100 million made 
available annually for grants and programs. 
Initially set up as a $3.9 billion investment, the FDF 
is expected to grow to $5 billion by 2028-2029 
(Australian Government, 2024). The funds aim is to 
build climate resilience for the broader benefit of 
the Australian agriculture sector, landscapes, and 
communities (Australian Government, 2024) and 
ensure that investments continue to address the 
evolving challenges from drought conditions  
across Australia.
A key initiative of the FDF is the Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program, which fosters 
collaboration between federal, state and territory 
governments to develop comprehensive drought 
plans for regions. The aim of the RDRP program is to 
empower regional communities to proactively plan and 
respond to drought risks, by building capability and 
resilience through partnerships and identifying actions 
to prepare for future droughts and climate variability.
In WA, DPIRD oversees the administration of the 
RDRP Program extension 2022-2025, supported 
operationally at the regional level by the Regional 
Development Commissions (RDCs). The WA State 
Government, through DPIRD, also provides 50%  
of funding. 
Figure 1: The Kimberley and Pilbara Regions
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDRP) is a collaboration between the Kimberley 
and Pilbara communities in northern Western Australia (WA) which spans a total area of 
930,000km2 and supports nearly 100,000 people. This RDRP brings together industry, 
Traditional Owners, stakeholders, and communities to develop practical strategies that 
enhance drought preparedness and support sustainable land and water management. 
This collaborative approach aims to build stronger, more resilient communities and 
industries across the region.
Introduction
Pilbara
Shire of East Pilbara
Newman
Paraburdoo
Tom Price
KarrathaWickham
Port Hedland
Broome
Derby
Fitzroy Crossing
Halls 
Creek
Kununurra
Wyndham
Dampier
Shire of 
Broome
Shire of 
Derby 
- West 
Kimberley
Shire of 
Wyndham -  
East Kimberley
Shire of Halls 
Creek
Shire of 
Ashburton
City of 
Karratha
Town of Port 
Hedland
Kimberley
12   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   13

Purpose 
The Project Advisory Group (PAG) was established as 
a focus for partnership, ensuring that the development 
of the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP was guided by local 
and technical knowledge. The PAG was engaged in all 
stages of the project, with its role being to:
⊲	 Inform and be part of the stakeholder 
engagement process.
⊲	 Review and advise on content of the RDRP with a 
view to informing drought resilience investment in 
the regions.
⊲	 Contribute to the identification of priorities and 
projects for inclusion in the RDRP arising from the 
stakeholder engagement process.
⊲	 Leverage existing strategic planning and avoid 
duplication of effort.
⊲	 Recognise the diversity of people, businesses 
and landscapes involved.
⊲	 Include primary production knowledge, including 
First Nations groups and landholders.
The PAG was chaired by the PDC CEO and included 
representatives from the Kimberley and Pilbara 
component of the Northern Hub, the Kimberley Pilbara 
Cattleman’s Association (KPCA), local governments, 
WA state government bodies, Aboriginal corporations, 
and other key stakeholders. 
Specialist consultants were engaged by the PDC 
and KDC in the areas of stakeholder planning and 
engagement, literature and context review and 
drought resilience assessment, and preparation of 
the report, informed by input from the PAG. Figure 3 
illustrates the process and inputs that contributed to 
the development of this RDRP. 
The development of Background and Context Reports 
and DVAs for each region are vital documents for the 
framing of the RDRP in terms of context and drought 
risk assessment.
Extensive stakeholder engagement identified existing 
and potential actions, with strong participation from 
First Nations groups across both regions. Potential 
regional projects were then rigorously reviewed and 
refined using the Investment Framework developed 
for this RDRP (see Implementation and Investment 
Framework section later in this document).
Funder: Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Program: Future Drought Fund
Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program
Background and 
Context
Drought Vulnerability 
Assessment
Stakeholder 
Engagement
Project 
Refinement
Kimberley  
Pilbara RDRP
Executing Entity: WA Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development
Working Group: DPIRD and Regional Development Commissions
Pilbara Development Commission
Kimberley Development Commission
Project Consultants:
BlueSalt Consulting, Andrew Huffer & 
Associates, Fran Haintz
Project Advisory Group
Figure 2: RDRP Governance and Relationship Between Stakeholders
Figure 3: Process and Inputs for Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP
RDRP Process and Inputs
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP covers the Kimberley 
and Pilbara regions of northern WA. The purpose 
of developing this plan is to help our communities 
prepare for and manage the impacts of future drought. 
The RDRP program aims to:
⊲	 Build economic, environmental and social 
resilience to future droughts.
⊲	 Build on existing planning.
⊲	 Be in a stronger position to adapt to climate change.
⊲	 Apply best practice data and information to make 
better decisions.
⊲	 Identify actions to prepare for future droughts 
based on evidence.
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP is designed to be 
community led and owned, ensuring it reflects local 
needs and priorities. It guides future investments in 
resilience-building initiatives, supports sustainable 
natural resource management and promotes 
innovative approaches to mitigate drought impacts. 
Through the RDRP stakeholder engagement  
process, which fostered collaboration among 
Traditional Owners, governments, industries, and 
communities, the RDRP enhances regional self-
reliance and positions regions well for challenging 
climatic conditions.
Governance
The development of the Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP was led and project managed by the Pilbara 
Development Commission (PDC) working closely with 
the Kimberley Development Commission (KDC). The 
governance structure adopted for the Kimberley and 
Pilbara RDRP is shown in Figure 2. 
14   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   15

Kimberley Regional Snapshot
Pilbara Regional Snapshot
POPULATION (2024)
39,934 
(1.4% of WA)
POPULATION (2024)
60,746  
(2.1% of WA)
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE (2024)
9.1%
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE (2024)
2.2%
TOTAL BUSINESSES (2024)
2,343
TOTAL BUSINESSES (2024)
2,530
ABORIGINAL POPULATION (2021)
41%
ABORIGINAL POPULATION (2022)
19%
MEDIAN AGE (2024)
33
MEDIAN AGE (2024)
33
TOTAL JOBS (2021)
15,650
TOTAL JOBS (2021)
59,782
TOP INDUSTRIES
Construction, 
mining, 
resources and 
tourism
TOP INDUSTRIES
Mining, 
construction, 
accommodation 
and food
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT (2024)
$4.521 bn
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT (2024)
$89.985 bn
Source: Remplan. ABS 2021 Census Place of Work Employment 
(Scaled), ABS 2022 / 2023 National Input Output Tables, and 
ABS June 2024 Gross State Product.
16   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   17

Vision
Outcomes
To deliver on this vision, the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP is organised into five focus areas which incorporate the 
overall aim and objectives of the FDF (see Figure 4). 
Aim: To build 
drought resilience, 
including climate 
resilience for the 
public good of 
the Australian 
agriculture sector, 
landscapes, and 
communities
Strategic objective: 
to build economic, 
environmental, and 
social resilience
Building on the FDF vision and aim and the key topics identified through the project 
inputs and stakeholder engagement process, a regional vision and focus was developed 
for the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP. The PAG members were collectively involved in the 
development of the vision statement, contributing their perspectives to create a purpose 
and direction for drought resilience in the regions.
Vision and Outcomes
Through collaborative planning, the Kimberley and Pilbara regions 
will be more resilient to drought, while supporting the environment, 
culture and economy for future generations.
Figure 4: Development of Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP Focus Areas
Figure 5: Theory of Change
FDF (2024-2028) Focus
Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP Focus Areas
Resilient Water Systems 
Resilient Communities
Resilient Agriculture
Resilient Landscapes
Resilient Economy
Outcomes under each focus area aim to ensure equity while supporting evidence-based action, collaboration and 
innovation. These outcomes are discussed in the Action Plan section of this report. 
Theory of Change 
To transition from plan to implementation, discussions 
will take place to co-design a theory of change for 
drought resilience adapted to the Kimberley and 
Pilbara regions, and subsequently a program logic. 
This will seek to link and build on the FDF program 
logic above, while adapting to the regions by linking 
to the five focus areas and outcomes identified by 
the stakeholder engagement. The program logic will 
provide a clear, collaborative and outcomes-based 
framework to guide project funding and future drought 
resilience of other aligned investment into the regions.
Vision
Activities
Activities
Strategic 
Priorities
Impact
Long-Term 
Outcomes
An innovative and profitable farming sector, a sustainable natural environment and adaptable rural, regional and 
remote communities - all with increased resilience to the impacts of drought and climate change.
Online climate and drought data • Digital tools • Natural Resource Management • Research & adoption 
• Knowledge & Innovation Hubs • Community networks • Leadership training • Farm business planning • 
Regional drought plans
Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool • Climate Services for Agriculture Program • Natural Resource 
Management Drought Resilience Program - Landscapes • Natural Resource Management Drought Resilience 
Program - Grants • Drought Resilience Research and Adoption • Networks to Build Drought Resilience • Drought 
Resilience Leaders • Farm Business Resilience Program • Regional Drought Resilience Planning
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and profitable 
agriculture sector
Agricultural businesses are 
self-reliant, productive and 
profitable
• (EC1) More primary producers 
adopt transformative 
strategies and technologies 
to reduce financial exposure 
to drought
• (EC2) More primary 
producers adopt risk 
management practices to 
improve their sustainability 
and resilience
Environmental resilience
for sustainable and improved 
functioning of agricultural landscapes
Agricultural landscapes are  
functional and sustainable, with 
healthy natural capital
• (EN1) More primary producers 
preserve natural capital while 
also improving productivity and 
profitability
• (EN2) More primary producers adopt 
whole-of-system approaches to 
NRM to improve the natural resource 
base, for long-term productivity and 
landscape
Social resilience
for resourceful and adaptable 
communities
Agricultural communities are 
resourceful, adaptable
• (S1) Stronger connectedness 
and greater social capital 
within communities, 
contributing to wellbeing and 
security
• (S2) Communities implement 
transformative activities that 
improve their resilience to 
drought
The FDF Monitoring Evaluation and Learning 
Framework (DAWE, 2020b) outlines a national theory 
of change for drought resilience, towards the vision of:
An innovative and profitable farming sector, a 
sustainable natural environment and adaptable rural, 
regional and remote communities - all with  
increased resilience to the impacts of drought and 
climate change.
This is followed by key limitations and a Theory of 
Change (program logic):
18   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   19

As part of the Background and Context review in developing this Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP, over 50 strategic documents at the sub-regional, regional, state and national scale 
were synthesised to ensure the RDRP has strong alignment with state, regional and 
subregional priorities for drought resilience. In addition, a range of technical reports and 
documents were used in the development of the DVAs for the Kimberley and Pilbara.
Strategic Context
Global Strategies 
As droughts become increasingly frequent and 
severe due to climate change, global strategies for 
drought resilience are evolving to prioritise proactive, 
integrated and collaborative approaches that 
strengthen the capacity of countries, communities and 
ecosystems to anticipate, withstand and recover from 
drought impacts.
The United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration 
spans the years 2021 to 2030. It recognises that 
ecosystem restoration sits at the core of global (as 
well as local) efforts to combat biodiversity loss and 
desertification, from which droughts, floods as well as 
wildfires are key symptoms of ecological disfunction.  
Resilience to these symptoms must therefore look to 
ecosystem restoration to address the root cause as 
best possible, however wider consideration must also 
address the inter-dependent socio-economic systems.  
The following strategies are recommended by the 
UNCCD (2019) and IUCN (2024) to enhance the  
ability of communities and ecosystems to anticipate, 
prepare for, and adapt to drought conditions,  
ultimately reducing their vulnerability and improving 
their resilience. 
⊲	 Drought Monitoring and Early Warning Systems: 
Implementing reliable drought monitoring and 
forecasting systems to provide timely alerts and 
enable proactive measures.
⊲	 Assessing Drought Vulnerability and Risk: 
Conducting comprehensive assessments to 
identify vulnerable areas and populations, and to 
understand the potential impacts of drought.
⊲	 Sustainable Land and Water Management: 
Promoting practices such as soil conservation, 
efficient irrigation, and water recycling to enhance 
the sustainability of land and water resources.
⊲	 Diversifying Livelihoods: Encouraging 
diversification of income sources to reduce 
dependency on drought-sensitive activities.
⊲	 Community Engagement and Capacity Building: 
Involving local communities in planning and 
decision-making processes and providing 
education and training to build local capacity for 
drought resilience.
⊲	 Policy and Institutional Frameworks: Developing 
and implementing policies that support drought 
resilience, including integrated water resource 
management and land use planning.
⊲	 Risk Transfer and Insurance: Establishing 
mechanisms such as drought insurance to help 
communities manage financial risks associated 
with drought.
National Strategies 
Australia has several key initiatives and programs 
aimed at building national drought resilience, the major 
ones being:
Future Drought Fund
The FDF is a significant investment by the Australian 
Government to enhance drought resilience across the 
country. Established in 2019 with an initial investment 
of $3.9 billion, the fund aims to grow to $5 billion by 
2028-2029. Each year, $100 million is made available 
for grants and programs (including this RDRP)  
focused on:
⊲	 Partnering for Local Solutions: Collaborating 
with regions and communities to manage drought 
and climate risks.
⊲	 Building Knowledge, Skills, and Capability: 
Supporting farmers and communities to make 
informed decisions about drought.
⊲	 Innovating for Transformation:  
Trialling innovative solutions and driving 
transformational change.
⊲	 First Nations Initiatives: Partnering with First 
Nations communities to manage drought and 
climate risks.
The FDF monitoring evaluation and learning framework 
outlines the Australian Government’s approach to 
building drought resilience (DAFF, 2023), with high 
level indicators under the following strategic priorities 
of the FDF:
⊲	 Economic Resilience: Supporting an innovative 
and profitable agricultural sector.
⊲	 Environmental Resilience: Ensuring sustainable 
and improved functioning of farming landscapes.
⊲	 Social Resilience: Building resourceful and 
adaptable communities.
Drought Resilience 
Research and Adoption
This program is part of the FDF and focuses on 
research and the adoption of practices that enhance 
drought resilience. It includes initiatives to develop 
and share climate tools, resilient farming practices, and 
support for regional communities (DAFF, 2025). 
The program includes establishment of eight 
regionally focused Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hubs in major climatic and agricultural 
zones across Australia to assist farmers and regional 
communities better prepare for, manage, and recover 
from drought. Their purpose is to connect farmers 
with experts, innovations and new practices, and to 
drive the adoption and extension of drought resilient 
technologies and strategies. The Hubs also foster 
collaboration among industry, researchers, farmers, and 
community groups, ensuring that solutions are tailored 
to local needs and knowledge is effectively shared 
and implemented (DAFF, 2021). The Northern Hub is 
discussed in the following section on State Strategies.
Australian Government 
Drought Plan
This plan outlines policies and programs to help 
farming businesses and communities prepare for, 
manage, and recover from drought, with a focus 
on building resilience, enabling preparedness, and 
providing targeted support during hardship. The plan 
promotes clear roles and responsibilities across all 
levels of government, encourages collaboration  
among stakeholders, and ensures transparent, 
evidence-based decision-making to address drought 
challenges effectively. It sets out a drought response 
framework and describes how the government 
supports awareness, preparedness, and response 
activities, including monitoring, evaluation, and 
learning frameworks.
20   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   21

National Drought 
Agreement (2024 – 2029)
This agreement is co-signed with state and territory 
governments, providing an overarching framework 
for nationally coordinated drought policy and outlines 
shared responsibilities and principles for drought 
preparedness, response and recovery.
Drought Response  
and Recovery
The Australian Government’s drought response 
and recovery strategies focus on both immediate 
relief and long-term resilience. Immediate support 
includes financial assistance, mental health services, 
and community support programs (Department of 
Agriculture, 2019), to help farmers and rural communities 
manage hardship. Longer-term strategies-such as the 
FDF and strategic projects, aim to build resilience, 
improve preparedness, and enable faster recovery 
from future drought events through investments in 
infrastructure, climate tools, and collaborative planning 
with state and territory governments.
Ecosystem and Soil 
Restoration
National strategies for ecosystem and soil restoration 
are essential components in building drought 
resilience, providing the foundation for sustainable 
land management, improved water retention, and 
enhanced landscape capacity to withstand and 
recover from drought impacts.
Australia’s Strategy for Nature 2024–2030 and 
the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 
offer Australia’s official framework for biodiversity 
conservation which focuses on halting biodiversity loss 
and restoring ecosystems by protecting 30% of land 
and oceans, preventing extinctions, and promoting 
sustainable land management. The strategy fosters 
ecological connectivity, Indigenous stewardship, and 
landscape restoration – key elements that enhance 
ecosystem and community resilience to water scarcity 
and climate extremes (DCCEEW, 2024b).
Australia’s strategy for soil health is outlined in the 
National Soil Strategy and the accompanying National 
Soil Action Plan (DAFF, 2024c). The National Soil 
Strategy sets out how Australia will value, manage, and 
improve its soil over the next 20 years. The Strategy 
has three main goals which are to prioritise soil health, 
empower soil innovation and stewards and strengthen 
soil knowledge and capability. The National Soil 
Action Plan (2023-2028) outlines specific actions to 
achieve the goals of the National Soil Strategy. These 
aim to ensure that Australia’s soil remains healthy 
and productive, supporting sustainable agriculture, 
biodiversity, and resilience to climate change and 
natural disasters.
State Strategies
At the state and regional level, this Kimberley and 
Pilbara RDRP has alignment with key strategic plans or 
documents including:
⊲	 Climate Adaptation Strategy 2023 (DWER)
⊲	 Foundations for a Stronger Tomorrow: State 
Infrastructure Strategy 2022 (Infrastructure WA)
⊲	 State Planning Strategy 2050 (WAPC/DPLH)
⊲	 WA Climate Change Policy 2020 (DWER)
⊲	 WA Natural Resource Management Framework 
2018 (DPIRD)
⊲	 WA Primary Industries Plan 2020-24 (DPIRD)
⊲	 WA Regional Development Framework  
2023 (DPIRD)
⊲	 Rangelands NRM Regional Plan 2017-2022
In addition to the strategic documents above, the 
Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP aligns with existing 
activities and priorities of region-wide key stakeholders 
including the Northern Western Australia and Northern 
Territory Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hub (Northern Hub). The Northern Hub aims to 
transform the drought resilience of farmers, Traditional 
Owners and communities in the Northern Territory 
and Northern Western Australian Tropical Top End and 
Rangelands (Australian Government, 2024a). Each 
hub has several nodes, reaching across their region. 
Kimberley-Pilbara hub nodes are in Karratha, Broome 
and Kununurra. The Northern Hub supports rural 
industries and communities to prepare for drought 
through the leveraging of expertise and fostering 
innovation and new practices (Northern Hub, 2023).
The following projects are currently underway through 
the Northern Hub:
⊲	 Ord Water: Water Use and Efficiency in the Ord 
River Irrigation Area (DPIRD). 
⊲	 Spinifex Dominated Pastures (KPCA)
⊲	 Early Career Extension Program: Supports skills 
development for early-career extension staff 
across northern Australia.
⊲	 Next Generation Land Managers: Delivers on-
station training for first- and second-year pastoral 
staff using property-specific resources. 
⊲	 Forestry Human Capacity: Capacity building 
and business development project for remote 
community resilience.
⊲	 Cultivated Agriculture: Provides crop  
production training to support diversification of 
grazing operations.
⊲	 Rain Ready Rangelands 2.0: Supports land 
managers to trial sustainable grazing strategies 
and gather monitoring data.
⊲	 Over-sowing Legumes: Extends successful QLD 
technology to WA/NT to improve dry season feed 
and cattle condition.
⊲	 Rehydration Project: Demonstration site in the 
Kimberley showing rehydration practices for 
degraded pastures.
⊲	 Long-term Co-design: Facilitates industry-led 
project generation to meet long-term needs.
⊲	 Consultation, Engagement, Planning for Natural 
Capital Markets: Workshops and plain-English 
resources to support understanding of emerging 
Natural Capital opportunities.
Other important programs include the Indigenous and 
Aboriginal Ranger programs, funded by the WA state 
government and the Australian government. Through 
these programs, First Nations organisations in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions are managing Country 
and protecting the environment in partnership with the 
public and private sectors (NIAA, 2024). The land and 
sea management activities undertaken in WA (DBCA, 
2024) have strong alignment with the goals and intent 
of the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP. 
This RDRP recognises the importance of both intra-
regional and cross-regional collaboration in building 
drought resilience. Within each region, existing 
networks—such as the Pilbara and Kimberley RDAs, 
Land Councils, the Northern Hub, KPCA, DPIRD 
branches, and local government forums play a vital 
role in knowledge exchange, coordination, and 
localised implementation. Beyond the regions, this 
RDRP supports broader knowledge sharing through 
engagement with other RDRP regions across WA. The 
Pilbara and Kimberley Development Commissions 
have actively shared progress and insights with other 
regions and have also learned from the experiences of 
other Development Commissions. These connections 
aim to strengthen cross-sector learning, identify 
innovations, and inform long-term resilience strategies 
through collaborative practice.
Numerous grass-roots efforts and projects on land 
regeneration, soil conservation, fire mitigation and 
developing positive grazing management have been 
undertaken collaboratively in northwest WA through 
voluntary Land Conservation District Committees 
(LCDCs), Rangelands NRM, Ranger Groups and other 
Landcare groups or projects, driven by land  
managers – namely pastoralists and Rangers in the 
north west. These grass-roots restorative efforts are 
documented at the national level by organisations 
such as Soils for Life (Soils for Life, 2025) highlighting 
these initiatives through case studies and reports that 
showcase the practices and outcomes of soil stewards 
across Australia.
There are some key themes of landscape regeneration 
which help build resilience to drought. The following 
case studies explore the themes of regenerative 
grazing management and proactive burning.
 
22   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   23

Strategic documents and stakeholders specific to 
the Kimberley have been incorporated into the focus 
and investment priorities in the Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP. They include (but not limited to): 
⊲	 Our North, Our Future 2021-2026 Targeted 
Growth
⊲	 Kimberley Regional Water Plan 2010-2030 
(DWER) 
⊲	 Kimberley Needs Assessment 2022-2024 
(WAPHA)
⊲	 Kimberley Regional Planning and Infrastructure 
Framework (RPIF) 2015 (DPLH)
⊲	 Kimberley Development Commission Strategic 
Plan 2024-2026 (KDC)
⊲	 RDA Kimberley Strategic Regional Plan (RDA)
⊲	 2036 and Beyond: A Regional Investment 
Blueprint for the Kimberley 
⊲	 East Kimberley Tourism Plan 2021 (East Kimberley 
Marketing Group)
The KDC has articulated a vision for the Kimberley to 
aspire to a future as one of the world’s most  
successful and sustainable regions. This vision is built 
around the pillars of people, place and prosperity 
(KDC, 2024), all of which are relevant to this Kimberley 
and Pilbara RDRP. 
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP has also built on the 
Regional Water Plan developed for the Kimberley by 
the Government of Western Australia in 2010. The 
Water Plan acknowledges the cultural and social 
values of water to the local communities, especially 
First Nations populations, and emphasises the need 
for ongoing research to understand water-dependent 
values for better planning and management 
(Government of Western Australia, 2010).
Pilbara Strategies
Strategic documents and stakeholders specific to the 
Pilbara have been incorporated into the focus and 
investment priorities in this Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP. They include (but not limited to): 
⊲	 Our North Our Future 2021-2026 Targeted Growth 
⊲	 Pilbara Regional Water Plan 2010-2030 (DWER)
⊲	 WA Strategic Industrial Areas
⊲	 Pilbara Development Commission Strategic Plan 
2023-2025 (PDC)
⊲	 RDA Pilbara Strategic Plan 2021/22 – 2023/24
⊲	 Pilbara Needs Assessment 2022-2024 (WAPHA)
⊲	 Ten Year Community Plan for the NGO Sector in 
the Pilbara 2016 (RDA Pilbara/PDC)
⊲	 Pilbara Regional Planning and Infrastructure 
Framework 2012 (DPLH)
The focus areas of the PDC’s Strategic Plan are 
particularly relevant to drought resilience and include 
liveability, economic development, diversification and 
innovation, Aboriginal empowerment and prosperity, 
climate resilience, low carbon transition, collaboration, 
and partnerships (PDC, 2023). 
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP builds on the 
Pilbara Regional Water Plan 2010-2030 developed 
by the Government of Western Australia in 2010. The 
Plan guides water resource management and sets 
strategic directions for the sustainable management 
and development of the region’s water resources. 
It outlines a shared vision for water in the Pilbara 
region, supported by several objectives with long term 
outcomes relating to water management (Government 
of Western Australia, 2010a).
The high-value water-dependent 
ecological and cultural features 
of the Kimberley region are 
maintained while ensuring 
sustainable management of 
appropriate water resource 
development.
Kimberley Regional Water Plan 2010-2030 
Shared Vision
Our precious water resources 
are managed and developed in a 
sustainable manner to maintain and 
enhance our natural environment, 
our cultural and spiritual values, 
our quality of life and the economic 
development of the Pilbara.
Pilbara Regional Water Plan 2010-2030 
Shared Vision
Case Study
Grazing Management
Grazing management (and agriculture as a whole) is undergoing a revolutionary shift in understanding, 
stemming from revived reverence for soil and ecosystem processes underpinned by holistic or systems 
thinking, broadly encompassed by ‘regenerative agriculture’.  
Cheela Plains Station in the Pilbara region and Kachana Station in the Kimberley region have been 
recently celebrated as “Soil Health Champions” by Rangelands NRM through a State-wide project on 
agricultural soil health with short video case studies (https://www.youtube.com/user/RangelandsNRM). 
Both demonstrate that livestock management can be used as a tool for ecosystem restoration in the 
region. These add to numerous case studies in Australia by Soils For Life and RCS Australia, as well as 
globally, of farms and stations which have enhanced ecosystem function with managed grazing (see 
Stanley et al 2024), enhancing the drought resilience of the land and business. 
Collaborative and proactive burning  
for healthy Country
The Dampier Peninsula Fire Working Group (DPFWG) has demonstrated the power of collaborative 
planning, action and review to reduce damaging bushfire impacts, and enhancing biodiversity habitat in 
the west Kimberley (Wysong et al 2022; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DW8QWO6D0-I). 
Damaging fire regimes can affect their own ‘drought’ by wiping out fodder, bushfoods and biodiversity 
alike, and exposing the land to wind and rain erosion which reduces landscape fertility and function 
for the next season.  Proactive and Traditional fire practices are a powerful tool to manage vegetation 
towards landscape resilience in northern WA.  
Case Study
Kimberley Strategies
24   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   25

Connections 
and 
Opportunities
Many projects and programs in the 
regions connected to land, water, 
community resilience and disaster 
recovery can contribute to drought 
resilience. The following case study 
highlights how a project (with various 
stakeholders) can contribute to 
overarching drought resilience, which 
by nature, hinges on diversity and 
strength of connections. 
Water systems
Key drivers of demand for water include mining and 
minerals processing, population growth, irrigated 
agriculture and pastoral development and clean 
energy production. 
In the Pilbara, coastal alluvial aquifers are important 
existing and potential water sources for coastal ports 
and towns (Government of Western Australia, 2023c). 
The CSIRO’s Pilbara Water Resource Assessment 
(McFarlane, 2015) found that these aquifers appear 
capable of withstanding a hotter and drier climate. 
Future drier climates are also projected to have a 
limited impact on the main future potential water 
resource in the west of the region. A range of 
potentially underutilised water resources are identified 
in the Assessment (McFarlane, 2015). 
Estimations of future water availability for the 
Kimberley in 2010 concluded that water resources 
are sufficient to accommodate predicted medium-
term growth trends, if a cautious approach to water 
management is adopted and targeted management 
strategies are established (Government of Western 
Australia, 2010).
In the West Kimberley there are several aquifers that 
sit within the Canning Basin. These water resources 
are used for drinking water, livestock watering 
and irrigated agriculture. Several WA Government 
groundwater allocation plans exist to manage water 
use in the regions to maintain environmental, social 
and cultural values (DWER, 2024).
Lake Argyle in the East Kimberley provides a water 
source for irrigated agriculture, mining, hydroelectric 
power as well as environmental, social and cultural 
values. Irrigation is the dominant consumptive use 
of water from Lake Argyle (Government of Western 
Australia, n.d.).
Case Study
Northern Native Seed Industry Initiative 
The Pilbara Development Commission is leading the Northern Native Seed Industry 
Initiative (NNSII), a $4.4 million dollar program to create a network of sustainable businesses built 
around the creation of native seed orchards for harvesting and sale. The resource sector, in particular 
mine revegetation, is identified as a potentially lucrative target market. There are opportunities for 
reintroduction and protection of native plant species adds to drought resilience both in the natural 
landscape and in urban areas. 
In the natural environment, plants act as a nutrient stripping filter between the land and waterways. This 
helps keep waterways such as creeks, rivers and lakes clean and reduces algae blooms. Plants also 
provide vital shade for animals and other plants as well as reducing erosion caused by desertification.
Urban settings with ample shade are many degrees cooler than those without and native plants can 
provide the necessary shade and amenity that activates outdoor spaces. They also encourage people 
to walk short distances instead of driving. Positive mental health outcomes are also linked to people’s 
access to parks, gardens and other nature-based spaces.
The regional context guiding the RDRP has been organised under the five focus areas of 
water systems, communities, agriculture, landscapes and economy. This section provides 
a summary of each focus area, with further information on concepts available in the 
Background and Context Reports and DVAs.
Regional Context
26   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   27

Figure 6: Native Title Determinations, WA
The Kimberley and Pilbara are home to a diverse 
population, with a generally younger population 
compared to other WA regions.  With an estimated 
population of 99,350 people – 39,389 in the Kimberley 
and 59,961 in the Pilbara, almost 25% identify as 
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. Overall, 16.7% of  
the population speaks a language other than English 
(ABS, 2023).
The Pilbara is crucial to WA’s economy, particularly 
through its iron ore and liquefied natural gas industries. 
The Kimberley also contributes significantly through 
mining, tourism, agriculture, and pearling.  
Both regions have strong and vibrant communities. 
However, both face complex social and economic 
challenges, such as community safety and youth 
wellbeing, and are currently experiencing an acute 
crisis in housing availability and affordability. Housing 
is fundamental to the functioning of any economy, 
enabling labour-force participation and underpinning 
the wellbeing of families and communities (KDC, 2023).
The disparity between opportunities and life  
outcomes between First Nations and non-Aboriginal 
people remains concerning, with labour force 
participation rates much lower than non-Aboriginal 
people. Similar disparities exist across a wide range of 
social and economic indicators. Strategies to unlock 
the enormous productive potential of the First Nations 
workforce and address complex social issues is 
paramount to regional success. 
Both regions have rich cultural history spanning tens 
of thousands of years. Figure 6 shows the Native Title 
Applications within WA currently determined by the 
Federal Court of Australia (Government of Western 
Australia, 2024). Kimberley Land Council (KLC) is the 
Native Title Representative Body for the Kimberley 
region (KLC, 2024) and Yamatji Marlpa Aboriginal 
Corporation (YMAC) is the native title representative 
body for the Pilbara. The Kimberley has the majority of 
WA’s 200 remote Aboriginal communities (Government 
of Western Australia, 2023a). It is essential that 
management of the region’s resources be fully 
inclusive of First Nation’s people through the provision 
of opportunities to become more involved in all 
levels of planning, research and wider promotion and 
appreciation of their cultural and historical legacy.
Fostering social and economic growth while balancing 
development aspirations with environmental and 
climate change impacts will present significant 
management challenges. These challenges will  
require strong leadership and careful planning for 
the future. Although there is a compelling case 
for promoting and facilitating growth, it is equally 
important to ensure that the region’s unique natural 
environment and cultural history, which are its 
comparative advantages, are preserved.
Agriculture
Across the Kimberley and Pilbara regions almost 35% 
of land is classified as agricultural, with the gross value 
of agricultural commodities being $504 million in 2021-
22. The Kimberley accounted for $374 million gross 
value of agricultural commodities, with key producing 
areas Derby-West Kimberley LGA ($135 million), and 
Halls Creek LGA ($111 million). The Pilbara produced 
$130 million, with almost half of this in the East Pilbara 
LGA (DAFF, 2024a). 
In 2021-22 the key production types (and % of gross 
value of agricultural commodities) were: 
⊲	 Meat cattle (over 1 million) - $429 million (91%)
⊲	 Vegetables (melons, pumpkin, sweet corn, beans) 
- $30 million (5.9%)
⊲	 Fruits and nuts (banana, mango) - $6 million (1.1%)
⊲	 Cotton and other oilseeds - $4 million (0.8%).
⊲	 Maize - $4 million (0.8%) (DAFF, 2024a). 
Tropically adapted meat cattle predominantly graze 
on native vegetation in the regions (DAFF, 2024a). 
Pastoral leases are leases over Crown land which give 
the lessees the right to graze authorised livestock 
on the natural vegetation (DPLH, 2022). Lessees are 
obliged to sustainably manage the rangelands  
(DPLH, 2023). 
Important cultural values are frequently closely 
associated with both ground and surface water 
sources in the Kimberley and Pilbara. It is important 
these values are understood and closely  
considered with Traditional Owners as part of the 
management and development of water resources  
in these two regions.
Provision of water services to Aboriginal communities 
is an important consideration in the regions. In 2023 
the WA Government transferred responsibility for 
water services for 101 Aboriginal communities in the 
Kimberley and 26 Aboriginal communities in the 
Pilbara and Mid-West regions to the Water Corporation 
(OAG, 2021). Through the Aboriginal Communities 
Water Services (ACWS) program the Water Corporation 
plans to work with each community over the next 
10 years (2023-2033) in a staged approach (Water 
Corporation, 2024a).
Community
28   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   29

Average ‘lease and improvement’ values for pastoral 
leases in the Pilbara increased more than five-fold over 
the 1992–2005 period (DCCEEW, 2008). An identified 
trend was for several leases to be operated as a 
single management unit (SMU), resulting in declines 
in staffing levels and permanent habitation (DCCEEW, 
2008a,b,c). The Western Australian Rangeland 
Monitoring System (WARMS) has sites distributed 
across the region and provides reliable, quantitative 
data for reporting changes impacting on production 
(DCCEEW, 2008).
Of the 15,650 jobs in the Kimberley region, 897 (5.7%) 
are in the agriculture sector, with 375 of these in Shire 
of Wyndham-East Kimberley LGA and 302 in Shire of 
Broome LGA. Of the 59,782 jobs in the Pilbara region, 
256 (0.4%) are in the agricultural sector, 115 of these in 
Shire of East Pilbara LGA (ABS, 2023).
The Ord River Irrigation Scheme is in the East Kimberley 
and is a significant agricultural development project 
aimed at harnessing the abundant water resources of 
the Ord River. The project constructed 2 major dams; 
Kununurra Diversion Dam in 1962, the first stage of 
the scheme, and Ord River Dam, constructed in 1972, 
creating Lake Argyle, Australia’s largest artificial lake 
(WA Government, n.d.). Lake Argyle has a capacity of 
10,700 GL at spillway level and is managed by the Water 
Corporation. It provides water for agriculture, mining, 
hydroelectric power, and other uses.
Water flows from Lake Argyle down the Ord River to 
Lake Kununurra where it is diverted, and gravity fed 
through a series of open channels to farms in the 
Ord River Irrigation Area (ORIA). The scheme initially 
irrigated 15,150 ha of agricultural land. The Ord-East 
Kimberley Expansion Project commenced in 2009 
and has been implemented in 3 phases. Ord Stage 2 
expanded the area to its current 28,000 ha footprint 
with prospective works expanding infrastructure to 
irrigate up to 50,000 ha enabling cultivation of a 
greater area of crops.
Irrigated agriculture is a smaller industry in the 
West Kimberley with approximately 3,000 ha under 
irrigation. Groundwater is pumped from large aquifers 
and used for horticultural and fodder production, 
predominantly via centre pivot or sub surface drip-
irrigation infrastructure. There is also potential for large 
scale irrigated agriculture fed by the extensive Fitzroy 
River Catchment area with allocation and management 
planning underway between the state government and 
Traditional Owner groups.
The Shire of East Pilbara is a key contributor to the 
agricultural sector. In 2020-21 the gross value of 
agricultural commodities for the Pilbara was $130 
million, with almost half of this in the East Pilbara LGA. 
Of the 59,782 jobs in the Pilbara region, 256 (0.4%) are 
in the agriculture sector, with 115 of these in the East 
Pilbara LGA.
Landscapes
The Kimberley has an extensive network of rivers and 
streams influenced primarily by monsoonal rainfall. 
It also has two of WA’s largest rivers – the Fitzroy 
River (700km long) and the Ord River (588km long) 
(Government of Western Australia, 2010). The Pilbara 
has a network of permanent and ephemeral river 
systems which are largely driven by cyclonic and 
tropical depressions (Curtin University, 2023). The 
Pilbara region includes the Fortescue River (760km 
long and the State’s third longest river) and the 
Ashburton River (680km).
Both regions have threatened ecological communities 
(TEC) with a strong connection to, or reliance on, 
water – the Kimberley currently has 11 TEC (including 
six critically endangered), and the Pilbara currently has 
two TEC (DBCA, 2023). A range of both aquatic and 
terrestrial ecosystems are highly likely to be reliant on 
water inflow (in addition to rainfall). In the Pilbara the 
greatest variety of groundwater dependent ecosystem 
types, and variability between wet and dry periods, 
occurs in the Hamersley Range area (McFarlane, 2015). 
There are four Ramsar Convention listed wetlands 
in the Kimberley – Ord River Floodplain, Lakes 
Argyle and Kununurra, Roebuck Bay and Eighty-
mile Beach (Commonwealth of Australia, 2022). The 
Lakes Argyle and Kununurra site forms a significant 
wetland ecosystem in the East Kimberley extending 
from Lake Argyle through the Ord River to Lake 
Kununurra. Covering approximately 117,000 ha it is 
one of Australia’s largest artificial wetland systems. 
These interconnected water bodies play a crucial 
role in supporting a diverse range of flora and fauna 
(DCCEEW 2010). The diverse landscape of wetlands, 
swamps and river channels support a rich biodiversity, 
providing critical breeding and foraging grounds for 
birds, reptiles and aquatic life. 
Figure 7: Climate classifications, Kimberley and Pilbara (Peet et al 2007).
Tropical Savanna,  
Dry Winter (Aw)
Hot Semi-Arid (BSh)
Hot Desert (BWh)
The RDRP regions are in the Rangelands NRM area 
and sit across 12 IBRA7 regions (Interim Biogeographic 
Regionalisation for Australia) (ALA, 2023). IBRA is 
a planning tool which classifies the land surface 
of Australia based on common climate, geology, 
landform, native vegetation and species information 
(DCCEEW, 2023). IBRA7 is the most current version, 
developed in 2012 and divides Australia into 89 
biogeographic regions and 419 subregions.
There are three climatic zones across the RDRP 
regions (see Figure 7):
⊲	 Tropical Savanna with Dry Winter (Aw) – north  
of Kimberley
⊲	 Hot Semi-Arid (BSh) – south and south-east 
Kimberley and parts of Pilbara (Chichester /  
Tom Price)
⊲	 Hot Desert (BWh) – Pilbara (Peel et al 2007). 
30   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   31

The Ramsar Site also plays a crucial role in the 
region’s cultural heritage, with significant importance 
to local First Nations communities who have a deep 
connection to the land and water. The area was subject 
to a native title claim by the Miriwoong and Gajerrong 
people, which was determined in September 2003 
(Government of Western Australia, 2024). As a result 
of the Ord Final Agreement negotiations, formal 
processes for First Nations consultation and interaction 
in management and management planning have 
commenced via the Joint Management Initiative.
The Fortescue Marsh, approximately 100 km north-
west of Newman, is the largest ephemeral wetland in 
the Pilbara region and is also recognised as nationally 
important. It is rich in plant and animal species of 
high conservation value and is part of an ancient and 
complex array of alluvial aquifers and groundwater 
systems. It is also at the heart of an important mining 
province and longstanding pastoral industry and 
has high cultural and heritage importance to the 
Indigenous peoples of the region. Fortescue Marsh is 
being considered for nomination as a Ramsar wetland 
as per the Fortescue Marsh Management Strategy 
2018 – 2024 and the Pilbara Conservation Strategy. 
The UNESCO World Heritage Listed Purnululu National 
Park (UNESCO, 2024) in the Kimberley and the 
Murujuga Cultural Landscape (nominated for World 
Heritage Listing) in the Pilbara (UNESCO, 2020) are 
two of the Kimberley and Pilbara regions’ 12 National 
Parks. Land management of the Kimberley and Pilbara 
regions is supported by Aboriginal Ranger Groups 
who aim to maintain the ecological integrity of 13 
Indigenous Protected Areas (DCCEEW, 2024a), also 
providing wellbeing and socio-economic benefits for 
local communities.
The Kimberley faces high biosecurity risks with 
regional and localised quarantine restrictions, 
particularly around horticultural product. Climate 
change is a significant contributor to increased 
biosecurity risk in the region (DAWE, 2020a).
Economy
The Kimberley and Pilbara regions have a combined 
economic output of $119.24 billion (14.55% of Western 
Australia’s $819.3 billion output) - $111.5 billion of this is 
from the Pilbara. East Pilbara LGA accounts for 38.7% 
of annual economic output for the Pilbara, followed 
by Ashburton with 30.3%. Broome LGA accounts for 
44.7% of annual economic output for the Kimberley 
(REMPLAN, 2024). 
At least $85.56 billion (71%) of the economy in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions is considered directly 
highly or moderately dependent on nature - $82.7 
billion (96.7%) in the Pilbara and $2.86 billion (67.4%) in 
the Kimberley (WEF, 2020). 
Mining has the largest economic output for the 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions. The Pilbara economy 
is highly reliant on mining, accounting for 87% of the 
Pilbara region output and over 90% of output within 
the East Pilbara and Ashburton LGAs. Mining accounts 
for 58.7% of output in Derby-West Kimberley LGA and 
54.75% in Halls Creek LGA (REMPLAN, 2024). 
Across the regions over $9.5 billion in mining royalties 
were collected by the state government in 2022/23 
(DEMIRS, 2024). While the regions’ mining sector 
generates both economic output and employment, 
there is a heavy reliance on Fly-In-Fly-Out models of 
work. An analysis of total mining employment in the 
regions compared to local industry employment shows 
as little as 14% of the workforce may be locally based 
(DEMIRS, 2024; ABS 2023).
The Kimberley region has greater economic diversity 
compared to the Pilbara, and the Shire of Broome and 
the Shire of Wyndham-East Kimberley have greater 
diversity compared to most parts of regional WA 
(Australian Government, 2023).
Industries with a reliance on outdoor work are 
particularly at risk from extreme heat, including 
agriculture, construction, sport and recreation, 
hospitality, transport and warehousing, mining, utilities, 
education, and training (DEMIRS, 2023). 
Tourism
The tourism sector generates $531.139 million (6.8%) of 
total output in the Kimberley and 2,011 jobs (12.8% of 
the region). In the Pilbara tourism generates $388.907 
million (0.3%) and 1,809 jobs (3% of the region). 
Tourism in the regions is highly reliant on the natural 
environment and is built around natural experiences, 
Indigenous tourism, cultural tourism, ecotourism and 
agritourism (EKMG, 2021; Destination Pilbara 2024). 
Both regions are renowned for their environmental 
features, national parks, waterways and waterholes 
and these are popular attractions visited by both 
tourists and locals. 
Tourist numbers in the Kimberley and Pilbara are likely 
to be negatively impacted by the predicted increase in 
heat stress days (when the Temperature Humidity Index 
is equal to or greater than 79); and hot days (greater 
than or equal to 35 °C between 1 May and 31 August).
Many tourism operators in the Kimberley and Pilbara 
have a high dependence on land-based experiences. 
Operators will need to assess the impact of increasing 
temperatures and humidity on outdoor-focused tourism 
activities, including those involving remote or basic 
accommodation or ‘glamping’ style accommodation, 
where client comfort levels may be compromised. The 
consultation process found that operators may face a 
potential ‘shrinkage’ of the tourism season for overland 
activities with a much-diminished operating window to 
work within.
Increased temperatures may pose health risks to 
tourists, particularly those engaging in outdoor 
activities like hiking or visiting remote areas. This could 
discourage visitors from spending extended periods in 
the region during peak heat periods and conversely, 
concentrate visitor numbers more intensely during the 
‘dry season’.
Some of the region’s key attractions, like waterfalls, 
gorges, rivers and national parks, could be impacted 
by changes in rainfall. For example, lower rainfall 
during the wet season might reduce the water flow, 
while increased rainfall might lead to floods, affecting 
access to popular spots. Many cultural sites, including 
ancient rock art and sacred places, could be at risk 
from climate change-related erosion, flooding, or 
bushfires. This would have a negative impact on 
Indigenous tourism, a key drawcard for the region.
It has been identified that agritourism, ecotourism  
and cultural tourism can support economic growth  
of communities by diversification of income on  
pastoral leases, creating jobs supporting local 
businesses and communities. There are  
approximately 60 stations in the Pilbara and 90 in the 
Kimberley, and of these stations approximately 20 are 
offering tourism experiences.
Local government profiles
This RDRP combines the Kimberley and Pilbara regions bordered by the Northern Territory to the east, the Indian 
Ocean to the north / west and the Gascoyne, Mid West and Goldfields regions to the south. It covers eight Local 
Government Areas (LGAs):
⊲	 Kimberley: Shires of Broome, Derby-West Kimberley, Halls Creek, and Wyndham-East Kimberley.
⊲	 Pilbara: City of Karratha, Shires of Ashburton and East Pilbara and Town of Port Hedland.
Following are profiles for each of the regional local government areas.
Source: Remplan. Australian Bureau of Statistics 2021 Census of Population and Housing, Census Place of Work Employment (Scaled), ABS 2022 
/ 2023 National Input Output Tables, and ABS June 2024 Gross State Product Australia’s Environment 2024 Report produced by the Australian 
National University’s Centre for Water & Landscape Dynamics. Pilbara Lands Board. 2021 Agriculture Census. DPIRD, ABS and DLPH.
32   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   33

Kimberley Local Government Profiles
Shire of Halls Creek
Shire of Wyndham-East Kimberley
Shire of Broome
Shire of Derby-West Kimberley
DAYS OVER 35°C:
160.7 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
DAYS OVER 35°C:
97.3 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
DAYS OVER 35°C:
124.3 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
DAYS OVER 35°C:
151.3 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
1,095
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
3,634
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
8,336
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
2,585
AREA:
133,045 km2
AREA:
112,066 km2
AREA:
54,401 km2
AREA:
119,730 km2
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 26  
With tourist experiences: 0
Head of cattle: 242,227
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 22  
With tourist experiences: 7
Head of cattle: 131,794
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 12  
With tourist experiences: 1
Head of cattle: 58,186
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 35  
With tourist experiences: 6
Head of cattle: 291,445
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Jaru, Kija, Kukatja, Walmajarri, and 
Gooniyandi people
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Wanjina-Wunggurr, Balanggarra, 
Miriwoong and Gajerrong people
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Bardi, Jawi, Bindunbur, Jabirr 
Jabirr / Ngumbari, Rubib and 
Yawuru, Joombarn – Buru, 
Birriman-Gan, and Karajarri 
Peoples
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Warrwa, Bardi, Jawi, Ngarinyin, 
Worrorra, Nyikina, Mangala, 
Unggumi, Bunuba, Walmajarri, 
Kija, Gooniyandi, Oogardang, 
Oomeday, Yow Jabi and 
Wangkatjunka peoples
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
8.5 (2024)
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
8.6 (2024)
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
2.3 (2024)
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
4.7 (2024)
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$658.5 m
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$1.8 bn
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$3.6 bn
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$2 bn
POPULATION:
3,574   
(10.19% of Kimberley)
POPULATION:
7,476   
(21.31% of Kimberley)
POPULATION:
16,958  
(48.33% of Kimberley)
POPULATION:
7,074  
(20.16% of Kimberley)
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Halls Creek
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Kununurra and Wyndham
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Broome
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Derby, Fitzroy Crossing
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Nil
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Sandalwood, cotton, cereals, fruit 
trees, small crops
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Hay & silage, corn, fruit trees, 
small crops, grapes, aquaponics 
& turf
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Hay & silage, fruit trees, small 
crops, grapes, cereals 
PRECIPITATION:
588 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
PRECIPITATION:
1127 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
PRECIPITATION:
652 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
PRECIPITATION:
816 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
TREE COVER:
4.4%
TREE COVER:
11.5%
TREE COVER:
3.5%
TREE COVER:
4.6%
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
540 
(Kimberley = 859)
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
899 
(Kimberley = 859)
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
962 
(Kimberley = 859)
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
734 
(Kimberley = 859)
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 43%  
Natural environments: 56%
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 38%  
Natural environments: 60%
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 33%  
Natural environments: 67%
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 57%  
Natural environments: 42%
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
Balgo (Wirrimanu), Billiluna 
(Mindibungu), Mulan, Ringer Soak 
(Kundat Djaru), Warmun (Turkey 
Creek) and Yiyili
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
36 Aboriginal communities 
including Kalumburu and  
Doon Doon
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
65 Aboriginal communities 
including Bidyadanga, Djarindjin, 
Lombadina, Ardyaloon, and 
Beagle Bay
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
46 Aboriginal communities 
including Yungngora, Looma  
and Mowanjum
34   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   35

Pilbara Local Government Profiles
Shire of Ashburton
Shire of East Pilbara
Town of Port Hedland
City of Karratha
DAYS OVER 35°C:
146.1 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
DAYS OVER 35°C:
161.2 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
DAYS OVER 35°C:
137.5 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
DAYS OVER 35°C:
100.3 p.a.  
(avg 2000-2023)
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
14,704
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
19,098
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
11,029
TOTAL NUMBER OF JOBS:
14,951
AREA:
100,817 km2
AREA:
372,295 km2
AREA:
18,417 km2
AREA:
15,238 km2
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 33  
With tourist experiences: 2
Head of cattle: 97,325
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 21  
With tourist experiences: 1
Head of cattle: 150,372
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 8  
With tourist experiences: 1
Head of cattle: 33,995
PASTORAL STATIONS:
Total: 7  
With tourist experiences: 0
Head of cattle: 19,018
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Banjima, Guruma, Thalanyji, 
Puutu Kunti Kurrama, Pinikura, 
Yindjibarndi Yinhawangka 
peoples
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Nyamal, Palyku, Nyangumarta, 
Nyiyaparli and the Martu peoples
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Kariyarra, Ngarla, and Nyamal 
people.
TRADITIONAL LANDS:
Ngarluma, Mardudhunera and 
Yindjibarndi peoples
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
1.9 (2024)
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
5.6 (2024)
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
1.4 (2024)
ENVIRONMENTAL  
CONDITION SCORE:
2.3 (2024)
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$38.189 bn
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$48.433 bn
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$16.588 bn
ANNUAL ECONOMIC OUTPUT:
$22.201 bn
POPULATION:
7,391   
(13.43% of Pilbara)
POPULATION:
9,760   
(17.73% of Pilbara)
POPULATION:
15,684  
(28.5% of Pilbara)
POPULATION:
22,199  
(40.34% of Pilbara)
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Tom Price, Onslow,  
Pannawonica, and Paraburdoo
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Newman, Marble Bar and 
Nullagine
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Port Hedland, South Hedland
MAIN TOWNSHIPS:
Karratha, Dampier,  
Roebourne, Point Samson, 
Wickham, Cossack
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Nil
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Fodder crops, hay and silage
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Nil
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
AND PRODUCTION:
Nil
PRECIPITATION:
350 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
PRECIPITATION:
423 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
PRECIPITATION:
400 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
PRECIPITATION:
331 mm p.a. 
(avg 2000-2023)
TREE COVER:
4.3%
TREE COVER:
1.8%
TREE COVER:
1.2%
TREE COVER:
3.1%
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
1,024 
(Pilbara = 1,016)
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
939 
(Pilbara = 1,016)
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
1,011  
(Pilbara = 1,016)
2021 SEIFA SCORE:
1,052 
(Pilbara = 1,016)
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 61%  
Natural environments: 39%
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 15%  
Natural environments: 83%
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 54%  
Natural environments: 42%
LAND USE:
Grazing native pasture: 67%  
Natural environments: 32%
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
Bindi Bindi, Wakathuni, Bellary 
Springs, Youngaleena and 
Ngurrawaana
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
Jigalong, Punmu, Kunawarritji, 
Parnngurr, Goodabinya and 
Irrungadji
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
Yandeyarra, Jinparinya, Punju 
Nyamal, Marta Marta, Strelley  
and Woodstock
ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES:
Cheeditha, Weymul and 
Mingullatharndo
36   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   37

The Kimberley and Pilbara DVA reports each present 
detailed sections on the following topics:
Climate and drought in the regions - defines  
drought for the purposes of Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning and details the exposure of this 
region to drought. A brief analysis of the system 
(region) is also provided to give context to  
potential vulnerabilities. 
This includes:
⊲	 Regional Overview (high level social, economic 
and environmental features)
⊲	 Regional Climate
⊲	 Historical Drought and Drought Impacts
⊲	 Climate Change and Future Drought
Drought risk priority areas - summarises 
environmental, economic, production and social 
domains in the region that may in turn affect the 
adaptive capacity to respond to drought. This is 
intended to help identify priority areas for investment.
Stakeholder engagement – key regional  
challenges and priority activities identified by high 
level stakeholders. 
Vulnerability and resilience assessment - summarises 
how the combined impact, resilience and vulnerability 
of each region is measured, specific to the climate, 
production and context of each region.
Please refer to the Kimberley and Pilbara DVA reports 
on the PDC and KDC websites for further detail on the 
topics listed above.
Understanding drought vulnerability in the Kimberley 
and Pilbara regions involved an assessment of both 
current and projected impacts and the adaptive 
capacity of the people and systems across  
both regions. 
The analysis utilises the overarching DVA conceptual 
framework from the Pilot phase of the RDRP (Figure 8),  
which understands overall vulnerability as the 
relationship between drought impacts (an outcome 
of sensitivity and exposure), and adaptive capacity 
parameters (described here as human/social, natural 
and physical capital). Unlike from the Pilot phase, 
resilience was specifically included as a pillar in 
the DVA, with potential sources of resilience (or 
opportunities) identified alongside vulnerabilities.
Conceptual Framework
Pilbara Regional Climate
The Pilbara is one of Australia’s hottest and driest 
regions. Drought conditions here are often prolonged 
and difficult to define due to naturally low and highly 
variable rainfall. While river systems such as the 
Fortescue, Ashburton, and De Grey support life and 
industry, many communities rely on groundwater 
sources that are under pressure during extended  
dry periods.
Key drought-related stressors in the Pilbara include 
water insecurity, dust storms, land degradation, and 
heat stress. Towns like Marble Bar and Newman have 
experienced record-breaking heat and minimal rainfall, 
reduced soil moisture, limiting vegetation growth, 
and elevated fire risk. For more detailed data and 
information, please refer to the Pilbara DVA report.
Kimberley Regional Climate
The Kimberley’s tropical climate is defined by distinct 
wet and dry seasons but increasing unpredictability 
in seasonal patterns has heightened drought 
vulnerability. Shifts in rainfall timing and intensity  
now pose risks to water access, biodiversity, and  
food production.
Even though formal drought events have been 
infrequent, historical impacts include declines 
in cattle condition, crop failures, and bushfires. 
Remote communities and Aboriginal settlements 
are particularly vulnerable due to seasonal access 
constraints and infrastructure limitations. For more 
detailed data and information, please refer to the 
Kimberley DVA report.
History of Drought 
The Kimberley and Pilbara DVAs explore the climate patterns and drought histories for the regions offering detailed 
insights beyond the overview presented here. In summary, the Kimberley and Pilbara regions experience drought 
in different ways. While formal drought declarations in the Kimberley have been rare, only one or two since 1980, 
the impacts, when they occur, can be severe, particularly for remote communities, pastoral operations, and natural 
systems. In contrast, the Pilbara’s naturally low and highly variable rainfall contributes to more persistent and 
complex drought conditions. Across both regions, high temperatures, erratic rainfall, and compounding events such 
as fire and flood influence how drought is experienced and managed.
Figure 8: Conceptual Framework for Drought Vulnerability and Resilience
Sensitivity of subregion to drought 
conditions
Exposure to drought and drought-
related climate change processes
Drought impact:
Environmental, social, economic
Drought vulnerability & Resilience:  
The ability to absorb, respond to and recover from drought
Adaptive capacity: Natural, human, 
social, financial, physical capital
Drought vulnerability and resilience 
are central considerations in 
regional drought resilience planning. 
Understanding the factors that contribute 
to vulnerability and the capacities 
that enhance resilience is essential 
for developing effective strategies to 
mitigate the impacts of drought.
Drought
38   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   39

Karratha........................................287
Port Hedland...............................314
Marble Bar.................................. 380
Roebourne.................................. 256
Onslow...........................................303
Karratha...........................................3.1
Port Hedland.................................3.1
Marble Bar.................................... 4.4
Roebourne....................................2.9
Onslow.............................................2.7
Onslow: 26 mm (1944) to 1,085 
mm (1961); recent extremes in 3 
of 5 stations
Karratha..........................................114
Port Hedland................................141
Marble Bar....................................199
Roebourne....................................184
Onslow........................................... 108
+17 (Marble Bar) to +25 
(Karratha) heat stress days  
by 2050 (RCP4.5)
8 very dry years (1980–1999 
and 2000–2020)
Cyclones contribute 0–86% of 
summer rainfall; most cyclone-
prone region in Australia
Very high to extreme
Average annual 
rainfall mm
Average days 
>25mm rainfall 
per year
Rainfall 
extremes 
(annual total)
Average number 
of days over 35
Projected change in 
Heat stress days*
Drought frequency
Cyclone influence
Rainfall 
variability
INDICATOR
PILBARA
KIMBERLEY
Broome........................................ 630
Fitzroy Crossing........................683
Kalumburu.................................1257
Kununurra....................................872
Broome........................................... 7.2
Fitzroy Crossing.........................8.2
Kalumburu.................................. 16.5
Kununurra.....................................9.9
Broome: 132 mm (1992) to  
1,599 mm (2018); 90% of rain  
falls Dec–Apr
Broome............................................ 63
Fitzroy Crossing........................227
Kalumburu.....................................171
Kununurra.....................................192
+10 (Kalumburu) to +19 
(Broome) heat stress days by 
2050 (RCP4.5)
1–2 events (1980–1999);  
1 event (2000–2020)
Cyclones frequent Jan–Mar; 
significantly influence wet 
season rainfall
Moderate to high
* (When the Temperature Humidity Index is equal to or greater than 79) under medium emissions (RCP4.5) scenario to 2050
Climate and Drought Snapshot
Impact of Drought
Drought in northern WA does not always look like drought in the south. It is often experienced through the 
compounding effects of intense heat, erratic rainfall, water scarcity, dust storms, and bushfires rather than just 
prolonged dry periods alone. The Kimberley and Pilbara regions are impacted differently due to their climate, 
geography, and socio-economic profiles, but both face growing risks due to climate change and variability.
Economic Impacts
In both regions, drought impacts extend beyond 
agricultural production to affect energy, logistics, 
tourism, and water services. In the pastoral sector, 
reduced wet season rainfall limits pasture availability, 
affects stocking rates, and reduces profitability. 
Destocking is often used as a proactive strategy to 
manage feed availability during extended dry periods. 
Climate change is likely to result in shifts in forage 
species, heat stress for livestock and workers, and 
infrastructure risk due to extreme weather events. In 
the East Kimberley, Lake Argyle’s wet season inflows 
are critical to the Ord River Irrigation Area (ORIA). 
While restrictions have been rare since dam 
construction in the 1970s, dry seasons in 2013 and 
2016 triggered hydropower limitations. As water 
demand grows, particularly from nearby mining and 
agricultural expansion, there is strong justification  
for improved water use efficiency, shared 
infrastructure, and recycling systems. The Pilbara 
DVA also identifies broader drought risk to mining, 
small businesses, remote service delivery, and local 
governments, all of which are sensitive to water 
availability and heat exposure.
Environmental Impacts
Environmental impacts of drought are among the 
most visible and widespread. Decreased rainfall and 
extreme temperatures result in:
⊲	 Reduced vegetation cover, leading to soil erosion 
and land degradation.
⊲	 Lower stream flows and aquifer pressure, 
impacting water ecosystems.
⊲	 Loss of biodiversity and habitat stress.
⊲	 Increased bushfire risk due to accumulated dry 
fuel and lightning.
⊲	 Disruption of seasonal environmental indicators 
such as fruiting and animal breeding.
Environmental condition scores across both  
regions consistently decline during years of 
widespread or localised drought. These patterns are 
expected to intensify under future climate  
projections of increased temperature causing 
evaporation and evapotranspiration.
40   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   41

Drought affects regional wellbeing, cultural continuity, 
and the viability of remote communities. Financial 
pressure, uncertainty, and isolation can have significant 
impacts on mental health, particularly among 
pastoralists and Aboriginal communities. Water is more 
than a resource; it holds social, ethical, and spiritual 
meaning for First Nations peoples. The Living Waters 
model developed for the Martuwarra (Fitzroy River) 
shows how water is understood as a relational entity, 
embedded in law, kinship, language, and responsibility 
(see Figure 9). Drought can disrupt the ability to carry 
out cultural obligations, ceremonies, and seasonal 
activities. In the Kimberley, changes in water flow 
and drying of culturally significant sites have been 
observed in native title areas.
For more detailed data and information on impacts, 
please refer to the Kimberley and Pilbara DVA reports.
Figure 9: Relationship with Country. Ochre arrows in the Living Waters model (left) represent connections not generally considered by modern 
water resource models (right) (NESP, 2024)
1 Temperature Humidity Index Forecast and background information – Northern Australia Climate Program.
The DVAs tell us that both the Pilbara and Kimberley 
regions face an increasingly unpredictable climate 
and heightened future drought risk. These risks are 
not uniform. they reflect the unique climatic patterns 
and vulnerabilities of each region, shaped by their 
geography, land use, and community context.
In the Pilbara, a warming climate is intensifying already 
harsh conditions. Increased temperature extremes, 
reduced soil moisture, and shifts in cyclone activity 
are expected to amplify pressure on water supplies, 
infrastructure, and the pastoral sector.
In the Kimberley, changes to monsoonal timing, rainfall 
variability, and extreme heat are expected to disrupt 
ecosystems, dry season conditions, and community 
water access, particularly in remote and seasonally 
isolated areas.
Both regions are projected to see more frequent and 
compounding drought impacts, making it essential to 
invest in adaptive strategies that are both regionally 
specific and informed by long-term climate projections.
While the regions differ in geography and climate, both 
the Kimberley and Pilbara face increasing drought 
risk due to climate change. Projected climate models 
show declining soil moisture, rising temperatures, and 
greater variability in rainfall by 2050 and beyond.
Historically the Kimberley and Pilbara regions receive 
most of their rain in the summer (wet season) rains 
associated with the monsoon, and occasional tropical 
cyclones. May to October is historically the dry 
season in the region (NACP, 2024) and from June to 
September median rainfall across the Kimberley is 
typically below 10mm (BOM, 2020). 
Under a medium emission (RCP4.5) scenario, common 
projections across the Kimberley and Pilbara regions 
for the 2050s are: 
⊲	 An increase in hot days (above 35°C).
⊲	 A reduction in cold days (average temperature 
less than 19°C between 1 January and 31 
December).
⊲	 Increase in heat stress days (when the 
Temperature Humidity Index1 is equal to or 
greater than 79).
The highest maximum temperatures on record have 
occurred within the past ten years at two of the four 
weather monitoring stations analysed in the Kimberley 
and within the past two years at four of five stations 
analysed in the Pilbara (see DVAs). Wet season 
projections are inconclusive for the region (DAFF, 
2024b) – there is no widespread, clear trend towards 
lower annual rainfall. Increasing temperatures could 
lead to increased evaporation and evapotranspiration 
(Bastin et al, 2014) meaning that when drought does 
occur it is more extreme. 
An increase in temperatures and evaporation 
can also result in an increase in soil water deficits 
which will influence streamflow runoff as well as 
groundwater recharge thresholds (McFarlane, 2015) 
with both processes important considerations for risk 
management.  Pilbara hydrology is sensitive to small 
changes in rainfall, with drier and wetter future climate 
scenario modelling showing large potential change 
in runoff (by range of 5 to 50% change in runoff 
coefficients) and moderate change in groundwater 
recharge (range of -25% to +3%) (McFarlane, 2015). 
Additional relevant climate change impacts for the 
Kimberley are increased intensity of rainfall events and 
sea level rise (CSIRO, 2024).
“The Pilbara is projected to 
experience more frequent and 
intense hot droughts, driven by 
extreme heat and declining rainfall 
reliability.”
Pilbara Drought Vulnerability Assessment, 
2024
“The Kimberley’s wet-dry seasonal 
rhythm is becoming less predictable, 
increasing vulnerability to water 
stress and ecological disruption.”
Kimberley Drought Vulnerability Assessment, 
2024
Social and Cultural Impacts
Climate and Future Drought Risk
42   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   43

Climate forecast tools are in development for Northern 
Australia, which has typically lagged in research 
and development (compared to higher populated 
southern areas).  The Combined Drought Indicator 
(CDI) available through the Northern Australia Climate 
Program is an example approach for rapid assessment 
of drought in development. 
The CDI is an impact-only assessment that can provide 
an indication if the region is going into, continues to 
be in, or is coming out of drought by viewing maps 
at different time scales – noting May to October is 
historically the dry season in the region (NACP, 2024). 
The CDI does not account for adaptive capacity, 
production or other local contextual factors. 
The risk and occurrence of drought varies across the 
vast Kimberley and Pilbara regions, as shown by the 
Australian CDI: 
⊲	 From March 2023 to March 2024 (see far 
left of Figure 10) western parts of the regions 
experienced moderate to extreme drought 
and eastern parts slight to moderate wet, while 
central parts had near normal conditions. 
⊲	 From March 2021 to March 2024 (see far right of 
Figure 10), an isolated western part of the regions 
experienced drought, central and north of the 
regions had near normal conditions and eastern 
and central parts experienced slight to moderate 
wet (NACP, 2024).
This section provides a summary of the assessment 
outcomes from the Kimberley and Pilbara DVAs.  
Please refer to the DVA reports for full details.
The assessments outline the vulnerability profiles 
of the Kimberley and Pilbara regions, based on the 
12-indicator framework used in the DVAs. While both 
regions share exposure to heat, variable rainfall, 
and reliance on natural systems, they differ in 
social, environmental, and economic context. These 
differences shape how each region experiences and 
responds to drought, as well as informing the focus 
areas and actions within this RDRP.
The results suggest that while the Pilbara 
demonstrates strengths in economic output and land 
stewardship, it faces notable challenges in areas 
such as housing, service access, and environmental 
condition, highlighting the need for place-based 
investments to improve social resilience and support 
long-term drought preparedness.
Findings suggest that while the Kimberley has valuable 
social and environmental foundations for resilience, 
particularly through strong cultural identity and natural 
capital, its drought resilience is constrained by limited 
infrastructure, variable access to essential services, 
and heightened vulnerability in remote communities. 
Addressing these gaps will be critical to improving 
adaptive capacity and ensuring long-term drought 
preparedness across the region.
Overall, given inconclusive projected change in rainfall, 
the two DVA reports 12 indicator assessment points 
show high economic resilience to drought due to the 
comparatively low contribution of agricultural workers 
and production to total regional employment and 
economic output. 
However, high vulnerability is highlighted by the 
projected impact of increasing hot days, heat stress 
(livestock and people) and increased evaporative 
stress leading to more extreme soil water deficits and 
drought when it does occur. These impacts threaten 
fundamental liveability, which pose more indirect and 
compounding economic as well as environmental risks 
to both regions. 
An adaptive and systems approach to understanding 
drought risk through a collaborative and cross-sectoral 
working group or similar is recommended to continue 
building drought resilience in the regions. 
Figure 10: Kimberley Pilbara Region Drought March 2024 at 12 and 36 months
Exceptional wet
Extreme wet
Severe wet
Moderate wet
Slightly wet
Near Normal
Slightly dry
Moderate drought
Severe drought
Extreme drought
Exceptional drought
Vulnerability and Resilience Assessment
From March 2023 to 
March 2024 
From March 2021 to 
March 2024 
44   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   45

Vulnerability and 
Resilience Assessment 
areas
Kimberley
Pilbara
Human and community
(top 4 of 12 indicators in 
overall assessment)
⊲	 In the Kimberley approximately 
41% of the population identify as 
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, 
compared to 3.3% in broader WA. 
See Figure of Domains of Common 
Disadvantage and Advantage, 
Kimberley (see Figure 11).
⊲	 Education, social support, and 
criminal convictions feature as 
high vulnerability domains for 
what is recognised as one of the 
key tourism, agriculture, cultural 
heritage and natural environment 
assets of the nation.
⊲	 Access to further education 
and training is a documented 
infrastructure gap in the region, 
while Foundations for a Stronger 
Tomorrow outlines the Pilbara’s 
assets as its globally significant 
resources sector and the largest 
regional economy in WA.
⊲	 See Figure 13 of Domains of  
Common Disadvantage and 
Advantage, Pilbara.
Environment and 
Production 
(bottom 8 of 12 Drought 
Vulnerability indicators in 
overall assessment)2
8 of 12 indicators used in the DVA framework relating to environment and 
production found High vulnerability in 2 indicators:
	 1. Change in annual hot days, and 
	 2. Production risk (livestock and crop).
This was common to both regions. See Snapshot assessments for Kimberley  
and Pilbara.
Physical /  
Infrastructure
⊲	 Infrastructure assets identified for 
the Kimberley are its education 
and research institutions, 
energy infrastructure, transport 
infrastructure and gateway ports.
⊲	 Gaps include broadband and 
mobile connectivity and the 
capacity, connectivity and quality of 
road infrastructure.
⊲	 Tourism, agriculture and food, 
Aboriginal enterprise, and liveability 
of remote Aboriginal communities 
are infrastructure directions of the 
WA Government.
⊲	 WA State government has 
transferred responsibility for 
water and power to 101 Aboriginal 
communities in the Kimberley, 
guided by the Aboriginal 
Communities Water Services 
(ACWS) program and national 
Closing the Gap agreement.
⊲	 Infrastructure assets identified for 
the Pilbara are its gateway ports 
and transport connections. Ports are 
located at Ashburton, Dampier, Port 
Hedland and Varanus Island, with 
Port Hedland the world’s largest 
bulk export port.
⊲	 Infrastructure gaps identified for 
the Pilbara include the availability, 
diversity and affordability of housing 
and the distribution, transmission 
and generation of energy. The 
availability of water in the Pilbara is 
a risk factor in almost all sectors.
⊲	 WA State government has 
transferred responsibility for water 
to 26 Aboriginal communities in 
the Pilbara, guided by the ACWS 
program and national Closing the 
Gap agreement.
Vulnerability and Resilience Assessment 
2 It is noted that the DVA selected limited indicators from the broader list of potential indicators identified for more detailed or 
industry specific assessment.
The Kimberley DVA reveals a region of high ecological 
and cultural value with emerging economic pressures. 
Key insights include:
⊲	 The Kimberley scores 3.5/5 on drought 
vulnerability—slightly higher resilience compared 
to Pilbara.
⊲	 Approximately 67.4% of the $2.86 billion regional 
value add is nature-dependent.
⊲	 Social vulnerability is higher in remote 
communities, particularly in Shires of Halls Creek 
and Derby-West Kimberley.
⊲	 The region has a strong cultural governance 
structure through the Kimberley Land Council, 
which supports integrated land and water 
management.
The history of Aboriginal people in the Kimberley has 
been described as one of resistance, adaptation and 
survival in the face of dramatic change (DCCEEW, 
2024). While past research in WA assumes that 
existing vulnerabilities will be exacerbated by 
drought (Lester et al., 2022; Spelwinde et al. 2009) 
and Aboriginal Australians are also likely to be 
disproportionately affected by drought because of 
pre-existing health and social disadvantage (Stehlik 
et al., 1999), an asset-based view also acknowledges 
the wealth of culture and heritage and demonstrated 
resilience and adaptation. 
Human and Community assessment found common 
domains of high disadvantage across the region 
shown in Figure 11, with a more detailed listing under  
‘Drought Risk Priority Areas’ of the DVA. Note this 
includes domains in all areas of capital (natural, 
physical and human).
Kimberley Vulnerability Assessment Insights
46   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   47

Highest Vulnerability
Lowest Vulnerability
Housing 
Overcrowding
Psychiatric Admissions
Disability Support
Pension
BROOME
KUNUNURRA
DERBY- WEST
KIMBERLEY
HALLS
CREEK
ROEBUCK
Proportion of 
Recreation, Parks, Culture
No Internet Access
Prison Convictions
Prison Admissions
Year 3 Numeracy (NAPLAN)
Year 3 Reading (NAPLAN)
Early Childhood
Development
Heat Vulnerability
Particulate Matter
(Air Quality)
People <24 Not In Education,
Training or Employment
Juvenile Convictions
Year 9 Reading (NAPLAN)
Low School Attendance
Teenage Pregnancy
Families wIth Jobless
Parents
Green Canopy Coverage
Number of GPs
In The Area
Underemployment
Housing Stress
Long-Term
Unemployment (>1 year)
BROOME
KUNUNURRA
DERBY- WEST
KIMBERLEY
HALLS
CREEK
ROEBUCK
Receiving Rent
Assistance
Financial Stress
Figure 12: Snapshot assessment using a range of indicators for the Kimberley (Source: Kimberley DVA, 2024)
Areas of high vulnerability or impact derive from 
increasing hot days and production risks from both 
an increase in heat stress days for livestock and 
workers (includes humidity) and less cold days for fruit 
production, as well income inequality (with this found 
to have a negative effect on economic development). 
Areas of economic resilience or low impact include 
a comparatively low direct exposure of agriculture 
workers and economic output, a sound proportion 
of protected land and a good and improving 
environmental condition score (9 out of 10 in 2023).
Kimberley Drought Vulnerability Indicators 
% Agriculture workers
Environment Condition Score Trend
Soil Moisture Rank
Index of Relative Socio-economic
Advantage and Disadvantage
Summer Evapotranspiration
1
2
3
4
5
% Agriculture output
% Protected Land
Change in Wet Season Rainfall
Gini Index
Change in Annual Hot Days
Vulnerability or High Projected Impact
Resilience or Low Projected Impact
Production Risk (Livestock and Crop)
Change in Drought Frequency
KIMBERLEY
Figure 11: Domains of common disadvantage and advantage, Kimberley SA2s (Source: Kimberley DVA, 2024)
48   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   49

The Pilbara DVA highlights the region’s exposure to 
extreme heat, high inter-annual rainfall variability,  
and dependence on nature-based industries. Key 
insights include:
⊲	 The Pilbara scores 3.33/5 on drought vulnerability, 
indicating a mix of strengths and risks.
⊲	 Over 96% of the Pilbara’s $82.7 billion value add 
is highly or moderately dependent on nature.
⊲	 Adaptive capacity varies widely, with strengths 
in infrastructure and weaknesses in health and 
social resilience.
⊲	 Cultural, environmental and economic 
interdependencies are pronounced, especially for 
water and land use.
Overall, sectors most at risk from broader climate 
change in the region include agriculture, mining, small 
business and the services sector including transport, 
water services, and ports. Other services at risk include 
health, local government and services to remote 
communities. The availability of water in the Pilbara is a 
factor in almost all sectors.
Human and Community assessment found common 
domains of high disadvantage across the regions 
are shown below, with a more detailed listing under 
‘Drought Risk Priority Areas’ of the DVA. Note this 
includes domains in all areas of capital (natural, 
physical and human).
Pilbara Vulnerability Assessment Insights
Areas of high vulnerability or impact derive from increasing hot days and production risks from both an increase 
in heat stress days for livestock and workers (includes humidity) and less cold days for fruit production. Areas of 
resilience or low impact include a low direct exposure of agriculture workers and economic output.
In summary, the Kimberley and Pilbara regions each face distinct drought-related challenges, shaped by their 
climate, social context, and economic structure. While both regions are highly exposed to heat and rainfall variability, 
the Kimberley’s vulnerability is heightened by geographic isolation and infrastructure limitations, while the Pilbara 
contends with compounding pressures from intense heat, land degradation, and water scarcity. Despite these 
challenges, both regions possess important sources of resilience, especially in strong cultural identity, deep 
knowledge of Country, and emerging innovations in land and water management. Understanding these regional 
vulnerabilities and strengths provides a foundation for prioritising action, directing investment, and designing 
drought resilience strategies that are both place-based and future-focused.
Pilbara Drought Vulnerability Indicators 
Highest Vulnerability
Heat Vulnerable
Lack of 
Green Canopy
Prison Convictions
Low School 
Attendance
Juvenile Convictions
Particulate Matter
ROEBOURNE
ASHBURTON
NEWMAN
EAST 
PILBARA
KARRATHA
PORT 
HEDLAND
SOUTH 
HEDLAND
Unskilled Work
Year 3 Numeracy
(NAPLAN)
Year 3 Reading
People <24 Not In Education,
Training or Employment
Families with 
Jobless Parents
Lowest Vulnerability
Low Family Income
(<$650/week)
Underemployed
Psychiatric 
Admissions
Needing Assistance
With Core Activities
Housing Stress
ROEBOURNE
ASHBURTON
NEWMAN
EAST 
PILBARA
KARRATHA
PORT 
HEDLAND
SOUTH 
HEDLAND
Receiving Rent 
Assistance
Long-Term 
Unemployment (>1 year)
Financial Stress
Figure 13: Domains of common disadvantage and advantage, Pilbara SA2s (Source: Pilbara DVA, 2024)
Figure 14: Snapshot assessment using a range of indicators for the Pilbara (Source: Pilbara DVA, 2024)
% Agriculture workers
Environment Condition Score Trend
Soil Moisture Rank
Index of Relative Socio-economic
Advantage and Disadvantage
Summer Evapotranspiration
1
2
3
4
5
% Agriculture output
% Protected Land
Change in Wet Season Rainfall
Gini Index
Change in Annual Hot Days
Vulnerability or High Projected Impact
Resilience or Low Projected Impact
Production Risk (Livestock and Crop)
Change in Drought Frequency
PILBARA
50   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   51

Figure 15 Example of scenario development from The 
Future of Australia’s Agriculture Workforce (Wu et al, 2019)
The DVAs, along with the Background and Context 
Reports provide an evidence base for development of 
this RDRP and Investment Framework. The DVAs also 
lay the foundation for the development of scenario 
planning as part of the RDRP development.
A range of areas of disadvantage and potential 
resilience have been identified through the RDRP 
process, including the potential for both exacerbated 
impacts for First Nations people, as well as sources 
of resilience in relation to adapting to country. The 
DVAs lay the foundation for participatory community 
scenario planning as part of the RDRP development, 
and subsequent implementation. 
Scenarios are evidence-based stories about the 
future which can be useful to contextualise and inform 
operational and strategic choices. They typically 
identify multiple futures and therefore can assist in 
developing actions (such as planning, investment 
prioritisation, collaboration, or governance structures) 
required to work towards the desired state. 
Scenario development for the regions is recommended 
for a 2050-time horizon, and the DVAs provide a basis 
for the current projected states of the two regions 
(see the Drought in the Region sections of the DVAs). 
Two axes of change are recommended, which could 
include significance of impact, degree of uncertainty 
or alignment with a focal question. An example of 
this approach can be seen in the CSIRO report The 
Future of Australia’s Agricultural Workforce (Wu et 
al, 2019), where 2 axes of change and technology 
advancement and uptake across the sector were 
measured as limited through to substantial to produce 
four scenarios, see the Figure on the following page. 
Another approach to scenario planning is to consider:
⊲	 one where we Do Nothing – where there is little 
change and we continue thinking, behaving, and 
making decisions in the region, much the same as 
we have in the past.
⊲	 one where we Do More – where we learn, adapt 
and modify – where we increase the intensity, 
scope, size or frequency of our actions. This 
could mean more people, more money, more 
often, etc.
⊲	 one where we Do Things Differently – where we 
undertake transformative change and where we 
move towards making systemic changes.
The transition from RDRP plan to implementation 
will undertake co-design of a theory of change 
and program logic. This process will also explore 
assumptions, risks and scenarios as part of the co-
design process.
Scenario Planning
SCENARIO 2
Technology Tsunami 
Multiple technology breakthroughs 
by key multinational agricultural machinery 
and tech companies are leading to substantial 
reductions in the cost of automated farming 
technologies. Automation is further decreasing 
the need for regional labour.
SCENARIO 1
Treading Water 
Lack of available funds for 
infrastructure improvements in regional 
centres stall development. In addition, limited 
R&D investment is seeing many technology 
advancements moving offshore.
SCENARIO 4
Fast Forward Regions 
Strong regional policies are 
attracting residents to live in regional towns  
and centres. Increased R&D investment is 
enabling the development of homegrown 
agricultural innovations, including  
traceability-related technologies.
SCENARIO 3
Regional Revival
High cost of living and congestion 
in large cities is motivating city residents to 
seek a regional lifestyle. However, limited R&D 
investment is constraining the development 
of homegrown agricultural technologies and 
the feasibility of large-scale tech adoption to 
improve productivity.
Regional development
Regional development
Technology advancement and uptake across the sector
52   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   53

The aim of the engagement process was to:
⊲	 Build strong stakeholder ownership of the 
outcomes from the process.
⊲	 Understand the core needs of the two regions’ 
stakeholders regarding drought resilience.
⊲	 Identify potential projects for inclusion in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP.
A tailored 1:1 and small group interview process was 
used, to enable a more detailed understanding of 
issues and opportunities. This strategy was undertaken 
in person which helped to build rapport and gain 
firsthand observation and stronger understanding of 
the issues being discussed. 
Stakeholders were chosen through a selection 
process by the PDC and KDC, consultation with the 
PAG, and drawing on the expertise of the consultants 
engaged to undertake the engagement and with 
other key stakeholders. Sectors important to the 
regions were engaged with and included agriculture, 
natural resource management, culture and heritage, 
business and economic development, tourism, social, 
and local and state government. The goal of the 
engagement was to interact with stakeholders across 
economic, social and environmental sectors, ensuring 
a comprehensive and inclusive process.
Interviews were conducted as a conversation rather 
than using structured interview questions. However, all 
conversations focused on: 
⊲	 Identifying key issues regarding drought 
resilience
⊲	 Considering the major barriers
⊲	 Suggesting opportunities and projects for 
inclusion in the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP.
Participant views and ideas were then categorised into 
the RDRP focus areas and a range of time horizons 
(short, medium, and longer term).
A total of 87 people from 70 organisations across the 
Kimberley and Pilbara were interviewed between April 
to June 2024 (see Figure 16, 17 and Appendix A). This 
represented a broad range of stakeholder values, 
interests and perspectives with some of the larger 
organisational focus areas being culture and heritage, 
natural resource management and business and 
economic development (see Figure 17).
Further stakeholder engagement was undertaken 
throughout the planning phase, following the initial 
interview process. This included additional 1:1 
interviews with stakeholders and technical experts, 
meetings, a workshop with Kimberley and Pilbara 
pastoralists and a tailored PAG workshop. All 
stakeholders consulted were also invited to participate 
in the public comment period.
The engagement also featured a strong commitment 
to incorporating First Nations voices, demonstrated 
by a dedicated process conducted by a specialist 
in First Nations engagement. Engagement with 
First Nations groups across both regions resulted 
in high participation from individuals, organisations, 
foundations, Prescribed Body Corporates (PBCs), 
Ranger groups and service providers.
This focus has been carried through into the Kimberley 
and Pilbara RDRP, with a commitment to supporting 
projects that align with the Closing the Gap priority 
reforms of:
⊲	 Formal partnerships and shared decision making
⊲	 Building the community-controlled sector
⊲	 Transforming government organisations
⊲	 Shared access to data and information at a 
regional level.
Key critical insights gained from these  
discussions were:
⊲	 The evident knowledge gap regarding drought, 
drought resilience and climate change, 
particularly within First Nations communities and 
organisations. 
⊲	 Several recurring themes emerged, notably 
centred around water management, ownership 
and control of water knowledge, licensing, the 
impacts of mining, agriculture and pastoralists on 
traditional lands. Concerns were voiced about the 
environmental consequences of these activities 
that are impacting the overall wellbeing of 
country and in turn the wellbeing of its people.
⊲	 Aboriginal Ranger programs in the Kimberley and 
Pilbara contribute significantly to sustainable land 
and fire management.
Stakeholder engagement is a critical component of the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP 
process to ensure it is a community owned and led plan. The stakeholder engagement 
process was planned and delivered to suit the regions’ context and incorporated the 
views of a broad range of stakeholders. 
Stakeholder Engagement  
Location of 
organisations
Types of 
organisations
Focus of 
organisations
Pilbara
Kimberley
Multi-region
First Nations
Business
Fed & State Government
LGAS
NFPs
Peak body
Agriculture
Local Government
NRM
Culture & Heritage
Business & Economic 
Development
Tourism
Social
First Nations Engagement
Figure 16: Location of organisations, their focus and RDRP engagement	
8%
54%
44%
13%
10%
19%
30%
16%
10%
3%
9%
9%
19%
10%
10%
38%
54   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   55

Engagement 
Outcomes 
Through the engagement process a range of insights 
were gathered, which were categorised into the five 
focus areas. 
Resilient Water Systems
The consultation process revealed that accessing 
information and monitoring groundwater supplies in 
the region presents several challenges. These include:
⊲	 Isolation – being remote and sparsely populated 
makes access to monitoring sites difficult.
⊲	 Geographical and environmental  
factors – understanding and mapping the 
complex water systems is difficult, especially 
without comprehensive data.
⊲	 Data availability and gaps – comprehensive, 
long-term groundwater data is scarce in many 
parts of the Pilbara. Monitoring programs may 
be inconsistent, leading to data gaps that hinder 
a detailed understanding of groundwater trends 
over time.
⊲	 Regulatory and governance issues – even when 
information is available, in some cases it is of a 
proprietary nature, with no legal requirement to 
publicly share the information.
⊲	 Limited resources – government and industry 
stakeholders face budget constraints, reducing 
the number and frequency of monitoring stations 
and studies.
There is also a greater opportunity for traditional 
knowledge from First Nations communities about 
water resources to be incorporated into formal 
groundwater monitoring programs.
Erosion control, soil conservation and landscape 
rehydration principles and practices offer a wealth of 
knowledge and resources on landscape-scale water 
conservation relevant to the Pilbara and Kimberley, 
particularly around roads and other linear infrastructure 
which concentrate runoff. 
Resilient Communities
Key challenges identified though the engagement 
process include:
⊲	 Climate – both regions experience extremely 
high temperatures, particularly during the summer 
months, which can affect comfort and health.
⊲	 Isolation – communities are remote, with 
long distances to essential services such as 
healthcare, education, and basic supplies. 
⊲	 Infrastructure – road and transport links and 
communications are often inadequate or  
poorly maintained.
⊲	 High living costs – including groceries, housing 
and utilities.
⊲	 Housing availability – housing is expensive and 
limited, with shortages in rental properties and 
high property prices. 
⊲	 Health and wellbeing – access to healthcare 
services can be limited, with fewer medical 
facilities and specialists available. Emergency 
healthcare can also be delayed due to distance.
⊲	 Mental health – the isolation and harsh 
environmental conditions can contribute to 
mental health issues, including stress and anxiety.
⊲	 Community services – access to adequate 
community and recreational services is limited 
which can impact social cohesion and quality  
of life.
Addressing these challenges requires a multifaceted 
approach involving improved infrastructure, enhanced 
access to services, economic diversification and 
community engagement. 
Given the resilient nature of native and endemic  
plants to a region, there should be a focus on 
resourcing development projects that can assist 
the overall plan of improving an areas/community’s 
drought readiness. This could be land restoration and 
mine rehabilitation projects.
Resilient Agriculture
Pastoralists across the Kimberley and Pilbara manage 
significant areas of land that often varies substantially 
in its productive capacity. To be able to balance rising 
input costs with varying returns there is a need for 
pastoralists to sustainably utilise their most productive, 
high value grazing areas to increase drought resilience 
whilst maintaining rangeland condition. 
A suite of project approaches can be used to  
support Kimberely and Pilbara pastoralists to improve 
their strategic grazing management skills and  
capacity, including:
⊲	 Strategic grazing management to increase 
drought resilience.
⊲	 Improved finishing of cattle for expanded  
market access and reduced reliance on 
rangeland pasture.
⊲	 Capability building for enhanced productivity  
and profitability, particularly for managers new to 
the region and station staff building  
management expertise.
⊲	 Diversification of income streams to manage risk, 
enhance financial stability, and adapt to a changing 
economic and environmental landscape.
⊲	 Strengthened connection, networks and support 
to exchange ideas between producers dealing 
with drought.
Resilient Landscapes
Stakeholder engagement found that Aboriginal Ranger 
programs in the Kimberley and Pilbara contribute 
significantly to sustainable land and fire management. 
Examples shared covered four overarching aspects:
⊲	 Traditional knowledge integration.
⊲	 Biodiversity conservation.
⊲	 Cultural connection.
⊲	 Collaboration.
Two key aspects of infrastructure for resilient 
landscapes were highlighted in the engagement 
process - an increased number of weather stations 
and improved road and infrastructure construction 
to reduce erosion impacts. The engagement also 
revealed low capacity in the region for weed and feral 
animal control with contractors sourced from outside 
the region and interstate. 
Simple resources and support mechanisms were 
identified that could have significant impact on 
landscape improvement. Using tools and products 
tailored to First Nations groups can significantly 
improve the reach and impact of landscape resilience.
Resilient Economy
Stakeholder consultation highlighted the challenges 
already faced by regional and remote communities 
(including developing and maintaining critical 
infrastructure and affordable housing) are further 
exacerbated by the impacts of water scarcity and 
climate change. 
Within the scope of the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP, 
stakeholders identified the opportunity to improve 
pastoral property management and expand market 
access through tailored capacity building along with 
demonstrations and promotion of improved cattle 
finishing options.
It has been identified that agritourism can support 
economic growth of communities by diversification of 
income, creating jobs, and supporting local businesses 
and communities. 
More stations are offering agritourism experiences, 
enabling them to diversify income streams through 
providing quality outback experiences beyond 
traditional camping. During the winter months of April 
to October (for most), the stations switch focus to 
tourism, offering guests remote outback experiences 
accessible to major towns and attractions. This 
includes a diverse range of accommodation from 
seasonal tents to grand old homesteads, paddock to 
plate dining experiences and bookable guided tours. 
Each Station offers a unique visitor experience on their 
property, whether that be their location, their approach 
to dining and visitor services or their focus to authentic 
outback touring. 
There are approximately 60 stations in the Pilbara and 
90 in the Kimberley. Of these, approximately 20 offer 
tourism experiences. Some stations are a standalone 
tourist destination. Importantly, stations are adding 
more beds in regional areas where accommodation 
supply and investment is constrained. Their growth 
is creating regional jobs and added value to regional 
visitor economies.
Project Ideas
A total of 85 projects ideas were identified through the 
engagement process. These projects were prioritised 
by the PAG using the Investment Framework with five 
prioritisation criteria:
1.	 Public good
2.	Impact on resilience
3.	Feasibility and readiness
4.	Financial sustainability
5.	Stakeholder engagement
Following the prioritisation process, the resulting list 
of projects was further reviewed to test they were 
actionable, fit within the scope of the RDRP and not 
duplicating work already underway in the regions.
56   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   57

Driving the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP are key strategic actions, organised under five 
focus areas of water systems, communities, agriculture, landscapes and economy, but 
recognises that many of these themes are interconnected. 
Each focus area has an outcome – where achievements are interconnected and 
projects that deliver against multiple outcomes are prioritised in the Investment 
Framework (see page 73). 
Action Plan
Vision
“The Kimberley and Pilbara communities are resilient to future 
drought, while sustaining and enhancing our rich culture, unique 
landscapes and thriving economy for future generations.”
Resilience to future water stress is improved through water resource efficiency 
and conservation as well as collaborative and climate-responsive planning.
The community has the capacity to respond and recover from water-related 
stress, with equitable access to water sustaining healthy communities.
The prosperity and livelihood of pastoral and agricultural enterprises is 
preserved and enhanced through sustainable water management and climate 
adaptation measures.
Unique landscapes and water dependent ecosystems are protected and 
restored through an integration of ecology, sustainable production and 
Aboriginal knowledge.
A robust economy that is resilient to water scarcity and climate change and 
creates long-term economic opportunities for communities.
1. Resilient Water Systems 
2. Resilient Communities
3. Resilient Agriculture 
4. Resilient Landscapes
5. Resilient Economy
The action plan incorporates the views and ideas captured during the stakeholder engagement process which 
were then prioritised through engagement with the PAG using the prioritisation criteria in the investment 
framework (page 73).
Figure 17: RDRP Vision, Focus Areas and Outcomes
58   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   59

Outcome
Resilience to future water stress is improved through 
water resource use efficiency and conservation as well 
as collaborative and climate-responsive planning.
Considerations
The Kimberley region experiences moderately low to 
moderately high annual rainfall variability from year 
to year. In certain months, such as March to June, 
this increases to extreme variability. The Pilbara 
region typically experiences moderate to high rainfall 
variability from year to year (BOM, 2020) and in certain 
seasons this increases to extreme variability. Tropical 
cyclones can contribute up to 86% of summer rainfall 
(DPIRD, 2021) and the Pilbara sits in the most tropical 
cyclone-prone region of the Australian coast (BOM, 
2024b); During some months evaporation exceeds 
precipitation and the availability of water is a factor in 
almost all sectors of the economy (RDA Pilbara, 2020). 
Key drivers of demand for water include mining and 
minerals processing, population growth, irrigated 
agriculture and pastoral development and clean 
energy production. This heightens the need for 
precise and timely groundwater and surface water 
information to ensure sustainable use. The Pilbara is 
renowned as being home to some of Australia’s largest 
mining operations, which use significant amounts 
of groundwater for activities like dewatering, ore 
processing and dust suppression. 
Important cultural values are frequently closely 
associated with both groundwater and surface water 
sources in the Kimberley and Pilbara. It is important 
these values are understood, monitored and closely 
considered with Traditional Owners as part of the 
management and development of water resources in 
these two regions.
Erosion control, soil conservation and landscape 
rehydration principles and practices offer a wealth of 
knowledge and resources on landscape-scale water 
conservation relevant to the Pilbara and Kimberley, 
particularly around roads and other linear infrastructure 
which concentrate runoff. 
Timeframe:
S
Short term
M
Medium term
L
Long term
Resilient Water Systems 
Objective: To enhance drought resilience preparedness by improving the 
availability and use of accurate water data, optimizing sustainable water 
management practices, and ensuring equitable access to water resources.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
1.1
Support sustainable water 
monitoring projects.
⊲	 Engage with Jamukurnu Yapalikurnu Aboriginal 
Corporation to understand the support needed to  
deliver and complete their current groundwater 
monitoring project in the Western Desert and assess  
the opportunity to provide funding support for this final 
phase of the project.
S
1.2
Support water information 
sharing activities.
⊲	 Engage with relevant ACCOs and DWER to host Water 
Forums which aim to share monitoring data and identify 
gaps, communicate current issues and deepen  
knowledge and understanding of the risks posed by 
drought and climate change.
⊲	 Identify intended outcomes and support the planning  
and delivery of Water Forums.
S
1.3
Support drought related 
projects which identify areas 
of cultural significance and 
address drought impacts.
⊲	 Explore a potential pilot project in the Fortescue 
Catchment (Pilbara region) with interested TOs, 
pastoralists and mining companies, to map cultural values 
for water allocation and support implementation. Engage 
with DWER and relevant groups to scope the project, 
considering the need for capacity building in monitoring 
and reporting.
M
1.4
Strengthen regional capacity 
to monitor and manage water 
resources to protect cultural 
values.
⊲	 Support relevant ACCOs in developing a capacity building 
project to train Aboriginal rangers in data collection and 
monitoring to maintain water resources and address 
drought risks.
S
1.5
Develop management 
practices and projects with 
TOs to assess the status and 
better understand the health of 
water systems on Country and 
address water security. 
⊲	 Identify interest and location for a pilot project with TOs 
to assess the status and better understand the health of 
water systems on Country and address water security. 
Project to include a coordinated approach, engaging 
a project manager, expertise of a hydrologist and 
development of a strategy for information sharing and 
management.Review project outcomes and identify 
options for extending across other catchments and First 
Nations groups.
M
1.6
Develop Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs) for 
key catchments in each LGA to 
improve water management, 
environmental outcomes and 
drought preparedness.
⊲	 Facilitate partnerships between LGAs, Traditional 
Owners, Rangelands NRM, DWER and DBCA to prioritise 
catchments for EMPs development and support 
development of EMPs for these prioritised catchments.
M
Key Actions 
All water related activities should be carried out in consultation with the Department of Water and 
Environmental Regulation (DWER), in particular the North West Region team.
60   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   61

Outcome
Communities have the capacity to respond and 
recover from water-related stress, with equitable 
access to water sustaining healthy communities.
Considerations
Lifting and normalising living standards and economic 
development for First Nations people is a shared vision 
for the region. The Kimberley has the majority of WA’s 
First Nations communities (Government of Western 
Australia, 2023a). 
Efforts to improve liveability in the Kimberley and 
Pilbara regions should balance the need for economic 
development with the preservation of the unique 
environmental and cultural characteristics of these 
areas. Whilst many aspects of liveability are outside 
the direct scope of the RDRP, some initiatives can 
contribute to improved community drought resilience. 
Climate change impacts such as extreme heat 
can have a greater effect on those with existing 
disadvantage. There are also well researched causal 
links between extreme heat and increased rates of 
assault (Mahendran et al., 2021) and domestic violence, 
with exposure to both heat and family violence 
influenced by social determinants of health (Stevens  
et al., 2023).
Timeframe:
S
Short term
M
Medium term
L
Long term
Resilient Communities 
Objective: To increase community drought resilience by improving 
community liveability
Priority
Action
Timeframe
2.1
Support tree planting 
programs in communities 
which enhance cooling and 
shading effects and liveability 
of towns.
⊲	 Support community groups and LGAs with tree planting 
programs and participation in the Cooler Towns project.
⊲	 Support tree planting projects that combine with 
stormwater management.
⊲	 Support LGAs to participate in the Urban Greening Grant 
Program to maximise outcomes. 
M
2.2
Support projects addressing 
sustainable water security.
⊲	 Support feasibility study on installation of an  
atmospheric water generator to provide quality drinking 
water for the Cheeditha remote Aboriginal community 
(Pilbara region), as an alternative to bottled water using a 
water condensation system. Support further development 
of this project, if found feasible, including partnerships 
with other stakeholders (i.e. Charles Darwin University, 
Water Corporation).
S
Objective: To strengthen social connection, collaborative networks and 
community support systems 
Priority
Action
Timeframe
2.3
Support native seed projects 
which maximise land 
restoration.
⊲	 Support the development of feasibility studies, business 
cases and implementation of native seed projects that 
are closely linked to drought resilience.
⊲	 Partner with relevant Aboriginal Corporations and other 
stakeholders to support nurseries, native seed planting 
activities that contribute towards drought resilience.
⊲	 Encourage pastoralists to use native pasture species  
and native seeds in land management activities to  
restore biodiversity. 
M
2.4
Support and promote projects 
which strengthen connection, 
networks and support 
between land managers.
⊲	 Support forums, field days and events focusing on 
drought and personal resilience strategies.
⊲	 Support ‘Keep in Touch’ days to maintain connection 
and exchange of ideas between producers to support 
communities when faced with drought.
S
Key Actions 
62   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   63

Outcome
The prosperity and livelihood of pastoral and 
agricultural enterprises is preserved and enhanced 
through sustainable water management and climate 
adaptation measures.
Considerations
Drought resilient pastoral business in the Kimberley 
or Pilbara need to integrate a variety of features and 
strategies to effectively manage the challenges they 
face to ensure long-term sustainability and productivity. 
Achieving this requires both strengthening the drought 
resilience of agribusiness, and resilient people. 
Critical areas to be addressed include:
⊲	 As per McCosker et al (2021) projects ought to 
address people, business then land management 
to achieve holistic improvement. 
⊲	 Support and adapt sustainable grazing  
practices to prevent overgrazing and to allow 
country to recover.
⊲	 Having a strategy for supplementary feeding, 
including access to quality supplements during 
periods of feed scarcity.
⊲	 Water infrastructure - investing in reliable and 
drought-proof water sources such as bores, 
tanks, and troughs.
⊲	 Using weather forecasts and climate data to 
anticipate drought conditions and make informed 
decisions.
⊲	 Regularly monitoring livestock condition and 
feed quality to make timely adjustments to 
management practices.
⊲	 Financial planning and management to help 
manage the economic impact of drought.
Timeframe:
S
Short term
M
Medium term
L
Long term
Resilient Agriculture 
Objective: To enhance drought resilience in pastoral systems by 
implementing strategic grazing management practices that optimise land 
health and sustain productivity.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
3.1
Support pastoralists with 
technology-based grazing 
management tools and 
management options to 
support decision making  
when facing drought events.
⊲	 Partner with relevant stakeholders to promote access  
to mapping tools that assist grazing management 
decisions and planning, establish an information  
sharing platform, and prepare and promote relevant  
case studies. 
M
3.2
Support pastoralists to 
participate in ‘whole of 
business’ training in integrated 
grazing, land and business 
management programs, as 
well as market/economic 
diversification forums.  
⊲	 Promote participation in ‘whole of business’  
management programs such as Ecologically  
Sustainable Rangeland Management (ESRM) Planning, 
and Resource Consulting Services ‘Grazing for Profit’ 
programs, as well as accessing information on  
emerging biodiversity market opportunities.
M
3.3
Support pastoralists to access 
best management grazing, 
land condition, nutrition and 
pasture assessment tools.
⊲	 Support planning and delivery of workshops, webinars, 
events or activities focussing on knowledge and training 
gaps in key management topics to improve rangeland 
condition. 
S
3.4
Support mentoring and 
knowledge sharing  
programs focussed on 
drought resilience.
⊲	 Provide mentoring and peer-to-peer learning 
opportunities such as 1:1 or group events that support 
pastoralists to trial, share and collectively learn and 
adapt management approaches to improve rangelands 
condition (i.e. grazing management, landscape 
rehydration, fire management). 
⊲	 Support social network building opportunities for 
community drought resilience.
S
Key Actions 
64   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   65

Outcome
Unique landscapes and water dependent ecosystems 
are protected and restored through an integration of 
ecology, sustainable production and Traditional  
Owner knowledge.
Considerations
Sustainable fire management in the Kimberley and 
Pilbara regions was identified as a strong focus in 
the engagement process and involves navigating a 
complex set of issues, including:
⊲	 Biodiversity Conservation – balancing 
prevention of destructive wildfires with the 
protection of sensitive species and habitats.
⊲	 Cultural Practices – integrating traditional 
knowledge systems with modern fire 
management practices.
⊲	 Increased Fire Frequency and Intensity – climate 
change is leading to hotter and drier conditions, 
which can increase the frequency and intensity  
of fires, 
⊲	 Land Use – overgrazing and clearing for mining 
operations can reduce vegetation cover and 
change species composition, potentially leading 
to more intense fires,
⊲	 Resource allocation and coordination – effective 
fire management requires resources for planning, 
implementation, and monitoring. Ensuring 
adequate funding and coordination among 
various stakeholders is a significant challenge.
Collaborating with First Nations people who have 
traditional fire management practices can enhance 
sustainability and improve drought resilience. 
Their knowledge and experience are invaluable for 
developing culturally appropriate and effective fire 
management strategies. This approach, complemented 
by sound community engagement practices and 
awareness raising about fire risks and safety can 
improve overall drought resilience.
Observations by Traditional Owners already include a 
shifting of seasonal indicators, with the drying of water 
sources and a shift in seasonal fruit blooming and 
animal breeding times (KLC, n.d.).
Timeframe:
S
Short term
M
Medium term
L
Long term
Resilient Landscapes 
Objective: To enhance drought resilience by improving fire  
management through stronger partnerships, First Nations knowledge and 
healthier ecosystems.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
4.1
Strengthen the capacity of 
existing fire management 
groups and pastoralists in  
fire management.
⊲	 Support fire management groups and pastoralists to 
deepen their knowledge of TO fire management and 
implementation of early season prescribed burning.
⊲	 Engage with Dampier Peninsula and Fitzroy Fire  
Working Groups to identify strategies to increase  
capacity, knowledge and resources.
⊲	 Support workshops on fire management focused on 
management options.
⊲	 Investigate the establishment of a Pilbara Fire 
Management Group.
M
4.2
Strengthen understanding  
of sustainable fire  
management practices of 
applicable land managers.
⊲	 Create and share educational resources on strategies  
and tips for sustainable fire and grazing management, 
using knowledge gathered from Kimberley and Pilbara 
station owners.
S
4.3
Support projects  
addressing ecosystem 
health, sustainable water 
management and Aboriginal 
led conservation practices, 
which contribute to improved 
hydrological understanding 
and climate adaptation.
⊲	 Prepare a feasibility study to develop a research 
hub dedicated to the sustainability and ecosystem 
regeneration of the Fitzroy River. 
L
Objective: To support ranger programs focusing on sustainable water, fire 
and ecosystem management.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
4.4
Support First Nations Ranger 
programs to build capacity  
and engagement.
⊲	 Build capacity of rangers in fire and land management 
with a focus on drought resilience.
S
Key Actions 
66   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   67

Objective: To build drought resilience through proactive, inclusive and  
data-driven strategies that empower First Nations communities and 
pastoralists to adapt to climate risks.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
4.5
Enable proactive, data driven 
adaptation to drought risk by 
leveraging climate monitoring 
and analysis.
⊲	 Installation of radar and weather stations to build climate 
and drought resilience by providing greater opportunities 
for informed decision making and proactive management.
⊲	 Investigate co-investment options between BoM and 
mining companies in radar and weather station installation 
the  regions.
⊲	 Collaborate with DWER North West Region on location 
advice to optimise co-benefits in improving river and 
groundwater monitoring activities and flood predictions.
M
4.6
Develop informative materials 
and tools on climate change 
for First Nations people.
⊲	 Create and share a highly visual-style educational 
document on impacts of climate change on TO 
landscapes, including culturally appropriate engagement, 
communication and education strategies.
S
4.7
Support projects with First 
Nations groups which improve 
land condition.
⊲	 Provide training, engagement and support to First 
Nations contracting businesses to increase knowledge 
and capacity in weed and feral management for the 
improvement of land condition.
M
4.8
Support locally led innovative, 
cross sector collaborative 
drought resilience projects 
focused on pastoralist 
empowerment.
⊲	 Support the Pilbara Innovation Partnership to adopt 
a station-led community-driven approach to develop, 
test and implement sustainable drought management 
practices which empowers pastoralists.
⊲	 Pilbara Development Commission to support the Pilbara 
and Northern Gascoyne Future Drought Fund Long Term 
Drought Resilience Trials as a consortium member.
S
Key Actions (continued)
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   69
68   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025

Outcome
A robust economy that is resilient to water scarcity 
and climate change and creates long term economic 
opportunities for communities.
Considerations
At least 71% of the economy in the Kimberley and 
Pilbara regions is considered directly highly or 
moderately dependent on nature – made up of 96.7% 
in the Pilbara and 67.4% in the Kimberley (WEF, 2020). 
Tourism in the Kimberley is highly reliant on the 
natural environment including natural experiences, 
indigenous tourism, heritage tourism and agritourism 
(EKMG, 2021). Income from tourism has also provided 
a substantial proportion of pastoralists’ livelihood in 
some locations (DCCEEW, 2008).
Resilient Economy 
Timeframe:
S
Short term
M
Medium term
L
Long term
Objective: To improve cattle finishing systems for expanded market access.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
5.3
Reduce reliance on  
rangelands pastures to 
improve land condition and 
enhance drought resilience.
⊲	 Promote current DPIRD pasture trials focusing on the 
finishing of cattle for expanded market access.
⊲	 Design and deliver farm trials, demonstrations, field days, 
pilot projects, study tours and discussion groups on 
finishing options.
⊲	 Promote the increasing range of supplements  
available to the northern beef industry including access  
to cotton seed.
⊲	 Investigate a pilot project to link East Kimberley cotton 
and cattle producers for the supply of cotton seed as a 
feed supplement.
M
Objective: to enhance climate resilience of tourism operators by integrating 
adaptive strategies.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
5.4
Upskill tourism operators to 
plan and adapt operations to  
a changing climate.
⊲	 Provide training and development for tourism operators  
to better understand climate predictions to plan for a 
viable tourism experience.
⊲	 Develop stronger linkages between chambers of 
commerce, tourism operators and WAITOC across 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions.
⊲	 Provide support for operators to gain sustainability 
accreditations (e.g. B Corp Certification, eco-tourism 
Australia) through mentoring or fee subsidies.
M
5.5
Support diversification of 
tourism operators to build 
drought resilience.
⊲	 Develop a ‘guide to agritourism’ document aimed at 
pastoralists, which covers information on how to set  
up a station stay, including regulation requirements. 
Explore opportunity to partner with Tourism WA for a 
whole of WA document. 
⊲	 Encourage Kimberley and Pilbara stations to  
undertake mentoring in agritourism, for example the 
WA Station Stay Collective, a selection of ‘trade-ready’ 
agritourism enterprises enabling the stations to  
diversify their income streams through providing  
quality outback experiences.
M
Objective: To strengthen adaptive capacity, foster innovation and integrate 
sustainable resource management across pastoral and regional communities.
Priority
Action
Timeframe
5.1
Strengthen pastoralists 
capacity to anticipate, adapt 
to, and recover from drought 
through skills development, 
business resilience and 
knowledge sharing.
⊲	 Provide pastoralists with intensive capacity building 
opportunities to improve property management which 
enables increased productivity and long-term drought 
resilience.
⊲	 Facilitate delivery of the ‘Business of Farm  
Business’ program.
⊲	 Prepare case studies and develop resources related to 
property management during drought and communicate 
to the pastoral industry.
M
5.2
Enhance LGA capacity to 
respond to and mitigate the 
impact of drought through 
innovative and sustainable 
approaches addressing water 
management, infrastructure 
and planning.
⊲	 Support LGAs in implementing transformational and innov-
ative climate change projects to improve drought resilience.
⊲	 Support LGA projects related to wastewater treatment 
systems and reuse or stormwater capture and reuse, 
irrigation practices and infrastructure. As well as vertical 
farming and innovative shading systems.
⊲	 Support LGA development projects through that include 
drought resilience in their planning.
M
Key Actions
70   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   71

Implementation and Investment Framework
This Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP is intended as a guide for action and investment in 
drought resilience for the Kimberley and Pilbara regions. Given the practical challenges of 
staff attraction, recruitment and retention, as well as the additional costs of delivery in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara regions, an emphasis was placed on projects that utilise existing 
work, information and resources wherever possible. In addition, projects that feature 
collaboration, co-funding and clear project leads to drive action were highly regarded. 
The Pilbara and Kimberley Development Commissions are the coordinating agencies for 
implementing the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP at the regional/ local level.
Implementation, 
Monitoring and Evaluation
Implementation of the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP will 
be driven by the collaborative and multidisciplinary 
PAG in conjunction with the Kimberley and Pilbara 
Development Commissions.
An Implementation Plan will be developed by the 
Pilbara and Kimberley Development Commissions, in 
collaboration with the PAG which includes prioritised 
actions from this Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP. These 
actions for implementation will be:
⊲	 delivered within an agreed timeframe.
⊲	 aim to improve drought resilience in the region’s 
agriculture sector and/or the region’s supporting 
communities and supply chains.
⊲	 take place within the region, or may be 
considered outside of the region, if the activity 
applies to the region (e.g. a feasibility study 
conducted for the region by specialist advisors 
outside of the region).
⊲	 deliver a demonstrated public benefit.
The process for distribution of funding for 
implementation will be determined by the PDC,  
KDC and PAG during preparation of the 
Implementation Plan. Activities presented for funding 
will be assessed against criteria focussed on the 
Investment Framework, and must be able to meet the 
following requirements:
⊲	 Must explicitly aim to improve drought resilience 
in the regions’ agriculture sector and/or the 
regions’ supporting communities and supply 
chains, in line with the guidelines.
⊲	 Must have partnerships in place and evidence the 
activities have not received previous funding.
⊲	 Must be able to demonstrate an expected public 
benefit (i.e. benefits generated by the funding 
must be able to be accessed and/or shared by 
many, rather than be captured solely by  
individual businesses or industries for private 
commercial gain).
⊲	 Must demonstrate value for money by providing 
evidence of cost-effectiveness, competitive 
pricing, quality, risk management, and long-term 
sustainability. This approach ensures that the 
selected option maximises overall benefits within 
budget constraints.
Further detail on the implementation process will be 
made available via the RDRP page on the Kimberley 
and Pilbara Development Commissions’ websites. 
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP has been developed with regional stakeholders to identify priority projects to build 
drought resilience. Many projects and activities were identified through the engagement process for inclusion in the 
Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP. These were prioritised by the PAG using the Investment Framework below (Figure 18): 
INVESTMENT CATEGORIES
PRIORITISATION CRITERIA
Infrastructure
Support the development and 
upgrade of infrastructure that 
addresses key issues like water 
availability, desalination, and irrigation 
development.
Infrastructure
Support the development 
and upgrade of infrastructure 
that addresses key issues 
like water availability, 
desalination, and irrigation 
development.
Stakeholder 
Engagement
Ensure investments are 
informed by, and/or tightly 
align with, the extensive 
stakeholder engagement 
conducted during the RDRP 
process. Prioritise projects 
that have broad support from 
local communities, Traditional 
Owners, and industry groups.
Impact on Resilience
Prioritise investments that 
have the highest potential to 
enhance drought resilience 
across the region and, 
preferably, combine building 
economic, environmental and 
social resilience.
Closing the Gap
Ensure that supported 
projects align with the 
Closing the Gap priority 
reforms of:
⊲	Formal partnerships and 
shared decision making
⊲	Building the community-
controlled sector
⊲	Transforming government 
organisations
⊲	Shared access to data  
and information at a 
regional level
Feasibility & 
Readiness
Funded projects should have 
an identified project lead, 
clear timelines, available 
resources, risk assessment 
and stakeholder support.
Prioritisation should be given 
to projects with:
⊲	High technical feasibility
⊲	Cost-effectiveness
⊲	Acceptable risk profile
⊲	Demonstrated readiness for 
implementation
⊲	Significant confirmed  
cash co-contribution via 
other partners
Monitoring & 
Evaluation
Projects must have clear 
metrics to assess the 
performance of investments 
in terms of their contribution 
to drought resilience. MEL 
Plan hould be provided  
with specific indicators 
aligned with the in relevant 
RDRP outcomes, data 
collection methods and 
evaluation timeline.
Financial 
Sustainability
Preference should be 
given to projects that can 
demonstrate financial| 
viability in the long term. 
In projects which address 
existing inequalities or 
vulnerable populations, 
viability could be 
demonstrated through public 
good or other evidence-
based benefits.
Adaptive 
Management
This framework adopts 
an adaptive management 
approach that allows 
for adjustments to the 
investment strategy based 
on ongoing monitoring of 
funded projects, stakeholder 
feedback, and changing 
contextual conditions.
Policy & Program
Support initiatives for strategic policy 
and regulatory review and redesign. 
Invest in programs that enhance 
community cohesion and build capacity, 
improve access to safe water, and 
build capacity to respond to climate 
impacts. Focus on projects that restore 
landscapes, improve ecological health, 
and integrate Aboriginal knowledge into 
land and water management.
Innovation & Research
Invest in the development 
and deployment of new 
technologies, practices, and 
research initiatives that enhance 
drought resilience.
Figure 18: Investment Framework
72   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   73

Monitoring and Evaluation
Approach
The FDF approach to Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL) has been adopted for the Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP and is represented in Figure 19. As part of the implementation process, a Theory of Change approach will 
underpin MEL planning.
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP aims to support the 
regions to: 
⊲	 Build economic, environmental and social 
resilience to future droughts.
⊲	 Be in a stronger position to adapt to climate 
change.
⊲	 Form stronger connections and networks within 
and between regions.
⊲	 Apply best practice data and information to make 
better decisions.
To ensure its effectiveness and for ongoing  
adaptive management of the Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP, a strong monitoring, evaluation and learning 
cycle is needed.
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP integrates 
actions across five focus areas, with governance 
(PAG), monitoring and evaluation, and stakeholder 
engagement processes working across all 
components. For example, land restoration 
(Landscape) also supports cultural resilience (Social) 
and economic opportunity (Economic). Integration is 
supported through the grant process and assessment 
criteria, which consider multiple resilience domains 
and stakeholder perspectives.
Figure 19: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
The following table (Figure 20) describes how governance, MEL, stakeholder input, and actions work together across 
the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP through Theory of Change. It demonstrates how each action supports multiple 
dimensions of resilience and reinforces its alignment with the FDF’s definition of resilience.
Action/
Focus 
Area
Resilience 
Domain
Expected 
Outcome
MEL 
Indicator 
Example
Social 
Resilience
Economic 
Resilience
Environ- 
mental 
Resilience
Cross-
cutting 
Outcome
Water 
Systems – 
Groundwater 
monitoring
Environmental
Improved 
water data 
for decision-
making 
and cultural 
protection
Increase 
in shared 
groundwater 
data use
Yes
No
Yes
Improved 
planning, 
cultural water 
stewardship
Communities 
– Urban 
greening 
projects
Social
Cooler 
towns, 
improved 
liveability, 
community 
cohesion
Tree canopy 
coverage, 
wellbeing 
survey 
scores
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cooler towns, 
liveability, 
jobs, 
wellbeing
Agriculture – 
Agritourism 
mentoring
Economic
Diversified 
income 
streams 
and local 
employment
Number of 
agritourism 
businesses 
started
Yes
Yes
No
Diversification 
of income,  
regional  
pride
Landscapes 
– Native 
seed 
planting
Environmental 
+ Social
Restored 
land, 
stronger 
cultural 
connections, 
jobs in 
revegetation
Hectares 
restored, 
community 
engagement 
metrics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Land  
restoration, 
cultural  
reconnection,  
revegetation 
jobs
Economy 
– Support 
for climate 
adaptation 
business
Economic + 
Social
Increased 
adaptive 
capacity 
of regional 
enterprises
Uptake 
of climate 
adaptation 
measures
Yes
Yes
No
Business 
adaptation, 
regional 
economic 
resilience
Figure 20: Relationship between Focus Areas and Social, Economic and Environmental Resilience
74   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   75

Figure 1: The Kimberley and Pilbara Regions...............................................................................................................................................13
Figure 2: RDRP Governance and Relationship Between Stakeholders...............................................................................................14
Figure 3: Process and Inputs for Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP...............................................................................................................15
Figure 4: Development of Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP Focus Areas.................................................................................................18
Figure 5: Theory of Change...............................................................................................................................................................................19
Figure 6: Native Title Determinations, WA...................................................................................................................................................28
Figure 7: Climate classifications, Kimberley and Pilbara (Peet et al 2007).........................................................................................25
Figure 8: Conceptual Framework for Drought Vulnerability and Resilience.....................................................................................39
Figure 9: Relationship with Country. Ochre arrows in the Living Waters model (left) represent  
connections not generally considered by modern water resource models (right) (NESP, 2024)...............................................42
Figure 10: Kimberley Pilbara Region Drought March 2024 at 12 and 36 months............................................................................44
Figure 11: Domains of common disadvantage and advantage, Kimberley SA2s (Source: Kimberley DVA, 2024)................48
Figure 12: Snapshot assessment using a range of indicators for the Kimberley (Source: Kimberley DVA, 2024).................49
Figure 13: Domains of common disadvantage and advantage, Pilbara SA2s (Source: Pilbara DVA, 2024)........................... 50
Figure 14: Snapshot assessment using a range of indicators for the Pilbara (Source: Pilbara DVA, 2024)..............................51
Figure 15: Example of scenario development from The Future of Australia’s Agriculture Workforce (Wu et al, 2019).........53
Figure 16: Location of organisations, their focus and RDRP engagement.........................................................................................55
Figure 17: RDRP Vision, Focus Areas and Outcomes.............................................................................................................................. 59
Figure 18: Investment Framework...................................................................................................................................................................73
Figure 19: Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning.........................................................................................................................................74
Figure 20: Relationship between Focus Areas and Social, Economic and Environmental Resilience......................................75
Table of Figures
Key Evaluation Questions 
The key evaluation questions for the Kimberley and 
Pilbara RDRP are: 
1.	 To what extent has the Kimberley and Pilbara 
RDRP been implemented and has impacted on 
the regional stakeholders’ capacity and resources 
to better plan, manage and recover from climate 
challenges? 
2.	What changes/support are needed to ensure that 
the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP best provides an 
effective framework for action and stakeholders 
can effectively work together towards 
implementing those actions? 
Assumptions underpinning the 
implementation of the Kimberley 
and Pilbara RDRP 
The FDF MEL plan identified the following assumptions 
for the Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP to be effectively 
implemented. 
Key assumptions affecting outcomes from 1–2-years:
⊲	 Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning. 
⊲	 Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other on regional planning. 
⊲	 Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs. 
⊲	 Relevant planning at other scales can be aligned. 
⊲	 Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them. 
⊲	 Communities are willing to share learnings with 
other regions. 
⊲	 There are sufficient learnings to inform future 
program design. 
Key assumptions affecting outcomes from 2+ years: 
⊲	 Supporting consortia of local governments/
stakeholders representing a region will result in 
changes in practice through those regions. 
⊲	 There are sufficient opportunities for regions to 
implement elements of plans. 
⊲	 Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience across Australia. 
⊲	 Regions continue to review, update and 
implement their plans. 
These assumptions will need to be monitored during 
the implementation phase to provide feedback and 
highlight areas that require further intervention.
MEL Data Collection Methods
The Kimberley and Pilbara RDRP will employ a 
comprehensive data collection strategy, incorporating 
both qualitative and quantitative methods. Data will be 
gathered at predetermined intervals and integrated 
into a collaborative process of planning, analysis, 
and review. This will involve utilising a combination of 
surveys, interviews, focus groups, and case studies 
to provide a rich and nuanced understanding of 
the program’s impact. By carefully balancing these 
approaches, we aim to capture a comprehensive 
picture of the program’s effectiveness and identify 
areas for improvement.
76   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   77

References
ABS (2023). Data by Region: Kimberley, East Pilbara, West 
Pilbara SA3s. Estimated resident population for 2023 used. 
Jobs in Australia data used. Retrieved from: https://dbr.abs.
gov.au/index.html 
AIHW (2011). Health and the environment: a compilation of 
evidence. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Cat. 
no. PHE 136. Canberra: AIHW. Retrieved from: https://www.
aihw.gov.au/reports/environment-and-health/health-environ-
ment-compilation-of-evidence/summary 
ALA (2023). Spatial Portal, Atlas of Living Australia. Retrieved 
from: https://www.ala.org.au/  
Anderton, L. (2022). The economic impacts of drought. A 
report for Regional Drought Resilience Planning 2022.
ANU (2024). Australia’s Environment Explorer: Soil Moisture 
– 2023 (Rank). Retrieved from: https://ausenv.tern.org.au/
aex/#/2023/Soil_moisture/Region/Rank/Local_Government 
percent20Areas/bar,options/-21.38/121.50/6/Karratha per-
cent20(C)/Roadmap/Opaque
Aqueduct (2024). Water Risk Atlas. Retrieved from: https://
www.wri.org/applications/aqueduct/water-risk-atlas/#/?ad-
vanced=false&basemap=hydro&indicator=w_awr_def_
tot_cat&lat=30&lng=-80&mapMode=view&month=1&opaci-
ty=0.5&ponderation=DEF&predefined=false&projection=ab-
solute&scenario=optimistic&scope=baseline&threshold&ti-
meScale=annual&year=baseline&zoom=3 
Aslin H. & Russell J. (2008). Social impacts of drought: review 
of literature. Bureau of Rural Sciences, Canberra. Retrieved 
from: www.agriculture.gov.au
Australian Government (2023). Understanding regional data: 
Industry. Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional 
Development, Communications & The Arts. March 2023. Re-
trieved from: https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/sites/default/
files/documents/bcarr-understanding-regional-data-indus-
try-march2023.pdf
Australian Government (2024). Future Drought Fund: 
Drought Resilience Funding Plan 2024-2028) Determination 
2024 and Explanatory Statement. Retrieved from: https://
www.legislation.gov.au/F2024L00150/asmade/downloads 
Bastin G, Stokes C, Green D and Forrest K. (2014) Australian 
rangelands and climate change – pastoral production and 
adaptation. Ninti One Limited and CSIRO, Alice Springs. 
BoM (2020). Rainfall Variability Map: Annual, 1900-2019, Aus-
tralian Bureau of Meteorology, Issued 28/07/2020. Retrieved 
from: http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/maps/averages/rain-
fall-variability/?period=an 
BoM (2024a). Climate Data Online (selected station locations 
listed). Bureau of Meteorology. Retrieved from: http://www.
bom.gov.au/climate/data/
BOM (2024b). Tropical cyclone climatology. Bureau of Meteo-
rology. Retrieved from: http://www.bom.gov.au/cyclone/tropi-
cal-cyclone-knowledge-centre/history/climatology/ 
Campbell, A., Alexandra, J., Curtis, D. (2017). Reflections on 
four decades of land restoration in Australia. The Rangeland 
Journal 39, 405-416. https://doi.org/10.1071/RJ17056Common-
wealth of Australia (2022). Ramsar Sites Australia, DCCEEW. 
Retrieved from: https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/
documents/ramsar-sites-australia.pdf 
CSIRO (2009), Water in Northern Australia: Summary of 
reports to the Australian Government from the CSIRO North-
ern Australia Sustainable Yields Project, CSIRO, Australia in 
Government of Western Australia, 2010. 
CSIRO (2024). Climate Change in Australia: Projections 
– North Rangelands. Retrieved from: https://www.climat-
echangeinaustralia.gov.au/en/projections-tools/regional-cli-
mate-change-explorer/sub-clusters/?current=RLNC&toolti-
p=true&popup=true
Curtin University (2023). Pilbara Water Resources: Back-
ground Review of Publicly Available Information for Water 
Resources Situational Analysis. Retrieved from: https://stor-
ymaps.arcgis.com/stories/d094bb09545a40a0bddfadc3e-
c3621a4
DAFF (2021). Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hubs. Australian Government. Retrieved from: https://www.
agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/
drought/future-drought-fund/research-adoption-program/
adoption-innovation-hubs
DAFF (2023). ABARES – Drought Resilience. Australian Gov-
ernment: Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
Retrieved on 9/4/2025 from: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/
abares/research-topics/climate/drought/resilience
DAFF (2024a), ABARES – Australian Agricultural Census 
2020-21 visualisation – LGA. Australian Government: Depart-
ment of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. Retrieved from: 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/aclump/land-use/agri-
culture-census-dashboards-lga
DAFF (2024b). Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation 
Hubs. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. 
Retrieved from: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agricul-
ture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-fund/
research-adoption-program/adoption-innovation-hubs 
DAFF (2024c). National Soil Strategy. Retrieved on 10/4/2025 
from: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-
food-drought/natural-resources/soils
DAFF (2025). Future Drought Fund. Australian Government. 
Retrieved on 9/4/2025 from: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/
agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-drought-
fund
DAWE (2020a). Northern Australia Biosecurity Strategy 2030. 
Northern Australia Biosecurity Framework Reference Group. 
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 
Retrieved from: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/
files/documents/Northern%20Australia%20Biosecurity%20
Strategy%202030.pdf 
DAWE (2020b). Future Drought Fund. Monitoring, Evaluation 
and Learning Framework. Retrieved from: https://www.agri-
culture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.
pdf
DBCA (2023). Threated Ecological Communities, updated 
23 Nov 2023. Retrieved from: https://www.dbca.wa.gov.au/
wildlife-and-ecosystems/threatened-ecological-communities/
list-threatened-ecological-communities
DBCA (2024). Aboriginal Ranger Program. Department of 
Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions. Retrieved from: 
https://www.dbca.wa.gov.au/management/aboriginal-engage-
ment/aboriginal-ranger-program 
DCCEEW (2008). Rangelands 2008 Taking the Pulse: Pilbara 
Bioregion. Retrieved from: https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/
default/files/env/resources/a8015c25-4aa2-4833-ad9c-
e98d09e2ab52/files/bioregion-pilbara.pdf  
DCCEEW (2008b). Rangelands 2008 Taking the Pulse: 
Central Kimberley Bioregion. Retrieved from: https://www.
dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/env/resources/a8015c25-
4aa2-4833-ad9c-e98d09e2ab52/files/bioregion-central-kim-
berley.pdf 
DCCEEW (2008c). Rangelands 2008 Taking the Pulse: 
Northern Kimberley Bioregion. Retrieved from: https://www.
dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/env/resources/a8015c25-
4aa2-4833-ad9c-e98d09e2ab52/files/bioregion-north-
ern-kimberley.pdf 
DCCEEW (2023). Australia’s bioregions (IBRA). Department of 
Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. 14 July 
2023. Retrieved from: https://www.dcceew.gov.au/environ-
ment/land/nrs/science/ibra 
DCCEEW (2024a). Indigenous Protected Areas National Map: 
August 2024. Department of Climate Change, Energy, the 
Environment and Water. Retrieved from:  https://www.dcceew.
gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/ipa-national-map.pdf 
DCCEEW (2024b). Australia’s Strategy for Nature 2024-2030. 
Retrieved 10/4/2025, from https://www.dcceew.gov.au/envi-
ronment/biodiversity/conservation/strategy
Department of Agriculture (2019). Australian Government 
Drought Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan. Can-
berra. November. Retrieved on 9/4/2025 from: https://www.
agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/aust-govt-
drought-response-plan_0.pdf
Destination Pilbara (2024). Destination Pilbara: Powered by 
Nature. Retrieved from: https://destinationpilbara.com.au/ 
DEMIRS (2023). WorkSafe SmartMove Knowledge. Out-
door workers: Working safely in the sun and heat. Western 
Australian Government. Retrieved from: https://smartmove.
safetyline.wa.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/SM-Outdoor-Work-
ers-study-guide-2023-2.pdf
DEMIRS (2024). Royalty Receipts by Region Financial Year 
(Kimberley and Pilbara). Retrieved from: https://www.dmp.
wa.gov.au/about-us-careers/latest-statistics-release-4081.
aspx 
Department of Water (2010). Reservoir simulations in the Ord 
River catchment, Western Australia. Department of Water. 
Retrieved from: https://www.wa.gov.au/system/files/2022-10/
Reservoir-simulations-in-the-Ord-River-catchment.pdf
DPIRD (2021). Climate change in the Pilbara region of West-
ern Australia. Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development. Retrieved from: https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/
climate-change/climate-pilbara-region-western-australia 
DPIRD (2023). Climate change and the pastoral industry in 
Western Australia. Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development. Published 14 April 2023. Retrieved 
from: https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/climate-change/cli-
mate-change-and-pastoral-industry-western-australia 
DPLH (2022). Pastoral land lessee information and compli-
ance. Department of Planning, Lands and Heritage. Retrieved 
from: https://www.wa.gov.au/government/document-collec-
tions/pastoral-land-lessee-information-and-compliance 
DPLH (2023). Pastoral land and leases. Department of 
Planning, Lands and Heritage. Retrieved from: https://
www.wa.gov.au/organisation/department-of-plan-
ning-lands-and-heritage/pastoral-land-and-leases   
DWER (2024). Groundwater allocation plans - North 
West region. Retrieved from: https://www.wa.gov.au/
service/natural-resources/water-resources/water-alloca-
tion-plans-north-west-region 
EKMG (2021). East Kimberley Tourism Plan 2025. Shire 
of Wyndham-East Kimberley and East Kimberley Market-
ing Group. Retrieved from: https://www.swek.wa.gov.au/
Profiles/swek/Assets/ClientData/East_Kimberley_Tourism_
Plan_2025.pdf
Government of Western Australia (2010). Kimberley Regional 
Water Plan 2010-2030. Retrieved from: https://acrobat.adobe.
com/id/urn:aaid:sc:AP:d80f3407-c116-48fd-a64c-c716043dfd-
1b?viewer%21megaVerb=group-discover
Government of Western Australia (2010a). Pilbara Regional 
Water Plan 2010-2030.
Government of Western Australia (n.d.) Managing Water from 
the Ord River. Retrieved from: https://www.wa.gov.au/system/
files/2022-07/Managing-water-from-the-Ord-River.pdf
78   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   79

Government of Western Australia (2022). Foundations for a 
Stronger Tomorrow: State Infrastructure Strategy. Retrieved 
from: https://prod-iwa-public-files.s3.ap-southeast-2.ama-
zonaws.com/public/2022-07/strategy_download/2022%20
Final%20SIS.pdf
Government of Western Australia (2023a). Remote Aboriginal 
communities. Retrieved from: https://www.wa.gov.au/organ-
isation/department-of-communities/remote-aboriginal-com-
munities
Government of Western Australia (2023c). Pilbara groundwa-
ter allocation plan. Page last updated January 2023. Re-
trieved from: https://www.wa.gov.au/service/natural-resourc-
es/water-resources/pilbara-groundwater-allocation-plan 
Government of Western Australia (2024). Map: Native Title 
Determination LGATE-066. Retrieved from: https://catalogue.
data.wa.gov.au/dataset/native-title-determination-lgate-066 
last updated 1 August 2024
Hanigan IC, Butler CD, Kokic PN, Hutchinson MF. (2012) Sui-
cide and drought in New South Wales, Australia, 1970-2007. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 28;109(35):13950-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1112965109. Epub 2012 Aug 13. PMID: 22891347; 
PMCID: PMC3435226. Retrieved from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3435226/
IMF (2017). A New Twist in the Link Between Inequality 
and Economic Development. International Monetary Fund, 
Blog. Retrieved from: https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Arti-
cles/2017/05/11/a-new-twist-in-the-link-between-inequality-
and-economic-development
IUCN (2024). Commission on Ecosystem Management. 
Restoring ecosystems to reduce drought risk: Nature-based 
Solutions for drought. Gland, Switzerland: International 
Union for Conservation of Nature. Retrieved from: https://
iucn.org/resources/publication/restoring-ecosystems-re-
duce-drought-risk
KC (2023). Residential Housing and Land Snapshot. Kim-
berley Development Commission. Retrieved from: https://
www.kdc.wa.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Kimber-
ley-Land-and-Housing-Snapshot-Final-Version.pdf 
KDC (2024). Kimberley Development Commission Strate-
gic Plan 2024-26. Kimberley Development Commission. 
Retrieved from: https://www.kdc.wa.gov.au/wp-content/up-
loads/2024/04/KDC-Strategic-Plan-2024-26.pdf 
KLC (2024). Kimberley Land Council website. Retrieved from: 
https://www.klc.org.au/
Kimberley Land Council (nd). Valuing Indigenous People in 
Climate Change – Nolan Hunter. Retrieved from: https://stat-
ic1.squarespace.com/static/59fecece017db2ab70aa1874/t/5c-
736927c83025124243c322/1551067438077/Nulungu+lec-
ture_final.pdf  
Lester L., Flatau P., & Kyron M. (2022). Understanding the 
social impact of drought. Perth: The University of  
Western Australia. 
Mahendran, R., Rongbin, X., Shanshan, L., Yuming G. (2021). 
Interpersonal violence associated with hot weather. The Lan-
cet: Volume 5, Issue 9e571-e572September 2021. Retrieved 
from: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanplh/article/
PIIS2542-5196(21)00210-2/fulltext 
Peel, M., Finlayson, L &, T. A. Mcmahon, (2007). Updated 
world map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification. 
Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions, 2007, 4 
(2), pp.439-473. Retrieved from: https://hal.science/file/index/
docid/298818/filename/hessd-4-439-2007.pdf 
Mastrantonis, S. (2022). Defining Drought in Western Aus-
tralia. Centre for Crop and Disease Management, School of 
Molecular and Life Science, Curtin University, Bentley, WA. 
April 2022.
McCosker, T.H., Richardson, P., Curcio, A., Davidson, B. 
(2021). Grazing Systems - Recent Findings Australia. NRM 
in the Rangelands: Shaping our Future. Available at: https://
www.rcsaustralia.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Grazing-sys-
tems-%E2%80%93-Recent-Findings-in-Australia-2022.pdf 
McFarlane, D. (2015) Pilbara WRA Whole of Pilbara Factsheet. 
CSIRO website: CSIRO; 2015. CSIRO:EP157490. https://doi.
org/10.5072/83/5849a2c9dfa54 
NACP (n.d.). Climate Savvy for Grazing Management: Kimber-
ley and Pilbara. Northern Australia Climate Program: MLA, 
USQ, Qld Government. Retrieved from: https://nacp.org.au/
static/regional_guides/Regional%20Guide%20-%20Kimber-
ley%20&%20Pilbara.pdf 
NACP (2024). Drought Monitor. Northern Australia Climate 
Program. Retrieved from: https://www.nacp.org.au/drought_
monitor  
NIAA (2024). Indigenous Rangers Program. Australian 
Government: National Indigenous Australians Agency. 
Retrieved from: https://www.niaa.gov.au/our-work/environ-
ment-and-land/indigenous-rangers
Northern Hub (2023). Drought Projects. Retrieved from: 
https://northernhub.au/ 
OAG (2021). Delivering Essential Services to Remote Aborig-
inal Communities – Follow-up.  Western Australian Auditor 
General’s Report. Retrieved from: https://audit.wa.gov.au/
wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Report-25_Delivering-Essen-
tial-Services-to-Remote-Aboriginal-Communities-–-Follow-up.
pdf 
PDC (2023). Strategic Plan 2023-25. Pilbara Development 
Commission. Retrieved from: https://www.pdc.wa.gov.au/Pro-
files/pdc/Assets/ClientData/PDC_StrategicPlan_2023-2025_
SCREEN_Singles.pdf 
Rafferty, F. (2021). The road to Jigalong: an exploration into 
the effect of altered landscapes in the Pilbara on place-iden-
tity. Thesis for Master of Philosophy, Curtin University. 
December 2021. Retrieved from: https://espace.curtin.edu.au/
bitstream/handle/20.500.11937/86764/Rafferty percent20F-
percent202021.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
RDA Pilbara, (2021). Strategic Plan 2021/22-2023/24. 
Retrieved from: https://www.rdapilbara.org.au/_files/ugd/
c14dc8_ad9b335c5f254d6eb1cdb003496be9cf.pdf
REMPLAN, (2024). Community and Economy Profiles. Re-
trieved from: https://app.remplan.com.au/pilbararegion/econ-
omy/summary?state=WZPpFw0lPI7owpXCnE1dORtYh2hplq
Rigby CW, Rosen A, Berry HL, Hart CR. (2011) If the land’s 
sick, we’re sick the impact of prolonged drought on the 
social and emotional well-being of Aboriginal communi-
ties in rural New South Wales. Aust J Rural Health. 2011 
Oct;19(5):249-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1584.2011.01223.x. PMID: 
219333
Shelter WA (2021). Housing the hot topic in Port Hedland. 
Retrieved from: https://www.shelterwa.org.au/housing-the-
hot-topic-in-port-hedland/  
Shelter WA (2022). Shelter WA in Broome. Retrieved from: 
https://www.shelterwa.org.au/shelter-wa-in-broome/ 
Shelter WA (2023). Kimberley regional engagement trip. 
Retrieved from: https://www.shelterwa.org.au/kimberley-re-
gional-engagement-trip/ 
Soils For Life (2025). Retrieved from: https://soilsforlife. 
org.au/
Spelwinde, Peter C.; Angus Cook; Peter Davies; Philip Wein-
stein. (2009). A relationship between environmental degra-
dation and mental health in rural Western Australia. Health 
& Place 15(3): 880-887. Retrieved from: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/19345135/ 
Stevens, H., Beggs, P. and Graham, P (2023). As the tempera-
ture rises, so do rates of domestic violence. RACGP. 12 Dec 
2023. Retrieved from: https://www1.racgp.org.au/newsgp/
clinical/as-the-temperature-rises-so-do-rates-of-domestic-v 
Tanton, R., Dare, L., Miranti, R., Vidyattama, Y., Yule, A. and 
McCabe, M. (2021). Dropping Off the Edge 2021: Persistent 
and multilayered disadvantage in Australia, Jesuit Social 
Services: Melbourne. Retrieved from: https://www.dote.org.
au/s/WA_final.xlsx
Taylor, M. & Poelina, A. (2021). Living Waters, Law First: Nyiki-
na and Mangala water governance in the Kimberley, Western 
Australia. Australasian Journal of Water Resources, 25(1), 
40–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/13241583.2021.1880538 
TERN (2023). Australia’s Environment 2022 Report. ANU and 
TERN. Retrieved from: https://www.tern.org.au/australias-en-
vironment-in-2022/
Tozer P & J Leys. (2013). Dust storms – what do they really 
cost? The Rangeland Journal 35: 131-142. Retrieved from: 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/rj/Fulltext/rj12085
UNCCD (2019). United Nations Convention to Combat 
Desertification. Drought Resilience, Adaptation and Man-
agement Policy (DRAMP) Framework: Technical Guidelines. 
Bonn: UNCCE Secretariat. Retrieved from: https://www.unc-
cd.int/sites/default/files/relevant-links/2019-09/190906%20
UNCCD%20drought%20resilience%20technical%20guide-
line%20EN.pdf
Stanley, P. L., Wilson, C., Patterson, E., Machmuller, M. B., 
& Cotrufo, M. F. (2024). Ruminating on soil carbon: Apply-
ing current understanding to inform grazing management. 
Global change biology, 30(3), e17223. https://doi.org/10.1111/
gcb.17223 
UNESCO (2024). Purnululu National Park. UNESCO World 
Heritage Centre. Retrieved from: https://whc.unesco.org/en/
list/1094 
UNESCO (2020). Murujuga Cultural Landscape. UNESCO 
World Heritage Centre. Retrieved from https://whc.unesco.
org/en/tentativelists/6445/ 
Water Corporation, (2024). Climate and the North West. Re-
trieved from: https://www.watercorporation.com.au/Our-wa-
ter/Climate-change-and-WA/Climate-and-the-North-West 
Water Corporation, (2024a). Aboriginal Communities Water 
Services. Retrieved from: https://www.watercorporation.com.
au/Outages-and-works/Ongoing-Works/Aboriginal-Communi-
ties-Water-Services   
WEF, (2020). Calculated for Kimberley and Pilbara based on 
the findings of: Nature Risk Rising. World Economic Forum. 
Retrieved from: https://www.weforum.org/publications/na-
ture-risk-rising-why-the-crisis-engulfing-nature-matters-for-
business-and-the-economy/
Wysong Michael, Legge Sarah, Clark Alex, Maier Stefan, 
Bardi Jawi Rangers, Nyul Nyul RangersH, Yawuru Country 
Managers A, Cowell Stuart, Mackay Grey (2022) The sum of 
small parts: changing landscape fire regimes across multiple 
small landholdings in north-western Australia with collabora-
tive fire management. International Journal of Wildland Fire 
31, 97-111.
Wu, W., Dawson, D., Fleming-Muñoz, D., Schleiger, E., & Hor-
ton, J. (2019). The future of Australia’s agricultural workforce. 
CSIRO Data61, Canberra, Australia. Retrieved from: https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/355770042_THE_FU-
TURE_OF_AUSTRALIA’S_AGRICULTURAL_WORKFORCE_
Report_prepared_by_Australia’s_Innovation_Catalyst_CITA-
TION_COPYRIGHT_AND_DISCLAIMER
80   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   81

Appendix A: List of Stakeholder 
Engagement Participants
The following organisations were engaged in the development of this RDRP.
Organisation
Category
Region
Sector
Australia's North West
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Multi-region
Tourism
Broome Chamber of Commerce and Industry
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Kimberley
Economic 
Development
Cambridge Gulf Limited
Business
Kimberley
Economic 
Development
Care for Hedland
Community
Pilbara
Environmental
Dambimangari Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
NRM
Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and 
Attractions
State Government 
Multi-region
Government
Department of Energy, Mines, Industry Regulation 
and Safety
State Government
Pilbara
Government
Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
Development
State Government
Multi-region
Government
Department of Water and Environmental 
Regulation
State Government 
Pilbara
Government
East Kimberley Chamber of Commerce & Industry
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Kimberley
Economic 
Development
Emama Nguda Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
Agriculture
Empowered Communities East Kimberley - 
backbone organisation Binarri-binyja yarrawoo 
(BBY) 
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Kimberley
Social
Gelganyem Group
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
Culture & Heritage
Gobawarrah Yinhawangka Aboriginal Corporation 
RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
IBN
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
Social
Jamukurnu-Yapalikurnu Aboriginal Corporation 
(Western Desert Lands) RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Job Pathways
NFP
Kimberley
Employment
Juluwarlu Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
Culture & Heritage
Kanyirninpa Jukurrpa (KJ) 
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
NRM
Karajarri Traditional Lands Association (KTLA)
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
PBC
Kariyarra Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Organisation
Category
Region
Sector
Karlka Nyiyaparli Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Karlka Nyiyaparli Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Karratha and Districts CCI
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Pilbara
Economic 
Development
Kimberley Agricultural Investment
Business
Kimberley
Agriculture
Kimberley Agriculture and Pastoral Company 
(KAPCO)
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
Agriculture
Kimberley Boab
Business
Kimberley
Agriculture
Kimberley Land Council
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
Culture & Heritage
Kimberley RDA
NFP
Kimberley
Economic 
development
Kimberley-Pilbara Cattlemen’s Association 
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Multi-region
Agriculture
Kulyakartu (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Legislative Assembly
State Government
Pilbara
Government
Marputu Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Mira Consulting
Business
Kimberley
Culture & Heritage
Murujuga AC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
Culture & Heritage
Ngarliyarndu Bindirri Aboriginal Corporation 
(NBAC)
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
Economic 
Development
Ngarluma Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Northern WA/ NT Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hub (NWANT)
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Multi-region
NRM
Nyamal Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Nyangumarta Warrarn Aboriginal Corporation 
RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Oasis Farms
Business
Kimberley
Agriculture
Onslow CCI
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Pilbara
Economic 
Development
Palyku-Jartayi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Pilbara Aboriginal Health Alliance (PAHA)
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Pilbara
Social
Pilbara Mesquite Management Committee
NFP
Pilbara
NRM
Pilbara Ranger Network
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Pilbara
NRM
Pilbara Regional Biosecurity Group (PRBG)
NFP
Pilbara
NRM
82   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   83

Organisation
Category
Region
Sector
Rangelands NRM
NFP
Multi-region
NRM
RDA Pilbara
NFP
Pilbara
Economic 
Development
Robe River Kuruma Aboriginal Corporation 
RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
RRR Network
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Kimberley
Social
Shire of Ashburton
Local Government 
Pilbara
Government
Shire of Broome
Local Govt
Kimberley
Government
Shire of Derby–West Kimberley
Local Govt
Kimberley
Government
Shire of East Pilbara
Local Government 
Pilbara
Government
Shire of Wyndham–East Kimberley
Local Government
Kimberley
Government
Town of Port Hedland
Local Government 
Pilbara
Government
WA Indigenous Tourism Operators Council
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Kimberley
Tourism
WA Primary Health Alliance (WAPHA)
Fed Government
Pilbara
Social
WACOSS Pilbara
Peak Body / Member 
Group
Pilbara
Social
Walalakoo Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
PBC
Wangka Maya Pilbara Aboriginal Language Centre
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
Culture & Heritage
Water Corporation
State Government 
Multi-region
Government
Wirraka Maya Health Service
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
Health
Wunan Foundation
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
Economic 
Development
Yawuru Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Org
Kimberley
PBC
Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Yindjibarndi Ngurra Aboriginal Corporation 
RNTBC
Aboriginal Org
Pilbara
PBC
Appendix B: Key Aspects for 
Consideration in Future Plan Iterations
The following suggestions from CSIRO’s independent review of the Pilbara and Kimberley Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan have been noted for future consideration. While they are not addressed in the current draft, 
they are recognised as important and will help shape future iterations of the Plan as the program evolves into 
implementation and long-term monitoring phases.
CSIRO 
Suggestion
Summary of Feedback
Future Consideration Rationale
3.2
Assess quality of stakeholder engagement to inform 
more community-driven actions
Will be considered in future engagement phases 
during implementation
4.2
Clarify roles and responsibilities of implementation 
partners
To be determined in collaboration with PAG during 
implementation planning
5.2
Establish structured learning as part of MEL 
framework
Governance and learning mechanisms to evolve with 
PAG and stakeholder engagement
6.1 & 6.2
Apply adaptive governance principles to future plan 
design and governance structures
Will be developed with input from PAG; requires 
broader collaboration and time
7.2
Include wider social/economic indicators, e.g. 
housing, wellbeing, First Nations data
To be integrated as MEL framework is expanded
8.1
Strengthen integration with other regional plans and 
policies
Cross-referencing and regional alignment will be 
improved in future planning stages
9.2
Deeper analysis of drought effects on different 
stakeholder groups
Will require targeted engagement and social 
research
10.1
Develop resilience assessment using time-based 
indicators and graphs
May be incorporated through future data and 
evaluation efforts
11.1
Include participatory scenario planning for future 
drought contexts
Not feasible in current plan timeframe, but a priority 
for future engagement
12.2
Show how actions build spare capacity and options 
for future resilience
Future work to build deeper understanding of 
systems-based resilience approaches
13.2
Prioritise and sequence actions into pathways with 
triggers for change
Implementation planning will explore sequencing and 
adaptive decision-making
14.2
Identify innovative intervention options through 
scenario analysis
Dependent on resourcing and further engagement
15.2
Show how proposed actions contribute to resilience 
goals within MEL framework
Expanded theory of change and MEL indicators to be 
considered
16.1
Develop robust, evidence-based theory of change 
with impact pathways
Guidance from Future Drought Fund MEL tools will 
inform this work
17.2
Include broader MEL indicators aligned with ABS/
SEIFA and economic data
Will inform long-term monitoring framework
18.2
Explore cross-component interactions more explicitly
Will be included in next iteration based on 
governance and outcome learnings
84   Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025
Kimberley and Pilbara Regional Drought Resilience Plan 2025   85

© 2025. Pilbara Development Commission and Kimberley Development Commission. All rights reserved.