Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
MOREE PLAINS AND NARRABRI

Acknowledgement of Country
Moree Plains and Narrabri Shire Councils acknowledge Traditional Owners of 
Country throughout Australia. We recognise the continuing connection to lands, 
waters, and communities of people of the Gamilaraay/Gamilaroi/Gomeroi/Kamilaroi 
Nation, and pay respect to their Elders past, present and emerging. 
Moree Plains and Narrabri Shire Councils acknowledges the various spellings of 
‘Gamilaraay, Gamilaroi, Gomeroi, and Kamilaroi’ and as valid and interchangeable, 
guided by the Shires’ Local Aboriginal Land Councils.
This project is supported by Moree Plains and Narrabri Shire 
Councils, through funding from the Australian Government’s 
Future Drought Fund and NSW Government.
We value the vital involvement of members of the primary production 
and broader communities of Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires to the 
formulation of this plan and extend our thanks to those who contributed. 
This document was prepared for Moree Plains 
and Narrabri Shire Councils by Meridian Urban.

Contents
Introduction 
2
Purpose 
4
How does the plan help
4
Vision and principles 
6
Region snapshot
8
About the Moree Plains and Narrabri Region 
9
People
11
Economy 
11
Environment 
12
How this plan was prepared 
13
Alignment 
14
Stakeholder engagement 
14
Engagement Outcomes – Community Insights 
16
Engagement Actions – Key Statistics’
16
How our region is impacted by drought
17
Interconnected nature of drought
19
Drought history 
20
Comic relief buoys the community
21
Future climate scenarios 
28
Our drought resilience 
32
Resilience into the future 
36
A regional strength in education 
37
Drought action plan 
38
Pathway 1 – Economic opportunity 
41
Pathway 2 – Community strength
44
Pathway 3 – Environmental health
46
Pathway 4 – Supply chain certainty
47
Pathway 5 — Shared commitment 
48
Implementation 
49
Resilience Pathways Implementation 
49
Governance structure
50
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
50
Tracking progress and reporting
51
Appendix A
53
Concepts to guide adaptative learning
53

Glossary
Key terms used throughout this plan are defined below.
ADAPTATION
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual or expected shocks and 
stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and socio-economic changes.
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE
Coordinating iterative, flexible, and responsive interactions between systems when designing interventions 
and for their implementation and evaluation.
COPING CAPACITY
Communities that may be constrained in their capacity to use available resources to cope with adverse 
events and to prepare for, absorb and recover.
DROUGHT
Drought means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors without changing the 
economic status or outcomes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
natural processes and ecosystem services.
GOVERNANCE
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a society share 
power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or informal.
INTERVENTION OPTIONS
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, initiatives, and investments that are 
planned to bring about change in the system.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of lived experience within a landscape, 
bearing witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people 
interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
RESILIENCE
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise to maintain the existing functions, structure, 
and feedback. Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic resilience, environmental 
resilience, and social resilience.
RISK
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values 
and objectives associated with such systems.
SHOCK
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples include major storms, floods, bush fires, 
heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism, and cyber-attacks’.
SOCIAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
existing social and community functions.
STRESSOR
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect, e.g. drought.
SYSTEMS
The interaction of processes, networks, and inter-dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
THEORY OF CHANGE
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain how and why outcomes and impacts 
will be achieved through use, implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities, and outputs.
TRENDS
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and are expected to shape change 
into the future.
THRESHOLD
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable causes a system to shift to a 
qualitatively different regime. Also referred to as a tipping point.
TRANSFORM
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, functions, feedback, 
and identity.
TRIGGER POINT
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management intervention. Trigger points are 
usually defined in the planning phase.
1
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Introduction 
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a collaboration between Moree Plains Shire 
Council and Narrabri Shire Council, and their communities, working together to advance 
the region’s focus on its resilience to absorb, adapt or transform’ the impacts of drought. 
Of all of the climate and weather-related conditions that affect Australia, drought is often 
the most challenging, not just on-farm but for entire communities and regions. The costs 
of drought are spread across economic, social and environmental factors. The toll is 
enormous, and the impacts can linger for decades. 
1  Other focus areas under the Future Drought Fund include farm business resilience, roll-out of the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool, and better 
land management practices that support landscape resilience.
The Moree Plains and Narrabri region of New South 
Wales is prone to periods of persistent drought 
with downward trends in rainfall and soil moisture. 
Climate projections for the Moree Plains and 
Narrabri region indicate continued susceptibility to 
variable rainfall periods, reduced average rainfall 
and higher temperatures into the future. 
We know drought will come again, and in a region 
that is dependent on the land for its prosperity, the 
most effective response to is to plan for greater 
resilience through a range of regionally informed 
actions to absorb, adapt or transform impacts of 
drought. Sustainable and diverse economies and 
connected communities responsive to drought 
signals provide a strong foundation to reduce 
vulnerability and mitigate potential impacts, with the 
benefit of enhancing natural environmental values.
 
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan program 
is one of five focus areas1 of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund. These plans 
focus on locally relevant and targeted ways to build 
regional drought resilience, taking steps to plan now 
to stem the impact of future drought on our region. 
The NSW Regional Drought Resilience Plan program 
is jointly funded through the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund and the NSW 
Government, supporting local governments to work 
together regionally to plan for drought resilience 
proactively and pragmatically. 
The framework of the Moree Plains and 
Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan is 
provided overleaf.
Drought resilience, as described 
by the CSIRO (2022):
‘will ensure regional Australia can endure 
deeper, longer droughts, and recover from them 
sooner. This will help Australia’s agricultural 
industries maintain national farm income, 
increase food security, and protect the regional 
jobs that rely on agriculture during the toughest 
years. Importantly, it will also increase the 
resilience of rural and regional communities and 
improve environmental outcomes’.
Image: Boggabri mural
2
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Moree Plains and Narrabri Drought Resilience Plan Framework
The vision for future droughts 
We are joined by a common love of the land, and we nurture it as the basis of our 
prosperity and well-being. We see immense value in the small things that link and 
fuse our farms, towns, business and landscape; our people, friends, family and 
networks. We understand drought will come again. We prepare for this by choosing 
new pathways as needed and acting on our significant regional strengths in 
landscape, skills and community spirit. 
Strategic pathways
Priority Themes
Priority 
Actions
	
›
Leverage existing tourism assets as a major economic 
pillar 
	
›
Building financial strength
	
›
Diversify the regional economy
	
›
Establishing the region as an education hub 
	
›
Supporting local business 
Our 
Action
Plan
Monitoring 
Evaluation and learning 
1. Economic 
Opportunity
	
›
Supporting strong social cohesion 
	
›
Attracting and retaining skills and people
	
›
Maintaining services and retail options locally
	
›
Maintaining pride in our communities 
2. Community
Strength
	
›
Supporting land management 
	
›
Biosecurity 
	
›
Water Security
3. Environmental 
Health
	
›
Roads as an economic enabler
4. Supply 
Chain Certainty
	
›
Maintain collaborative and reciprocal networks 
	
›
Improve communications and information access 
5. Shared 
Commitment
The principles that guide our plan
PEOPLE AT 
THE CORE
PROSPERITY 
THROUGH THE LAND 
IT’S THE LITTLE 
THINGS 
HARNESSING EXISTIG 
OPPORTUNITY 
STRENGTH IN SKILLS 
AND SERVICES 
COLLABORATION FOR 
COLLECTIVE SUCCESS 
We acknowledge and recognise the triggers of drought
We anticipate the impacts of drought
We advance our regional strengths and opportunities 
We act together 
The way we will act 
Implementation
Figure 1 — The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan Framework
3
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Purpose 
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan is a regionally informed plan that 
provides relevant and targeted adaptation pathways 
and options to enhance existing local drought 
resilience within and through community networks 
to deal with the compounding and cascading effects 
of drought from the farm gate to small business, 
local land health and community cohesion. The 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan provides direction 
and options for how the local community, business 
and networks including Moree Plains and Narrabri 
Shire Councils can absorb, adapt or transform for 
greater resilience.
The purpose of this plan is to:
	
→increase the understanding of the region’s 
current and future drought resilience, 
considering the region’s unique economic, 
environmental and social characteristics
	
→recognise the interdependent nature of the local 
economy, community health and wellbeing and 
environmental sustainability through the drought 
cycle and across business types
	
→understand local signals and drought priorities 
in the community’s voice and create stronger 
connectedness and greater social capital 
within communities, contributing to wellbeing 
and security
	
→empower communities to implement adaptive 
and transformative activities that improve their 
resilience to drought
	
→combine local knowledge with resilience and risk 
data and information to make informed decisions
	
→identify actions, pathways and opportunities to 
improve regional drought resilience, mitigate 
risks and adapt to change
	
→help Councils be in a stronger position to 
implement strategic actions and take advantage 
of opportunities as they arise; and 
	
→develop concrete actions to address and 
mitigate short and long term drought impacts.
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is supported 
by a Regional Drought Resilience Assessment that 
provides a technical evidence base to drought 
impacts, history of drought in the region and 
future climate trends. The core component of this 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan is the community 
contribution, which illuminates in detail and at 
township and local business scale, the impacts 
of drought, how they are dealt with currently and 
opportunities to improve and prosper through the 
next cycle. 
For the purposes of this plan, references to 
regional businesses include farms and agricultural 
business, contractors, suppliers, industry, retail and 
commercial services and references to community 
includes all townships, irrespective of size. 
How does the plan help
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan combines drought history, climate 
science and local input to understand the impacts 
and to anticipate and prepare for the next drought 
cycle. Whilst we don’t have a crystal ball to predict 
the future, this plan addresses drought resilience by 
considering drought futures.
How drought has manifested in the past for social 
and community networks, local business and the 
landscape are a useful guidepost around what 
can be done to address drought periods before 
they become severe. This supports a focus on 
outcomes through:
	
→prevention of potential impacts
	
→increased preparedness and resilience through 
recognition of signals
	
→what is needed in response; and
	
→what is needed for recovery.
Characteristics of drought are slow, long and often 
insidious. It is important that we also understand and 
convey regionally, the warning signals of drought 
which can be evident a long time before a drought 
is upon the Moree Plains and Narrabri region. In this 
regard, a focus on prevention and an increased 
preparedness is paramount to avoid a long recovery. 
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan relies on collaborative 
implementation approaches involving a range 
of stakeholders. The action plan for drought 
resilience spans the prevention, preparedness, 
response and recovery (PPRR) cycle, providing 
the framework to embed implementation across 
the different functions of local government, as 
well as guide other stakeholders (including other 
levels of government, community and industry 
groups, service providers, not-for-profits, 
landowners, and local communities) with actions 
that can make a difference. This includes short, 
medium and long term opportunities.
4
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

This Regional Drought Resilience Plan addresses 
the cycle and helps the region prevent and prepare 
for drought through: 
	
→recognising drought triggers
	
→understanding the potential impacts
	
→proposing actions to increase preparedness
	
→proposing pathways to help: 
	
→absorb impacts where possible
	
→adapt to new conditions; and 
	
→transform to meet the challenge. 
This concept forms part of a resilience ‘theory of 
change’ model2 which helps us to break down 
and consider the complex elements of drought 
resilience and links across issues. This makes clear 
both how and why its impacts run so deep. This 
approach also helps to inform decision-making for 
enhanced resilience and adaptation as conditions 
and circumstances change over time.
Having a plan enables us to think and act 
strategically, start planning now for prevention 
of impacts and putting programs in place for 
preparedness. Once the pressure of drought is 
upon us some of the impacts are already being felt 
with spending decreasing and employment losses. 
These are the small but vital impacts that we aim to 
lessen through this Plan. A drought resilience plan 
helps us coordinate and direct effort, resourcing, 
funding and investment to actions that offer 
maximum benefit. 
2 The Moree Plains and Narrabri drought resilience plan integrates the ‘Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach’ (RAPTA) developed 
by CSIRO which provides a framework to map resilience interventions. For more information on RAPTA, visit https://research.csiro.au/eap/rapta/ 
How this plan will help the Moree Plains and 
Narrabri region is through the adoption of a drought 
resilience pose that:
bell	
Acknowledges and 
recognises the triggers 
umbrella	
Anticipates the impacts 
timeline-arrow 	 Advances regional strengths 
and opportunities; and 
people-group 	 Acts together
The 2017-2019 ‘Tinderbox Drought’ was NSW’s 
worst drought on record. Future droughts may 
become more frequent and intense. We want to 
learn from the past to be better prepared for next 
time. The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan is about taking a local view 
for local benefit. A plan can’t bring rain, but it can 
work to make things a bit easier in its absence.
Implementation funding is available from the longer-
term annual investment across Australia under 
the Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought 
Fund, as well as other funding and grant assistance 
opportunities. This Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan provides the framework for implementation 
and identifies practical ways the community and 
businesses of the region can prepare for and 
respond to drought impacts.
sun-plant-wilt
Absorb
swap-arrows
Adapt
seedling
Transform
5
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Vision and principles 
Vision
We are joined by a common love of the land, and we nurture it as the basis of our prosperity and well-being. 
We see immense value in the small things that link and fuse our farms, towns, business and landscape; 
our people, friends, family and networks. We understand drought will come again. We prepare for this by 
choosing new pathways as needed and acting on our significant regional strengths in landscape, skills and 
community spirit. 
Guiding principles 
people
People at the core
Community connection and cohesion is 
strong. There are deep familial roots and 
commitment of business and residents to the 
history and foundation of this region. This 
strong fabric holds together through stresses 
and shocks. 
briefcase
Strength in skills and services 
The region boasts impressive existing skill 
base through agriculture, mining, education, 
small business innovation and natural beauty 
that can be harnessed to sustain the economy 
through drought. They are at functional peak 
when supporting services remain accessible in 
all phases of the drought cycle. 
money-bill
Harnessing existing opportunity 
There is vast untapped opportunity when 
drawing together community strengths, 
technical skills, quality of local produce, 
landscape values, locational attributes 
and existing planned major projects and 
investment. 
hand-holding-droplet
It’s the small things 
The region already shows significant resilience 
and has endured the drought cycle through 
focus on the small things that make a big 
difference. This is a hallmark of the region’s 
resilience. 
tractor
Prosperity through the land 
As caretakers of the land, we acknowledge 
it provides us with our economic base. Our 
industries and endeavours are based on its 
bounty. We understand its behaviours and 
accept its’ sometimes harsh and cyclical 
nature. We value our lifestyle close to the land.
object-intersect
Collaboration for collective success
Together is always stronger. Whether this is 
together in a tiny village or together regionally. 
Seeking partners, merging resources and 
sharing knowledge a region that collaborates 
enhances its strength to combat stress and 
shocks. 
6
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Outcomes
The outcomes sought from the Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan are outlined 
below. The monitoring, evaluation and learning framework to guide plan implementation sets out a range of 
criteria against which implementation can be measured against these outcomes in order to test growth in 
drought resilience attributes over time. 
THEME
OUTCOME
Community Strength 
Community cohesion and wellbeing is maintained
Economic Opportunity 
	
→Gross regional product remains steady or grows relative to:
	
→Non-drought periods
	
→Previous drought periods
	
→Other regions in NSW, Victoria and South Australia
Environmental Health 
Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways is 
reduced throughout and emerging from drought. 
Regional water quality and quantity projects are 
continually underway
Supply Chain Certainty 
Market accessibility has improved
Regional road projects are continually underway 
Shared Commitment 
Drought resilience priorities are embedded across Council’s 
Integrated Planning and Reporting Framework and informs the 
plans, strategies and efforts of allied stakeholders
Image: Narrabri Creek, Narrabri
7
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Region snapshot
Principal Agricultural 
Commodities
check Dryland and irrigated 
broadacre cropping for: 
Cotton, Grains & Legumes 
check Beef cattle
check Sheep
check Fruit and nuts 
Research facilities = 3 
check University of Sydney 
Plant Breeding Institute 
check International Centre of 
Crop and Digital Agriculture
check The Australian Cotton 
Research Institute
Sites of environmental  
importance = 3
check Pilliga State Forest 
and National Park 
check Mount Kaputar 
National park 
check Gwydir Wetlands 
(International RAMSAR site) 
shop
Local businesses
3,700
user-doctor-hair
Local jobs
19,919
people-roof
25,454
Population 
(0.3% of NSW population)
First Nations population
17.3%
(3.4% NSW average)
user-doctor
Unemployment
4% 
(4.9% NSW average)
user-tie
Median age
39
(same as NSW average)
car-building
Gross Regional Product 
Moree Plains $0.96bn
Narrabri $1.84bn
Largest industries (by employment)
MOREE PLAINS
tractor Agriculture, forestry and fisheries
school Education and training
star-of-life Health care and social assistance 
shopping-cart Retail trade; and 
house Construction 
NARRABRI
pickaxe Mining 
tractor Agriculture, forestry and fisheries
star-of-life Health care and social assistance
shopping-cart Retail trade; and
school Education and training
Information sourced from ABS 2021 Census data and Regional Development Australia’
8
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

About the 
Moree 
Plains and 
Narrabri Region 
The region is a productive agricultural area with 
reliable summer-dominant rainfall and a climate 
that allows for crop and pasture growth most of the 
year. The region is home to natural artesian water, 
rivers, state forests and national parks, wetlands and 
protected parkland. It also bolsters significant natural 
resources including hard rock tin and other rare earth 
metals. 
Key centres in the region include the administrative 
centres of Moree and Narrabri which are supported 
by a network of townships, villages, and localities. 
In the Moree Plains Shire, these townships include 
Mungindi and Boggabilla, Boomi, Biniguy and 
Pallamallawa, Mallawa, Ashley and Gurley. In Narrabri 
Shire, townships include Baan Baa, Bellata, Boggabri, 
Edgeroi, Gwabegar, Pilliga and Wee Waa. 
Following European colonisation, land in the region 
was subject to pastoral expansion from the mid 
1800’s. Centres, townships and villages across 
the region provide important access to social and 
economic services, retail, medical services and 
infrastructure. They are destinations for residents, 
workers and visitors. They are also home to the 
majority of the region’s non-agricultural enterprises. 
The rural main street character each township 
offers is unique and highly dependent on functional, 
flourishing trade and business activity.
The region has a strong association with bore water. 
Artesian mineral waters were discovered in 1895, 
acting as a significant tourism draw card to the region.
The region is home to industry-research 
collaborations such as the Australian Cotton Research 
Institute outside of Narrabri and educational facilities 
such as the recently announced University of New 
England regional study centre. Mining plays a strong 
role in the Narrabri economy along with the traditional 
agricultural backbone.
The Kamilaroi Nation 
The Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/Gomeroi 
Nation has a deep historical connection 
to Moree Plains and Narrabri, 
encompassing about 30,000 square 
miles of land. However, colonisation 
drastically changed their way of 
life, leading to dispossession and 
cultural suppression.
European settlers moving westward in 
the early 1800s clashed with Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander peoples, 
leading to conflicts known as the 
‘Frontier Wars’. Sadly, there were brutal 
encounters like the Waterloo Creek 
Massacre, where an estimated 40 to 50 
Kamilaroi Gamilaroi/Gomeroi people lost 
their lives. 
The history of colonisation has left a 
lasting impact on Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander languages. However, 
there are ongoing efforts to revive and 
preserve the Gamilaraay/Yuwaalaraay 
language, with courses now available 
through institutions like the Australian 
National University. 
Despite past injustices, the descendants 
of this nation continue to occupy and 
cherish their ancestral lands today.
Byron Bay
Moree
Connamble
THE KAMILAROI
Gunnedah
Tamworth
Narrabri
Walgett
Newcastle
Queensland
Sydney
Figure 2 — Regional map
9
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Water holds deep cultural, spiritual, and 
practical significance for Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander Peoples in Australia. 
Moree Plains and the Narrabri Shire Council’s 
acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the land, 
the Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/Gomeroi People (also 
known as Gamilaraay). The Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/
Gomeroi lands extend across New South Wales 
to southern Queensland. The Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/
Gomeroi mob forms one of Australia’s four largest 
Indigenous nations.
The relationship between Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/
Gomeroi communities and water is intricately tied to 
their understanding of the environment, traditional 
knowledge systems, and spiritual beliefs. This 
connection spans thousands of years and is now 
severely challenged by modern environmental 
pressures, particularly drought. As climate change 
exacerbates the frequency and severity of droughts, 
the impact on Aboriginal communities and their 
deep affinity to water becomes more profound 
and urgent.
For the Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/Gomeroi people, 
water is far more than just a physical resource; it is 
a vital element connecting them to their ancestors, 
culture, and land. Water sources such as rivers, 
lakes, and springs are considered sacred and 
often associated with creation stories, known as 
Dreaming or Dreamtime. These stories explain 
the origins of the land, its features, and the life it 
sustains. Water is seen as a living entity imbued 
with spiritual essence and is often central to 
rituals, ceremonies, and cultural practices. 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples 
have developed a sophisticated understanding 
of water management grounded in thousands 
of years of observation and experience. This 
traditional ecological knowledge encompasses a 
holistic approach to managing water, ensuring its 
sustainability for future generations. Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander water management practices 
include the careful monitoring of seasonal cycles, 
the protection of waterholes, and the maintenance 
of wetlands. Knowledge about the land, the weather 
patterns, and the behaviour of animals is passed 
down through generations, ensuring that water 
resources are respected and used sustainably.
These practices have enabled Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/
Gomeroi communities to survive in some of the 
harshest environments on Earth, where water is 
often scarce. They understand that water is a shared 
resource that must be carefully managed to sustain 
human life and the plants and animals that are 
integral to the ecosystem. 
Their approach to water management is not about 
domination or exploitation but about living in 
harmony with the environment.
However, this delicate balance is increasingly 
being disrupted by prolonged droughts, which are 
becoming more frequent and intense due to climate 
change. Droughts have a devastating impact on 
water availability and, by extension, on the cultural 
practices, livelihoods, and well-being of Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islander People. When water 
sources dry up, so too does the ability to conduct 
ceremonies, connect with ancestral lands, and 
maintain traditional ways of life.
The degradation of rivers and wetlands, often 
exacerbated by over-extraction of water for 
agricultural and industrial purposes, further 
compounds the problem. In many cases, Aboriginal 
communities are left with little or no access to 
clean water, impacting their health and their ability 
to sustain themselves. The destruction of sacred 
water sites is not just an environmental issue; it 
is a profound cultural loss, leading to a sense of 
displacement and disconnection from the Country.
Despite these challenges, the Kamilaroi/Gamilaroi/
Gomeroi people continue to demonstrate 
remarkable resilience. Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander knowledge systems are being recognised 
as vital to the sustainable management of water 
resources, and there is a growing movement to 
incorporate traditional ecological knowledge into 
broader environmental and water policies.
Boobera Lagoon
Boobera Lagoon is a permanent waterhole 
13.5km west of Boggabilla.  It is a sacred site 
for the Aboriginal People.
This tranquil body of water is deeply woven 
into the cultural fabric of Aboriginal people, 
representing a vital connection to their 
ancestors and the Dreamtime. Legend says 
the Lagoon was created by the Garriya 
(Rainbow Serpent), a powerful spiritual being. 
The lagoon has been a place of ceremony, 
reflection, and sustenance for generations. 
However, threats from water extraction and 
droughts have endangered the Lagoon’s 
fragile ecosystem, jeopardising the Kamilaroi/
Gamilaroi/Gomeroi spiritual practices and 
connection to this ancient, sacred waterway.
10
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

People
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires are 
supported by a chain of communities which act 
as hubs, meeting places, and event venues, each 
with strong local identities from Boggabri in the 
south to Boggabilla in the north, and out west at 
Pilliga and Mungindi. Local venues in schools, 
halls, childcare, sport, golf, racing and business 
or pleasure are connections that are integral to 
providing opportunities to maintain and strengthen 
the existing deep commitment of business and 
residents to the history and foundation of this 
region. The region hosts a diverse community 
from generational farmers to First Nations and 
international researchers. 
The region has a combined population of 25,454 
persons based on 2021 census data (12,703 in 
Narrabri Shire and 12,751 in Moree Plains Shire) 
with a median age of 39. Both Shire’s populations 
decreased slightly in the last intercensal period3. 
Moree Plains Shire is anticipated to have a positive 
growth rate of 1.37% per annum, resulting in an 
additional ~4,000 people in the Shire by 20414. 
Narrabri Shire is anticipated to have a negative 
growth rate of 0.36% per annum, resulting in 
approximately 900 less people than current in 2041. 
Both Shires have a very large Aboriginal population 
well in advance of the state average of 3.4% at 
19.9% and 14.8% for Moree Plains and Narrabri 
respectively5.
Economy 
The Moree Plains Shire had a gross regional product 
(GRP)of $966 million for the 2022-23 financial 
year. Narrabri Shire’s GRP totalled $1.84 billion. 
Combined, the region supports an estimated 19,919 
local jobs (2020) and 3,700 local businesses6. 
The top five industries by employment for both 
Shires are:
wheat	
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
school 	
Education and training
user-nurse 	
Health care and social assistance 
shop	
Retail trade; and
house-building	
Construction7 8.
3 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2021, Moree Plains 2021 Census All persons QuickStats, Available online at https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-
data/quickstats/2021/LGA15300
4 NSW Government, 2022, NSW Population Projections
5 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2022, Moree Plains 2021 Census All persons Regional profiles, Available online at https://dbr.abs.gov.au/region.
html?lyr=lga&rgn=15300
6 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2022, Data by Region: Local Government Area: for Moree Plains and Narrabri, Available online at https://dbr.abs.gov.au/
compare.html?lyr=lga&rgn0=15750&rgn1=15300
7 Ibid
8 Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2022, 2021 Census All persons Regional profiles, Available online at https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/
quickstats/2021/LGA15750.
9 ABS 2022, Value of Agricultural Commodities Produced, Australia, 2020-21. Gross and local value estimates by 2021 Local Government Areas (LGA).
Figure 3 — Gross value product of agricultural commodities, 
2021, for Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires9
The livelihoods of all residents of the region are 
dependent upon the landscape. The economic 
fortunes of businesses with direct and indirect 
contact with agriculture are strongly linked despite 
impacts being felt at different times and scales. 
Town based indirect businesses support farm based 
business and in reverse. 
The agricultural industry is a significant economic 
driver for the region. Considering the commodities 
produced, broadacre crops (e.g. cereal and non-
cereal crops) account for the vast majority of the 
region’s agricultural Gross value product (GVP), 
at 92 percent. Livestock is a minor commodity 
comparatively (6 percent). The graph provides a 
breakdown by commodity subclass. 
Broadacre Crops
Nurseries, cut ﬂowers or cultivated turf
Livestock slaughtered and other disposals
Livestock products
Fruit and Nuts
$1,322m (92%)
$91m (6%)
$7m (0%)
$0m (0%)
$20m (1%)
11
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Environment 
Moree Plains and Narrabri are fed by multiple river systems including the Gwydir, Macintyre, Mehi and Namoi 
Rivers, collectively forming part of the wider Murray-Darling Basin. The Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires lie on 
the Border Rivers, Gwydir and Namoi Regional water catchments. Bore water from the Great Artesian Basin 
(GAB) is a major tourism attraction as well as an agricultural and community asset.
Moree Plains Shire and Narrabri Shire’s historical development has been linked to the discovery of and use of 
water from the Great Artesian Basin. Across the region, communities rely on the Great Artesian Basin and the 
Murray Darling Basin for thriving agricultural production including intensive horticulture, irrigated crops and 
grazing along floodplains benefiting from riparian flows. Food production and tourism contribute significantly 
to Moree Plains and Narrabri region economies. Abundant and diverse animal and plant life rely on this 
complex system to survive. 
Apart from the immensely fertile floodplains, the region boasts some impressive natural assets including the 
international listed RAMSAR wetlands of the Gwydir River, the outstanding rock formations of Kaputar National 
Park, the vast areas of the Pilliga and Timmallallie forests and conservation areas and Yarrie Lake formed by 
ancient meteor strike. 
Image: Open plains north west of Narrabri
12
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How this plan was prepared 
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan was prepared with 
the valued contribution of a broad cross section of community members, stakeholders, 
local government, resilience officers, health and counselling practitioners and local 
businesses and farmers. It is supported by an evidence-based resilience assessment. 
These inputs have drawn together technical analysis with local knowledge and insight. 
There are two primary components to preparing the Plan: 
map
Resilience Assessment,
which includes: 
	
→literature analysis
	
→plans, policies and strategies review
	
→regional characteristics
	
→trends and projections for drought 
impacts; and
	
→drought resilience indicators assessment
building-user
Stakeholder engagement
	
→online community surveys
	
→community, industry and government 
workshops across both Shires
	
→community drop-in sessions at venues 
across both Shires; and
	
→targeted consultations, interviews and 
discussions with community, industry and 
services representatives.
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan focuses on the consideration of complex 
drought challenges from a systems-based perspective where economic, natural environment and social 
capacity to endure, respond and evolve through drought are enhanced.
Image: Community engagement techniques for the plan
13
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Alignment 
This provides strategic alignment with international 
scale goals including the United Nations sustainable 
development goals, the Sendai Framework for 
Disaster Risk Reduction, with national-scale 
strategies and frameworks and state-level strategic 
instruments. This alignment demonstrates how 
working locally contributes to broader sustainability 
and resilience outcomes. 
The regional drought resilience plans focus on 
the community as a system to enhance economic, 
built, environmental, and social capacity to endure, 
respond and evolve.
Key plans and strategies contributing to this 
alignment and the preparation of the Moree Plains 
and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan has 
included (but is not limited to):
	
→New England North West Regional Plan 2041
	
→Upper North West Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2023 update) 
	
→The Border Rivers, Gwydir and Namoi regional 
water strategies
	
→NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
	
→NSW Government Department of Primary 
Industries Drought Hub
	
→The Moree Plains Special Activation Precinct 
Delivery Plan
	
→Department of Primary Industries and Regional 
NSW Drought Signals Dashboard; and 
	
→Commonwealth Government’s Drought 
Resilience Self-Assessment tool.
This is complemented by local knowledge 
and vision.
Stakeholder engagement 
Participation in the Plan and generous donation of 
time and insights was given by: 
	
→local primary producers (dry land and irrigated 
crops including cotton and legumes, other grains 
and livestock) 
	
→local town residents in public forums
	
→business owners including primary producers, 
café owners, retailers, contractors and 
agricultural suppliers 
	
→community group representatives 
	
→Rural Financial Counselling Service
	
→Grain Producers Australia 
(regional representative)
	
→NSW Farmers (regional representative)
	
→National Emergency Management Agency 
(regional representative)
	
→local flood recovery officers from both Councils 
	
→Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional NSW
	
→Rural Adversity Mental Health Program (RAMHP)
	
→Salvation Army chaplains 
	
→Anglicare counsellor 
	
→Healthwise Primary Health Care provider
	
→Narrabri Chamber of Commerce 
	
→South West Queensland and Northern NSW 
Drought Innovation and Resilience Hub
	
→Cotton Growers Association; and
	
→Local Land Services (natural resource 
management and livestock officers) 
In person engagement was interactive and 
prompted participants to think about lived 
experience and pathways for action. 
Images: Community consultation in action. Left: Balo Square, Moree and Right Piliga Community Hall
14
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

face-smile-hearts
“One Mungindi @ 2406” 
The unique township of Mungindi on the NSW and Queensland 
border, straddles the border line of the Barwon River with services 
and businesses operating in both states presenting both opportunity 
and challenge. Cross border issues are topical in any conversation 
on climate policy and especially extended drought and how the 
various governance approaches can accentuate the border or unite 
a community. 
Challenges include time zones during summer and differences in 
access to, availability and eligibility of drought funding or status. 
Opportunity works in the same way with business taking advantage of 
the two for one locations. 
The people of Mungindi do not feel like they are any different from 
one side of the river to the other and the township (in both states) 
has only one postcode @ 2406. This is a little thing that has done 
wonders to cement the local identity of Mungindi and strengthen 
community cohesion.
Image: Mungindi mural
15
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

people-roof
17 in-person 
engagement sessions: 
5 workshops, 3 pop-up public events, 
9 drop in sessions 
users-rectangle
10 in-person and 
online interviews 
car
10 communities 
8 days 
square-poll-horizontal
53 drought impact 
survey responses 
comment
2 research centre drought 
discussions and site visits 
people-arrows
Over 140 one on one 
conversations with participants 
Engagement Outcomes – Community Insights 
sheep	Primary producer wellbeing is principally 
influenced by direct issues of animal welfare 
and financial stability, however the function 
of the town impacts farmer welfare too and 
farm businesses rely up on the skills and 
services of the towns for services at all 
phases of the cycle. 
coin	 A functional local economy expedites 
recovery. Keeping everything ‘open and 
normal’ is paramount so that the region can 
hit the ground running as soon as conditions 
change. 
group-arrows-rotate	 Community fabric, cohesion and proactivity 
at the township scale drives success. ‘It’s 
the little things’ is a constant theme across 
community feedback and insights. 
baby-carriage	 Skills and services work both ways: the skills 
within the region support the strong local 
business resilience, capacity and innovation. 
Simultaneously, those businesses rely upon 
services to support their practices from 
health to financial services (e.g. Childcare).
kit-medical	 Centralisation of essential services 
(health, financial etc.) can impact smaller 
communities twofold: directly through 
withdrawal of skills and people; and 
then indirectly as locals are forced to 
drive to other regional centres, all needs 
are satisfied outside the region, fully 
circumventing local business. 
handshake-angle	People need one on one support – but in 
a variety of ways (ad hoc, social, formal). 
Locals are more inclined to seek assistance, 
advice, support or whatever need arises 
when it is delivered in a personal manner. 
The variables and complexities are too great 
for blanket approaches. 
heart-pulse	 Health goes by the wayside in tough times: 
everything from skin, dust, dehydration, 
mental and physical health issues. Health 
care needs to be highly accessible, 
especially to those more remote and 
delivered in innovative ways. 
cow	There is a need to better connect on-farm 
decisions to township businesses to help 
identify and anticipate any downturns and 
trigger points for resilience actions. 
truck	Farming is big business and the 
infrastructure and services to facilitate that 
are needed such as supply chain security 
and communications. 
face-worried	 Economic uncertainty and direct job losses 
influence in-town wellbeing, as does the 
state of the built form and public spaces. 
buildings	 Middle income people and also middle-sized 
employers sustain the towns. Diversity in the 
economy but also diversity within business 
can be a hallmark of resilience. 
bank	 Financial support options are not open 
to directly impacted businesses other 
than landowners, such as harvesting or 
spraying contractors.
Engagement Actions – Key Statistics’
16
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How our region is 
impacted by drought
family
People and Social 
Impacts
	
→Loss of, and irregular 
funding of baseline 
services in health, social 
support and education
	
→Decrease in school 
enrolments and 
loss of associated 
service professionals
	
→Young people move away 
to find work
	
→Physical and mental health 
matters are put aside 
	
→Mental health and 
emotional burdens 
intensify with the strain 
	
→Decrease in volunteering 
	
→Decrease in social 
activities as everyone feels 
financially strained, without 
funds to spend leads to 
social isolation 
	
→People need to feel busy 
and valued during drought
water
Environmental 
Impacts
	
→Drinking water quantity 
and quality 
	
→Health side effects from 
dust and dust storms 
	
→Sediment run off after 
drought – stream water 
quality and water course 
erosion 
	
→Reduced root zone soil 
moisture 
	
→Dealing with Hudson and 
Prickly Pear infestations 
	
→Importation of weed 
species previously 
unknown to the region 
with stockfeed
	
→Stock route management 
	
→Soil erosion from wind and 
dust storms 
	
→Rodent outbreaks
	
→Dieback of large mature 
trees knock on affect to 
surrounding biodiversity
gas-pump Impacts from external trends 
	
→Commodity prices 
	
→Fuel prices
	
→Telecommunications 
	
→Insurance access 
and certainty
	
→Funding certainty for 
baseline programs 
	
→Loss of or reduction in 
baseline services
trees
Economic 
Impacts
	
→Price-cost squeeze for 
residents and business
	
→Loss of local discretionary 
spending 
	
→Capital expenditure put on 
hold 
	
→Loss of workers and 
their families has a 
spiralling effect
	
→The best workers tend 
to go first and are hard 
to keep taking with them 
skills and knowledge
	
→Impacts are across 
business directly and 
indirectly impacted, not 
just farms
	
→Uneven distribution of 
financial assistance across 
business types 
	
→Difficult to attract people 
and skills for businesses 
that are operating well
	
→Non-payment of debts 
(especially rates) 
	
→Road construction ceases 
due to lack of water 
	
→Assistance starts to late 
in the drought cycle 
and takes too long to 
be approved
“Loss of people 
is like the 
‘leaky bucket’
Community
member
“Happier towns 
make happier lives” 
Community 
member
17
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Image: Cotton Road Train
face-smile-hearts
The Pilliga 
“Meat Tray Index” 
A measure of social cohesion and 
wellbeing. 
Every Friday the Pilliga Pub raffles off meat 
trays for a different community group: the 
fishing club, the cricket club, the Pilliga 
Play group, community centre, schools 
and more.
Widely supported by the community the 
Friday meat trays exemplifies proactive 
action in community, for community 
character that is evident across the region. 
The Friday night meat tray raffles is a little 
thing that serves great purpose for the 
Piliga community in a drought resilience 
context: 
	
→attendance provides a measure of 
wellbeing on a scale of individual 
community members 
	
→attendance provides an opportunity for 
spontaneous connection and emotional 
support where needed
	
→the meat tray purchase supports local 
butchers and business
	
→the meat tray proceeds supports local 
community group to keep providing the 
services and events to the locals, in turn 
maintaining community wellbeing; and
	
→it can provide much needed additional 
fare to share in financially stretched 
households for the price of a 
raffle ticket
The Pilliga Meat Tray Index is a vital metric 
for community cohesion and emotional 
wellbeing during drought.
18
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Interconnected nature of 
drought
The economy of Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires 
is underpinned by the landscape, whether this is 
through crops, livestock, mining or tourism. The 
value of agricultural and resource commodities to 
the regional economy is significant. Communities 
and industry are water dependent at different 
scales. Because of this, it is important to consider 
the projected impact of future climate changes, to 
help us plan now for potential increased rainfall 
uncertainty. 
The landscape provides our wellbeing and our 
prosperity as reflected in our vision; thus, the three 
elements together sustain our region. When one is 
diminished, the others follow with cascading and 
compounding effects across the community.
To hedge against cascading impacts, the further in 
advance we plan, build awareness and put in place 
redundancy measures, the more options we will 
likely have available to address issues down the 
track. Conversely, opportunity narrows through time 
constraints. 
The discussion with community highlighted the 
challenge to the well-documented question of 
“When does the drought start?”. While community 
members, business, farms and services were 
unanimous in the need to be better prepared with a 
great appreciation of impacts and solutions during 
drought. However, the goal of this resilience plan is 
to increase our understanding of local triggers and 
empower communities to implement transformative 
activities that improve their resilience to drought. 
Businesses feel direct impacts and indirect impacts. 
The diagram reflects the locally observed cycle of 
drought, as described by the community. It shows 
when business may be affected along the decision 
and action progression. Staying connected to 
this progression will enable businesses indirectly 
affected to act earlier.
Farms are operated with a range of variables: location, crops, water access, size, soil moisture and 
with management styles that have equally wide ranges of variables such as conditions across one 
property, risk appetite, drought readiness, decision making power and more which means that no 
decisions are made across the region uniformly. Precautionary and watching-style decisions can be 
made on farms many many months before any open conversation on drought conditions occurs.
It is at the precautionary time that drought preparedness is paramount
Precautionary measures
Watching brief
Onset actions
Drought experience
Recovery road
TIME
IMPACT
Conﬁned to isolated 
on-farm decisions, 
farmers make 
precautionary decisions 
about crops and 
livestock, such as 
leaving a paddock fallow 
or minor destocking, 
decisions are short term 
and no impact oﬀ farm
Numerous on farm 
decisions to delay 
planned capital 
expenditure (new 
machinery or asset 
upgrades). Reduce 
discretionary spending 
(holidays, house 
renovations). Longer 
term decisions, minor 
impact on local asset 
suppliers   
More farmers make 
drought preparedness 
decisions. Local spending 
declines a little especially 
on discretionary items. 
Traders who are primary 
agriculture suppliers 
feel full eﬀects. Some 
job losses, especially for 
contractors. 
Smaller secondary 
suppliers and retailers to 
agriculture are impacted. 
Physical and mental 
health is aﬀected, and 
everyone is tired. Local 
ﬂora and fauna are 
not breeding but the 
community ﬁnds time to 
stick together. 
The weather turns. 
Progress is slow, vermin 
can be rife, recovery is 
expensive and ﬁnancial 
assistance is needed to 
ensure we can remain 
on track.  It’s a delicate 
balance of investment 
and energy to move 
forward 
Figure 4 — The time and impact progression
19
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought history 
Both Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires form part of the 
headwaters of the Murray-Darling Basin and are situated west 
of the Great Dividing Range. While not as wet as locations east 
of the range, rainfall in these Shires is influenced by proximity to 
the range. 
Precipitation (rainfall) and root zone soil moisture are 
considered as indicators of drought according to the Bureau 
of Meteorology’s Australian Water Resources Assessment 
Landscape (AWRA-L) service10. Root zone soil moisture is a 
calculation of the upper and lower soil layers in the AWRA-L, 
which represent the water-holding capacity of the top one metre 
of soil. Root zone soil moisture and precipitation rates are each 
useful indicators of future drought potential. 
The projections below use the National Hydrological Projections 
dataset, a product of the (AWRA-L) service. There is year-to-
year variability in rainfall amounts across both Shires. Notably, 
Narrabri appears to have a higher soil moisture carrying capacity 
than Moree Plains, with larger changes This is consistent across 
the recorded timescale. 
10  Bureau of Meteorology 2021, The Bureau of Meteorology Australian Water Outlook Service Data Collection, National Computational Infrastructure, 
Available at: https://dx.doi.org/10.25914/6130680dc5a51
Figure 5 ­— Root-zone soil moisture
Figure 6 – Yearly total precipitation by LGA
Figure 7 – Yearly mean precipitation by LGA
20
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Some of the continent’s most impactful droughts have affected the Moree Plains and Narrabri region. 
Significant Australian drought periods identified by the Bureau of Meteorology11: 
	
→1890 to 1902 (Federation drought) 
	
→1914 to 1915 
	
→1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
	
→1965 to 1968 
	
→1982 to 1983 
	
→1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
	
→2017 to 2019 (Tinderbox drought)
In the Figure 8 below*, these droughts are considered against a present-day baseline of 2022 to 2022. 
*Note that the data does not go back to the Federation drought of 1890-1902 
Figure 8 — Australian drought history timeline
11 Bureau of Meteorology n.d, Previous droughts, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml
1895 – 1902
Federation 
Drought
1937 – 1945
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009
Millennium 
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019
Tinderbox
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
face-smile-hearts
What a relief! 
Comic relief buoys the community
Across the region, one of the most outstanding 
memories of drought endurance was the community’s 
appreciation of efforts to bring humour back to the 
region and allow community to shake off their troubles 
for a short period. 
These gatherings have compounding benefits: 
	
→allowing health and other practitioners spontaneous 
access to people in need for casual judgement-free social conversations; and 
	
→attendance provides much needed social contact generally and emotional support; and 
	
→providing temporary relief from physical and mental strain. 
Continuing programs that bring light relief to the community are a little thing that remains a high 
priority with compounding benefits.
21
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1914 to 1915
Nationally, this drought was short but notable, primarily due to the failure of the national wheat crop. This 
drought was driven by a strong El Nino, with drought conditions first becoming evident in 1913. This drought 
period was most severe in southern Australia. For the Moree Plains and Narrabri region, records indicate that 
the 1914-1915 period was still relatively wet for both Shires, but particularly Moree Plains. Both LGAs instead 
experienced decreased rainfall and soil moisture in the period from 1918 to 1920 (illustrated in the graph 
below). 
Figure 9 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1913 to 1922)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
22
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
This drought period was characterised by several breaks, but intense periods of dryness. For this region, 
reduced rainfall was evident from 1935 to 1940. A reprieve came in 1941 and 1942 but following that there was 
period of dryness from 1943 to 1946. Across the entirety of 1937 to 1945, there is a reduction in rainfall across 
much of the region. Changes in the soil moisture were less pronounced, except for the southern portion of 
Narrabri. 
Figure 10 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1934 to 1948)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
23
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1965 to 1968
The 1960s was generally dry across the continent. Drought developed in 1964 in northern New South Wales 
and extended across most of the country by the following year. This was evident across the region, with lower 
rainfall across both Shires and lower soil moisture in the south and southeastern extents. 
Figure 11 ­— Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1962 to 1971)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
24
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1982 to 1983
Despite only being a yearlong, this was one of Australia’s most severe droughts of the 20th century. A very 
strong El Nino led to these drought conditions. The region was geographically on the cusp, between drought-
unaffected south east Queensland and north eastern New South Wales, and the balance of south eastern 
Australia which was experiencing significant rainfall deficiencies. This split is demonstrated in the difference in 
rainfall and soil moisture between the LGAs (see right), where Narrabri is drier than Moree Plains. 
Figure 12 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1979 to 1986)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
25
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
The Millennium drought was a long-lasting period of dryness, most severe in densely populated areas of the 
south-east and south-west of the country. For the Moree Plains and Narrabri region, the beginning of this 
period is relatively unimpactful based on rainfall and soil moisture figures. It is not until 2002 when there is a 
significant dry spell. Then again in 2006 to 2007. 
Editor’s note: The maps to the right show significant rainfall and higher soil moisture over this period, despite 
it being identified as a drought. This discrepancy is likely due to the reference period used to produce 
these maps (2002 – 2022) and that there was significant dryness in the latter half of that period. This result 
is then compounded by the short-lasting periods of rainfall decline during this long drought period (1997 
– 2009). Therefore, leading to the appearance of increased rainfall and soil moisture compared to the 
reference period. 
Figure 13 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1994 to 2012)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
26
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

2017 to 2019 	
Following a wet 2016, dry conditions returned in 2017 across south and eastern Australia. This was a 
sustained multi-year period of dryness, unprecedented in recorded history12. A strong Indian Ocean Dipoles 
was a significant contributor to dry conditions the second half of 2019, leading into significant 2019/2020 
bushfire season. Both Shires were similarly affected during this period, with widespread low rainfall and low 
soil moisture.
Figure 14 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1994 to 2012)
12 Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Special Climate Statement 70 update—drought conditions in Australia and impact on water resources in the Murray–
Darling Basin, 13 August 2020, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs70.pdf
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
27
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Future climate scenarios 
The latest state-of-the-art climate science states that global surface temperature will continue to increase in 
the near term (2021 to 2040), irrespective of mitigation efforts due to cumulative CO2 emissions within the 
climate system. It is projected that the mean global surface temperature change will reach 1.5ºC in the first half 
of the 2030s. Every increment of global warming will intensify the risks of climate hazards, such as heatwaves 
and bushfire weather, and bring further climate instability. 
Projections of drought and associated climate conditions over Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires are assessed 
over two possible future climate scenarios using regional climate model ensembles. These climate scenarios 
are designed to explore a range of possible futures relating to greenhouse gas emissions, land use, and air 
pollution. 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 
4.5 and 8.5 are the two future scenarios presented. RCP 4.5 models mean global warming of between 2 to 
3ºC and is the most likely future scenario based on current climate commitments. RCP 8.5 is a mean global 
warming of 4ºC or more. This is considered a worst-case scenario. Despite RCP 8.5 not necessarily being 
likely, it is still important to consider ‘worst-case’ scenarios. It also provides an indicative view of possible 
futures where global climate tipping points are breached. 
While days above 35ºC and Forest Fire Danger Index (FFDI) are not direct indicators of drought, they describe 
weather conditions that often occur alongside drought or are exacerbated by drought. Below projections of 
these indices use an ensemble of CSIROs Electricity Sector Climate Information (ESCI) datasets (days above 
35ºC and days above an FFDI of 25).
Both Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires are projected to experience reductions in root zone soil moisture and 
annual rainfall under both RCP scenarios, compared with the model baseline. These reductions will be slightly 
larger in Narrabri than Moree Plains. Each will also experience an increase in days above 35ºC and days with 
an FFDI above 25. Under a 2050 RCP 8.5 scenario, each indicator almost doubles.
Despite an overall reduction in precipitation being projected, the south-west and west of Moree Plains and 
Narrabri respectively may see precipitation rates increase in the medium term (2050); and then decrease in 
Narrabri and south Moree Plains by 2070. Further, root zone soil moisture is projected to decrease annually, 
with reductions more severe in the Narrabri in 2070. Soil moisture decreases in Moree Plains may occur on a 
shorter timespan than those in Narrabri.
Moree Plains Shire
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
16.27 percent#
↓ 0.012 
mm/year^
↓ 0.026 
mm/year^
↓ 0.016 
mm/year^
↓ 0.027 
mm/year^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
583.15 mm
↓ 13.41 
mm/year
↓ 19.42 
mm/year
↓ 9.88 
mm/year
↓ 24.62 
mm/year
Days above 35ºC
47 days
75 days 
+28
89 days 
+42
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI 
above 25
52 days
67 days 
+15
77 days 
+25

# Mean water content as a percentage of capacity.
^ Change in relative soil water content of the 1976-2005 reference period’s relative soil water holding capacity.
28
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Narrabri Shire
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
22.94 percent#
↓ 0.011^ 
mm/year
↓ 0.031^ 
mm/year
↓ 0.026^ 
mm/year
↓ 0.032^ 
mm/year
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
627.93 mm
↓ 1.02 
mm/year
↓ 15.74 
mm/year
↓ 24.20 
mm/year
↓ 32.53 
mm/year
Days above 35
39 days
62 days 
+23
75 days 
+36
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI 
above 25
39 days
53 days 
+14
60 days 
+21

# Mean water content as a percentage of capacity.
^ Change in relative soil water content of the 1976-2005 reference period’s relative soil water holding capacity.
The following three figures show the precipitation across the region using the reference period map and then 
two timescales 2036-2065 and 2056 to 2085 and coloured from dark brown (lower) to dark green (higher) 
precipitation. 
1976—2005
2036—2065
2056 — 2085
100 - 200
Precipitation Reference Period (mm)
200 - 250
250 - 300
300 - 350
350 - 400
400 - 500
500 - 600
600 - 700 
700 - 800
800 - 1,000+
Image: Narrabri Farming
29
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The following three figures show the root zone soil moisture across the region using the reference period 
map showing zero and then two timescales 2036-2065 and 2056 to 2085 and coloured from dark brown 
(change below zero baseline) to dark green (change above the zero baseline) soil moisture levels. Root zone 
soil moisture is presented as a percentage of total capacity during the baseline reference period and as a 
change of millimetres per year for the climate-adjusted scenarios. During the reference period, Moree Plains 
had a root zone soil moisture capacity of 16 percent, while Narrabri was 23 percent. This moisture indicator 
is projected to decrease annually into the future, with the magnitude of decrease to grow to the end of the 
century. These soil moisture reductions will be more severe in Narrabri come 2070, compared to Moree 
Plains. However, soil moisture decreases in Moree Plains may occur on a shorter timespan (more rapidly) than 
those in Narrabri.
1976—2005
2036—2065
2056 — 2085
0
Root zone soil moisture reference period (%)
10
25
50
60
70
80
85
90
100
Climate-adjusted root zone soil mositure 
(mm/year)
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
-100+
Climate-adjusted precipitation (mm/year)
-50
-25
-10
-5
5
10
25
50
100+
Image: Silos in the Lowlands area
30
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

What does the climate data tell us?
Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires will continue to be susceptible to the impact of drought. Major historical 
droughts over the past 120 years have occurred in conjunction with low values of commonly used drought 
indicators including rainfall and soil moisture percentiles. Droughts can be protracted events spanning 
more than 10 years, such as the Millennial drought, or relatively shorter time periods, such as the recent 
Tinderbox drought.
Climate projections indicate an increase in drought risk by 2070 and beyond under both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 
scenarios due to changes in long term rainfall patterns and increasingly hot weather. Combined, these are 
the drivers of increased frequency and severity of drought conditions, especially towards the latter part of 
this century.
Our resilience to future drought impacts requires early planning and early intervention, which is the focus 
of this regional drought resilience plan. This will help us stand in good stead to deal with the impacts of a 
changing climate.
Image: Barwon River Park, Mungindi
money-bill-transfer
Our economy 
	
→Reliance upon the 
landscape will become 
more uncertain which will 
drive innovation in new 
economic pursuits 
	
→Shift to a wider variety 
of agriculturally based 
products across the region 
and within farms and 
seasons 
	
→Management models 
and practices that work 
in harmony with climate 
changes 
people-arrows
Our social networks 
	
→Change in employment 
types and required skills 
	
→Increased movement 
of people in and out 
of communities and 
employment changes 
	
→Climate may interrupt 
our social structures 
more often
seedling
Our environment  
	
→Maintaining local iconic 
environmental features that 
are water dependent may 
become harder
	
→Flora and fauna will feel 
the impacts and change 
habits and movements. 
This includes stock and 
particularly heat stress and 
access to water impacts 
	
→Seasonal changes may be 
less pronounced. 
In the future we can expect climate to influence:
31
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Our drought resilience 
13 Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 2023, ‘Drought Resilience’, Available online at https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/
climate/drought/resilience 
14 Department of Primary Industries and Regional NSW
15 ABARES, 2022, ‘Community Vulnerability and Resilience to Drought Index – Stage 1’, Available online at https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-
topics/climate/drought/resilience#community-vulnerability-and-resilience-to-drought-index-cvrdi_2 
Drought resilience can be considered against three 
macro indicators:
chart-mixed	
economic resilience
trees	
environmental resilience; and
people	
social resilience13
A series of drought resilience factors have been 
developed14 (using these indicators) which inform 
how we consider vulnerability and resilience, as 
well as being a useful framing for the consideration 
of actions to ensure action planning absorb, 
adapt or transform all areas that contribute to and 
underpin drought resilience. This framework was 
used extensively for the engagement to explain the 
concepts and purpose of the project. 
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics and Sciences’ (ABARES) Community 
Vulnerability and Resilience to Drought Index is 
the first stage of a comprehensive body of work 
to measure the potential impact of drought on 
communities. 
ABARES has prepared a national index that 
ranks remote, rural or regional agriculturally 
dependent communities (at the local government 
level) according to their potential to be adversely 
affected by drought. These indicators account for 
both agriculture industry exposure and sensitivity 
and community sensitivity, using ABS Census of 
Population and Housing 2021 data to represent the 
level of community dependence on agriculture15.
Figure 15 — Drought resilience factors
Source: DPIRD
Drought
resilience factors
S
o
ci
al
 a
n
d 
C
o
m
m
u
ni
ty
E
n
vi
r
o
n
m
e
n
ta
l
E
c
o
n
o
m
ic
Pe
rs
on
al 
we
llb
ei
ng
De
cis
io
n 
Ma
kin
g 
ca
pa
cit
y
Co
m
mu
nit
y 
we
llb
ei
ng
La
nd
 M
an
ag
em
en
t
Na
tu
ra
l p
ro
ce
ss
es
bu
ilt
 a
ss
et
s
In
fra
str
uc
tu
re
 a
nd
Co
nti
nu
ity
Em
plo
ym
en
t
Em
plo
ym
en
t
Di
ve
rsi
ty
32
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The index combines ABARES data for exposure and 
sensitivity (at the farm enterprise level), and data 
representing community sensitivity (agricultural 
dependence of a community), to initially produce 
an index of ‘Potential drought impact’ that can be 
applied consistently at LGA geography across 
Australia. The adaptive capacity concept is critical to 
understanding the likely resilience of a community 
to drought because it represents the positive 
resources and capacities available to a community 
to adapt or avoid loss and harm. The aim is to 
develop the index further by including indicators of 
potential adaptive capacity of communities to cope 
with and adapt to these circumstances.16 
The table shows that the region has relatively high 
farm and drought sensitivity. It is encouraging to 
see that sensitivity declines for the community and 
economic sensitivity. 
Measure 
Regional Average 
Farm Sensitivity 
0.66
Community Sensitivity 
0.30
Economic Diversity 
0.35
Potential Drought 
Impact 
0.65
16 Ibid
hand-holding-water
Whilst the region is susceptible to 
future drought impact, its diverse 
opportunities can improve capacity 
to manage and mitigate risks and 
reduce the overall susceptibility 
to drought impacts. The region’s 
levels of community connection and 
social capital, along with diversified 
economic baseline through 
emerging and committed major 
projects, offer substantial prospects 
for to build long-term stability and 
strengthen drought resilience.
Image: Grain silos, Bellata
33
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Trends and stressors 
There is a range of trends and stressors that may amplify or contribute to compounding drought impacts 
or provide challenges in resilience building, beyond the climate. This is an important consideration for our 
resilience to different conditions, circumstances and scenarios. It is also important to understand the trends 
which may originate or reside outside regional governance structures. Many of these trends and stressors 
were identified by the community as consequences of drought and downturn. Trends and stressors that may 
interface with drought resilience in Moree Plains and Narrabri include:
Resilience to drought is therefore not just about water and stretches beyond the farm gate in the systems at 
play which influence social, economic and environmental pressures and outcomes. Planning for our drought 
resilience requires a holistic and inclusive approach. This recognises and respects that different groups have 
different needs and aspirations when it comes to drought resilience, and that we all operate in different parts 
of the same systems.
family
Social & Community
	
→Centralisation of 
services to larger 
centre creating a 
spiralling effect of 
distance to access 
services and 
service availability
	
→Reduced spending in 
local centres, range 
of service available 
and proliferation of 
online spending
	
→Rising costs of living, 
especially fresh 
produce and fuel 
	
→Social isolation 
and the need for 
personal contact
farm
Economic
	
→Commodity prices, 
market volatility and 
interest rates
	
→Water pricing and 
water security
	
→Input costs: energy, 
labour, fertiliser, feed 
and fuel 
	
→Changing and evolving 
technologies which 
add efficiency but 
sometimes result in 
less labour need
	
→Rapid cycles between 
flood and drought
	
→Impacts of road quality 
on market access and 
supply chain reliability; 
and 
	
→Unreliable 
telecommunications 
services 
trees
Environmental
	
→Water management 
across water sources 
including quality and 
water levels from the 
Great Artesian Basin, 
access arrangements 
and sediment control 
for the Murray Darling 
Basin. 
	
→Flow on health effects 
from dust cause 
increased respiratory 
issues for people and 
environmental issues 
with sediment run off.
	
→Increasing pest 
impacts, especially 
plant-based from 
imported feed
	
→Animal welfare through 
a changing climate 
34
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

face-smile-hearts
Community quality of life needs provided by 
locals for locals 
The people of Moree Plains and Narrabri are not afraid to step up and ensure their 
communities are provided with the little things that make a big difference 
	
→to attracting and retaining staff who are looking for the little things that enhance quality of life
	
→providing opportunities to congregate and socialise
	
→providing essential services - which the locals have confirmed - good coffee is essential to 
community function! 
	
→supporting and maintaining local economy and jobs.
Commitment to the region through investment in local business simply for the benefit of locals is 
exemplified in 
	
→Flock Café Mungindi, the enterprise of a local group of women
	
→The Pallamallawa Hotel, or the ‘Pally Pub’ a joint venture by five local families, transformed into 
an elegant, warm and welcoming venue; and 
	
→The Vicarage at Northstar, was inspired locals who acted on a story about a retaining a local 
doctor who missed the opportunity to have good coffee in the small town. 
Image: Pallamallawa Hotel
35
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Regional major projects 
Moree and Narrabri Shires are fortunate to have the 
benefit of a number of regional major projects which 
can provide long term economic stability through sector 
diversification and also augment existing industry through 
value add and attraction of adjacent and complementary 
economic activities. 17 18 19 20 21
17  nbn-fixed-wireless#toc-map-of-communities-included
18  https://inlandrail.artc.com.au/what-is-inland-rail/
19  Santos_Narrabri_Gas_Project_factsheet_v4.pdf
20 Moree SAP Delivery Plan 
21  Pers comm. Dept of Planning, NSW 
The Inland Rail project is aimed at meeting Australia’s 
growing freight tasks through a continuous route from 
Melbourne to Brisbane. The route passes through 
both Narrabri and Moree. Once complete the Inland 
rail will enhance national supply chain capabilities 
and link business to markets and create opportunities 
for regions. 
Santos’ Narrabri Gas Project, located in the Pilliga 
area would produce natural gas for domestic use via 
the existing nearby pipeline system 
The NSW Government and NBN Co, agreement will 
see enhanced connectivity through fixed wireless 
internet for Mungindi, Moree, Wee Waa, Merah North 
and Narrabri by the end of 2025
The Moree Special Activation Precinct will support 
diversification of Moree’s agricultural economy 
by building on its strong Connection to Country 
and sustainable gali-water endowments. It will 
leverage transport connections, renewable energy, 
innovation and agricultural expertise for horticulture 
and diversified agricultural production and attract 
investment to boost regional economy.
The Narrabri Place Strategy seeks to support 
residential development on flood-free land, south 
of the Narrabri township to accommodate housing 
for existing and future residents. It will support and 
attract new investment including light industries, 
warehouses and offices. The Place Strategy supports 
Council’s investment in the Inland Port Precinct.
Resilience into the future 
Image: https://Inlandrail.artc.com
36
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

A regional strength in education 
diploma
A NEW ERA for agricultural research has germinated 
in Narrabri with the opening in 2023 of the 
$15.2-million International Centre of Crop and 
Digital Agriculture. Featuring digital, genetic, 
agronomy and soil laboratories, plus teaching and 
industry-briefing spaces, the centre was delivered 
by the NSW Government in partnership with the 
University of Sydney, Australian Grain Technologies, 
the Grains Research and Development Corporation, 
and the NSW Wheat Research Foundation. This 
world-class facility enhances collaboration between 
researchers and growers to progress our knowledge 
and practical implementation of robotic farming and 
data-driven agriculture. The centre is an enticement 
for postgraduate students, national and international 
researchers and industry leaders to come together for 
the purpose of improving crop performance. 22
flask
The Australian Cotton Research Institute (ACRI) is 
located between Narrabri and Wee Waa in NSW’s 
main cotton production areas. Research activities at 
the ACRI have played a key role in the development 
of cotton. Scientists at ACRI are assisting the 
cotton industry to develop a sustainable future 
based on productivity and best practice natural 
resource, disease and pest management. The site is 
277 hectares with 183 irrigated hectares. It includes 
glasshouses, laboratories, cotton gin, controlled 
environment growth rooms, insectaries, workshops 
and conference rooms. 23
22 https://www.graincentral.com/news/international-centre-of-crop-and-digital-ag-opens-at-narrabri/
23 https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/dpi/about-us/research-and-development/centres/narrabri-australian-cotton-research-institute-acri
24 https://www.tafensw.edu.au/locations/new-england/moree
25 https://www.sydney.edu.au/science/our-research/research-centres/plant-breeding-institute.html
school-flag
The Moree training organisations offers practical 
training programs that provide skills and qualifications 
needed to enter the local workforce. Students learn 
in a training environment that closely mimics real 
workplaces with the latest technology and industry-
standard equipment. This ensures graduates get 
the skills and knowledge they need to thrive in their 
chosen careers.
Outside the classroom, TAFE Moree has a strong 
connection with the region’s industries. It provides 
courses in finance, contracting, languages and 
health to name a few. The campus is committed to 
the educational interests of Aboriginal students and 
recognises the importance of identity and culture. 
Whether students are looking to start a new career or 
enhance existing professional skills, TAFE Moree is 
committed to helping them achieve their goals.24
bag-seedling
The University of Sydney Plant Breeding 
Institute (PBI) is committed to improving crop and 
horticultural species using the best that technology 
has to offer. The (PBI) was established in 1973 to 
ensure a continuing University commitment to crop 
breeding and research. The grains and horticultural 
industries require a continuum of new cultivars that 
maximize profitability and sustainability in a dynamic 
production and market environment. This requires a 
continuous flow of new genetic materials, knowledge, 
technologies and trained people; the core business of 
the PBI. Our research largely focuses on the genetic 
improvement of cereal, legume and horticultural 
crops, as well as cross-cutting themes on food quality, 
farming systems and digital agriculture in recognition 
of the changing nature of Australian agriculture.25
wifi
The University of New England (UNE) maintains a 
Regional Study Centres in both Moree and Narrabri. 
Students can access resources, access student 
devices and printing facilities, Edu roam Wi-Fi and 
access to the University network. The centres 
provide device workstations, direct phone link to UNE 
academic and professional staff and access to free 
study space.
users
The North West Country University Centre (CUC) 
operates across two sites located in Moree and 
Narrabri. The CUC provide student support and 
dedicated study spaces for students in regional and 
rural locations. 
Each Centre is locally governed and driven by 
its community through an independent Board of 
Directors. The network approach of the model means 
that Centres and students are collectively represented 
by an aggregated body that assists in overcoming 
the inevitable thin numbers in regional education. 
Dedicated learning and study spaces in Narrabri and 
Moree are designed for regional people. Students 
have free access to high-speed internet, modern 
technology, and general academic support.
Image: New Laboratory at the CSIRO Cotton Research Centre 
Image courtesy of CSIRO Cotton Research Centre 
Image: UNSW Facilities 2023. 
Image courtesy of UNSW
37
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought action plan 
The drought action plan for Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires incorporates priorities for 
drought resilience across the five pathways for action which include the three systems 
explored with the community: social, economic, and environmental. The action plan 
provides: 
	
→a priority action theme
	
→details of specific actions against the theme
	
→anticipated stakeholders
	
→the alignment of the action to an implementation pathway; and 
	
→potential funding options. 
Each of the actions provide discernible and pragmatic steps that are drawn from local circumstances, existing 
initiatives and local knowledge insights. The action plan also provides a basis for anticipating, acting and 
advocating for drought resilience needs. 
Many of the actions included were identified directly by community members as part of the engagement and 
consultation process to inform this plan, while others are a synthesis of gathered information. Timeframes are 
indicative and are dependent upon opportunities and timing for funding and other variables. 
A program logic approach was used to match the drought resilience needs illuminated by the consultation 
and engagement feedback with pragmatic actions, and the degree to which the actions contribute to our 
movement along the resilience ‘theory of change’ journey. This is about whether the actions ‘absorb, adapt or 
transform’ how we collectively prepare for and grow our resilience to drought effects. This scale also helps us 
to understand the level of effort and the timeframes associated with each action.
Immediate
Opportunity
Absorb
Adapt
Transform
1—2
Years
2—5
years
Figure 16 — Resilience theory of change 
38
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Pathways for change 
This drought action plan establishes a framework to guide focus and efforts in response to community need, 
highlighted by community engagement. Through the engagement, approaches to greater resilience stemming 
from existing community strengths will enable the region to absorb, adapt or transform in the face of drought. 
The action plan spans five strategic pathways or themes, reflecting the three core elements of drought. These 
strategic pathways are:
chair-office	
Economic Opportunity 
church	
Community Strength
house-tree	
Environmental Health 
conveyor-belt-boxes	
Supply Chain Certainty; and 
share-nodes	
Shared commitment  
These pathways can be approached at different scales, with or by different actors and through a range of 
mechanisms over time from transformative resilience actions at a large scale to proactive resilience actions by 
individuals and the more formal or common pathways. 
Transformative Resilience
Large scale shifts requiring 
longer term commitment  for 
considerable regional beneﬁt
Resilience Tools 
Together these draw together the actors, time frames, scales and 
structure needed for greater resilience over time.  
Resilience Pathways
The purposeful action plan 
across the three drought 
elements: social, economic and 
environment  that provides 
common direction for regional 
resilience.   
Proactive Resilience
Small scale actions requiring personal, individual, 
location or business scale change for considerable 
small scale beneﬁts which can collectively create  
regional resilience improvements. 



Figure 17 — Resilience Pathways
39
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Regional drought resilience plan 
– Top 5 priority actions
Regional First Nations voice to drive 
connection between landscape and 
Country  (action SC3.1)
Understanding connection to country is vital 
in a region that generates its prosperity and 
lifestyle from the landscape. Engaging more 
thoroughly with the Kamileroi people across 
the region is imperative to understand how the 
actions identified by the broader community are 
fit for purpose for the Aboriginal community and 
how delivery can be improved through cultural 
awareness. 
Actions must be scoped to ensure that the region 
learns from First Nations experiences, plans for 
actions that are culturally suitable and recognises 
particular needs of the local and regional 
Aboriginal community. 
Detailed and comprehensive consultation is 
planned through the existing reconciliation 
networks and local land councils to embed First 
Nations voice in the Regional Drought Resilience 
Plan. 
Regional drought resilience officers to 
drive actions  (action SC1.1)
The Future Drought Fund program provides 
initial seed funding for implementation of priority 
actions. The region has identified the need for 
Resilience Officers to lead and drive change. 
The primary responsibilities of a resilience officer 
include; 
	
→socialise drought resilience concepts further 
with community and promote resilience 
actions at a variety of scales
	
→continue the engagement program with 
stakeholders, agencies and First Nations, 
creating partnerships and strengthening 
regional ties 
	
→understand funding opportunities
	
→commence scoping actions over medium term 
Proactively seek opportunities to strengthen 
resilience across the region and community 
through participation in on contributing to 
projects and programs with common resilience 
objectives. The structure of the role can be 
determined by the regional governance model. 
Securing our supply chain
(action SCC1.1 and 1.3)
Promote existing road private-public-partnership 
program and policies for road reconstruction 
and maintenance; and 
Explore extension of policy for joint venture road 
upgrades across the region. 
Business resilience planning
(action E2.2) 
Promote financial planning for local small 
business through funding for a third party 
delivered program
Regional education collaboration
(action E4.1)
Assemble stakeholders from educational facilities 
and research facilities and develop some local 
strategic actions to: 
	
→pinpoint regional education opportunities
	
→expand offerings by existing facilities
	
→identify upskilling and partnership 
arrangements during drought (e.g. JobKeeper)
	
→attract and maintain skilled researchers, 
complementary research avenues, workers 
and associated professionals 
1
2
3
5
4
40
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 1 
– Economic 
opportunity 
The region’s economic resilience 
to drought underpins almost 
all other activity. Businesses 
are inextricably linked through 
the landscape. Farming itself is 
varied in business model from 
families, generational holdings 
and corporate investors. In all 
cases operations are viewed and 
referred to as businesses. 
Community consultation has 
identified that financial literacy 
and business planning for 
business is critical to being 
able to anticipate changing 
circumstances driven by drought, 
and the ability to act to avoid or 
prevent drought impacts.  
The region boasts many 
economic development 
opportunities which over time, 
will offer varied income and 
productivity opportunities. Some 
of these are truly transformative 
and offer long term prospects for 
change, growth and stability. 
As an agriculturally based 
economy, there is benefit 
in advancing:
	
→Leveraging existing tourism 
assets as a major economic 
pillar 
	
→Building financial strength of 
all businesses regardless of 
sector or scale 
	
→Diversifying the regional 
economy 
	
→Advancing the region as an 
education hub; and
	
→Supporting local business for 
local prosperity.
PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
E1
Leveraging 
existing tourism 
assets as a major 
economic pillar  
E1.1	
Develop a calendar of events from existing iconic experiences and extended 
itineraries that allow travellers to stay in the region for longer. Consider connecting 
the itinerary, to events just outside the region. 
E1.2	
Develop a joint tourism strategy and involve local business, attractions and 
events. Identify facilities for upgrade and renewal and opportunities for ongoing 
improvement. 
E1.3	
Maintain the core local services to townships: parks and gardens, services and 
ensure stability and welcoming feel for visitors and locals
E1.4	
Investment in local retail and product or services gaps to cater for and capture 
incoming tourism and promote longer stays
	
→Narrabri 
Region Visitor 
Information Centre
	
→Moree Tourism  
	
→Broader regional 
tourism stakeholders 
and event co-
ordinators 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Destination NSW 
Country and Outback
Absorb — diversification 
of economic base 
through increased visitor 
numbers and overnight 
stays 
Adapt — 
local business offerings 
to ensure business 
remains local
	
→Tourism external 
funding and grant 
programs; and 
	
→Existing
governance
structures
E2 
Building financial 
strength of all 
businesses 
regardless of sector 
or scale
E2.1	
Encourage retailers to expand their range to provide complementary goods lines 
that community is travelling away for or obtaining online such as basic apparel and 
children’s wear. 
E2.2	
Promote financial planning for local small business through funding for a third 
party delivered program
E2.3.1	 (Consider with Priority E4) Advocate for the design a ‘JobKeeper’ style program to 
retain skilled workers in the region through: 
	
→wages subsidies for businesses with direct impact who are not landowners
	
→programs that enable staff to stay and supports continued study for topics such 
as: welding, hazardous chemicals, forklifts, etc. delivered by local educators
	
→programs that enable staff to be remunerated for assisting at a research facility 
program; or 
	
→programs that enable staff to stay and supports tertiary upskilling through 
UNE or Country University Centres for local business, industry or emerging 
industry related course such as Agri-business, project management or business 
management  
E2.4	
Advocate for support mechanisms for businesses directly impacted by agricultural 
downturn (who are not landowners) through drought such as contractors and 
farm staff.
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Growers’ associations 
or relevant employers 
and landowners 
Absorb using priority 
actions to amend 
business models now 
in readiness for the 
next event
Adapt through planning 
for changed economic 
circumstances 
Transform through 
advocacy to change 
approaches during a 
drought 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs
41
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
E3 
Diversifying the 
regional economy 
E3.1	
Explore opportunities for stabilised income through renewable energy projects 
and carbon farming
E3.2	
Continue to maintain relationships with resource industry companies operating or 
investing in the region
E3.3	
Develop an investment prospectus for the Moree Plains SAP and Narrabri Place 
Strategy to attract new middle sized employers, including exploring preliminary 
feasibility or benefits of new industries to value add existing or generate new 
industries and identifies their operational needs.
E3.4	
Continue to work with stakeholders for delivery of the Moree Special Activation 
Precinct and the Narrabri Place Strategy 
	
→Landowners 
and associated 
stakeholders 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Relevant government 
agencies 
	
→Local 
resource industries
Adapt through 
planning for changed 
economic circumstances
Transform the long-
term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
	
→Private capital 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Special projects and 
infrastructure funding
E4 
Advancing the 
region as an 
education hub 
E4.1	
(see also priority E2) Assemble stakeholders from educational facilities and 
research facilities and develop some local strategic actions to: 
	
→pinpoint regional education opportunities
	
→expand offerings by existing facilities
	
→identify upskilling and partnership arrangements during drought 
(e.g. JobKeeper)
	
→attract and maintain skilled researchers, complementary research avenues, 
workers and associated professionals 
E4.2	
Promote employment of local apprenticeships (including advocating to the 
resources industry to continue their existing programs) to implement and continue 
school based traineeships and programs
E4.3	
Support and promote training opportunities with the University of New England 
‘bite courses’ in agribusiness and agricultural science. These offer practical 
accreditations for the field
E4.4	
Support and promote opportunities at local TAFE centres within the Region
	
→Locally represented 
universities, 
researchers, 
institutes, research 
facilities, 
	
→TAFE or Registered 
Training 
Organisations, 
higher education 
professionals and 
stakeholders 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Relevant 
government agencies
Adapt trough leveraging 
existing resources for 
different outcomes 
Transform the long-
term economic stability 
through catalyst projects 
and advocating for 
different approaches to 
dealing with drought
	
→Stakeholder 
investment 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs 
diamond-turn-right
Pathway 1 
– Economic 
opportunity 
(continued)
42
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
E5 
Supporting local 
business for local 
prosperity 
E5.1	
Maintain successful buy local programs and initiatives such as: 
	
→‘Why leave town’ 
	
→Promotional programs such as extra-long lunches for stably employed staff 
upon receipt of a local purchase >$50
	
→‘Go without for the drought’ program where non-drought affected cities donate 
a coffee ($5) which is spent in local outlets; and 
	
→Vouchers useable only at local outlets. 
E5.2	
Maintain or extend the shop front improvement programs such as the ‘Renew 
Moree’ and the Narrabri Street Frontage Activation Program and extend to other 
townships 
E5.3	
Explore opportunities for public art or other point of interest projects in town 
centres 
E5.4	
Explore opportunities to support businesses through third party business 
resilience and continuity planning training
	
→Local business 
owners and 
organisations 
	
→Chambers of 
commerce or trading 
associations 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
Absorb immediate 
shocks through locally 
run successful projects
Adapt through continual 
improvement and 
reshaping local assets
	
→Stakeholder 
investment 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs 
	
→Maintain business as 
usual approaches 
diamond-turn-right
Pathway 1 
– Economic 
opportunity 
(continued)
43
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 2 – 
Community strength
A key drought resilience 
opportunity is a deliberate 
program of public, local and 
community events of all types 
and scales. These events can 
be led by a myriad of community 
groups, businesses and local 
sporting or social organisations to 
maintain the existing community 
strength. Funding for community 
infrastructure and events of all 
scales and types, for different 
demographic cohorts and 
communities across the region 
bonds the community during 
drought. 
This was one of the clearest 
priorities identified through the 
plan engagement process by 
the Moree Plains and Narrabri 
communities, was community 
connection, participation and 
identity are already strong 
resilience attributes of the region 
that need to be maintained 
and fostered.
Existing funding tends to be ad 
hoc and opportunistic in nature, 
but pre-planning for opportunities 
to utilise funding for this purpose 
is likely to meet a clear need in 
times when connection is even 
more valuable. These events 
have compounding benefits 
of combatting social isolation, 
providing access opportunities 
to financial, mental and physical 
health counselling or to simply 
have a yarn to the neighbour. 
PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
C1 
Supporting strong 
social cohesion
C1.1	
Maintain a schedule of free community events bringing light relief and cultural 
activities to small and remote locations during drought times
C1.2	
Support to upgrade community-owned centres and audit government owned 
facilities to identify upgrades to continue delivering local events such as disability 
access, air-conditioning, landscaping and the like. 
C1.3	
Empower community groups for continuous improvement of equipment, internal fit 
out, building painting or similar through ensuring all groups 
	
→understand and can access the Community Consultation Committee (CCC) 
funding; and
	
→understand or have access to grant writing and preparation assistance 
C1.4	
Continue seeding celebrity and star power during drought times for emotional and 
stress relief for locals 
C1.5	
Consider smaller scale township-based plans (where townships are proactive) 
to pinpoint hyper-local needs such as particular facilities upgrades or economic 
opportunities or complementary infrastructure priorities
	
→Broader regional 
tourism stakeholders 
and event co-
ordinators 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Local community 
groups, associations 
and sporting clubs 
Absorb through 
recognition of existing 
strengths  
Adapt through targeted 
strengthening of 
existing networks
	
→Tourism external 
funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding 
programs 
	
→Community (CCC) 
funding programs; 
and 
	
→Existing
governance 
structures
C2 
Attracting and 
retaining skills and 
people 
C2.1	
Promote the ‘Welcome to town” programs with a one on one tour by a volunteer, 
(for example The Australian Greeters Association and Welcoming Cities Network) 
to provide ongoing personal support, and multicultural activities
C2.2	 Proactively work with and leverage the needs of the research facilities and local 
employers to target and attract people and services to the region 
C2.3	
Consider development of a welcome and information brochure such as ‘Knowing 
the Namoi’ or ‘Paradise on the Plains’ that provides newcomers with friendly 
advice and information about living in the region. 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Institutes, businesses, 
growers’ associations 
or relevant employers 
and landowners 
Absorb through 
fortification of existing 
strengths 
Adapt existing strengths 
for alternate purposes 
and reposition. 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs
	
→Merge into business 
as usual projects 
C3 
Maintaining services 
and retail options 
locally 
C3.1 	
Support local venues and opportunities for a chat and a cuppa through 
maintaining physical services in very small locations such as post offices and cafes 
C3.2 	 Pilot a community facility design for multi-purpose, flexible building to be used as 
a hall, retail, business link services, childcare or as the community may require in 
townships in need of local infrastructure
C3.3 	 Advocate for consistent funding and certainty for baseline services provided by 
others to the region especially health
	
→Community group 
and sporting 
associations 
	
→Land and 
business owners 
and associated 
stakeholders 
	
→Relevant government 
agencies Moree 
Plains and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
Adapt existing strengths 
for alternate purposes 
and reposition
Transform through 
commitment of others to 
foundational elements 
	
→Private capital 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Special projects and 
infrastructure funding
44
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 2 – 
Community strength
(continued)
This pathway seeks to focus on 
the strength of Moree Plains and 
Narrabri communities, building on 
existing tangible and non-tangible 
assets as a routine activity to 
support social and community 
fabric and morale during drought 
times through:
	
→Supporting strong 
social cohesion
	
→Attracting and retaining skills 
and people
	
→Maintaining services and retail 
options locally
	
→Maintaining pride in 
our communities
PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
C4 
Maintaining pride in 
our communities 
C4.1 	
Maintaining heritage and walking trails
C4.2 	 Engage with community to assist with beautification programs in slow times. For 
example, local councils provide specifications and funding opportunities, and 
community provides labour for tree planting or landscape rehabilitation works. 
C4.3 	 Develop a program of community lead project options as CCC candidates
C4.4 	 Bolster confidence through programs such as messages from the city “Thank a 
farmer” programs during drought
C4.5 	 Explore opportunities for communities that would like a community garden
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Chambers 
of commerce
	
→Community 
groups and 
sporting associations
	
→Land and 
business owners 
and associated 
stakeholders 
Absorb through 
recognition of existing 
strengths 
Adapt existing strengths 
for alternate purposes 
and reposition
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs 
	
→Merge into business 
as usual 
Community strength and 
tourism attractors through 
the events calendar. 
The region is renowned for: 
Moree on a Plate Food Festival 
NarraBright Festival
Festival of Rugby: Reds 
vs Waratahs
Kev’s Big Breakfast 
Boggabri Drover’s Campfire
CREATE Festival 
Bellata Harvest Under the Stars 
Local markets at Moree, Narrabri 
and Pallamallawa
Golden Triangle Racing Carnival: 
Moree, Mallawa and Talmoi 
Narrabri and Moree Local Markets 
Nosh on the Namoi 
Light’n  Moree Spring Street 
Festival 
Moree, Narrabri and 
Mungindi Shows
45
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 3 – 
Environmental 
health
The health of the landscape 
supports our economic and 
community wellbeing. Retaining 
soil moisture in the landscape, 
and topsoil retention are clear 
drought impact reduction pursuits, 
helping to mitigate erosion, 
protect soil health and prevent 
other events like dust storms. 
Pest and weed management 
offer further opportunities to stem 
landscape degradation. 
Livestock health and animal 
welfare offers particular 
challenges in drought which can 
extend to farmer emotional stress 
where animal health cannot be 
saved. Hand feeding brings with 
pest species not seen in the 
region before. 
Local Land Services, the South 
West Queensland and Northern 
NSW Drought Hub and the local 
research institutes offer significant 
technical assistance and 
innovation in dealing with these 
land, livestock and landscape 
issues. Land and stock route 
management, and biosecurity is 
everyone’s business. 
The region is exposed to 
potentially significant impacts 
depending on how water is used 
and managed. Moree Plains and 
Narrabri Shires are particularly 
concerned about the health 
of the Great Artesian Basin. 
For improved environmental 
connectivity, there is benefit 
in advancing:
	
→Supporting land management 
	
→Maintaining and enhancing 
biosecurity; and 
	
→Increasing water security
PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
EH1 
Supporting land 
management 
EH1.1	 Maintain and continue the Rural Service Support Network (RSSN) of all agencies 
and service providers to strengthen ties and understanding of challenges and 
opportunities 
EH1.2	 Explore regenerative agriculture in land management education programs and 
pilot studies 
EH1.3 	 Explore opportunities for programs to sustain flood corridors, and combat 
soil erosion
	
→Landowners, land
management 
groups
	
→Local Land Services
	
→SWQNNSW Drought 
Hub 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
Absorb through 
bolstering existing 
programs across 
multi purposes
Adapt programs to 
enhance preparedness 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs
	
→Merge into business 
as usual projects
EH2 
Maintaining 
and enhancing 
biosecurity 
EH2.1 	 Explore opportunities for collaborative groups of farmers to engage in pest control 
and environmental programs during drought 
EH2.2 	Ensure funding is available or programs during the slow times
EH2.3 	Ensure rodent control is part of the recovery solution
	
→Landowners, land
management 
groups
	
→Local Land services 
	
→SWQNNSW Drought 
Hub  
Absorb through 
utilisation of existing 
strengths and networks  
Adapt programs to 
ensure they contribute or 
are available at the right 
time in the cycle
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs
	
→Merge into business 
as usual projects 
EH3
Increasing water 
security  
EH3.1 	 Consider a local rainwater tank program to promote better quality residential 
water supply
EH3.2 	Ensure funding opportunities for continued improvement in town water quality and 
quantity and urban supply are taken up  
EH3.3 	Support and partner with entities responsible for the , Murray Darling Basin, the 
Lower Gwydir Groundwater Sources and the Namoi Alluvial Groundwater Sources
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
Adapt to maintain 
community within 
constraints 
Transform the long-
term economic stability 
through catalyst projects
	
→Private capital 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Special projects and
infrastructure
funding
46
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 4 – 
Supply chain 
certainty
Roads are the lifeblood of rural 
and remote communities. They 
are the physical connection to 
friends, family, social interaction, 
household necessities, education, 
employment and regional access 
to markets and supply chains.  
Heavy vehicle access and the 
ability to transport agricultural 
products in varied weather 
circumstances is fundamental to 
the wellbeing of the region. The 
agriculturally productive land of 
the Moree Plains and Narrabri 
region are capital intensive, 
big business, that needs fit for 
purpose infrastructure to ensure 
valuable stock, seed and cotton 
can get onto freight routes.  
PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
SCC1 
Promoting roads as 
an economic enabler 
SCC1.1	
Promote existing road private-public-partnership program and policies for road 
reconstruction and maintenance 
SCC1.2	
Ensure continuous funding is sought to maintain local roads for expected 
supply chain activity
SCC1.3	
Explore extension of policy for joint venture road upgrades across the region
SCC1.4 	 Identify pinch points in the road network for condition and resilience and 
advocate for road upgrades which are integral to supply chain security
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Landowners 
Adapt programs and 
approaches for common 
good outcomes 
Transform to ensure 
resources and recovery 
can contribute 
as intended
	
→Private capital 
	
→External funding and 
grant programs
	
→Special projects and
infrastructure
funding
	
→Merge into business 
as usual 
47
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

diamond-turn-right
Pathway 5 — 
Shared commitment 
Communication and commitment 
to regional drought impacts 
flows in all directions, from 
community upwards and from 
higher levels of government 
downwards. Drought does not 
follow hierarchies, borders or 
administrative lines. Drought 
has some common solutions 
at regional scale (the drought 
scale) as well as at local scales. 
For the most resourceful use of 
funds, capacity and opportunity, 
resources can be pooled, and 
collaborative solutions found for 
greater benefit. Communications 
channels should be kept open 
and active relationships fostered 
at all levels. 
PRIORITY 
ACTION AREA 
SPECIFIC ACTION 
STAKEHOLDERS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY (TIMING)
FUNDING OPTIONS 
SC1 
Maintain 
collaborative and 
reciprocal networks 
SC1.1	
Engage regional drought resilience officer (s) to 
	
→drive and embed resilience knowledge, socialise drought resilience concepts
	
→continue the engagement program with stakeholders, agencies and 
First Nations
	
→understand funding opportunities
	
→commence scoping actions over medium term 
	
→proactively seek opportunities to strengthen resilience across 
SC1.2	
Participate in the Rural Service Support Network (RSSN) of all agencies and 
service providers to strengthen ties and understanding of challenges and 
opportunities 
SC1.3	
Regenerate regional collaborative opportunities at local and regional 
governance levels in all directions
	
→Moree Plains and 
Narrabri Regional 
Drought Resilience 
Plan stakeholder 
group 
Absorb drought 
resilience actions into 
BAU and on going 
learning and exchange 
Adapt existing actions 
to incorporate drought 
resilience as BAU
	
→Merge into business 
as usual projects
SC2 
Improve 
communications and 
information access 
SC2.1	
Maintain personal contact between communities and local government elected 
members and representatives
SC2.2	
Reinvigorate council committees under s335 of the Local Government Act for 
communication and transparency purposes
SC2.3	
Simplify the process of accessing assistance during drought - open a ‘drought 
hub’ that is manned with staff to assist with forms and program availability
SC2.4	
Advocate for programs to support rural and remote communities to maintain 
BAU to ensure assistance is not delivered too late 
SC2.5 	
Facilitate opportunities for 3, 6, and 12 month on-farm seasonal conditions 
and forecasts to be conveyed to local government, business, and other 
stakeholders to understand business outlooks. This may occur through the 
RSSN, Chambers of Commerce and Business eNewsletters 
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
	
→Relevant drought 
assistance agencies 
	
→Chambers 
of Commerce
Absorb through common 
understanding  
Adapt through 
transparency 
Transform through 
advocacy for different 
approaches 
	
→Drought funding and 
grants programs
	
→Merge into business 
as usual projects 
SC3 
Undertake ongoing 
collaboration with 
the Kamilaroi People 
SC3.1	
Undertake detailed and comprehensive consultation through the existing 
reconciliation networks and Local Land Councils to embed First Nations voice in 
drought actions future iterations of the Regional Drought Resilience Plan. 
	
→Local Land Councils 
	
→All Stakeholders
	
→Moree Plains 
and Narrabri 
Shire Councils
Absorb through common 
understanding 
Adapt through ongoing 
learning and exchange
	
→Merge into business 
as usual projects
	
→Embed in RDRP
governance
processes
48
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Implementation 
The Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan relies on collaborative 
implementation approaches involving a range 
of stakeholders. The action plan for drought 
resilience spans the prevention, preparedness, 
response and recovery (PPRR) cycle, providing the 
framework to embed implementation across the 
different functions of local government, as well as 
guide other stakeholders (including other levels 
of government, community and industry groups, 
service providers, not-for-profits, landowners, and 
local communities) with actions that can make a 
difference. This includes short, medium and long 
term opportunities. 
Resilience Pathways 
Implementation 
The purpose of this action plan is to inform future 
drought funding and ongoing preparedness across 
the region. Stakeholders work together regionally 
to build drought resilience in the economy, 
environment and our communities, proactively and 
pragmatically. 
The action plan has been drawn together through 
community expression, existing initiatives and 
background data. In developing this action plan, it is 
noted that: 
	
→actions are purposefully listed with multiple 
stakeholders, and unspecified timeframes 
or funding to acknowledge that delivery is 
dependent on a range of variables
	
→implementation will occur through participation 
of all stakeholders over time as priorities, 
resources and funding arise
	
→as a regional plan, the actions are collective and 
collaborative 
	
→roles and responsibilities are flexible, including 
for local government role: the plan is owned 
by the region, and any stakeholder can start an 
action within their capacity; and   
	
→some actions are indeed underway by various 
stakeholders, the purpose of maintaining them 
in the action plan, is that the community has 
advised that the action is integral to drought 
resilience. 
Learnings from the plan development  for future 
iterations are provided in Appendix A. 
DESCRIPTION 
An advocate actively supports a position, action 
or policy. The task is outside the advocate’s 
jurisdiction, capacity or resourcing and 
advocacy is required to engage with those 
parties with capacity to deliver. For example, 
telecommunications advocacy.  
A partner joins others in a common cause 
or action where roles and responsibilities 
are shared across areas of expertise. Each 
partner brings an element to the action for 
joint delivery. For example, region-wide 
strategic initiatives.
A lead is in control of an action. The action 
may still involve partners or other roles, but 
the action is reliant upon a lead party due to 
their technical or other expertise. For example, 
Health or counselling matters. 
An owner is the only party that can undertake 
or permit the action. For example, local 
government as public asset owners. 
A supporter is united with others in the need 
or benefits of the action but potentially does 
not have a major role. The action is led or 
owned by others. For example, a supporter may 
provide assistance in kind, technical advice or 
donations to action leaders. 
A stakeholder is anyone who has an interest 
in the project, program or action. Stakeholders 
will have varying degrees of involvement from 
owner to advocate and all points between.
A deliverer is responsible for implementation 
and outcomes of an action or funded program. 
For example, community agency delivering 
social aid programs. 
A funder provides the funding arrangements. 
The party is not involved with scoping, 
executing or delivering the program but may 
require some outcome reporting or evidence. 
For example, the government grant funding for 
a pest control program delivered by others. 
49
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Governance structure
Implementation of the regional drought resilience 
plan is to be driven by a collaborative and multi-
disciplined drought resilience project control group 
(PCG). Membership will be deliberately broad to 
provide an integrated and coordinated approach to 
drought resilience efforts. 
The PCG will operate using a status system tied 
to the PPRR framework to transition priorities in 
lockstep with the transition of drought cycles. The 
PPRR status system is to be triggered by drought 
indicators. The NSW Government’s ‘Drought 
Signals’, BoM, Farming Forecaster or other tools 
or indicators should be selected by the PCG for 
this purpose, in consultation with the Department 
of Primary Industries and Regional NSW. This will 
be supplemented by local knowledge described in 
action SC2.5. 
This will enable the PCG to adopt agile approaches 
and change priorities as needed depending 
on changing circumstances. For example, 
when drought indicators suggest a dry period 
has commenced, the status of actions to be 
implemented will move from ‘preparedness’ to 
‘prevention’ and likewise when drought conditions 
are experienced, the actions for ‘response’ 
become an area of focus. Despite this, all actions 
remain relevant in terms of maximising funding 
opportunities. This approach simply enables the 
PCG to consider those actions which will generate 
more immediate outcomes, when needed. 
Both Councils should co-chair the PCG. A working 
group Terms of Reference is to be prepared for 
its membership to guide its function. This should 
include the key stakeholders involved in the actions 
for transformative change such as tourism bodies, 
business chambers, local research facilities and 
the voice of the Local Land Councils and Kamilaroi 
people. The ToR could include: 
	
→Role and purpose and connection to the RDRP
	
→Stakeholder and membership lists 
	
→Meeting arrangements, (potentially quarterly) and 
responsibilities of attendees
	
→The circumstances of a quorum and decision 
making protocols
	
→The election or rotation of a chair person
	
→An action plan for the first 60 days or 12 months 
including delivery of the priority actions with the 
implementation funding; and 
	
→A process for reflection and nominating next 
priority actions
A Memorandum of Understanding may also 
be required.
Monitoring, evaluation and 
learning framework
The Drought Action Plan incorporates a large suite 
of projects and actions, some offer immediate 
opportunity, some are medium-term items 
and others are longer-term transformational 
opportunities. Not all actions can be focused on or 
delivered at once. The PPRR framework and status 
system approach, which will guide the PCG in terms 
of its implementation and coordination of activities 
and funding pursuits, will enable a flexible and agile 
approach as drought conditions change, guiding the 
focus. This system will:
	
→Provide regular opportunities to define when 
conditions are changing locally; and
	
→Catalyse a change in focus to respond to the 
needs of the changing conditions.
This ensures a level of agility is adopted regarding 
the implementation approach.
The local government members may wish to apply 
more objective targets for immediate actions or 
further incorporate the outcomes of this plan into 
the local government reporting framework to ensure 
delivery. Optionally, monitoring can be incorporated 
into the PCG Terms of Reference for review and 
reflection on achievement of resilience actions. 
As immediate efforts in response to the action plan 
are delivered, broader efforts across collaborators 
are guided in its approach, underpinned by this plan 
which enables stakeholders to work towards and 
contribute to regional drought resilience outcomes, 
including those at the local and property level.
The drought resilience action plan also requires that 
a ‘lessons learned’ posture is adopted, ensuring 
new information, knowledge, approaches and 
science is rolled into implementation delivery as 
a guiding principle. This will mean that over time, 
the drought resilience action plan may be adapted 
to reflect new learnings and the adjustment of 
intervention pathways as required. The PCG 
is responsible to conduct an annual e‘llssons 
learned’ review, with changes to inform action 
moving forward.
The Drought Resilience Action Plan has been 
thoughtfully designed to not only guide collective 
effort and action but to enable adaptation through 
ongoing monitoring, evaluation and learning. The 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a 10-year plan, 
to be reviewed after five years.
50
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Tracking progress and reporting
Action-based project tracking against the drought resilience action plan, the principles and objectives of 
the plan should be undertaken on an annual basis. This tracking and reporting shall be the responsibility of 
the implementation PCG chair, unless otherwise delegated. Likewise, an annual evaluation process will be 
conducted by the PCG, guided by the evaluation questions that follow.
Key evaluation questions
These key evaluation questions are high level questions designed to frame the analysis of progress and 
performance of the Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan against the above framework. 
These key evaluation questions may help to structure annual tracking and reporting.
PROPERTY
EVALUATION
Effectiveness and Outcomes 
What have been the outcomes (intended, unintended, positive and 
negative) of the plan implementation process and progress?
To what extent has progress contributed to or furthered the 
principles and objectives of the regional drought resilience plan?
Has the plan been used for or otherwise supported successful 
funding and grant applications?
To what extent have stakeholders outside the PCG responded to 
the plan’s content? 
Have any barriers or challenges been identified throughout the 
implementation of plan, and what solutions to address these have 
been identified?
Drought resilience maturation 
To what extent has efforts in implementing the plan contributed to: 
	
→Creating stronger connectedness and greater social capital 
within communities, contributing to well-being and security? 
	
→Empowering communities and businesses to implement 
activities that improve their resilience to drought? 
	
→Supporting more primary producers and land managers 
to adopt whole-of-system approaches to natural resource 
management to improve the natural resource base, for long-
term productivity and landscape health?
Stakeholder engagement 
In what ways are the PCG and other stakeholders collaborating 
and collectively contributing to efforts outlined by the action plan?
In what ways has the plan provided inclusive involvement across 
sectors, disciplines and communities?
In what ways has the plan been able to support individual 
stakeholder goals, objectives and aspirations regarding 
drought resilience?
51
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The reporting may be undertaken using a range of tools to capture experiences and perspectives from across 
the PCG, allied stakeholders as well as the communities of Moree Plains and Narrabri Shires more broadly. 
These tools may include:
	
→Meetings and event data capture
	
→Targeted meeting / interviews with stakeholders
	
→Survey data
	
→Case studies and data from the PCG
	
→Media, including social media; and
	
→Funding and grant applications.
Achieving the plan’s outcomes
A further opportunity for the PCG to measure the contribution to or achievement of the plan’s outcomes is by 
using local data to assess specific outcomes. The data sources or indicators will need to be selected by the 
PCG and can provide insights as to how the plan is tracking against the resilience theory of change. Outcomes 
include (but are not limited to):
THEME
OUTCOME
Community Strength 
Community cohesion and wellbeing is maintained
Economic Opportunity 
Gross regional product remains steady or grows relative to:
Non-drought periods
Previous drought periods
Other regions in NSW and Qld
Environmental Health 
Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways is 
reduced throughout and emerging from drought. 
Regional water quality and quantity projects are 
continually underway
Supply Chain Certainty 
Market accessibility has improved
Regional road projects are continually underway 
Shared Commitment 
Drought resilience priorities are embedded across Council’s 
Integrated Planning and Reporting Framework and informs the 
plans, strategies and efforts of allied stakeholders
Learning
Regular (annual) monitoring provides the ability for reflection and learning. The progress tracking and 
reporting methodology, using key evaluation questions, will present specific insights in terms of those 
opportunities to build in ‘lessons learned’ through engagement across stakeholders with a role in 
drought resilience.
These lessons should, on an annual basis, be contemplated regarding the drought action plan to determine 
any relevant updates, new insights, intelligence and technologies that can be integrated to ensure the action 
plan keeps pace with a growing drought resilience maturation across systems and sectors.
This process will ensure the action plan remains a ‘live document’ that appropriately supports and services 
the needs of all stakeholders and importantly, those of the Moree Plains and Narrabri Shire communities in 
preparation for, endurance of, and recovery from drought.
52
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Appendix A
Concepts to guide adaptative learning
This appendix provides key aspects for consideration as part of learning processes throughout 
implementation of this plan, to guide further iterations and amendments to this RDRP. As drought resilience 
processes mature, the ability for further robust adaptation pathways to be implemented will emerge. The table 
below captures specific items identified for integration as part of future plan iterations. 
Table 1 - Key aspects of consideration to guide future plan iteration
NO
ASPECT FOR CONSIDERATION 
1
Definitions, vision, goals, outcomes
Future plan updates could analyse the trends, stressors and challenges identified in the plan (p. 
33) and in the resilience assessment (p. 25) to explore the impact of future change and uncertainty 
on its vision, guiding principles, and outcomes, and make revisions accordingly. 
Future updates could then go on to build on the identified potential future trends, stresses and 
shocks by further exploring whether the outcomes, guiding principles and vision could be realised 
if these future changes came about. The vision, guiding principles and outcomes could then be 
revised if such an assessment suggests a mismatch with these potential future changes.
2
Stakeholder Engagement, participation and partnerships 
Future plan updates could clarify how the community will be involved in the plan’s evaluation (e.g. 
via the envisaged annual ‘lessons learned’ review mentioned on p. 55 and p. 57). Stakeholder 
engagement could be expanded to better include direct participation of different drought 
vulnerable groups (e.g. First Nations communities, the elderly, youth, etc.), including gauging their 
capacity to participate and how best to engage with them moving forward. This information could 
be used to better include vulnerable residents and ensure adequate supports are in place to 
involve different community segments.
3
Active learning and adaptive governance 
Future plan updates could include more details about structured processes to support active 
learning and ongoing adaptation of the plan and its actions. This could be incorporated as a set of 
structured monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) activities and processes for each pathway.
Future plan updates could more explicitly link with governance arrangements across local, state 
and federal levels to address the following points:
	
→How will the governance arrangements ensure ongoing appropriate representation of groups 
with different vulnerabilities to drought, including First Nations communities?
	
→How will the governance be nested with other governance structures and ensure that 
decisions are made at the appropriate level, that is at the level closest to where they will have 
an effect (subsidiarity)?
4
System description and resilience assessment 
Future plan updates could do more to better understand the effects of drought on the livelihoods 
and wellbeing of different stakeholder groups and provide specific examples of ‘local triggers’ and 
supports that could bring forward open conversations about drought preparation (picking up on 
valuable insights in the ‘Interconnected nature of drought’ section, p. 18).
53
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan

5 
Future Scenarios 
Future plan updates could develop a suite of plausible future scenarios through a participatory 
process, and based on climate, drought and other drivers of change. The development of future 
scenarios could consider how trends, stresses or shocks (including drought) will interact with, 
and likely affect, the region’s economic, social and environmental characteristics, as well as the 
implications for diverse stakeholder groups. This exercise will also assist these stakeholders to 
explore and identify actions and pathways that assist with building resilience under different 
plausible future scenarios.
6
Intervention options and pathways for building regional resilience 
Future plan updates could more clearly outline how the proposed actions increase reserves, spare 
capacity and response options. Ideally, this should be informed by a resilience assessment of the 
current state of reserves, spare capacity and economic diversification. This would provide better 
insights on how effective the proposed actions are likely to be in building drought resilience in the 
region. 
Future plan updates could also provide more explicit descriptions of what external support is 
required for successful implementation. More detail is needed about envisaged responsibilities, 
rights and resourcing arrangements across local, regional, state and national levels to ensure that 
the plan’s implementation is not overly reliant on external sources. This could involve articulating 
how initial external investment might lead to reduced reliance on external support in the future.
Future plan updates could prioritise, sequence and link proposed actions into alternative and 
complementary pathways. Such pathways, along with clear triggers for changing pathways, 
would better enable the navigation of uncertainty and adaptation to future change. This exercise 
may also help with identifying missing actions critical to these pathways. The plan would benefit 
from the addition of a diagram characterising how actions are sequenced, and how pathways 
are interlinked.
7
Theory of change, Monitoring, evaluation and learning
Future plan updates could expand the theory of change to include more diverse mechanisms, and 
more evidence to substantiate the assumed mechanisms, by which its outcomes can be achieved. 
This evidence could be drawn from diverse knowledge sources (e.g. published research, 
government and industry experience, and community lived experience).
Future updates could include an expanded set of MEL indicators, including drawing on those 
suggested by the Future Drought Fund’s MEL framework, the extensive indicators used in the 
resilience assessment, and other segment-specific measures (e.g. for youth, women and First 
Nations people) that could be tracked with Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Census data (i.e. 
Socio-Economic Indexes for Areas (SEIFA) index and population change).
8
Integration between components 
Future plan updates could explore the interactions and linkages among its different components 
more explicitly, and what this reveals about requirements for reducing vulnerabilities and building 
resilience to drought in the region. The system description and resilience assessment could be 
used to show how the plan’s proposed actions intend to address the region’s vulnerabilities as 
identified in the resilience assessment.
54
Moree Plains and Narrabri Regional Drought Resilience Plan