OVENS 
MURRAY 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
PLAN

Acknowledgement  
of Country
We acknowledge and respect Victorian 
Traditional Owners as the original custodians of 
Victoria’s land and waters, their unique ability to 
care for Country and deep spiritual connection 
to it.  We acknowledge that the Ovens Murray 
region is on traditional lands, including those  
of the Yorta Yorta, Taungurung and Gunaikurnai 
Nations, as well as other Traditional Owner 
groups who are not formally recognised.
We honour Elders past and present, whose 
knowledge and wisdom have ensured the 
continuation of culture and traditional practices. 
We are committed to genuinely partner, and 
meaningfully engage, with Victoria’s Traditional 
Owners and Aboriginal communities to support 
the protection of Country, the maintenance of 
spiritual and cultural practices and their broader 
aspirations in the 21st century and beyond.

Preface
Drought is an enduring, regular feature of the 
Australian landscape which inflicts major financial, 
social, and environmental costs on farm businesses 
and communities.
The Ovens Murray Drought Resilience Plan (the 
Plan) is one of nine regional plans developed in 
Victoria, as part of the Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning (RDRP) Program, under the Future 
Drought Fund. The region is committed to taking 
steps now to ensure good strategies are in place to 
prepare for and manage future drought conditions. 
The $5 billion Future Drought Fund invests in a 
wide range of drought resilience initiatives to help 
Australian farms and communities prepare for 
the impacts of drought. These are implemented 
through a suite of programs under four focus areas:
•	Better climate information
•	Better practices
•	Better planning
•	Better prepared communities
The RDRP Program is part of the ‘better planning’ 
focus area and supports the development of 
regional drought resilience plans throughout 
Australia from 2021 to 2025. 
The Ovens Murray Plan bridges all Future Drought 
Fund focus areas and identifies a broad variety  
of actions for the community in the region to build 
drought resilience.
The aim of the Plan is to empower and enable 
communities to collectively identify and address 
their needs to be better prepared for and able 
to manage future dry seasonal conditions and 
droughts. The Plan also draws out regional needs 
and priorities to inform future investments in 
drought resilience.
Some of the key programs and documents that 
informed the development of the Plan are the:
•	Goulburn Drought Resilience Plan1
•	Ovens Murray Regional Skills Demand Profile2
•	Ovens Murray Coast Digital Plan3
•	Victorian Primary Production Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan 2022–20264
•	Hume Climate Change Adaptation Strategy5
•	North East Regional Catchment Strategy6
•	Future Drought Fund’s Farm Business  
Resilience Program7
•	Riverine Plains, North East Node of the Victorian 
Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub8
•	Victorian Government’s ‘Strong, Innovative, 
Sustainable: A New Strategy for Agriculture  
in Victoria’9
This Plan builds on the Ovens Murray region’s 
historic and recent experiences of drought and 
related strategies, programs, and activities. It has 
been developed using the consistent methodology 
of the RDRP Program across Victoria including:
•	A drought impact analysis to understand the 
prevalence, severity, and frequency of past, 
present, and future drought impacts.
•	Stakeholder engagement to identify and  
collate issues and develop actions to build 
drought resilience.
Agriculture Victoria facilitated the development  
of this Plan which is jointly funded by the Victorian 
and Commonwealth Governments under the 
Future Drought Fund.
This Plan was jointly funded by the Victorian and 
Commonwealth Government under the Future Drought Fund.
“To enable our farms to be productive, sustainable,  
and profitable we adapt. We adapt day by day, season  
to season, and generation to generation. We adapt to 
many things, but one significant part of our environment 
that we adapt to is climate and climate change”.
—Katie Warner, Chief Executive Officer,  
North East Catchment Management Authority
1

Contents
Preface	 	
	
1
Introduction	
4
Purpose	 	
	
4
Plan development	
5
Plan design	 	
6
Vision	
	
	
8
The Ovens Murray Region	
10
Region and Community	
10
Geography	 	
12
Population	 	
12
Industry/employment	
12
Climate trends	
14
Drought in the Ovens Murray region	
16
Past experience of drought	
18
Recent experience of drought	
20
Future drought scenarios	
23
Drought resilience in the Ovens Murray Region	
24
Themes, Outcomes and Focus Areas	
26
Theme 1:	 People and Community	
28
Theme 2:	Coordination and Collaboration	
30
Theme 3:	Agriculture and Allied Industries	
34
Theme 4:	Natural and Built Environment	
38
Theme 5:	Research, Education and Innovation	
40
Case Studies of Resilience	
44
Next Steps	 	
54
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning	
56
Appreciation	
60
References		
62
Appendices		
64
Appendix 1:	 Ovens Murray stakeholder engagement	
64
Appendix 2:	Existing strategies, reports and programs	
66
3

INTRODUCTION
Drought is a recurring feature 
of the Australian landscape, 
and has been for thousands of 
years. However, the impacts of 
climate change are increasing the 
frequency and severity of drought.
Drought is most effectively addressed at the 
regional level, considering factors like community, 
geography, economy, and climate. Droughts vary in 
duration and impact and should be managed as a 
regional risk, with community members taking the 
lead, supported by industry and government.
The Ovens Murray Plan provides an opportunity 
to identify a series of actions aimed at enhancing 
social, environmental, and economic resilience  
to dry seasons. Given the substantial body of  
pre-existing work in relation to drought, a key goal 
of the Plan is to align with and reinforce existing 
strategies and activities to bolster the region’s 
drought resilience.
Purpose
There could not be a better time to plan for drought 
in our region and communities. Development 
of the Plan has encouraged a collaborative and 
coordinated approach, and includes a collectively 
agreed framework for building economic, 
environmental, and social resilience to drought.
The long-term objectives of the Plan are to:
•	Build the social capital of communities through 
increased connectivity, improved wellbeing, and 
a greater sense of security, 
•	Empower communities and businesses to 
implement activities to build their economic 
resilience to drought, and
•	Support land managers to improve the natural 
resource base for long-term productivity and 
landscape health.
•	Support Traditional Owners and Aboriginal 
communities to continue to self-determine and 
care for Country in the lead up to, and during, 
times of drought.
A resilience approach has been used to guide this 
Plan, and focuses on the connections between 
people and place. With this approach, drought and 
climate variability can be viewed as opportunities 
to build resilience and drive transformation 
through planning, preparedness and learning.
For the purposes of this Plan, resilience is defined 
as the ability of people and the environment in 
the Ovens Murray region to cope with change, 
while continuing to function in a desired way. 
Resilience is about being able to adapt, thrive and 
take advantage of new opportunities rather than 
trying to maintain the status quo. This includes the 
ability to be flexible yet decisive during periods of 
uncertainty and change. 
Resilience is critically important in rural and 
regional communities because it assists individuals 
and groups to develop the mindset, social network, 
and business skills to navigate difficult periods and 
extreme events.
4

Plan development
Agriculture Victoria facilitated the development 
of this Plan in collaboration with a Reference 
Group of key stakeholders from the Ovens Murray 
community, regional organisations, and sectors 
with a role in managing drought and its impacts 
(Appendix 1). In addition to the Reference Group, 
the Plan was co-developed in consultation with:
•	farmer representatives
•	industry groups
•	the water, health, education and financial sectors
•	Traditional Owners
•	local, state, and Australian government agencies.
The wider community was engaged via the 
Victorian Government’s public consultation 
platform Engage Victoria.
Several engagement strategies were used to 
consult with community throughout the Plan’s 
development, including: 
•	periodic meetings of the core Reference Group 
to guide the process and content
•	targeted interviews with key stakeholders  
to provide content and advice
•	surveys of community members and key 
stakeholders for feedback
•	micro-workshops with key stakeholders  
and sectors.
Action learning is a process where peers ‘learn by 
doing’, collaborating on a project to problem solve, 
question, reflect and support each other to achieve 
a desired outcome. This type of learning has been 
central to the way the Plan has been developed. 
By listening, questioning and challenging diverse 
perspectives, we have attempted to identify and 
collate actions to enhance drought resilience  
into the future.
The initial stages of developing the Plan involved 
gathering information from the community on 
their experience of past droughts. This included 
highlighting what worked, what didn’t work and 
identifying what the community believes is needed 
to increase drought resilience in the future. 
Stakeholders told us that drought is experienced 
differently across the region and that:
•	the pathway to resilience will vary depending on 
individual circumstances
•	there is a strong connection between drought, 
fire, and flood
•	drought has had a significant impact on 
Traditional Owners’ ability to care for Country
•	a more integrated approach to how risk is 
mitigated is required
•	increased awareness and preparedness are 
essential to building social, environmental, and 
economic resilience
•	all businesses have a responsibility to prepare 
for drought and that the best way to mitigate 
the impacts are by understanding the risks and 
being well prepared.
The development of the Plan included scanning 
existing strategies, plans and programs related  
to drought and drought resilience. This Plan builds 
on, extends, and seeks to avoid duplication with 
existing planning and strategic drought work in 
the region. This information was organised into 
themes and led to the development of a thematic 
framework under which the Plan’s actions are  
now arranged.
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
5

Plan design
The Plan has a thematic framework which contains 
5 Themes with associated Outcomes. Within 
each theme, Actions to achieve the desired 
outcomes are arranged under Focus Areas to 
guide effort and investment for building drought 
resilience. Some of the actions can be addressed 
directly by the community, while others require 
broader cooperation from governments, agencies, 
community organisations or the private sector. 
Though a strong focus of the Plan is on agriculture 
and allied industries, community feedback 
highlighted that resilience should be considered 
more broadly due to the interconnection of social, 
economic, and environmental impacts of drought 
and the ripple effect on agricultural enterprises 
and the broader community.
The community identified a wide range of actions 
to improve resilience which have been collated into 
five themes with aligned outcomes to form the 
basis of this Plan:
 
Theme 1: People and Community
Outcome: A healthy and thriving region, resilient 
to climatic shocks, supported by local, trusted 
health and wellbeing services, and community 
connection
 
Theme 2: Coordination and Collaboration
Outcome: A coordinated and collaborative 
approach to decision making and delivery of 
drought resilience activities within the region
 
Theme 3: Agriculture and Allied Industries
Outcome: Thriving agricultural industries 
better able to withstand the impacts of drought 
supported by a skilled workforce
 
Theme 4: Natural and Built Environment
Outcome: Healthy landscapes better able to 
withstand the impacts of drought
 
Theme 5: Research, Education and Innovation
Outcome: Evidence based research and 
development to support industry to manage 
risk, uptake innovative practices and increase 
profitability
6

OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
7

VISION
A broad range of values and perspectives are held 
across the Ovens Murray community. This helps 
shape the community’s identity and potential to 
build resilience to change. Understanding the 
community’s values and perspectives is critical, 
as individual and collaborative action is needed to 
achieve significant change and improve drought 
preparedness. 
To encapsulate the region’s commitment, enthusiasm 
and drive to become more resilient, a vision was 
developed. The vision articulates the aspirations of 
the region through the implementation of the Plan.
Vision:  
Ovens Murray communities 
are empowered to take a 
coordinated and collaborative 
approach to building drought 
resilience across the region.
8

OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
9

THE OVENS 
MURRAY 
REGION
Region and Community
The recognised Traditional Owners of the Ovens 
Murray region include the Taungurung, Yorta Yorta, 
and Gunaikurnai Peoples, as well as other First 
Nations groups not formally recognised. They have 
inhabited the region for millennia and maintain a 
strong connection to land and water through their 
cultural practices and spiritual beliefs.
The Ovens Murray region is situated in northeast 
Victoria and encompasses the local government 
areas of the Alpine, Benalla Rural City, Indigo, 
Mansfield, Towong, Wangaratta Rural City, and 
Wodonga City Shires. It is characterised by fertile 
land, natural waterways, attractive townships, 
localities with a rich offering of cultural events, and 
friendly welcoming communities. There is a strong 
sense of belonging, volunteerism, community 
connection and stewardship of natural resources.
The Ovens Murray region borders New South  
Wales (NSW) and also shares a border with  
the Goulburn and Gippsland regions of Victoria.  
Cross-border communities present unique 
opportunities and challenges, and demand 
collaborations across national, state, regional  
and municipal levels.
“Community is many things. A geographical place, an industry, an organisation, 
or more generally: a group of people that come together through a common 
interest or shared goal. Community is the lifeblood that connects us together 
and fosters an environment of belonging and purpose. Critically, a community 
requires internal sustenance through the continued efforts of its members, in 
addition to external environmental factors such as funding and opportunities.
The strength of a community is made up of the sum of individuals that live 
and work within it. In regional areas, where townships can be quite small and 
resources are finite, it is essential that people can come together, increase 
their capacity, and be empowered and inspired to grow their communities”.
—Alpine Valleys Community Leadership, 2023
10

11.4%
POPULATION 
(2022)
POPULATION GROWTH 
(2013–2022)
GROSS REGIONAL PRODUCT  
(2022)
135,054
$7.7
billion
Source: Ovens Murray Regional Economic 
Development Strategy (2022)
BENALLA
WANGARATTA
MANSFILED
ALPINE
TOWONG
INDIGO
WODONGA
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
11

Geography
The region has varied agricultural land 
encompassing the Ovens and Murray River 
catchments, and the Victorian alpine region. 
It comprises distinct regions, with the south 
extending to Mansfield and Lake Eildon, the west 
containing the undulating plans of central Victoria 
and the Hume Highway, Victoria’s High Country 
and Lake Dartmouth to the east, and the New 
South Wales-Victorian border along the Murray 
River with Lake Hume in the north.
The region is a part of the Murray-Darling Basin 
and water flows from the alpine region down 
through the Ovens, Kiewa and Mitta-Mitta rivers. 
These water catchments are nationally important, 
supplying 40% of the inflows into the Murray-
Darling system10. The landscape is rural, alpine, 
and urban, covering mountains, farmland, forests, 
and floodplains. Due to the large national and state 
parks, less native vegetation has been cleared than 
in other parts of the state.
Population
In 2022 the region had a population of 135,054, 
predominately distributed across the largest 
towns of Wangaratta, Wodonga, Benalla, and 
Mansfield11. Wodonga is one of the top 5 fastest 
growing regional cities in Victoria, with projected 
population growth of 23% in 2023–2036 reflecting 
its livability and the educational and employment 
opportunities in the area. Over the past two 
decades, the region more broadly has experienced 
stable population growth, although the rate of 
growth has been slower than the regional Victorian 
average. This trend is expected to continue2.
Industry/employment
The Ovens Murray region has a diverse and 
interconnected economy with a Gross Regional 
Product (GRP) of $7.7 billion in 202211. The top 7 
employing industries account for approximately 
70% of the region’s workforce (Figure 3.), and  
are all significant drivers of economic growth  
and employment.
The region’s employment continues to diversify, with 
ABS Census data recognising that employment  
in the agriculture industry has gradually declined 
since the early 2000’s. Future declines in agricultural 
industry employment are projected in the transition 
to more capital intensive and less labor-intensive 
markets, where there may be gains through 
innovation, improved productivity and value add 
throughout the agricultural supply chain12.
The region’s main food processers are in Wodonga, 
Wangaratta, Wahgunyah and Benalla. Activities 
are focused on grain mill and cereal products, 
processing beer, wine and dairy products.
The region’s strategic location between Sydney 
and Melbourne, supports a large transport and 
logistics industry, including Logic in Wodonga, 
with the capability to convey goods to 75% of 
Australia’s population within 24 hours. It also  
hosts the Bandiana Military area, Wodonga TAFE 
and La Trobe University.
Manufacturing is the largest industry, making 
up 15% ($876 million) of the region’s total 
economic output. Beef, dairy, sheep, and wool 
make the largest contribution to the agriculture 
industry (Figure 4.). Together, the agriculture and 
manufacturing industries comprise 72.8% of the 
Figure 2. Broad land use in the Hume region 
Source: Australian Bureau of Agricultural  
and Resource Economics and Sciences
	 Nature conservation  
and minimal use
	 Grazing native vegetation
	 Production native forests
	 Plantation forests  
(commercial and other)
	 Modified pastures
	 Cropping
	 Horticulture
	 Intensive uses
	 Water
12

region’s export value2. In addition to the more 
traditional agricultural enterprises, there are many 
vineyards, equine ventures, and lifestyle farms. 
Food and wine, including cellar doors, cafés, 
restaurants and accommodation, and the nearby 
snow fields are the major drivers of tourism, 
accounting for approximately 3.9 million visitors 
and a $1.3 billion regional tourism spend13.
Figure 3. Employment by industry in the Ovens Murray 
Source: Ovens Murray Regional Economic Development Strategy (2022)
Figure 4. 2018-19 value ($ million) of agricultural production in the Hume region 
Source: Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences
Health Care and Social Assistance
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
Manufacturing
Construction
Retails Trade
Education and Training
Accommodation and Food Services
Public Administration and Safety
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
Transport, Postal and Warehousing
Administritive and Support Services
Other Services
Wholesale Trade
Arts and Recreation Services
Fincancial and Insurance Services
Rental, Hiring and Real Estate Services
Electricity, Gas, Water and Waste Services
Mining
Information Media and Telecommunications
10000
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Cattle and Calves
Sheep and Lambs
Wool
Milk
Hay
Cherries
Poultry
Beans
Eggs
Wheat
Other Commodities
$m
100
200
300
400
500
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
13

Climate trends
Rainfall in the region is highly variable, occurs 
predominantly in winter and spring, and is 
generally the result of rain-bearing weather 
systems from the west. Most areas receive annual 
rainfall of 700–800mm. The highest rainfall 
occurs around Harrietville, with an annual median 
of 1219mm, while Rutherglen records an annual 
median of 566mm14. Since the 1950s, rainfall has 
declined in most seasons.
Climate projections for the region, based on 
climate change scenario modelling13, indicate 
continued variability and change in future such as:
•	average temperatures to increase by 1.4–2.4°C
•	spring rainfall to decrease by 6–14%
•	an increase in the number of fire danger days  
by 44%
•	a decrease in frost risk.
14

OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
15

Droughts are a period of drier than normal 
conditions and are a cyclical feature of the 
Australian weather cycle. They are a complex 
phenomenon, easily identified in hindsight, 
but highly variable depending on a region’s 
topography, rainfall, temperature, wind patterns, 
vegetation, and soil types. 
Drought poses substantial risks to regional 
communities’ landscapes, infrastructure, 
industries, people and economies. Drought can 
negatively impact agricultural yields, employment, 
health and regional spending. Often the slow onset 
of drought can add complexity to decision making 
that is essential to best prepare and successfully 
manage an agricultural business.
The drought cycle includes three phases:
•	preparing for drought
•	responding to drought
•	recovering from drought
As regions transition through the drought cycle 
communities experience a series of flow on effects. 
Impacts to mental health increase substantially, 
soil and surface moisture declines, fodder, 
water, and cash reserves become depleted, and 
supplementary feed, water and transport costs  
increase. As drought impacts increase, there is an 
escalation in family violence, abuse, and suicide. 
Further along the drought cycle, spending from 
the agricultural industry reduces and negatively 
impacts regional and national supply chains.
DROUGHT IN THE 
OVENS MURRAY 
REGION
16

Droughts also pose a key threat for Traditional 
Owners, impacting the health of Country, and 
affecting their rights and responsibilities in  
caring for Country. For Traditional Owners and 
Aboriginal Victorians, caring for Country extends 
beyond physical landscapes and involves the 
natural waters, animals and resources and how 
they influence and impact each other. Healing 
Country in the wake of drought events is essential 
to ensuring positive health and wellbeing 
outcomes for Aboriginal Victorians.
An integrated assessment of the socio-economic and 
environmental impacts of past and future droughts 
was prepared to inform the development of the 
Plan and is available as a supplementary report – 
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region13. The report 
looks at the effect drought has on agriculture and 
the flow on impacts to regional communities.
“We fail to realise the hidden impacts of drought, fire, flood 
and storm on the wellbeing of staff and the community”.
—The Alpine Community Recovery Committee – Community Recovery Plan
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
17

Past experience of drought
The region has witnessed multiple droughts of 
varying duration and extremity, and its farming 
families have first-hand experience of the 
impact of drought on their businesses, land, and 
wellbeing. The effects also extend to non-farming 
community members through the interdependence 
of farms, businesses, services, and the social 
networks that constitute and bind communities.
Significant droughts in the region have included:
1837–1844
It was so dry the 
Wodonga Lagoon 
(today known as the 
Belvoir Park Lagoon) 
was used to grow hay
1866–1869
In 1868 the year 
closed amidst 
great depression, 
temperatures of  
46°C in the shade  
and bushfires on the  
hills around Albury  
and Wodonga on 
Christmas Day15
1892–1902
The Federation 
drought saw much 
below average rainfall, 
which impacted 
towns dependent on 
the Murray River for 
transport by paddle 
steamer
1937–1945
The World War II 
drought – stories 
include that it was so 
dry that there was not 
one shower of rain from 
November through  
to March for 4 years
•	Black Friday 
bushfires of  
13 January 1939
1914–1915
A strong El Nino 
brought intensely 
dry conditions and 
the lowest rainfall on 
record in some areas
1965–1967
For over a decade, 
very dry years were 
interspersed with 
milder conditions
1982–1984
A very strong El Nino 
event led to many  
areas experiencing 
their lowest rainfall  
on record
•	The earliest seasonal 
Total Fire Ban Day 
in 40 years was 
declared on 24 
November 1982
•	The devastating  
Ash Wednesday 
bushfires occurred  
on 16 February 1983
1997–2009
The Millennium 
Drought with record 
low rainfalls recorded 
in many areas
•	2003 the Hume Weir 
was just 6% capacity 
•	Black Saturday 
bushfires – 173 lives 
were lost on  
7 February 2009
•	Traditional Owners 
had a reduced ability 
to care for Country
18

Figure 5. National rainfall decile range during 
the Millennium drought 1997 to 2009 
Source: Bureau of Meteorology
Highest on record
Very much above average
Above average
Average
Below average
Very much below average
Lowest on record
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Figure 5 shows the severity of the Millennium 
drought from 1997 to 2009, with the North East 
region experiencing its lowest rainfall on record.
The Bureau of Meteorology (2024) reported that 
the Millennium Drought was essentially a cool-
season drought in southern mainland Australia, 
with low rainfall in winter and spring, and above 
average warm-season (November to March) rainfall 
received in many areas. A distinctive feature of the 
Millennium drought was the extended dry periods 
the region encountered for over a decade.
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
19

“Utilising professional services can play an important 
role in supporting good decision-making in drought 
preparedness and recovery”.
Recent experience of drought
In 2018–2019, widespread dry conditions were 
experienced, and rainfall was very much below 
average16. The region experienced significant 
economic, social, and environmental impacts. 
There was a cumulation of production losses, 
a decline in consumer spending and negative 
impacts on employment in the community, with 
GRP declining by over $100 million annually. 
Negative impacts were often concentrated in 
smaller isolated communities where businesses 
did not have many options to adapt their economic 
activity. This led to a surge in demand for mental 
health and Rural Financial Counselling services13.
In January 2019, the Bureau of Meteorology 
reported that the Murray Darling Basin was in 
the grip of its most severe 3-year dry spell in 120 
years. Impacts included:
•	water levels in local river systems experienced 
significant declines
•	incomes of many farm businesses were slashed
•	many families experienced difficulties paying 
utility bills
•	farmers worked long hours to earn additional 
income off farm
•	exposed ground cover led to a severe dust storm 
•	livestock producers faced forced stock sales
•	invasive pests caused widespread damage on 
public and private land
•	farmers lodged less farm management deposits 
(due to restricted cash flows)
•	compounded experiences of bushfire 
Figure 6 shows the severity of the 2018–2019 
drought with the region experiencing very much 
below average rainfall.
Recent analysis of the Ovens Murray region17 
found that the cumulative effects of drought,  
and changes to rainfall patterns and bushfires 
were the biggest risks to agricultural businesses  
in the north east, with a relatively even spread 
across industries.
Over 75% of land managers have made changes to 
their business due to the changing climate, in part 
driven by experience of recent extreme weather 
events (e.g. drought, bushfire and flood).
The major recent financial investments in 
adaptation have been pasture improvements (25%), 
machinery (22%) and water infrastructure/storage 
(16%). The analysis reported that 71% of landowners 
indicated that they intend to make fundamental 
changes to their agricultural businesses because  
of the changing regional climate.
The effects of climate change, including drought, 
also significantly impact on Aboriginal communities 
across Victoria. Drought harms Country and people, 
through impacts on waterways, plants, animals, 
ecosystems and seasons, making it hard to practice 
culture and heal Country. Cultural heritage sites 
are also damaged by fire, drying soils and erosion, 
caused by drought.
The social, environmental, and economic 
vulnerabilities that may already exist in 
regional communities are amplified as drought 
conditions slowly unfold. Table 1 summarises 
the interconnected social, economic and 
environmental impacts of drought as described  
by the Ovens Murray community.
20

Figure 6. Australian rainfall deciles for the  
36 months from January 2017 to December 2019 
Source: Bureau of Meteorology
Highest on record
Very much above average
Above average
Average
Below average
Very much below average
Lowest on record
10
8–9
4–7
2–3
1
Photo: Mark Walpole
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
21

Table 1. The interconnected 
impacts of drought in the  
Ovens Murray region as  
described in community 
consultationa
a Ovens Murray Regional  
Reference Group workshop
Environmental
•	Declining inflows into river 
systems leading to reduced 
water availability for native  
flora and fauna
•	Increased understanding of the 
nuances of reduced stream flows
•	Changing water security planning
•	Decline in waterway health,  
for example erosion
•	High reliance from landowners 
for stock access to water ways
•	Water quality declines impacting 
domestic and stock use 
•	Permanent loss of established 
trees and plants
•	Increased ecosystem stress
•	Traditional Owners’ ability to  
care for Country using traditional 
and culturally appropriate tools  
is reduced
•	Elevated fire risk
•	Firefighting challenged with 
river system reserves low and 
volunteer firefighter capacity 
reduced 
•	Increased animal health and 
wellbeing concerns
Social
•	Negative health and wellbeing 
outcomes with many in the 
community in ‘survival mode’
•	The uncertainty of the timing  
and duration of drought and  
other climatic events
•	Increased family violence
•	Reduced amenity and community 
aesthetic
•	Reduced capacity for recreation 
when green spaces are lost and 
water sports are inhibited
•	Some individuals have a better 
understanding of resilience  
and seek to be better prepared
•	Heightened community angst 
around understanding of 
community water plans
•	Emphasised lack of community 
water literacy
•	Increased demand on not-for-profit 
sector and support services  
such as The Salvation Army,  
St Vincent de Paul and others
•	Families move away from the 
region causing a slow erosion  
of confidence
•	Farm safety risks increase
•	Heath system burden with 
increased health issues, 
particularly mental health
•	Traditional Owners unable to 
practice culture and care for 
Country
•	Damage to cultural heritage sites
Economic
•	Negative impacts on regional GDP
•	Decreased on-farm productivity, 
business profitability and viability
•	Pasture profitability drops and 
stocking rates decline
•	Producers are exposed to 
increased fodder prices
•	Reduced water, pasture, and 
fodder availability
•	Inability to build good feed and 
fodder reserves
•	Reduced cashflow leading to 
decreased spending in the 
regional supply chain
•	Decision making paralysis
•	Little to no cash flow for most 
impacted social-economic 
populations
•	Decreased enrolment and 
attendance at school and 
education institutions
•	Reduced tourism
•	Negative impacts on other regional 
industries such as construction, 
manufacturing, hospitality, and retail
•	Reduced employment 
opportunities
•	Lack of business planning prior to 
and within drought exacerbates 
economic impacts
•	Increased demand for small 
businesses financial, business  
and succession advice
•	Increased pressure from invasive 
native and pest species on farms 
(including feral deer)
•	Changes in water markets and how 
water moves through the system
•	Understanding and utilisation of 
water markets changes
•	Restrictions in water trade 
compared to the Murray system
•	Increase in irrigation water prices
•	Increased competition for bore water
•	Requirement to cart water at 
higher costs
•	Incorrect modelling used to  
build infrastructure
22

Future drought scenarios
Future drought modelling by Frontier Economics13 
forecasts greater impacts on smaller, agriculturally 
reliant communities in the north-west of the Ovens 
Murray region. Ongoing and continued experience 
of dry seasonal conditions and drought in the 
region will result in:
•	a growing number of fire danger days per year
•	inland lakes, rivers, and dam levels continuing  
to decline with negative impacts on biodiversity
•	Gross Domestic Product falling by 9.2%
•	a reduction of more than 800 jobs
•	a decline of 2.7% in consumer spending
•	social and economic impacts on the community
•	an increase in population moving to coastal areas
•	parks and sporting precincts experiencing  
water restrictions
•	fluctuating tourist numbers 
•	increasing wait times for services such as 
healthcare and Rural Financial Counselling
•	land use changes such as the movement  
of cropping areas, impacting landscape 
biodiversity
•	increased vulnerability of cultural sites  
located on flood plains
“There is a need for better preparedness at the 
individual, property, community and regional scales”.
—The Alpine Community Recovery Committee – Community Recovery Plan
Despite the physical region that the Plan 
encompasses, it is recognised that many 
communities, including Traditional Owner 
communities, do not exist and function solely 
within such boundaries. Equally, the social, 
economic and environmental impacts are not 
confined to any one part of a region. Land and 
resource management may have inter-regional 
impacts and effects. And, for many Traditional 
Owners, connection to Country is more holistic 
than the constructs and regional boundaries  
of the Plan.
Therefore, many aspects of the Ovens Murray Plan 
will be applicable to neighbouring communities 
and regions. It will be important to cooperate and 
share information on drought resilience between 
regions through the RDRP Program, not only with 
immediate neighbours such as bordering shires, 
but also between states and across Australia.
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
23

DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE 
IN THE OVENS 
MURRAY REGION
There are many definitions for the term resilience. 
Resilience is defined by Walker (2020)18 as the 
capacity of a system to absorb a disturbance and 
reorganise to keep functioning in the same kind 
of way. Rather than just bouncing back, resilience 
is also about changing and adapting to new 
circumstances.
In looking for something more specific to this 
region, resilience is defined as the ability of the 
people and environment in the Ovens Murray 
region to cope with change, while continuing to 
function in a desired way. Resilience thinking helps 
us to understand and manage dynamic systems 
such as landscapes and river catchments6.
The capacity to cope with disruption and continue 
to function in desired ways is critical when 
encountering change. A lack of resilience limits 
the ability of regional economies and communities 
to adapt and bounce back when shocks cause 
significant disruption. A resilient region can better 
absorb challenges, allowing different parts of 
the economy to flourish, while those who are 
challenged are supported to recover and adapt.
It is vital that the region continues to evolve and 
changes its emphasis from responding to shocks 
and events, to understanding that enduring long 
term positive change is driven by looking more 
deeply at the systems, structures and processes 
used before. The challenge is to move from a 
‘persistence’ mindset to an active ‘adaptation  
and transformation’ mindset. The concept of 
resilience has been explored extensively across 
the Ovens Murray and neighbouring Goulburn 
and Gippsland regions, and is reflected in several 
key strategies that underpin work programs 
and activities that relate to or can be applied to 
drought resilience including:
•	Goulburn Murray Resilience Strategy19
•	Goulburn Broken Regional Catchment 
Management Strategy 2021–202720
•	Hume Regional Climate Adaptation Strategy5
•	Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan21
•	Goulburn Drought Resilience Plan1
•	Wimmera Southern Mallee Drought  
Resilience Plan22
•	North East Regional Catchment Strategy6
24

The Plan has been developed with a focus on the 
connections between people and place across 
the region. This has then been brought together 
in a strategic framework to take action. Building 
resilience includes a focus on the long-term 
sustainability of communities with the explicit 
objective of strengthening the liveability, viability, 
and wellbeing of both the people and the landscape.
A drought resilient community should demonstrate:
•	Local leadership and initiative
•	Governance that embraces change
•	Connection through formal and informal networks
•	Diverse experiences and perspectives, 
representative of the whole community, 
including Traditional Owners.
The community needs to be able to: 
•	Work together in the pursuit of common goals
•	Foster responsibility within
•	Be flexible and adaptable
•	Learn from change
•	Anticipate issues
•	Solve problems from multiple angles.
“Communities should be empowered to lead their  
own recovery and resilience”.   —Sam Kirby, Emergency Recovery Victoria
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
25

THEMES, OUTCOMES 
AND FOCUS AREAS
As a result of the engagement with 
community, the following themes, 
outcomes, and actions have been 
identified in the Ovens Murray 
Drought Framework. The tables 
detail implementable actions  
to achieve the desired outcomes  
for a drought resilient region.
Under each theme, focus areas have been 
articulated with multiple actions to deliver. 
These include activities to assist farms and other 
businesses to anticipate and manage drought 
risk, and supporting programs such as networking 
and leadership training that will contribute to 
better health and wellbeing of individuals and the 
community. The Plan also identifies longer term 
actions involving partnerships and systems that 
can be activated to support communities in the 
lead up to, during, and post drought.
26

Photo: Henry Brydon
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
27

PEOPLE AND 
COMMUNITY
Theme 1
Outcome:  
A healthy and thriving region, resilient to climatic shocks, supported by 
local, trusted health and wellbeing services and community connection.
Theme 1 focuses on enhancing community 
resilience by strengthening community 
connections and health services, to support a 
healthy, well prepared and connected community 
capable of managing the challenges of drought. 
The theme promotes strengthening local  
health services, improving collaboration and 
advocating for trusted service providers.  
It also aims to bolster community and business 
leadership through mentoring and building 
trusted, integrated business networks.
28

Actions
1.1.1
Strengthen the capacity and tenure of local health care and community care services,  
and co-design programs to best meet the local need, especially in remote areas
1.1.2
Provide training and awareness programs for health and community service practitioners  
to better understand and support the community through the impacts of drought 
1.1.3
Improve collaboration and coordination between healthcare and community service 
providers to optimise service delivery, and improve the user experience (e.g., consider  
‘one touch’ case management and memorandum of understandings between providers)
1.1.4
Promote and support connection and links to health and wellbeing support services,  
and programs, including those in cross border communities
1.1.5
Promote the provision and uptake of health and wellbeing services pre, during and post 
drought, and link these with the work being completed by recovery groups and committees
1.1.6
Advocate for the engagement of local, trusted service providers, and utilise these  
services to meet the needs of community, including those in isolated border communities
1.1.7
Raise awareness of, access to, and support for community services e.g., Neighbourhood 
House and Service Clubs
1.1.8
Improve information sharing with and among service clubs and not-for-profit  
organisations through community forums
1.1.9
Partner with Traditional Owners to support culturally appropriate practices during 
emergency events
Actions
1.2.1
Identify, support and build the collaborative leadership capacity and capability  
across the region
1.2.2
Support the development of leaders through pathway programs, mentoring 
opportunities, and access to regional leadership networks and cross sector  
leadership networking events  
1.2.3
Support community-driven events that bring people together and build social cohesion
1.2.4
Encourage businesses to establish a trusted, integrated business network to build 
capability, capacity, expertise and sharing of knowledge
1.2.5
Support networking of industry, businesses, and the professional services sector  
(Bankers, lawyers, solicitors, financial advisors, agronomists)
Focus Area 1: Strengthen health and wellbeing services
Focus Area 2: Strengthening community 
and business leadership and networks
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
29

COORDINATION AND 
COLLABORATION
Theme 2
Outcome:  
A coordinated and collaborative approach to decision making and  
delivery of drought resilience activities within the region.
Theme 2 highlights the shared responsibility of 
community, industry and government to enhance 
collaboration to build drought resilience in the 
region. The actions emphasise a coordinated 
approach by utilising a governance body to 
identify priorities, clearly define stakeholder roles, 
and promote interagency planning and alignment  
to the work being done in neighbouring regions.  
The theme promotes collaboration in sharing 
education materials in relation to preparing for 
drought and strengthening forecasting and 
communication tools.
30

Actions
2.3.1
Establish or utilise an existing governance body to coordinate the delivery of the Ovens  
Murray Drought Resilience Plan to increase preparedness and resilience of the region
2.3.2
Develop clear regional drought governance and coordination arrangements with 
appropriate industry, community and agency leaders
2.3.3
Define and articulate the responsibilities of all stakeholders in drought preparedness
2.3.4
Promote and support proactive interagency planning for the preparation for and response 
to drought periods and incorporate mitigation actions into relevant regional and local 
strategies and plans
2.3.5
Leverage and align to the work being done in neighbouring regions and interstate  
resilience initiatives 
2.3.6
Collaborate to strategically design and develop local programs, leveraging off the learnings 
from community leadership programs focussed on disaster recovery and climate change 
adaptation and resilience
2.3.7
Support opportunities for Traditional Owners to build drought resilience and  
preparedness efforts, in line with their self-determined values, goals and aspirations  
for Country and community
2.3.8
Support, advocate for and assist, the community to design and implement drought 
resilience projects
2.3.9
Local Government Authorities and community groups to provide a voice for the  
region at state and national government levels to drive action for drought preparation,  
mitigation and adaptation
2.3.10
Support Local Government Authorities to prioritise strategic drought planning and 
infrastructure investment, and ensure this is in alignment with their Municipal Emergency 
Management Plans (MEMP), and implementation of their climate adaption strategies
2.3.11
Promote an all-hazards approach to planning and risk mitigation 
2.3.12
Advocate for our Local Government Authorities and towns to connect in identifying their 
resilience strategies and build relationships with all services to prepare for events through 
centralised education programs, so critical decisions are made consistently and clearly
2.3.13
Promote the use of shared local trusted services within and along the borders by 
developing Memorandum of Understanding between Local Government Authorities
2.3.14
Develop a collaborative approach which supports proactive targeted community  
messaging on drought resilience, including those in isolated cross border communities
Focus Area 3: Delivery of a coordinated approach
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
31

Actions
2.4.1
Support the collaborative provision and centralised collation of information that  
enables community to better understand how drought impacts them and broader  
business resilience. Information is to include:
•	Social, economic and environmental impacts of drought and  
climate change in the region
•	Relevant policies and plans
•	Climate change impacts and projections
•	Climate change scenarios and possible technologies, services and  
land use that may become relevant
•	Drought preparedness case studies and success stories
•	Drought preparedness education opportunities
•	Drought resilience research, development and extension information
•	Indigenous knowledge and practices
•	Resources to help understand drought and climate change and their  
impacts on business and the region 
•	The interrelated risks of drought, fire, floods, biosecurity and storms
2.4.2
Strengthen forecasts and communication tools about water availability under  
predicted climate scenarios including drought
2.4.3
Collaboratively produce and distribute education and communication materials  
relevant to the region on water use (efficiency, allocations and its distribution)  
to the various users in community (urban, rural, brokers, groundwater)
2.4.4
Continue to document best practice, lessons of experience and case studies to  
inform future drought mitigation processes, strategies and programs
Focus Area 4: Information sharing and collaboration
“It is important to avoid duplication by using trusted 
existing partnerships, setting up mechanisms so there is  
a joint effort, and working together with partner agencies”
—Mark Bailey, Goulburn Murray Water
32

OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
33

AGRICULTURE AND 
ALLIED INDUSTRIES
Theme 3
Outcome:  
Thriving agricultural industries better able to withstand the impacts  
of drought, supported by a skilled workforce.
Theme 3 emphasises bolstering the economic 
viability and resilience of the business community 
by proactive holistic business planning, skill 
development and management programs. It aims  
to support agribusinesses to strengthen their 
strategic business planning to manage risk, 
improve decision making and diversify income 
streams and builds farm resilience by utilising 
innovative land management practices. It also 
aims to empower the younger generation to view 
a career in agriculture as a rewarding choice and 
advocates for improved training, career programs 
and youth engagement to increase the attraction 
and retention of a skilled workforce.
34

Actions
3.5.1
Improve access to, and build the capability and capacity of, local business planning 
organisations to support farmers and agribusinesses
3.5.2
Encourage and support businesses to identify, navigate and seek professional advice  
to strengthen holistic business planning incorporating:
•	drought as a risk
•	timely decision making
•	system and income diversification
3.5.3
Promote drought business preparation and self-resilience messaging through established 
industry supply chains and community networks
3.5.4
Support business at all scales adapt to the challenges of a changing climate to enable  
them to become more resilient and competitive in the marketplace
Focus Area 5: Encourage and support business 
planning incorporating risk management
Photo: Murray Dairy
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
35

Actions
3.6.1
Strengthen the Ovens Murray extension knowledge network to encourage innovative  
land management practices to improve efficiency, productivity, sustainability and  
overall system health
3.6.2
Build farmers knowledge base, skills and decision-making capabilities to improve  
practices that build landscape resilience, leading to longer term productivity gains
3.6.3
Promote landscape management strategies to maintain ground cover to support healthy 
soils, maintain soil moisture content, reduce erosion, increase productivity and improve 
resilience to drought
3.6.4
Encourage the establishment of appropriately designed stock containment areas,  
including infrastructure and reticulation considerations, as well as fostering successful 
feed management and fodder production systems
3.6.5
Support primary producers by offering one-on-one advice, field visits, peer learning 
networks and developing online resources to develop and implement farm water plans
3.6.6
Develop farm water extension programs that promote the drought resilience benefits  
of fencing off farm dams and waterways, and utilising infrastructure such as tanks,  
troughs, pumps and pipes
3.6.7
Advocate for a review of regional water point management and number  
(locations, operation, ownership, maintenance) to ensure sufficient access  
to water during times of drought
3.6.8
Encourage and educate producers to select for genetic traits that maximise  
productivity to build the resilience of their herds
3.6.9
Promote the integration of renewable energy into agricultural systems
Focus Area 6: Encourage and support on-farm 
drought resilience and preparedness activities
“I believe that farmers as land stewards have a responsibility to the 
community to farm sustainably and in doing so, have an opportunity 
to be part of the solution for climate change”.
—Jane Carney, Chair (North East) Ovens Landcare Network Inc
36

Photo: Rural city of Wangaratta
Actions
3.7.1
Establish or strengthen programs such as youth networks, vocational training in  
high schools, scholarships and exchange programs to make careers in agriculture  
and natural resource management more accessible and attractive to youth 
3.7.2
Advocate for the provision of training for those already in, or new to, the agriculture  
industry to support up skilling, transitioning and/or retention
3.7.3
Support and promote careers and educational pathways to gain industry qualifications  
in agriculture through workshops, agricultural enterprise excursions, careers days,  
on-farm work experience and traineeships
3.7.4
Support and encourage the attraction, training and retention of high calibre educators 
to schools, TAFEs and universities, to improve the standard and overall outcomes of 
agricultural education
3.7.5
Support the creation of partnerships between universities, vocational education training 
providers, community leadership programs, and the agriculture industry, to support 
industry-wide tailored training initiatives, and ensure agricultural graduates have 
streamlined access to career opportunities
3.7.6
Provide access to training to grow the agricultural and natural resource management 
workforces to better deal with the specific challenges of drought and other climate  
related risks
Focus Area 7: Create agricultural educational pathways 
that meet the needs of the region’s agricultural industry
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
37

NATURAL AND BUILT 
ENVIRONMENT
Theme 4
Outcome:  
Healthy landscapes better able to withstand the impacts of drought.
Theme 4 highlights the importance of sustainable 
land management practices, supporting healthy 
resilient landscapes through collaborative 
stewardship. It promotes sustainable landscape 
management and climate adaption strategies, in  
collaboration with Landcare and Traditional Owners, 
for long term drought resilience that addresses 
social, economic and environmental needs.
38

Actions
4.8.1
Advocate for cohesive policy development that acknowledges how land and resource 
management may vary between sub regions as they experience vastly different conditions 
(e.g. between Rutherglen and Harrietville or Mansfield and Myrtleford)
4.8.2
Support landholders to plan for drought resilience at the landscape scale through the 
development of whole of farm management plans, with consideration to waterways and 
catchments, biodiversity linkages, invasive plants and animals and on-farm natural capital
4.8.3
Support activities to understand and promote water retention in the landscape,  
including linkages with other regions
4.8.4
Identify, in partnership with Traditional Owners, opportunities to use traditional knowledge, 
and culturally appropriate tools to heal and care for Country
4.8.5
Support Traditional Owners/First Peoples to protect and build resilience of significant 
cultural landscapes vulnerable to drought, in line with Government’s legal and  
policy obligations
4.8.6
Support and promote the role that Landcare groups and networks play in building  
drought resilience at farm and landscape level
4.8.7
Increase the understanding of ecological thresholds (tipping points) for threatened  
species and ecological communities to inform management actions, considering  
climate change and extreme events such as drought
4.8.8
Advocate for additional support in the management of invasive pests, weeds and 
biosecurity risks during drought
4.8.9
Mitigate bushfire risk to the community by proactively reducing forest fuel loads  
with planned burning in a targeted and timely manner
Focus Area 8: Sustainable landscape management
Actions
4.9.1
Advocate and build collaborative partnerships to use recycled water close to water  
plants in the Ovens Murray region
4.9.2
Invest in community infrastructure and support access to water supplies to maintain 
irrigation of sporting, recreational facilities, green urban spaces, and other community 
assets during drought
Focus Area 9: Strategic infrastructure management
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
39

RESEARCH, EDUCATION 
AND INNOVATION
Theme 5
Outcome:  
Evidence based research and development to support industry to  
manage risk, uptake innovative practices and increase profitability.
Theme 5 advocates for evidence-based research 
and development to enhance adaptive sustainable 
management in agricultural industries. It promotes 
translating research to on-farm application 
and collaboratively identifying research and 
development priorities with industry. It promotes 
the awareness and uptake of new innovative 
technology and practices to support the region 
through climate adaptation.
40

Actions
5.10.1
Identify and seek investment in research, development and extension gaps,  
leveraging investment through collaboration and partnering with both national  
and global research providers
5.10.2
Support innovation and the co-development of research which is translatable  
to practical on-farm solutions and aligns with drought resilience principles
5.10.3
Strengthen collaboration and knowledge sharing between industry and research  
and development
5.10.4
Address research gaps, such as to understand and quantify underground water  
resources, inflow volumes and associated ecological change, including under climate 
change scenarios; and the shift of rainfall-runoff relationships, inflow volumes and 
associated ecological change in the region
5.10.5
Ensure research, development and extension priorities and activities are strategic, 
collaborative and targeted to improve profitability, productivity, competitiveness and 
preparedness for future opportunities and drought challenges
Focus Area 10: Support climate related research and development
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
41

Actions
5.11.1
Advocate for and support ongoing regional leadership and collaboration to eliminate  
the region’s digital divide, and capitalise on its digital strengths and opportunities 
5.11.2
Strengthen awareness of, and investigate new technologies and practices for,  
climate adaption
5.11.3
Co-design research and extension programs that resonate with farming communities,  
and highlight economic returns and farm sustainability
5.11.4
Support and empower farmers to accelerate the adoption of innovative and resilient 
farming practices that best suit their needs and circumstances, offering one-on-one advice, 
communities of practice, peer learning networks, workshops and online resources
5.11.5
Support and advocate for integrated training on modern farm systems across education 
providers and allied services
5.11.6
Increase the farming community’s digital skills and the integration of smart technology  
(e.g., having the knowledge and infrastructure to access cloud-based software, or benefit  
from cloud connected water monitoring systems)
5.11.7
Undertake an extension and awareness program that increases understanding of  
natural capital, natural capital accounting and environmental markets, such as carbon  
and biodiversity
Focus Area 11: Support the adoption of new technologies
“You can’t manage what you don’t measure”.
—Sophie Hanna, Riverine Plains
42

OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
43

The following case studies offer instances of real-life stories from 
the Ovens Murray community aligned with the themes of the drought 
framework. These examples showcase various facets of fostering 
resilience and encompass building a cohesive community, health and 
wellness, sustainable land management, self-accountability, adaptive 
governance and clear communication.
CASE STUDIES 
OF RESILIENCE
Photo: Alpine Valleys 
Community Leadership (AVCL)
“Wherever we can, we should use and build the capacity of local groups”.
—Helen Wilson, North East Catchment Management Authority
44

CASE STUDY 1
Alpine Valleys Community 
Leadership Program
Aligned – Theme 1: People and Communities – 
Focus Area 2: Strengthening community and 
business leadership and networks
The strength of a community is made up of the 
sum of individuals that live and work within it.  
In regional areas, where townships can be quite 
small and resources are finite, it is essential  
that people come together, increase their  
capacity, and be empowered and inspired to  
grow their communities.
In a world that is being disrupted by constant 
change, an ongoing challenge for regional 
communities is how to nurture, support and sustain 
leaders who encounter a variety of challenges  
that can impact their ability to lead effectively.
Alpine Valleys Community Leadership (AVCL) 
operates across the Northeast and Border 
regions of Victoria and NSW, delivering a range of 
contemporary programs focused on community 
capacity strengthening. The flagship program is 
the Alpine Valleys Community Leadership Annual 
Program (AVCLP) and is one of nine Victorian 
Regional Community Leadership Programs that 
aim to develop and facilitate the emergence of 
local leaders; strengthen existing community 
leadership capabilities; and develop stronger 
connections between local leaders and regional 
development initiatives.
Elise Hill is an Upper Murray dairy farmer, and 
an active member of her community, lending her 
support to the township and region she’s proud  
to call her own. In 2022, Elise completed the  
Alpine Valleys Community Leadership Program, 
through a scholarship funded by the Gardiner 
Dairy Foundation.
Through the program, Elise was immersed in 
place-based learning, undertook a community 
focused project with the intention of producing 
positive outcomes to the region, and engaged in 
experiential learning where she was introduced 
to key issues that encouraged her to develop and 
explore her own learning and leadership styles.
“The AVCL program was terrific, it helped me further 
develop and extend my skill set and strengthened 
my capacity to contribute and provide leadership 
within my community.”
People like Elise are at the heart of any thriving 
community, creating a sustained need for 
individuals who are empowered to act as local 
leaders, taking up positions through which they 
can facilitate action on local issues. The AVCLP 
has been invaluable in enhancing Elise’s and the 
broader region’s capacity, empowering AVCLP 
Alumni to pursue leadership opportunities, in both 
a community and professional capacity and to 
facilitate solutions to community-based projects, 
in alignment with regional priorities.  
Written by Madeline Hines,  
Alpine Valleys Community Leadership
CASE STUDY 2
Case Study 2 – Lessons from 
drought: prepare early
Aligned – Theme 2: Coordination and 
Collaboration – Focus Area 3: Delivery of  
a coordinated approach
Goulburn­-Murray Water’s (GMW) role is to 
efficiently manage, store and deliver water to 
a diverse range of enterprises across northern 
Victoria. GMW’s customers include gravity 
irrigation, regulated and unregulated surface 
water diverters, groundwater, urban water 
corporations and environmental water holders.
Victoria’s climate and streamflow is highly variable, 
but within this variability the Ovens Murray region 
has experienced a warming and drying trend over 
recent decades.
With the severity of the Millennium Drought 
of 1997-2009 still fresh in the minds of the 
community, seasonal determinations in northern 
Victorian systems ended the 2015 year below 
100% of high-reliability water shares. Under 
the Victorian allocation policy this meant water 
reserves for the 2016-17 year were low and water 
availability would depend on rainfall before 1 July 
2016. This scenario had not occurred since the last 
year of the Millennium Drought.
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
45

As the Northern Victorian Resource Manager, 
GMW, in consultation with urban water 
corporations, Catchment Management Authorities 
and the Victorian Environmental Water Holder, 
began preparing operating scenarios if dry 
conditions continued. This involved:
•	defining actions to conserve water; 
•	agencies briefing their own networks with 
updates on the impact of low storage volumes;
•	advising local government to help them  
prepare for impacts; 
•	a “Prepare for Dry” media campaign jointly 
prepared by GMW, Lower Murray Water and 
DEECA informing irrigators and communities 
and urging early preparation for a possible  
very dry year with low water availability and;
•	conducting public information sessions  
to allow community members to ask about  
water availability.
Mark Bailey was Manager of Water Resources  
with GMW at the time, reflects that:
“Fortunately, the region experienced wet conditions early 
in 2016 meaning our worst fears of a drought were  
not realised as rains began to refill storages. Ultimately, 
some parts of the Murray experienced flooding.
However, we learnt that with proactive planning and 
collaboration we gained a shared understanding 
allowing for more informed preparations, enhanced 
planning for actions and coordination across 
agencies, better information for communities, and 
closer liaison between water-based agencies”.
In future, the Ovens Murray climate will likely 
continue to be variable with wet years and dry years, 
against a background drying trend. With a warmer 
future and projections of declining water availability, 
there may be more frequent and severe droughts in 
coming decades and more extreme rainfall events.
These actions emphasise how a coordinated 
approach utilising a governing body to identify 
priorities, clearly defining stakeholder roles, 
promoting interagency planning and aligning 
interagency works, can assist in mitigating risk 
when dry conditions arise.
Written by Goulburn Murray Water
Photo: Goulburn Murray Water
46

CASE STUDY 3
Young Farmers connecting and 
collaborating across industry
Aligned – Theme 2: Collaboration and 
Communication – Focus Area 4:  
Information sharing and collaboration
The future of agriculture in the Ovens Murray region 
rests with young farmers, however, there are many 
challenges for young people in the industry, such as: 
•	Difficulty accessing land and capital 
•	Low profitability and high financial risk  
•	Limited opportunities 
•	Negative perceptions and stereotypes 
•	Social and cultural factors, such as gender  
and family expectations 
The challenge of attracting and retaining young 
people in agriculture is complex and requires a 
collaborative and holistic approach. The ‘Riverine 
Plains Youth in Ag Program’ provides an excellent 
opportunity for young farmers, agribusiness 
professionals and students to connect with 
like-minded people and receive early-career 
advice from industry leaders and Riverine Plains 
Scholarship Program recipients.
The Riverine Plains Youth in Ag Program is focused 
on establishing strong industry learning and 
networking connections, with two major events 
that bring young farmers: the Youth in Ag dinner, 
and the Cultivate & Connect Mentoring Day. 
These events include agribusiness tours, trial site 
and farm visits, discussions panels and keynote 
speakers of industry experts and business owners. 
New products and innovative practices are also 
on show; the Cultivate & Connect Mentoring Day 
is one of the most valued opportunities of the 
program. Former Riverine Plains CEO, Catherine 
Marriott has participated in various mentoring 
programs throughout her career and recognises 
their value, especially for those in the early stages 
of their career journey.
“Mentoring can be either formal or informal and 
is a great way for professionals to share their 
experiences and expertise to support young 
people on various aspects of career development. 
Mentoring is about creating connections that can be 
called on when needed, particularly when advice is 
given generously and with the sole aim of helping 
someone out”. 
Written by Riverine Plains
Photo: Riverine Plains
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
47

CASE STUDY 4
Managing business risk and 
increasing profitability
Aligned – Theme 3: Agriculture and allied 
industries – Focus Area 5: Encourage and support 
business planning incorporating risk management
Scott and Belinda McKillop operate their 500 
hectare, 380 cow dairy farm in Dederang in the 
Kiewa Valley. Their operation is predominantly 
dryland with a small amount of effluent water 
used for irrigation.
The McKillops endeavour to manage business 
risk and get a better return on investment by 
constantly exploring opportunities to optimise 
their farm production and profitability in an  
ever-changing environment.
The Ovens Murray dairy industry has a strong 
history of working collaboratively via discussion 
groups and farmer-to-farmer interactions. Scott 
and Belinda look to these and other trusted 
sources such as Dairy Australia, the CSIRO,  
long time farmers in the region, and the Bureau  
of Meteorology to build their knowledge base, 
skills and decision-making capabilities.
They also manage business risk by prudently 
controlling their costs and profitability with the 
following strategies: 
•	Improving operational efficiencies wherever 
possible
•	Keeping pasture quality high to ensure the  
milk production is higher for longer 
•	Regularly calculating their feed program  
and building fodder reserves as insurance 
against season variability
•	Proactively looking ahead using weather 
forecasting tools to manage climate  
influenced risk
•	Diversifying income streams 
•	Enhancing animal welfare with cow activity 
collars, offering insights on how cow health  
is impacted by extreme weather conditions
•	Reducing energy costs by using solar energy 
•	Nurturing good relationships with suppliers  
and contractors.
Scott believes that managing risk requires daily 
focus and a willingness to be decisive when 
adapting to changing climatic conditions. He is 
also a strong advocate for being proactive and 
flexible as it helps to build a more resilient  
farming business that is more connected to  
the local industry and agricultural community.
Written by the North East Catchment  
Management Authority
Photo: North East Catchment 
Management Authority
48

CASE STUDY 5
Holistic farm planning
Aligned – Theme 3: Agriculture and  
Allied Industries – Focus Area 6:  
Encourage and support on-farm drought 
resilience and preparedness activities
Jane and Peter Carney breed high performance 
Angus cattle on two grazing properties in the 
Ovens Murray region. Over the past two decades 
they have experienced the nuances of the region’s 
varied seasonal patterns and learnt to adapt to  
wet seasons, severe frosts, droughts, bushfires 
and storms.
Peter and Jan take a holistic approach to farm 
planning, seeking to find a balance between 
making short term decisions and long-term 
decisions to generate longer term profitability  
and sustainability.
Aiming to build productivity, they have 
concentrated on producing high quality feed 
and higher performing animals to minimise their 
carbon footprint. They have also joined their 
local Better Beef Group, sought to maximise the 
benefits of rotational grazing, started a multi 
species pasture cropping program, become 
an active Landcare member with a focus on 
implementing sustainable farming practices, 
sought agronomy advice, and taken part in the 
North East Catchment Management Authority’s 
Soils Health program.
The Soils Health program provided farmers with 
peer-to-peer learning and technical advice, with 
results demonstrating reduced salinity, increased 
moisture retention, increasing organic matter and 
nutrient value, which should ultimately lead to 
improved pastures.
The Carney’s demonstrate it is possible to unlock 
the potential productive value of soils, creating  
a robust viable farm business, and mitigating risk 
by setting up ‘holistic farm’ planning to improve 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability.
Written by the North East Catchment  
Management Authority
Photo: North East Catchment 
Management Authority
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
49

CASE STUDY 6
Young Farmer Business  
Bootcamps
Aligned – Theme 3: Agriculture and  
Allied Industries – Focus Area 7:  
Create a flexible workforce that meets  
the need of agricultural businesses
Agriculture Victoria has long recognised that 
the future of Victorian agriculture rests with 
young farmers. As a result of this, the Young 
Farmers Network was established by Agriculture 
Victoria to support the next generation of farmers 
and provide opportunities for young people in 
agriculture to have a say, enhance their skills  
and progress their careers.
A key program delivered through the Young 
Farmers Network are the Young Farmer Business 
Bootcamps, designed to help producers to 
understand and manage business risk, develop a 
business plan to grow their business and to have 
confidence that there is a future in agriculture  
for them. 
These fun and interactive Bootcamps use a 
series of farm case studies as real-life examples, 
providing participants with the skills to help 
manage their farm business, as well as planning 
their business future. 
Agriculture Victoria Young Farmer Coordinator, 
Sarah Wallis, is highly motivated by amazing 
stories from passionate young farmers who are 
being assisted in the agricultural industry.
“What makes the program so powerful is the 
rich mentoring relationships that are facilitated 
by private consultants. With the benefit of their 
mentor’s knowledge and experience, young farmers 
are assisted in building strong networks, being 
upskilled, supported to make better decisions, and  
to thrive in their pursuit to be a successful farmer”. 
Upskilling of new entrants to agriculture and 
attraction and retention of youth in the industry 
has been identified as a key initiative in the  
Ovens Murray region, and young farmers looking 
to establish a successful career in the agriculture 
industry can gain valuable skills through Young 
Farmer Business Bootcamps.
Part of Agriculture Victoria’s Farm Business 
Resilience Program, which is jointly funded through 
the Australian Government’s Future Drought Fund 
and the Victorian Government’s Future Agriculture 
Skills Capacity Fund, the Young Farmer Business 
Bootcamps are helping to grow the resilience  
of young farm businesses and prepare them for 
the future, while also providing opportunities  
for emerging farmers to connect with like-minded 
motivated people. 
Written by Agriculture Victoria 
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/youngfarmers
Photo: Agriculture Victoria
50

CASE STUDY 7
Managing biosecurity risks  
and improving soil health
Aligned – Theme 4: Natural and Built 
Environment – Focus Area 8:  
Sustainable landscape management
Victoria’s High Country is renowned for its pristine 
natural environment that attracts visitors to its alpine 
areas, agricultural landscapes and rural towns.
Upper Ovens Valley Landcare President Peter 
Jacobs believes that “extra care is needed to  
ensure riparian areas and waterways throughout  
the High Country are protected for the sake of 
future generations of visitors and locals alike.”
“Important riparian areas alongside rivers and 
streams act as a filter that preserves water quality  
and supports the habitat of animals and plants 
throughout the landscape. These areas are vulnerable 
to invasive pests and feral animals like deer, pigs 
and goats, and introduced tree and plant species 
like willows, maples, box elders, elms, sycamores, 
and blackberries. Without ongoing management, 
these kinds of biosecurity risks can cause significant 
harm by choking out native species, taking over the 
natural habitat and degrading the landscape.”
By completing strategic restoration work in high 
value areas, Peter and the Upper Ovens Valley 
Landcare group are stopping these invasive 
species from taking over the natural environment. 
Their continued efforts are demonstrating 
outstanding results in protecting the health of 
waterways throughout the Ovens Murray region.
Written by Agriculture Victoria 
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/make-a-difference
Photo: Upper Ovens Valley Landcare
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
51

CASE STUDY 8
Utilising technology to better 
inform management decisions
Aligned – Theme 5: Research, Education  
and Innovation – Focus Area 10:  
Support the adoption of new technologies
Anna Toland, Simon Riddle and family run Toland 
Merino with approximately 1200 stud Poll Ewes, 
800 Flock Ewes and shear 4500 sheep annually 
at their 650-acre property, at Feltrin in North 
East Victoria. They aim to breed highly productive 
modern sheep, with an emphasis on wool quality, 
growth rates and worm resistance.
An active community member, Anna recently 
joined the Board of Riverine Plains, who specialise 
in providing independent and relevant information 
through a research program, publications and 
events for the north east and Riverina farming 
community. The Board of Riverine Plains also 
coordinate the Northeast Node of the Victorian 
Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub, 
a program of the Australian Government’s Future 
Drought Fund.
One of the activities recently delivered by Riverine 
Plains, focused on maximising use of electronic 
identification (EID) tags to better inform livestock 
management decisions. Livestock producers are 
increasingly using EID tags to support livestock 
management decisions, however, despite a 
widespread increase in adoption, many are not 
collecting or utilising the data.
52

Anna and Simon have been using electronic 
identification (EID) for many years and identify  
the many benefits to the information the tags  
hold and how this supports livestock management 
and decision making. Benefits for Anna and  
Simon include:
•	fibre diameter measurement in wool classing 
and selection
•	fleece weight
•	annual pregnancy stats
•	ram allocation
•	stock selection for improved current and  
future production
•	in a dual-purpose enterprise, allocating Merino 
ewes or lambs into wool and meat groups  
based on wool fibre diameter, fleece weight  
and body weight
Anna and Simon’s message is simple.
“Identify what your buyers want and use it to define 
your breeding objectives. This will inform the data 
you require to collect through EID so you can select 
and manage stock accurately, improve your decision 
making, and be efficient.”
On-farm adoption of innovations, such as EID 
technology, has strengthened Toland Merino’s 
adaptive business practices and management 
decisions. Being adaptive has led to improved 
productivity and profitability, especially during 
periods of adverse conditions such as drought, 
when decision making is critical.
Written by Sophie Hanna from Riverine Plains
Photo: Toland Poll Merino
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
53

This Plan takes the first step in providing the 
necessary framework for the Ovens Murray region 
to communicate its needs and priorities in building 
regional drought resilience. We acknowledge that 
continued collective action is necessary for the 
Plan to succeed.
This Plan is a document to be used by the 
community, in collaboration with industry, the  
not-for-profit sector, and all levels of government to: 
•	coordinate investment
•	align to other plans or strategies  
to support funding proposals
•	collaborate for shared outcomes
•	inform future drought resilience priorities
•	develop drought resilience programs
•	monitor resilience to future droughts.
NEXT 
STEPS
54

Some of the actions identified can be addressed 
directly by the community, while others will 
require broader contribution, collaboration and 
coordination from governments, not-for-profit 
organisations, and industry.
A partnership approach will be needed with 
Traditional Owners to implement some elements 
of the Plan, in line with the Government’s policy 
and legal commitments, including the Victorian 
Aboriginal Affairs Framework and the Department 
of Energy, Environment and Climate Action’s 
Pupangarli Marnmarnepu ‘Owning Our Future’ 
2020–2025 self-determination reform strategy.
Immediate next steps include securing resources 
to support delivery of actions within the Plan, 
identification of a lead organisation to coordinate  
the Plan’s delivery, and establishment of a 
governance group to support and collaborate  
on the Plan’s implementation.
The Plan Coordinator will ensure engagement  
and partnership with community, industry, 
business, not-for-profit, government stakeholders 
and Traditional Owners/First Peoples to identify 
roles and responsibilities to deliver the Plan and 
achieve desired outcomes.
It is acknowledged that the Plan will need to be 
agile and adapt in response to changes in the 
natural environment, the operational and policy 
environments of industry and various levels of 
government, evaluation and learning, and the 
needs of the community.
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
55

MONITORING, 
EVALUATION 
AND LEARNING
The collaborative effort and shared expertise used 
to prepare the Plan is the important first step in 
building drought resilience in the Ovens Murray. 
Work has been done by the region to articulate 
the actions needed to achieve desired regional 
outcomes. The next step is for the actions and 
activities identified in the Plan to be implemented, 
evaluated and adapted as needed to achieve  
the longer-term outcomes for drought resilience.
Figure 8. Pathway of program delivery 
through discovery, engagement, development, 
implementation and evaluation
1
Understand 
the context
Past, current 
and future 
understanding 
of drought 
in the region
2
Gather 
momentum
Bring together 
the experiences 
and perspectives 
to develop a 
regional Plan
3
Articulate the 
desired steps 
for change
Work together 
to determine 
desired outcomes 
and actions
4
Take the steps 
and actions
Implement the 
actions and activities 
to acheive change 
and build resilience
5
Determine 
next steps
Evaluate regional 
outcomes and 
identify learnings 
and gaps for 
future progress
We are here
Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
56

Monitoring, evaluation and learning (MEL) is  
a key element of the RDRP Program. Program 
objectives, outcomes and measures of success  
are clearly articulated at all levels of program 
delivery (national, state and regional) and are over 
a range of short, medium and long timeframes.
Measuring success
The outcomes identified in this Plan are community 
and region wide, and dependent on the fourth step 
of implementation identified in the pathway of 
program delivery (Figure 8). Given the long-term 
outcomes of the Plan, the MEL framework below 
outlines how progress toward success will be 
measured. 
Management and reporting
The organisation awarded as the lead to coordinate 
delivery of the Plan will work with Agriculture 
Victoria to provide up-to-date data and information 
to support program implementation and planning. 
Monitoring and reporting will enable: key learnings 
to be identified, effective reporting, and adaptive 
program management. 
A range of assessment tools will be used to 
indicate progress including, but not limited to, 
surveys, case studies, stakeholder interviews and 
engagement data analysis. Data and information 
will be collected at various intervals across 
implementation planning, and during and after 
activities are implemented.
Assumptions underpinning 
success of the Plan
Measuring success and reporting on progress 
toward regionally specific outcomes is dependent 
on several key assumptions.
 
Key assumptions affecting short-term  
outcomes (1–2 years)
•	Regional stakeholders have the capacity and 
capability to participate in strategic planning
•	Regional stakeholders are willing to cooperate 
with each other on regional planning
•	Program design is sufficient to give regional 
stakeholders opportunities to identify and 
communicate regional drought resilience needs
•	Regional communities are motivated to take 
ownership of completed plans and actively seek 
to implement them
•	There are sufficient learnings to continuously 
improve program implementation 
 
Key assumptions affecting medium term 
outcomes (2–4 years)
•	Supporting regional stakeholders through 
program implementation will result in change in 
practice in the Ovens Murray
•	There are sufficient opportunities and funding 
for the region to implement elements of the Plan
•	Plans contain implementable activities to build 
drought resilience
•	The Ovens Murray Plan Coordinator and regional 
stakeholders continue to review and implement 
the Plan
MEL Framework
Key regional themes and outcomes are matched 
with relevant Future Drought Fund (the Fund) 
strategic priorities, regional progress measures 
(2–4 years) and indicators. 
The Framework is aligned to existing MEL Plans at 
the Program and Fund level to ensure consistence 
and to ensure the data collection tools provide 
information across a range of learning and 
reporting requirements. 
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
57

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
People and Community
A healthy and thriving region, resilient to climatic shocks, supported by local,  
trusted health and wellbeing services, and community connection.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Improved collaboration and coordination 
between governments, industry, 
communities and health care networks.
Communities are learning and building 
capability, capacity, expertise, and sharing 
innovative ways to build social resilience.
Improved community awareness of and 
access to health and wellbeing services.
Communities are using their 
knowledge to plan for drought 
resilience.
Communities have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver  
on actions across the region.
Coordination and Collaboration
A coordinated and collaborative approach to decision making and delivery  
of drought resilience activities within the region.
Social resilience 
for resourceful and 
adaptable communities
Communities are communicating regional 
drought resilience needs and priorities to 
inform investment.
Communities are coming together to 
prepare for and respond to drought.
Plan actions and opportunities are 
incorporated into other strategic planning 
across the region.
Traditional Owners are engaged 
in regional drought preparedness 
activities, and those activities reflect 
Traditional Owners’ priorities.
Implementation/planning  
groups and networks function 
well together.
Leaders in the region are  
more confident to implement 
strategic actions.
Stakeholders are working 
together to plan and deliver  
on actions across the region.
Traditional Owners are 
increasingly involved in drought 
programs and activities.
Agriculture and Allied Industries
Thriving agricultural industries better able to withstand the impacts  
of drought, supported by a skilled workforce.
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable communities
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Primary producers and businesses are 
better able to prepare for drought.
Primary producers are better able to 
identify business risk and make timely 
decisions.
Farmers are learning about and 
implementing new business 
strategies and practices.
Farmers and agricultural 
industries have an improved 
understanding of drought 
resilience specific to their region.
Table 1. MEL Framework for the Ovens Murray
1. Future Drought Fund
58

FDF1 Strategic priority
Progress measures (2–4 years)
Indicators
Natural and Built Environment
Healthy landscapes better able to withstand the impacts of drought.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Knowledge and understanding of 
resilience of natural resources across  
the region is increasing.
Capability to manage natural resource to 
build resilience is improving across region.
Partnerships, networks 
and engagement between 
stakeholders managing natural 
resources are ongoing.
Stakeholders have increased 
understanding of natural 
resource management to build 
drought resilience.
Research, Education and Innovation
Evidence based research and development to support industry to manage risk,  
uptake innovative practices and increase profitability.
Environmental resilience 
for sustainable and 
improved functioning of 
our natural landscapes
Economic resilience 
for an innovative and 
profitable agricultural 
sector
Innovative pathways and opportunities to 
improve drought resilience in the region 
are being identified. 
New technologies and practices are known 
and being adopted to support primary 
producers and communities to adapt.
Research and extension programs are 
being co-designed with community and 
industry to provide outputs relating to  
the region.
Best practice approaches 
are being used to identify 
opportunities to build drought 
resilience in the region.
Stakeholders are learning  
about, implementing and 
adopting new practices.
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
59

APPRECIATION
On behalf of the Regional Reference Group, 
Agriculture Victoria thanks the many individuals, 
groups, associations, agencies, departments, and 
organisations who contributed to the development 
of the Plan. Your support and considered input 
are greatly appreciated and will go a long way 
to ensuring the Ovens Murray region is better 
prepared and more resilient to the impacts of 
future droughts.
The members representing the organisations  
listed below for the Regional Reference Group are 
also acknowledged and appreciated for the vital 
role you played in the development of this Plan.
•	Alpine Shire
•	Benalla Rural City Shire
•	Indigo Shire
•	Mansfield Shire
•	Towong Shire
•	Wangaratta Rural City Shire
•	Wodonga City Shire
•	Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action (formally known as Department 
of Environment, Water, Land and Planning
•	Department of Families, Fairness and Housing
•	Department of Health (formally known as 
Department of Health and Human Services)
•	Emergency Recovery Victoria
•	Goulburn Murray Water
•	Murray Dairy
•	North East Catchment Management Authority
•	Riverine Plains – North East Node of the  
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption  
and Innovation Hub
•	Rural Financial Counselling Service
•	Agriculture Victoria
“A community that grows local leadership and invests in its 
future leaders demonstrates a vibrant and sustainable region”.
—Judy Charlton, Chair Alpine Valley Community Leadership
60

Photo: Rural city of Wangaratta
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
61

REFERENCES
1	 Goulburn Drought Resilience Plan (2023) 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning program. 
Future Drought Fund www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf 
2	 Ovens Murray Regional Skills Demand profile 
(2023) Victorian Skills Authority. Department of 
Jobs, Skills, Industries and Regions
3	 Ovens Murray Coast Digital Plan (2022)  
Regional Partnerships Ovens Murray.  
Regional Development Victoria
4	 Victorian Primary Production Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan 2022–2026. Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning
5	 Hume Regional Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategy (2021). Department of Environment, 
Land, Water and Planning
6	 North East Regional Catchment Strategy 
2021–2027. North East Catchment Management 
Authority.
7	 Farm Business Resilience program,  
Future Drought Fund  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/farm-management/
prepare/farm-business-resilience-program
8	 Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub – North East Node – Riverine Plains 
www.riverineplains.org.au/victoria-drought-
resilience-adoption-innovation-hub
9	 Strong, Innovative, Sustainable:  
A new strategy for Agriculture in Victoria  
(2020) Victorian Government
10	 Hume Bushfire Management Strategy  
(2020) Department of Environment, Land,  
Water and Planning
11	 Ovens Murray Regional Economic Development 
Strategy (2022). Regional Development Victoria
12	 Australian Bureau of Statistics  
(last updated 2023) www.abs.gov.au 
13	 Drought in the Ovens Murray Region (2022) 
Frontier Economics
14	 Bureau of Meteorology (last updated 2023) 
www.bom.gov.au
15	 Droughts, fires and floods affecting  
Albury/Wodonga. Wodonga Historical Society
16	 Bureau of Meteorology.  
Historical view of the drought years  
www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/ 
knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml
17	 Data collection and an analysis for decision 
making in agriculture and local government 
(2003) North East Catchment Management 
Authority
18	 Resilience: what it is and is not (2020) Walker B. 
Journal of Ecology and Society, vol 25/2
19	 Goulburn Murray Resilience Strategy – Adapt, 
Transform, Thrive (2020) Regional Partnerships 
Goulburn and the Victorian Government
20	Goulburn Broken Regional Catchment 
Management Strategy 2021–2027. Goulburn 
Broken Catchment Management Authority
21	 Gippsland Drought Resilience Plan (2023) 
Regional Drought Resilience Planning program. 
Future Drought Fund www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf 
22	Wimmera Southern Mallee Drought Resilience 
Plan (2023) Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning program. Future Drought Fund  
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
62

OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
63

Community and Not-for-Profit Organisations
Australian Red Cross (State-wide and  
regional programs)
Lions Need for Feed (Victoria)
Alpine Valleys Community Leadership
Landcare Victoria
Country Fire Authority
Community Health Organisations 
National Centre for Farmer Health
Education and Capability Building 
TAFEs
Melbourne University
Farmer Groups and Local Business Leaders
Municipal agriculture sector advisory groups
Victorian Farmers Federation
United Dairy Farmers Victoria
Riverine Plains
Rural Financial Counselling Service
Small Business Mentoring Service
Business Support Partners Australia
Ovens Murray Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
Reference Group Members
Agriculture Victoria 
Alpine Shire
Benalla Rural City Shire
Indigo Shire
Mansfield Shire
Towong Shire
Wangaratta Rural City Shire
Wodonga City Shire
Department of Energy, Environment and  
Climate Action (previously the Department  
of Environment, Land, Water and Planning)
Department of Families, Fairness and Housing 
Department of Health and Human Services
Emergency Recovery Victoria
Goulburn Murray Water
Murray Dairy
North East Catchment Management Authority
Riverine Plains - North East Node of the Victorian 
Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
Rural Financial Counselling Service
Agricultural Industry and Farm Business Services
Agriculture industry representatives 
Agricultural consultants
Finance
Murray Dairy
AgriFutures
APPENDICES
Appendix 1 
Ovens Murray stakeholder 
engagement
The Ovens Murray Regional Reference Group 
was established to provide expert input to the 
Plan and ensure that the outcomes and actions 
identified represent a coherent and balanced 
view of stakeholder feedback. We acknowledge 
and appreciate all of the knowledge, insight and 
support that we have received in the creation  
of this Plan.
In-depth conversations with the organisations  
and individuals listed below were instrumental  
to the development of the Plan.
64

Government Agencies and Statutory Authorities
Centre for Regional and Rural Futures
Climate Change Adaptation, Community  
& Partnership Programs
Country Fire Authority 
Cross Border Commissioner
Emergency Management Victoria
Emergency Recovery Victoria  
(formerly Bushfire Recovery Victoria)
Foundation for Rural regional Renewal (FRRR)
Fire and Forest Operations
National Recovery and Resilience Agency
Rural Assistance Commissioner
Victoria Police
Natural Resource Management Organisations
North East Catchment Management Authority
Goulburn Murray Water
Goulburn Valley Water
North East Water
Landcare networks
Parks Victoria 
Other Future Drought Fund Programs
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub 
Leadership development program  
(Australian Rural Leadership Foundation)
Farm Business Resilience program  
(Agriculture Victoria)
Regional Drought Resilience Planning program –  
Goulburn, Gippsland, and Wimmera Southern 
Mallee (Agriculture Victoria)
Agriculture Dependent Resilient Communities 
Community of Practice
Regional Development Organisations
Regional Development Victoria
Small Business Organisations
Small Business Victoria
Small Business Mentoring Service
Traditional Owners
Taungurung Land and Waters Council  
Aboriginal Corporation
Yorta Yorta Nation Aboriginal Corporation
Gunaikurnai Land and Waters Aboriginal 
Corporation
Dhudhuroa – Victorian Aboriginal Corporation  
for Languages
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
65

Appendix 2 
Existing strategies, reports  
and programs
This Appendix outlines the existing strategies, 
reports and programs that have been reviewed for 
their relevance in building drought resilience in the 
region, in addition to those referenced. This appendix 
is intended to be used as a resource document.
Agriculture
Climate Futures – Opportunities and Challenges. 
(Climate adaption for dairy farming in the Alpine 
Valleys (2019) Patten Bridge, Bridge Logic 
Consulting
Dairy Australia Strategic Plan 2020–2025.  
Dairy Australia
Dairy Australia Climate Change Strategy 2020–25. 
Dairy Australia
Drought preparedness module – more beef  
from pastures. Meat and Livestock Australia,  
www.mbfp.mla.com.au (last updated 2019)
Farm decision making. The interaction of 
personality, farm business and risk to make 
more informed decisions (2020) Grains Research 
Development Corporation 
Future Focus – Dairy Industry Strategy  
Murray Region (2019) Dairy Australia
Murray Dairy Strategic Plan 2020–23.  
Dairy Australia
People in Agriculture, www.peopleinag.com.au 
(last updated 2022)
Community Health
From inside the farm gate: rural women’s stories of 
surviving and thriving. National Centre for Farmer 
Health, www.farmerhealth.org.au/inside-farm-gate 
(last updated 2021)
Steering Straight: Adapting suicide risk safety 
planning as a prevention-focused self-management 
resource for the Australian farming community 
(2023) Australian Journal of Rural Health 
Summary of the Royal Commission into Victoria’s 
mental health system. National Centre for  
Farmer Health, www.farmerhealth.org.au  
(last updated 2022)
Economic Development
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and  
Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES), 
www.agriculture.gov.au/abares (last updated 
January 2024)
Ovens Murray Regional Profile – an analysis 
of regional strengths and challenges (2019) 
Infrastructure Victoria
Ovens Murray Digital Plan (2022) Regional 
Partnerships Ovens Murray, Regional  
Development Victoria
The Economic Benefits of Native Shelter Belts 
Report (2015) Basalt to Bay Landcare Network Inc. 
Landcare: Issue 3
The Financial Impact of 2020 Summer Bushfire 
Smoke on the Wine Regions of North East Victoria 
(2020) Walpole M., Rural City of Wangaratta and 
North East Catchment Management Authority
Emergency Management
Bushfire recovery consultation report (2020) 
Victorian Council of Social Services
Community Resilience Framework for  
Emergency Management (2017)  
Emergency Management Victoria
Hume Regional Emergency Management Plan 
(2020) Hume Region Regional Emergency 
Management Planning Committee
66

Federal and State Government Policy and Programs
Agriculture and Climate Change. Department of 
Energy, Environment and Climate Action,  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/climate-and-weather/
policy-programs-action (last updated 2021)
Drought, disaster and rural support. Department  
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,  
www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/ 
farm-food-drought/drought (last updated 2023)
Drought Policy. Department of Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Forestry, www.agriculture.gov.au/
agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/
drought-policy (last updated 2023)
Future Drought Fund Regional Drought Resilience 
Planning Program Framework Extension (2022) 
Australian Department of Agriculture, Fisheries 
and Forestry
National Climate Resilience and Adaptation 
Strategy 2021–2025. Australian Department  
of Agriculture, Water and Environment
National Drought Response, Resilience and 
Preparedness Plan (2019). Australian Department 
of Agriculture 
Natural Environment Climate Change Adaptation 
Action Plan Victorian Government (2022). 
Department of Environment Land Water  
and Planning
Victoria’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan  
2017–2020 (2016). Department of Environment 
Land Water and Planning
Victorian drought preparedness and response 
framework. Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action, www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/
farm-management/managing-for-and-during-
drought/drought-preparedness-and-response-
framework (last updated 2021)
Victorian Drought Resilience Adoption and 
Innovation Hub, www.vicdroughthub.org.au  
(last updated 2023)
Victorian Government Response to the Inquiry into 
Tackling Climate Change in Victorian Communities 
(2021). Department of Environment, Land, Water 
and Planning
Victoria in Future 2019 (2019) Department of 
Environment, Land, Water and Planning
Knowledge, Research and Innovation 
Farm drought resilience research program.  
CSIRO, www.csiro.au/Drought-Resilience  
(last accessed 2023)
Future Regions Research Centre (2023) Federation 
University, www.federation.edu.au/research (last 
updated 2023)
Tatura Smart Farm – Agriculture Victoria,  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/about/our-research/
our-innovation-ecosystem/our-smartfarms/ 
tatura-mildura-smartfarms (last updated 2020)
Natural Resource Management
Climate Futures Report (2022) Murray Dairy
North East Regional Catchment Authority –  
Insights Paper (2021) North East Catchment 
Management Authority
North East Region Socio-Economic Value of 
Recreational Water: Selected Waterways and 
Waterbodies, North East Catchment (2019)  
North East Catchment Management Authority
North East Strategic Directions Statement – 
Integrated Water Management Forums  
(2019) Department of Environment, Land,  
Water and Planning 
Ovens Murray Climate Projections (2019) 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, CSIRO and Victorian Government
Supporting local action on climate change. 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action, www.climatechange.vic.gov.au/supporting-
local-action-on-climate-change (last updated 2022)
Regional Resilience
Central West Regional Resilience Strategy – 
Championing resilience and prosperity  
across Central West Queensland (2020) 
Queensland Government 
Combining social capital and technology for 
drought resilience in agriculture (2013)  
Ranjan R. Natural Resource Modelling, vol 27/1
OVENS MURRAY DROUGHT RESILIENCE PLAN
67

Community resilience framework for emergency 
management (2017) Emergency Management 
Victoria
Drought and the future of rural communities: 
Opportunities and challenges for climate change 
adaption in regional Victoria (2012) Kiem A. and 
Austin E. Global Environmental Change, vol 23/5
Making ‘resilience’, ‘adaptation’ and ‘transformation’ 
real for the design of sustainable development 
projects: piloting the Resilience, Adaptation 
Pathways and Transformation Assessment 
(RAPTA) framework in Ethiopia (2017) CSIRO
Managing extreme water shortage in Victoria –  
lessons from the Millennium Drought (2016) 
Department of Environment, Land, Water  
and Planning
Nature Conservation Strategy (2021) Parks Victoria
Resilience, adaptation pathways and transformation 
approach. A guide for designing, implementing and 
assessing interventions for sustainable futures 
(version 2) (2019) CSIRO, Australia
Social impacts of drought: a report to NSW 
Agriculture (2004) Centre for Rural Research, 
Charles Sturt University
Strengthening Australia’s Resilience to Climate 
Change (2022) CSIRO
The Alpine Community Recovery Committee –  
Community Recovery Plan (2021) The Alpine 
Community Recovery Committee
Transformative Adaptation Research Alliance 
(2022) CSIRO, www.research.csiro.au/tara  
(last accessed 2022) 
Understanding the drought phenomenon: the role 
of definitions (1985) Wilhite D. and Glantz M.  
Water International, vol 10/3
What is maladaptation and why does it matter? 
Cervest, www.cervest.earth/news/what-is-
maladaptation-and-why-does-it-matter  
(last updated 2022)
Small business
Small Business Natural Disaster Preparedness 
and Resilience Review (2022) Australian Small 
Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman
Traditional Owners
Aboriginal Economic Development Strategy for 
Gippsland (2021) Gunaikurnai Land and Waters 
Aboriginal Corporation
Aboriginal Water Program Phase 1 (2016–2020) 
Department of Energy, Environment and Climate 
Action, www.water.vic.gov.au/the-aboriginal- 
water-program (last updated 2023)
East Gippsland Fires 2019-20 Culture and Healing 
Recovery Sub-plan (2019) Bushfire Recovery 
Victoria and East Gippsland Shire Council
Gunaikurnai Whole of Country Plan (2015) 
Gunaikurnai Land and Waters Aboriginal 
Corporation 
Taungurung Country Plan (2016) Taungurung  
Land and Waters Council Aboriginal Corporation
Water, Country and Community Program  
2020–2024 Department of Energy, Environment 
and Climate Action, www.water.vic.gov.au/ 
the-aboriginal-water-program/water-country- 
and-community-program (last updated 2023)
Water is Life – Traditional Owner access to water 
roadmap (2022) Department of Environment, Land, 
Water and Planning
Yorta Yorta Whole of Country Plan 2021–2030. 
Yorta Yorta Nation Aboriginal Corporation
68

For more information on the Future Drought Fund visit: 
www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
For more information on Victoria’s Regional Drought 
Resilience Planning program visit:  
www.agriculture.vic.gov.au/futuredroughtfund

Drought in the 
Ovens Murray Region
Information to support the Ovens Murray Regional Drought Resilience Plan
This research was jointly funded by the Australian Government 
and Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
November 2022

Regional summary
The Ovens Murray Region is on the edge of the Murray River and 
has access to Victoria’s high country. The region features the Mitta 
Mitta, Kiewa, Ovens and King Rivers. This offers a range of tourism 
and lifestyle benefits for the region including recreational activities 
of cycling, snow, nature-based tourism, food, wine, craft beer and 
cultural heritage. The region is located on national freight and 
transport routes which gives it a strong economic advantage. With 
a population of 134,593 in 2021, the region has a Gross Regional 
Product of $6.5 billion. Annually there are 3.9 million High Country 
visitors and $1.3 billion regional tourism spend. 
The Ovens Murray region includes the traditional lands of the 
Taungurung, Yorta Yorta, and Gunaikurnai peoples as well as other 
Traditional Owner groups in Victoria who are not formally recognised.
Key industries for employment in the Ovens Murray region in 
2021 included health care and social assistance, manufacturing, 
and retail trade, with agriculture, fishery and forestry contributing 
7% employment to the region.
Water in the region is sourced from key rivers including the Ovens 
and Murray. There is a growing reliance on groundwater within 
the region and a small amount of irrigation. 
The region recently experienced drought and dry seasonal 
conditions during the Millennium drought and 2017 to 2019.
C ampa spe
o lburn
Goulburn
Barwon
Ovens Murray
Mallee
Loddon Campaspe
Wimmera 
Southern Mallee 
Central Highlands 
Great South Coast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gippsland
Benalla
Indigo
Mansﬁeld
Wodonga
Alpine
Towong
Wangaratta
Assessing the impacts of drought
The Regional Drought Resilience Planning Program (RDRP Program) 
is about planning with communities at the regional level to better 
prepare for the next drought and forms part of the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future Drought Fund.
Economic analysis, research and stakeholder discussions have been 
undertaken to consider three questions:
Consultation with local stakeholders was undertaken for the analysis, 
which enabled a better and more localised understanding of how 
droughts impact the region. 
This research was jointly funded by the Australian Government and 
Victorian Government under the Future Drought Fund.
Drought
The definition of drought varies depending on region, needs and 
disciplines. Below are 4 ways to measure whether a region is in drought.
The first three approaches deal with ways to measure drought as 
a physical phenomenon. The last deals with drought in terms of 
supply and demand, tracking the effects of water shortfall as it ripples 
through socio-economic systems.
However, there is no one definition that encompasses all factors 
that bring rise to drought conditions — and the resultant impacts on 
regions and communities. Drought is complex and dynamic, meaning 
a universal ‘definition’ is near impossible. For example, when referring 
to the Millennium drought in practice it was a combination of the 
types of drought listed above.
The prevalence, 
severity and 
impacts of 
drought in the 
past
How this may  
change in  
the future
The Ovens 
Murray region’s 
vulnerabilities 
and gaps in 
preparedness for 
drought
3. Agricultural drought: 
links various characteristics of 
meteorological (or hydrological) 
drought to agricultural impacts
4. Socioeconomic drought: 
associates the supply and 
demand of some economic 
good with elements of 
meteorological, hydrological, 
and agricultural drought.
SOLD OUT
1. Meteorological drought: 
degree of dryness  
or rainfall deficit
2. Hydrological drought: 
precipitation shortfalls  
on surface or subsurface  
water supply
Frontier Economics
2
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region

Assessment framework
In order to consider how drought affects farms and the wider 
community, the following analytical framework distinguishes between 
agricultural impacts and non-agricultural impacts of drought. The 
framework is designed to consider the implications of specific 
drought impacts and what the outcomes of these implications will 
be. Within the two distinctions, the framework considers the social, 
economic and environmental impacts, to develop a more complete 
understanding of how drought impacts flow through the community. 
Figure 1 demonstrates how this analytical framework can be applied 
to agriculture. Drought reduces agricultural productivity, which results 
in a change in primary production on farm. This impacts farm income, 
consumption of farm inputs, and production of farm outputs. These 
on-farm implications of drought flow through to the community to 
generate a range of outcomes. The existence of agricultural markets 
(e.g. sheep and cattle prices, crop prices, etc) means the impact of 
drought on agriculture is easier to quantify than other non-market 
impacts of drought.
Figure 1 also considers how drought impacts non-agricultural 
settings. Drought can lead to significant water restrictions and low 
availability of water in lakes, rivers and dams. A reduction in water 
availability may mean community greenspace is reduced which will 
in turn reduce liveability benefits in the community and the amenity 
values from the green space. Furthermore, there are flow on effects 
if parks and sportsgrounds cannot be used including impact on 
community cohesiveness. A lack of water in lakes, rivers and dams 
could also hurt tourism in the region as there is a reduced ability to 
boat, water ski or fish. This in turn reduces the income and spending 
within the regional economy.
Figure 2 demonstrates the structure of the analysis for both 
past and future drought periods, with considerations from both 
agricultural and non-agricultural impacts of drought flowing through 
to community outcomes.
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Future drought conditions  
+ 
Changes in the Ovens Murray region
Agricultural impacts and implications  
+  
Non-agricultural impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 2 Structure of analysis
Change in agricultural 
productivity
Drought impact
Implications
Outcomes
•	Change in primary production
•	Change in farm income
•	Change in farm inputs
•	Change in farm outputs
•	Reduced spending in the 
community
•	Reduced demand for  
ag farm services  
(but could increase  
in demand for feed)
•	Reduced output associated
•	transport, processing/
manufacturing
•	Reduced primary 
production for distribution 
and value-add
•	Mental toll (and potential 
migration)
 
Water restrictions
•	Households: outdoor water use
•	Community green assets: parklands  
and sportsgrounds
Water availability in 
lakes, rivers & dams
•	Less water available for recreation 
(boating, water skiing, etc)
•	Reduced fishing opportunities
•	Reduced recreation  
and tourism
Figure 1 Impacts of drought and flow on effects
Note: this summary does not provide an exhaustive list of impacts, but rather is about providing a consistent evidence base across Victoria’s nine regions
•	Liveability and mental 
health
•	Mental toll 
•	Potential migration
•	Access to green space and 
flow on effects (i.e. footy 
clubs, parent groups etc)
•	Amenity values from  
green space
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region
Frontier Economics
3

Past drought conditions 
Large drought events have had wide effects across 
Victoria, with each drought being different in its 
regional severity and distribution. The last 25 years has seen 
Ovens Murray experience extensive drought periods, starting with 
the Millennium drought from 1997 to 2009 and more recently the 
dry conditions experienced from 2017 to 2019.
The historical rainfall and temperature charts in Figure 3, 
provides evidence of the severity of these recent drought 
events. Rainfall was below the 10th percentile in 2019 which 
was coupled with mean maximum temperatures over the 90th 
percentile. Additionally, from 2006 to 2009, the region experienced 
consecutive years of well below median rainfall and above median 
temperatures.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Annual
10th %ile
Median
Agricultural impacts and 
implications of drought  
+ Non-agricultural impacts  
and implications
The agricultural sector is the second largest exporting industry in 
the region. Beef is the most valuable followed by dairy, sheep and 
wool. Along with manufacturing, the two sectors comprise 72.8% 
of the region’s export value. As such, the Ovens Murray community 
rely on agriculture and downstream production industries for a large 
proportion of economic activity. This means that drought impacts in 
the agriculture sector flow through to impact the broader community. 
01
02
Water for agriculture in the region is sourced from a mix 
of regulated surface water, unregulated surface water and 
groundwater. The above charts show an annual average rainfall, 
however the success of dryland grazing is dependent on the timing 
of rainfall throughout the year. Some parts of the region have 
access to irrigation water which provides a secondary water source 
for farmers, but irrigation does not play a large role across the 
Ovens Murray region. 
Allocations in regulated systems (such as the Ovens) were 0% 
during the Millennium drought. The period of 2017 to 2019 also 
saw significant reductions in rainfall and hot temperatures, however 
allocations in Ovens were 100% and there was only a single year of 
reduced water allocations for the Murray in 2019 to 20.
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
Year
Annual
90th %ile
Median
01
02
03
Past drought  
conditions 
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
in past drought
Recently experienced droughts and dry 
seasonal conditions in the region:
•	 Millennium drought
•	 2017 to 2019
Figure 3 Annual rainfall and average maximum temperature in Rutherglen
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
450000
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2014-15
2013-14
2020-21
Total no.
Year
Livestock - Dairy cattle - Total (no.)
Livestock - Meat cattle - Total (no.)
Livestock - Sheep and lambs - Total (no.)
Figure 4 Livestock numbers in the North East  
NRM region
Rainfall (mm)
Mean maximum temperature (°C)
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region
Frontier Economics
4

The impacts of the 2017 to 2019 dry seasonal conditions were mitigated 
somewhat due to the experience gained and lessons farmers learnt 
from the Millennium drought which meant farmers had resilience 
actions in place.  Figure 4 shows the steady albeit increasing number 
of livestock in the region since 2015-16. The high reliance on livestock 
compared to other types of farming such as broadacre cropping means 
there are more drought preparedness and operational practices that 
can be introduced to reduce the impacts of drought. For example, 
buying more fodder to replace pastures and existing on farm dam 
storages can be used to water and feed livestock. Timing of rainfall has a 
significant impact on fodder growth. 
Large fires bring a different dynamic to drought impacts. Bush fires 
are devastating for the community as they damage land, stock and 
life. The areas affected by fire have differed between droughts. The 
most recent dry seasonal conditions contributed to fires in the Ovens 
Murray in 2019 to 2020 which burnt a significant area in the North 
East of the region and areas south of Bright. The fires had flow on 
impacts to winery production and tourism in the region. 
Town water 
Water restrictions were required during the Millennium drought
•	
North East Water was active in the market purchasing 5984ML 
of allocations from the market since 2007 to 2008 and also 
purchasing some entitlement (860ML) in earlier years.
•	
North East Water facilitated a pilot project to allow individual 
urban water users (including car washes, sporting grounds and 
bowling clubs) to purchase allocations on the water market and 
then access water through the urban reticulated system.
The drought led to a drilling of more bores in the region to introduce 
more reliable water supplies. 
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism in the region is both water dependent and non-water 
dependent. Tourists visit the region for its natural landscapes, 
wineries, high country and waterways. Increasing temperatures and 
less rainfall is likely to affect tourist’s amenity benefit from visiting the 
towns and landscapes in the region. Decreased water in dams and 
rivers may lead to stagnant water and blue green algae which is likely 
to deter visitors who are seeking water recreation in the region as 
well. The bushfires in 2019 to 2020 had a severe impact on tourism, 
and this was compounded by traffic disruption, road closures, and air 
quality issues.
Environment 
There were negative impacts on riverbank and in-stream vegetation in 
the rivers, lakes and dams in the region during the Millennium drought. 
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains 
and/or water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable to 
damage during past droughts. Additionally, the movement of stock 
to areas where there were feed reserves meant stock was placed 
in areas of cultural significance. Damage to these sites can lead to 
distress within the community.
03
Community outcomes  
in past droughts
Agriculture contributes 6.4% in value add to Wangaratta 
and 4.5% in Wodonga SA3 regions. Key industries for employment in the 
Ovens Murray region in 2021 included health care and social assistance, 
manufacturing, and retail trade, with agriculture, fishery and forestry 
contributing 7% employment to the region. In addition to the significant 
direct employment in primary production in the Ovens-Murray region, 
nearly the same number of people are directly employed in the up- and 
down-stream industries that provide services to agriculture and that 
process agricultural products.
Some communities in the Ovens Murray region have a high proportion 
of people directly affected by agriculture, with smaller communities 
heavily reliant on agriculture more impacted by drought. Production 
impacts also affect the range of down-stream processing facilities 
in the region. This means that the negative impacts of drought are 
concentrated in those communities. Further, businesses in smaller 
towns generally do not have many options to respond to a decline 
in the spending and economic activity. In contrast, Wodonga and 
Wangaratta are regional hubs with a high level of diversification.
This means that decreases in agricultural production in less diversified 
communities caused by drought created flow-on community impacts 
through reduced income and employment, especially on-farm labour 
and agricultural services. However, the 2017 to 2019 drought was well 
managed by the region, meaning these impacts were not as severe 
as perhaps the Millennium drought. These impacts do flow on to the 
wider community through reduced overall spending in the community. 
Since 2007, Food Production Manufacturing has been the largest 
contributor to the gross value add in the manufacturing industry.  
The sector includes beer and wine, grain mill and cereal products, 
and dairy products. The sector is relatively concentrated in the region, 
although it’s overall importance as an employer and contributor to 
value add is falling compared to the state average. This could be due to 
structural adjustments and the increase in service-based sectors. This 
industry is reliant on the outputs of agricultural production and is such 
susceptible to drought impacts. 
Economic modelling of the Millennium drought found that the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) of the Ovens Murray region declined by 
an average of over $100 million annually in the extended drought 
of 2006-07 to 2009-10. This accounts for the cumulative drought 
impacts on dryland and irrigated production in addition to negative 
spending effects in the region. The modelled production impacts were 
reduced by net water trade into the region, but were still found to 
have significant employment impacts (averaging well over 500 less jobs 
annually over the same period).
Overall, there were significant economic impacts to the Ovens Murray 
region during the Millennium drought. This is due to the cumulation 
of direct losses to production and the flow on spending and 
employment impacts to the Ovens Murray community. These also 
led to an increase in demand for services such as mental health and 
Rural Financial Counselling.
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region
Frontier Economics
5

Future Impacts of drought
Future impacts will differ from past impacts depending on the 
severity of future droughts, and the changes in the characteristics of 
the Ovens Murray region and its communities.
Future drought conditions
Climate change is likely to increase the variability of the 
weather in the Ovens Murray Region with future droughts 
expected to be longer, more frequent and more severe. Climate 
projections show that by 2050 the Ovens Murray region on average will 
be hotter, drier and be exposed to a growing number of fire danger 
days. Similar to the past, the region and sub-regions will continue 
to face variable conditions within and across seasons — however in 
the future this variability will be around a lower average rainfall and 
higher average temperature than previously experienced. This means 
that, compared to current conditions, it is likely that parts of Ovens 
Murray will face some seasons with rainfall significantly below and 
temperatures significantly above current averages.
Ovens Murray has a high prevalence of dryland agriculture, which 
relies on timing and quantity of rainfall. Dryland agriculture does not 
offer the same resilience options as irrigated agriculture, which has 
continued access to water that can be drawn upon during dry periods 
(although this is unlikely to limit the impact during extended periods 
of drought where water allocations may not be sufficient to maintain 
production levels).
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural impacts 
and implications
Dairy and mixed farming operations are expected to be most exposed 
to increasing temperatures, decreasing rainfall and the increased 
likelihood of prolonged drought. The adaptiveness of these producers 
and their ability to maintain sufficient reserves (e.g. in cash and fodder) 
will be critical to their farm profitability, with farmers already having many 
strategies to manage drought. The prevailing circumstances of a future 
drought — such as commodity prices, interest rates and fuel and 
fertiliser costs — will also play a role in resultant impacts.
There is a reliance on water dependent industries and agricultural 
reliant industries in the larger regional centres and across the region 
broadly. For example, the Uncle Toby’s factory in Wahgunyah is a 
large employer for the area and relies on wheat and grain production 
in the region as an input. Furthermore, the winery region attracts a 
lot of tourists. Without access to effective irrigation many wineries are 
at risk of crop damage during dry periods. This has flow on effects for 
cellar door sales in drought years and beyond. 
The diversity of water sources in the Ovens Murray region will continue 
to create a buffer for some farmers to drought impacts. However, a 
reduction in water availability will impact all agriculture production in the 
Ovens Murray region. Those farmers that use water from rivers, creeks, 
Changes in the Ovens Murray region
There have been many learnings and adaptions in agriculture 
since the Millennium drought, with farmers in the region being well 
prepared for the 2017 to 2019 drought. Resilience measures were 
introduced including buying and storing fodder, on farm dams 
and improving cash reserves. However, these measures were only 
accessible to farmers who had the means to implement them. 
An increase in tree-changers and hobby farmers since the last drought 
means there are new players in the space. These players are likely to 
have never experienced drought and most likely will not be prepared. 
Town water security planning and investment has increased in the 
region. The North East water plan growth outstripped the Victorian 
projections indicating population growth challenges. There is also a 
misunderstanding of the water sharing arrangements in the region. 
It is noteworthy that limited opportunities for water trade and 
irrigation distribution mean the Ovens Murray region is less exposed 
to broader ‘system level’ responses to drought and a changing climate 
(as compared, for example, to the neighbouring Goulburn region) – 
including interregional water trade and Basin Plan water recovery.
Finally, there has been a continuing diversification of the region’s 
economy, with ABS Census data identifying the percentage of 
the community directly employed in the agricultural industry has 
steadily decreased since the early 2000s.
01
02
Future droughts are likely to be longer, more frequent and more severe: By the 2050s
Average maximum temperatures in spring expected 
to increase by up to 3.1°C. Number of days over 
35°C increasing from 20.6 days to 30-54 days.
Rainfall will continue to be very variable, 
around a lower average rainfall (in spring 
expected to decrease by 11-22%).
6-14%
44%
Number of very high fire 
danger days to increase by  
8 days per year
1.9 to  
2.4 °C 
01
02
03
Future drought 
conditions  
+ 
Changes in the  
Ovens Murray region
Agricultural impacts and implications 
of drought + Non-agricultural 
impacts and implications
Community outcomes  
of future drought
Figure 5 Climate projections for the Ovens Murray region
Frontier Economics
6
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region

lakes and groundwater are likely to experience impacts from reduced 
water availability during drought times. Farmers that have access to 
irrigation water are likely to be somewhat resilient to drought impacts at 
least in the shorter term. 
Future implications of drought are likely to continue to impact the 
wellbeing and mental health of the local communities. Farmers and 
community businesses are likely to continue to rely on financial 
counselling services and the broader community will continue to rely on 
mental health services. 
Access to mental health services should continue to be supported 
moving into the next drought. People trying to make tough decisions in 
drought are already in a vulnerable space and need to be supported. 
Without a plan in place it is difficult to think rationally. The physical and 
mental health of the community might be impacted as people in the 
community value green spaces, trees and the waterways.
Town water 
Town water security planning has improved building on lessons 
from drought. Likewise, Urban Water Strategies are now required 
to incorporate future impacts of climate change (including 
potential droughts). For example, North East Water has used the 
Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning’s 2020 
‘Guidelines for Assessing the Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Availability in Victoria’ to undertake water demand system forecasts 
and identify a range of climate scenarios to assess potential 
impacts on water supply and customer demand. The water 
corporation is planning investment across a number of North East 
Water’s systems to maintain water supply security and treatment 
services in the coming decades.
Recreation and Tourism 
Tourism will continue to be exposed to fluctuations in water 
availability under future droughts. Initiatives that are not dependent 
on water availability could boost visitors to the region. The COVID-19 
pandemic has provided a boost to regional travel and tourism as 
international and state borders were closed for long periods of time.
Environment 
Inland lakes, rivers and dams are likely to be at lower levels during times 
of drought, which will impact the native biodiversity living in and relying on 
these water bodies. There is likely to be a lack of food and drinking water 
for wild animals living in the national and state parks in the region. This 
may impact the habitats of wildlife leading to changes in numbers and 
overall displacement. Additionally, the increased risk of wildfires will have 
significant environmental impacts.
Traditional owners 
Culturally significant sites particularly those located on flood plains and/
or water dependent were exposed and became vulnerable to damage. 
Damage to these sites can lead to distress within the community.
03
Figure 6 Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modelling for a future drought
Community outcomes  
in future droughts
Flow through impacts  
from ag to the community
The increased likelihood and severity of 
drought in the future and the increased 
competition for water under these 
conditions will mean that the drought 
impacts on the community from 
agricultural consequences of drought are 
expected to be larger than have been 
historically observed.
Impacts on GDP
Economic modelling of potential 
future drought in Victoria found the 
Ovens-Murray to be significantly 
affected, with GDP in the region 
falling by 4.6% and a fall in 
employment over 650 jobs.  
This flowed through the region 
reducing consumption/spending by 
nearly 3.0%.
Employment and value add impacts
The effects on employment will not be 
distributed equally across the regions, with the 
more agriculturally dependent regions likely to 
experience larger decrease in employment. 
The economic modelling finds that the large 
impact of drought on value-added output of 
agricultural primary production has significant 
impacts on the value-added output of: 
•	the Agricultural Services sector, and food 
processing (dairy products and meat products),
•	construction, wholesale and retail trade,  
hotels/cafes
•	 the road transport sector. 
4.6%
GDP
650
jobs
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region
Frontier Economics
7

Economic modelling of potential future drought in Victoria, 
undertaken by the Victoria University’s Centre of Policy Studies, found 
the Ovens Murray to be significantly affected with GDP falling by 4.6% 
and a reduction of almost 650 jobs in the region (see Figure 6). The 
modelled 3-year drought, while prolonged, is not equivalent to the 
most severe recorded in Victoria.
Access to local mental health services for community members in 
the agriculture and non-agriculture sectors will be vital as drought 
conditions become more prevalent. Not only are mental health services 
important during times of drought, but improved mental health 
increase a person’s ability to adapt. This can improve drought resilience 
by allowing people to effectively plan for future drought conditions as 
well as make informed decisions during a drought period.
The physical and mental health of the community might be impacted 
as people in the community value green spaces, trees and the 
waterways. Greenspace and associated community sport are 
drivers of community spirit and liveability within local communities 
in the region. Water Corporations and Councils now have a 
strong understanding of the importance of greenspace for their 
communities. North East Water is working with councils and the 
community to identify priority green spaces to provide water security 
during dry periods. However, should town water supply not allow 
watering of gardens this will have a mental health toll on residents.
The diversity of the Ovens Murray region will continue to mean that 
some areas will be impacted by future droughts more than others. 
While it is not possible to predict which area within Ovens Murray will 
be more affected than others, smaller communities that are highly 
dependent on agriculture and more geographically isolated will be 
most exposed. Declining populations in smaller towns may mean they 
are more vulnerable to change.
Overall the Ovens Murray region’s high exposure to agricultural 
industries creates the potential for significant community impacts 
from future droughts.
Vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness
The Ovens Murray region has learned from previous drought 
conditions and already has resilience measures in place or in 
development. However, the recent dry conditions, bushfires and other 
events in the region mean much of the community is ‘worn down’ by 
the prospect of another prolonged drought. 
An increased number of hobby farmers in the region who have not 
experienced drought in the past may be at risk of drought impacts. 
However, they may be able to easily reduce stock numbers or have 
fodder available due to cash reserves. 
Changing industries as tobacco farms are leaving the region leading 
the way for vines and hops. These crops to not extract as much water 
but require more consistent water availability. There is potential these 
newer players in the region are not drought prepared. 
Agricultural research, development and extension will remain 
important to support ongoing adaptation to build preparedness to 
future drought. Farmer’s capacity to adequately prepare for drought 
differs significantly within the Ovens Murray region.
Addressing gaps in on-farm business and decision-making skills, such 
as the skills required to maintain more adaptive farming practices and 
the ability to maintain buffers of financial assets or feed stocks, will 
help farmers better prepare for future droughts.
Tourism plays a large role in the region and can prop up agricultural 
businesses during drought. However, this is dependent on the 
infrastructure being in place to cater for tourism, and there is a risk a 
brown and dry landscape will deter tourists from visiting. 
Water access is changing in the region. Access to, and reliance on, 
groundwater for general production and to manage drought is 
increasing. Also, there are many unregulated water systems that are 
vulnerable to a drying climate and may go into restrictions earlier and 
more severely in future droughts.
Diversification is a key mechanism for the regional economy to 
contain the drought impacts flowing from agricultural sector. 
Towns throughout the Ovens Murray region have varying degrees 
of diversification with larger, centrally located towns more likely to 
experience these benefits. Specifically:
•	
The major regional centres, Wodonga and Wangaratta, will 
provide a buffer to some drought impacts as they have a more 
diverse economy. Townships near Wangaratta and Wodonga 
may also benefit from this buffer in the face of agricultural 
declines during drought. This is especially the case for townships 
within an approximately 50 km radius of the centres that 
offer the benefits of rural living while also allowing access to 
employment opportunities in the larger centre.
•	
Medium sized communities including Mansfield, Corryong, and 
Bright, are reliant on a mix of agriculture and tourism. Leaving 
them exposed to compounding effects of drought and fires. 
•	
Smaller communities are still likely to feel impacts of drought due 
to the reliance on agriculture. 
The Tri-State Murray Natural Resource Management Drought 
Resilience Discussion Paper identified: to make the appropriate 
decisions farmers need to not only have the analytical and decision-
making skills but also adequate mental health. Stress, delayed decision 
making, not able to spot opportunities and ‘giving up’ are all significant 
issues as a drought builds and during a drought.
Access to services such as mental health and Rural Financial 
Counselling are particularly important to manage drought. These 
kinds of health services have long wait times in the region, even 
outside of drought. Waiting for a boost in service provision as a 
drought response lags the demand and means that individual’s 
seeking these services are necessarily having to make drought 
management decisions under significant stress.
Frontier Economics
8
Drought in the Ovens Murray Region

Brisbane | Melbourne | Singapore | Sydney
We use economics to help our  
clients make the best decisions
frontier-economics.com.au
/frontierasia
/frontier-economics-asia-pacific
Photo credits Department of Jobs Precincts and Regions, Visit Victoria and Ride High Country.
CGE Modelling credits: Centre of Policy Studies, Victoria University.
Chart credits: Frontier Economics analysis of data from BOM and ARM online.
Frontier Economics Pty Ltd is a member of the Frontier Economics network, and is headquartered in Australia with a subsidiary company, 
Frontier Economics Pte Ltd in Singapore. Our fellow network member, Frontier Economics Ltd, is headquartered in the United Kingdom. The 
companies are independently owned, and legal commitments entered into by any one company do not impose any obligations on other 
companies in the network. All views expressed in this document are the views of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd.
Disclaimer None of Frontier Economics Pty Ltd (including the directors and employees) make any representation or warranty as to the accuracy or 
completeness of this report. Nor shall they have any liability (whether arising from negligence or otherwise) for any representations (express or implied) or 
information contained in, or for any omissions from, the report or any written or oral communications transmitted in the course of the project.