Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan
PARKES, FORBES AND LACHLAN

Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge the Wiradjuri people as the Traditional Custodians of the region’s 
lands and waters, and pay our respected to Elders past and present.
This project is supported by Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Shire 
Councils, through funding from the Australian Government’s 
Future Drought Fund and NSW Government.
We value the vital involvement of members of the primary production, 
service industries, community groups, health and education, First Nations, 
cultural and arts, and broader communities of the Parkes, Forbes and 
Lachlan Shires to the formulation of this plan and extend our thanks to 
those who contributed.

Contents
Introduction
2
A framework for drought resilience 
3
Purpose of this plan
4
A local plan for drought resilience
5
Strategic alignment
7
Region snapshot
8
About our region
9
People and communities
10
The Wiradjuri and First Nations People
10
Economy and industries
11
Environment 
11
Water in the region
11
How this plan was prepared 
12
A stakeholder-driven approach
13
Participation
14
Drought resilience ingredients
14
Engagement outcomes and key community insights informing the plan
15
How our region is impacted by drought
17
Interconnected and cascading drought impacts
18
Drought history 
19
Future drought
22
Future climate scenarios 
22
Trends, stressors and shocks
26
Drought resilience in the region
27
A snapshot of vulnerability and resilience to drought 
27
Drought resilience action plan
29
Implementation 
35
Tracking progress and reporting
37
Appendix A – Drought history
39
Appendix B — Concepts to guide adaptive learning
46

Glossary
Key terms used throughout this plan are defined below.
ADAPTATION
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human systems in response to actual or expected shocks and 
stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or exploit beneficial opportunities.
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond to environmental and socio-economic changes.
ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE
Coordinating iterative, flexible and responsive interactions between systems when designing interventions 
and for their implementation and evaluation.
COPING CAPACITY
Communities that may be constrained in their capacity to use available resources to cope with adverse 
events and to prepare for, absorb and recover.
DROUGHT
Drought means acute water shortage. Drought is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.
ECONOMIC RESILIENCE
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact of shocks and stressors without changing the 
economic status or outcomes.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
natural processes and ecosystem services.
GOVERNANCE
Governance is the structures and processes by which individuals, groups and agencies in a society share 
power and make decisions. It can be formally institutionalised, or informal.
INTERVENTION OPTIONS
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, policies, initiatives and investments that are 
planned to bring about change in the system.
LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporates elements of lived experience within a landscape, 
bearing witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects of people, landscape, culture – how people 
interact with surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
PATHWAYS
Understanding the future range of potential scenarios and the various pathways for adaptation relative to 
the systems that can be influenced.
RESILIENCE
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and reorganise so as to maintain the existing functions, 
structure and feedbacks. Also see general resilience, specified resilience, economic resilience, 
environmental resilience and social resilience.
RISK
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values 
and objectives associated with such systems.
SHOCK
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or region). Examples include: major storms, floods, bush fires, 
heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism and cyber-attacks’.
SOCIAL RESILIENCE
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse range of shocks and stressors while maintaining 
existing social and community functions.
STRESSOR
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that causes an adverse effect, e.g. drought.
SYSTEMS
The interaction of processes, networks and inter-dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
THEORY OF CHANGE
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions that explain how and why outcomes and impacts 
will be achieved through use, implementation and production of proposed inputs, activities and outputs.
TRENDS
Major global or regional influences that have driven change in the past and are expected to shape change 
into the future.
THRESHOLD
The point at which a change in a level or amount a controlling variable causes a system to shift to a 
qualitatively different regime. Also referred to as a tipping point.
TRANSFORM
The process of radically changing or building a new system with different structure, functions, feedbacks 
and identity.
TRIGGER POINT
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates a management intervention. Trigger points are 
usually defined in the planning phase.
VULNERABILITY
The propensity to be adversely affected by a hazard, including elements of sensitivity and susceptibility, or 
differential patterns of capacities to cope or adapt.
1
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Introduction
This Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan (RDRP) is 
a collaboration between 
Parkes, Forbes and 
Lachlan Shire Councils, 
developed alongside the 
community with a focus 
to advance the region’s 
resilience to the impacts 
of drought. The program 
is one of five focus areas 
under the Commonwealth 
Government’s Future 
Drought Fund1 and is 
jointly funded by the 
NSW Government to 
plan pragmatically 
and proactively for 
drought resilience.
1 Other focus areas under the Future Drought 
Fund include farm business resilience, roll-out of 
the Drought Resilience Self-Assessment Tool, and 
better land management practices that support 
landscape resilience.
Drought is a recurring and challenging experience in 
Australia. While a feature of the Australian landscape, the 
impacts are far-reaching, influencing the economic, social, 
and environmental characteristics of the community. The 
effects are felt both on-farm and across communities, and 
often amplify existing challenges or bring new issues to light. 
Even when drought ends the effects on people, businesses, 
and communities can persist for some time. 
The Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan region plays an important 
role in connecting the Central West region of NSW. The 
region’s location is a key strength, located at the juncture of 
major state and national transport connections with access to 
rich agricultural land, and linking to nearby regional centres. 
Opportunities for economic development in the region 
continue to evolve through investment in major projects and 
the flow on opportunities associated. Whilst each shire has 
their own vision, strengths, attractions, and challenges, they 
share strong connections and aspirations which support 
the regional identity of the Central West. The existing 
partnerships between these shires is a particular strength of 
the region.
The region of Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan has long 
experienced periods of drought, and reduced rainfall and soil 
moisture, set between cycles of good years. These cycles 
have been punctuated by other natural hazard events like 
floods, including the devastating 2022 floods, which come 
with their own impacts and recovery cycles. These events 
compound across the community and make community and 
economic recovery processes both harder and longer. 
The boom-and-bust cycles of flood and drought can move 
so swiftly in this region that it affects the ability to prepare for 
the next event. The result is increasing vulnerability, requiring 
a strategic approach in response. For the Central West, it 
is important that drought is not considered in isolation of 
broader systems and cycles. 
Across the region, residents and business already 
demonstrate strong foundations of resilience. Drought 
preparedness planning seeks to further support this through 
a roadmap of actions, which ensures amidst other challenges 
and changing priorities, we are ready for the next drought 
when it happens. 
It is acknowledged that the pathways and actions 
identified by this plan are dependent upon collaborative, 
whole-of-community efforts, resourcing and funding 
availability. It is not the responsibility of any one party to 
deliver. Instead, it seeks to serve many stakeholders in 
partnership, who can use this plan to guide action, effort 
and investment as an evidence-based for local and region 
drought resilience needs.
2
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

A framework for drought resilience 
Drought resilience, as described by the CSIRO (2022):
‘will ensure regional Australia can endure deeper, longer droughts, and recover from them 
sooner. This will help Australia’s agricultural industries maintain national farm income, increase 
food security, and protect the regional jobs that rely on agriculture during the toughest years. 
Importantly, it will also increase the resilience of rural and regional communities and improve 
environmental outcomes’.
Building a shared understanding of the issues that emerge or are exacerbated through drought, and the past 
interventions which have worked to mitigate local impacts serves as a valuable guide for our future efforts. 
Through this framing, we can recognise the symptoms and understand the signals to support action. These 
actions can be scaled and directed under several pathways:
sun-plant-wilt
Absorb
swap-arrows
Adapt
seedling
Transform
These areas of absorptive capacity, adaptive capacity and transformational capacity provide a view of the 
priorities identified by this plan relative to different components of the drought cycle, effort and/or costs 
associated. Some opportunities are short-term and more immediate, whilst others are more transformative in 
nature and require long-term effort to generate change.
This concept forms part of a resilience ‘theory of change’ model2 which helps to break down and consider 
the complex elements of drought resilience and interlinkages across issues. This makes clear both how and 
why its impacts run so deep, and why an integrated and adaption-driven approach is required. This framing 
also helps to inform decision-making for enhanced resilience and adaptation as conditions and circumstances 
change over time.
2 The Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan RDRP integrates the ‘Resilience, Adaptation Pathways and Transformation Approach’ (RAPTA) developed by CSIRO which 
provides a framework to map resilience interventions. For more information on RAPTA, visit https://research.csiro.au/eap/rapta/ 
3
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Types of resilience
To establish a holistic approach to planning for drought resilience, systems of resilience must be considered, 
including social resilience, economic resilience and environmental resilience.
coin Economic
Focuses on the ability to 
adapt to and recover from 
the economic shocks caused 
by drought. This may include 
diversifying the local economy, 
supporting business to be 
drought resilient and providing 
financial resources to mitigate 
economic losses during 
drought events.
family Community 
Supports the ability of 
individuals and communities 
to withstand the psychological 
and social impacts of drought. It 
involves fostering strong social 
networks, community cohesion, 
and mental health support 
systems to help people cope 
with the stress and challenges 
associated with water scarcity.
trees Environment
Centres on the capacity of 
natural ecosystems and water 
resources to endure and 
recover from the ecological 
impacts of drought. This 
may involve protecting and 
restoring habitats, improving 
water conservation practices, 
and preserving biodiversity to 
maintain ecosystem services 
during and after drought.
Purpose of this plan
comment-quote “Drought has a strangulation effect. 
It creeps in and breeds uncertainty that 
makes it really difficult to make decisions.”
Parkes Shire primary producer
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan for Parkes, Forbes 
and Lachlan builds upon local resilience initiatives, and 
community and economic development strategies to 
support an integrated approach to drought planning 
across the region. Alongside shifts in broader economic 
conditions, the region and its communities have endured 
the impacts from compounding natural hazards and other 
events over recent years. This plan works to ensure that 
drought preparedness remains a priority, even during 
wetter periods, to strengthen how we prepare for drought 
and position us to respond and recover.
The plan recognises the role of healthy Country and 
waters in supporting the region’s economic and social 
functions, and the cultural connection to the lands and 
waters which the region’s First Nations population, the 
Wiradjuri people, have maintained for tens of thousands of 
years. 
The chronic and insidious nature of drought distinguishes 
it from other climate and natural hazards. The uncertainty 
attached with drought is a major contributing factor to 
on-farm stress which also spreads across communities. 
Attached to this uncertainty can often be a feeling of 
decision paralysis, about what to do and when. This 
plan provides some direction across the region at the 
community and economy scale to address some of the 
challenges faced by drought and to ensure long-term 
support and capacity for those that already play a role in 
drought resilience. 
Parkes, Forbes 
and Lachlan RDRP 
objectives
Build an understanding of what 
supports drought resilience 
in the region, formed around 
economic, environmental and 
community characteristics
	
→Share these features of drought 
resilience to build an appreciation 
of the strengths of the region, its 
people, communities and industries
	
→Identify what the drought priorities 
are across communities, and how 
to address these
	
→Identify a suite of actions across 
the short-term to far-term, which 
builds upon what has been 
done well, addresses gaps and 
opportunities, and directs focus 
towards transformational change
	
→Provide a platform and evidence-
base to support public and private 
drought preparedness, response 
and recovery investment in the 
region, in a meaningful and 
impactful way.
4
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

A local plan for drought resilience
Understanding the past impacts of drought in the region needs to be considered alongside the changing 
pressures on communities and the potential changes under future climate scenarios and projections. This 
paints a picture of the pressures we may have into the future and enables a strategic view of what is needed 
to better position us when the next drought period occurs. 
Examining how issues have persisted and then building upon what has worked well in the past, is a useful 
guidepost around what needs to be done to alleviate drought impacts moving forward. This plan emphasises 
the role of risk reduction, acknowledging the need for clear governance in the management of drought and its 
impacts. A focus is led through: 
	
→Prevention / mitigation efforts to reduce the severity of potential impacts 
	
→Strengthening preparedness for drought to alleviate the negative effects of drought
	
→Having a clear picture of what is needed in response to drought, when we are in it, based on what has 
worked and what has not worked so well from the past
	
→Understanding the broader needs for recovery, to ensure we are best positioned after drought.
The above is based on the ‘prevention, preparedness, response and recovery’ or ‘PPRR’ cycle, a commonly-
used disaster management framework that is also applicable to how we think about the types of actions to 
address drought impacts. For the purposes of this plan, this framework is adapted to centre around our 
preparation, endurance and recovery. 
Figure 1 — Focus areas of the regional drought resilience plan
Implementation funding is available from the longer-term annual investment across Australia under 
the Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought Fund, as well as other funding and grant assistance 
opportunities. This is a foundational RDRP which provides the framework for implementation and identifies 
practical ways the community and businesses of the region can prepare for and respond to drought impacts.
Typical subsidies and relief programs will still play a role, particularly through the response period, but this 
local plan is about bolstering our preparedness with a clarity on direction, and a readymade guide once we 
are in drought so that we can quickly act based on what has worked and advocate with conviction for what is 
needed. 
Preparation
A focus on growing opportunties, anticipatory actions and 
capcacity building to better position us to deal with future 
dry periods
Recovery
Investment in activities which leverage lessons learnt, supporting 
community, economic and environmental vitality
Endurance
Re-focus of efforts to support business enterprise to endure, 
bolstered by community wellbeing and economic stability
5
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Taking proactive action
There are many different approaches that can contribute to enhanced drought resilience in the short and 
longer term, including those which are on-farm and those which are off-farm.
A core aspect of this plan is informing when to invest and the nature of activities to invest in. This was a 
particular gap identified through the stakeholder consultation process. The model below (figure 2) provides a 
blueprint for the action plan, framed around the influence of the drought cycle. It also highlights the need to 
remain aware of the influence of other trends, stressors and shocks which can impact community wellbeing 
and resilience more broadly, thereby affecting ability to focus on or invest in drought preparedness. 
The ’intervention differential’ is the difference sought to be achieved by the implementation of this plan and 
other drought preparedness and resilience measures to alleviate the impacts of drought and minimise the 
extent of community and economic downturn over time.
The focus of this plan is to minimise the effects that drought can have on the region’s future prosperity and 
growth aspirations. This concept can equally be applied to planning for other natural hazards in the region.
Consistent planning and support is required before during and after drought, r the difference at each stage is 
the scale. The focus for preparation and recovery includes ‘big picture’ considerations for trade, industry 
growth and strategic opportunities. During drought, when we are enduring its effects, the scale is more 
focused and requires agility in action to address the issues around mental health, income and family and 
community stability. 
Figure 2 — Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan region’s drought action approach (Source: Meridian Urban, 2024)
6
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Strategic alignment
This plan provides strategic alignment with international-scale goals and commitments including the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, along 
with national-scale strategic frameworks and state-level strategic and policy instruments. This alignment 
demonstrates how working locally contributes to broader sustainability and resilience outcomes.
Key documents to which this plan aligns includes (but is not limited to):
	
→NSW State Disaster Mitigation Plan 2024 – 2026
	
→NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
	
→Central West and Orana Regional Plan 2041 
	
→Mid-Lachlan Regional Economic Development 
Strategy (2023 update) and associated 
industry plans
	
→NSW water strategies (Lachlan Region (draft), 
NSW Water Strategy, NSW Aboriginal Water 
Strategy, NSW Groundwater Strategy)
	
→Murray-Darling Basin Plan
	
→Lachlan Water Resource Plan
	
→Southern NSW Drought Resilience Adaptation 
and Innovation Hub research
	
→Department of Primary Industry and Regional 
Development’s DroughtHub
	
→Department of Primary Industry and Regional 
Development’s Regional NSW Drought 
Signals Dashboard
	
→Commonwealth Government’s Drought 
Resilience Self Assessment tool
	
→Department of Primary Industry and Regional 
Development’s Climate Vulnerability Assessment
	
→Local government strategies and plans
	
→Industry group studies, plans, strategies 
and reports.
Image: Memorial Hill, Parkes
7
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Region snapshot
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY  
GROSS VALUE
list  Parkes $215.8m 
 list  Forbes $285.4m 
 list  Lachlan $419.8m
PRINCIPAL AGRICULTURAL  
COMMODITIES 
tractor Broadacre cropping 
sheep Livestock (meat and products) 
wheat Hay
bags-shopping
LOCAL 
BUSINESSES
3,470 
user-nurse
TOTAL 
EMPLOYMENT 
12,569
people-roof
30,044 
Population 
First Nations population
14.1%
(NSW average 3.4%)
user-minus 
UNEMPLOYMENT 
Parkes: 5.1%
Forbes: 3.8%
Lachlan: 5.4%
user-tie
Median age
41
(NSW average 39)
car-building
GROSS REGIONAL 
PRODUCT 
Parkes: $1,023m
Forbes: $597m
Lachlan: $329m
Largest industries (by employment)
PARKES
washing-machine Copper Ore Mining 
person-cane Aged Care residential 
building-columns State Government 
FORBES
school Education (Secondary 
and Primary)
cow Grain-Sheep or 
Grain‑Beef Cattle Farming
LACHLAN
sheep Grain-Sheep or 
Grain‑Beef Cattle Farming
wheat Other Grain growing
building-columns Local Government
handshake-angle
VOLUNTARY  
WORK 
(for organisations)
18.1% — 23.8%
(NSW average13.0%)
display-chart-up-circle-dollar
ASSETS
Country Universities Centre 
TAFE NSW campuses 
Central West Livestock Exchange
Parkes Special  
Activation Precinct 
Parkes Regional Airport
location-dot
AREAS 
OF SIGNIFICANCE
Lachlan river
Gum Swamp and Bird Hide
Goobang National Park
Sculpture down the Lachlan trail
Information sourced from: ABS 2021 Census data, Regional Development Australia, and AgTrack - Agricultural and Land Use Dashboard
8
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

About our region
The three shires form part of the broader 
Central West area of NSW, situated at the 
geographic heart of the state and within the 
lands of the Wiradjuri nation. 
The region spans 25,561km2, connected by the Lachlan 
River, Australia’s fourth longest river, running east to west 
across communities as part of the Murray-Darling system. 
Fertile alluvial soils dominate areas of the region and 
supports a strong agricultural industry, alongside natural 
resource strength in areas founded on the potential of 
the Macquarie Arc geological formation.
The location of the region is a key strength, connecting 
to nearby regional centres, and situated at the juncture of 
major rail lines, including the Sydney to Perth Rail and the 
Inland Rail. Established and future planned infrastructure 
are facilitating the growth of the freight and logistics 
sector, supporting traditional agricultural strengths and 
mining. Major investment is set to continue to leverage 
these locational benefits through several major projects, 
anchored by the Parkes Special Activation Precinct. 
The region’s population is spread across a network of 
centres in each of the shires, alongside rural localities 
and villages which support the dominant primary 
production surrounds. Parkes Shire contains the Parkes 
township as the main population centre and alongside 
the Forbes township they play a role as a strategic centre 
in the broader land use framework of the Central West 
and Orana region. In addition to Parkes are the villages of 
Peak Hill, Trundle, Tullamore, Bogan Gate, Gunningbland, 
Alectown and Cookamidgera. 
Similarly, the Forbes township plays a central role for 
the Forbes Shire which includes the smaller villages 
of Bedgerabong, Garema, Wirrinya, Warroo, Corinella, 
and Ootha. Forbes features a rich tapestry of heritage 
buildings throughout its main centre, alongside local 
service provision and a community core around Lake 
Forbes. 
The Lachlan Shire retains a strong connection to the 
Lachlan River which meanders the region, and its 
primary administrative centre in Condobolin, providing 
a valued natural resource and recreational focal point 
for the community. Smaller centres are located at Lake 
Cargelligo and Tottenham, as well as rural localities in 
Tullibigeal, Burcher, Derriwong, Albert, and Fifield, and 
the Aboriginal community of Murrin Bridge.
Tottenham
Bogan River 
Lachlan River
Tullamore
Peak Hill
Parkes
Forbes
Condobolin
Lake Cargelligo
Trundle
9
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

People and communities
The region is characterised by tightknit 
communities, exhibiting significantly higher 
volunteer rates relative to state averages and 
evident in the strong community groups which 
support the functioning of the villages. The local 
schools act as their own community hubs, playing 
their own unique roles in times of need led by 
inspiring educators and staff. 
Sport and recreation play a major role across the 
shires, with local sports teams bringing people 
together and fields and courts forming recognisable 
social points within towns and villages. These 
fields are set amongst the rich landscape with 
backdrops of the Lachlan River in Condobolin, 
Lakes Forbes in Forbes and a major multi-purpose 
sporting precinct in Parkes situated on the fringe 
of local environmental assets like Memorial Hill. 
These places support not only physical health, 
but also provide space for community to connect 
and socialise across ages and backgrounds and 
over shared hobbies, passions and a touch of 
local rivalry.
Similarly, the arts and culture sector is a strength 
across the Central West often operating out of 
heritage buildings, rejuvenating their use and 
activity in the shires. This sector is not only crucial 
for the local communities but plays a unique role 
in telling the stories of the Central West to those 
outside the region. Physical evidence of this is the 
Sculpture Down the Lachlan, a permanent, inland 
public art trail between Forbes and Condobolin 
along the Lachlan River. 
As a destination, Parkes’ major event is the Elvis 
Festival. The longstanding festival draws an 
annual influx to the town that headlines a diverse 
community events calendar and tourist attractions 
like ‘The Dish’. This is supported by additional 
calendar events like the Abba Festival in Trundle.
Forbes has a bustling events calendar, connecting 
to both environmental and cultural assets. The 
township is centred around a major community 
asset in Lake Forbes. Parks and community 
infrastructure are dotted around the lake, playing 
a role in connecting the community at major 
events and linking to a main street lined with 
heritage buildings and cafés acting as point for 
community connection.
Lachlan Shire supports several strong communities 
across its centres. Organically grown attractions 
such as the Utes in the Paddock, borne out 
of the local arts scene, are now a permanent 
fixture in Condobolin located amongst a range of 
community infrastructure link by the Lachlan River. 
Lake Cargelligo, a huge natural inland lake, offers 
recreation through water skiing, bird watching, and 
Aboriginal art and culture. 
The Wiradjuri and First Nations 
People
The Traditional Owners and Custodians of the 
Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Shires predominantly 
identify as Wiradjuri. The Wiradjuri nation is the 
largest Aboriginal group in Central New South 
Wales, and they possess a deep and enduring 
connection to their ancestral land and waters. 
Recognising the deep connection of First Nations 
peoples with these lands, their involvement is 
essential in developing a holistic and sustainable 
approach to drought resilience. 
The Wiradjuri people have a rich cultural heritage 
that is closely linked to the land and waterways, 
through traditional practices such as hunting, fishing, 
and farming. Their cultural landscape includes 
significant sites such as Wiradjuri Ngurambang 
in Parkes, and their heritage is modernly 
acknowledged through local exhibitions like the 
Wiradjuri Ngurambang Exhibition at the Henry 
Parkes Centre in Parkes. Similarly, Forbes contains 
the Wiradjuri Dreaming Centre and Lachlan the 
Wiradjuri Study Centre in Condobolin. 
The Lachlan River is deeply significant to the 
Wiradjuri people, with cultural practices tied to its 
seasonal flows and wetlands. Lake Cargelligo and 
Gum Bend Lake are culturally important wetlands 
that historically served as resource-rich areas for 
Indigenous communities. Traditional knowledge 
of these areas can offer valuable insights into 
sustainable water use during droughts. 
The peoples of Murrin Bridge, which was previously 
part of the Cobar Shire, are mostly of Ngiyampaa 
and Barkandji descent and the community is 
seen as a ‘Koori place’ rather than that of one 
particular Nation.
NEW SOUTH WALES
Wiradjuri
10
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Economy and industries
Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Shires form the Mid-
Lachlan Functional Economic Region. This region 
supports 12,659 jobs with a Gross Regional product 
of $1.89b in 2020. Agriculture produces the highest 
economic output and is the major employment 
sector with core specialisations in sheep, beef, 
grains and dairy cattle. Mining is the second largest 
industry, notable in Parkes, which benefits from 
a strong supply of metal ore, with potential from 
significant critical mineral deposits. 
A number of key projects anchor significant 
economic growth, such as the Parkes Special 
Activation Precinct (SAP), major transport 
infrastructure upgrades, and water security 
programs. This builds on strengths in the transport, 
logistics and warehousing sectors which are 
expected to support significant growth into future 
years. This is in addition to expansion and value-
add processing relating to agriculture and mining. 
Manufacturing also produces significant output in 
the region which will be furthered under the Parkes 
Special Activation Precinct, and nearby industrial 
estate development such as that in the northern 
areas of Forbes. 
The region supports a growing visitor economy, 
benefitting from environmental assets, and 
destination festivals. A range of other events 
support these events, such as Grazing Down the 
Lachlan and regular farmers markets. An emerging 
industry in the Mid-Lachlan is the energy sector, 
bolstered by infrastructure investments and 
environmental strengths in this area. 
Environment 
The natural environment consists of lakes, 
meandering waterways, and red soil plains. 
The expansion of pastoralism, mining, and the 
introduction of feral animals to the region has 
modified much of the vegetation and landscapes 
within the region. Remnant locations remain 
however, through a number of State forests and 
parkland reserves. Bordering the Parkes Shire is 
the Goobang National Park, an area of cultural 
significance to the Indigenous peoples of the region. 
The region connects across a range of important 
river systems and catchments. To the north, the 
Bogan River links to the towns of Tottenham, 
Tullamore and Peak Hill and forms one of the many 
tributaries of the Darling-Barwon River. The region 
mostly falls within the Lachlan River catchment, a 
long river which flows across the lands of the Nari 
Nari, Ngiyampaa, Wiradjuri and Yita Yita Nations. 
The Lachlan plays a key role in water security 
across the region through regulated supply of the 
major rural centres including Parkes, Forbes and 
Condobolin, and provides natural, recreational 
and cultural values across the region. The Great 
Cumbung Swap lies at the end of the Lachlan 
system, consisting of a number of important 
wetlands (located outside the region).
As a result, part of the region’s agricultural activity 
relies on surface water and irrigation, whilst dryland 
cropping and livestock rely on rainfall harvesting 
and storage as well as groundwater accessed via 
bore networks.
Water in the region
The Lachlan catchment’s headwaters are formed to 
the immediate east of Crookwell and Gunning in the 
Upper Lachlan LGA, with the upper catchment area’s 
complex system of waterways flowing into Wyangala 
Dam which is situated south-east of Cowra. The river 
flows downstream past Cowra where it is joined by 
the Belubula River which flows west from Carcoar 
Dam. 
The Lachlan River flows past Gooloogong, joined by 
Mandagery Creek which caused major flash flooding 
in Eugowra in the floods of 2022. Major flooding 
also affected the town of Forbes and broader areas 
of Forbes Shire in this event, before floodwaters 
continued downstream through the Lachlan Shire. 
The 2022 flood event affected many properties 
across all three LGAs. 
Lake Cowal is an important Ramsar wetlands in the 
mid part of the catchment. It is also in this area, to 
the south of Condobolin, where the Lachlan 
catchment divides into a series of channels and 
lagoons. The Lachlan River continues through 
the townships of Kiacatoo and Eubalong where 
it turns south. Past the Cargelligo weir are the 
waterbodies of The Sheet of Water, Curlew Waters 
and Lake Cargelligo which are natural features of 
landscape, however with regulated water levels. 
These waterbodies have and do run dry in severe 
drought events. The Lachlan River continues west 
beyond the Lachlan Shire, Lake Brewster and to 
Hillston before eventually discharging to a series of 
wetlands in Balranald Shire, in the State’s far south-
west. 
The Lachlan River is connected to the Murray-
Darling basin only when both the Lachlan and 
Murrumbidgee Rivers are in flood. 
Township water in the region is drawn from a 
combination of river water and borefields located 
along the river’s length, with irrigated areas in the 
Forbes and Lachlan Shires. Water supply across the 
dryland areas of the region is largely sourced from 
rainwater harvesting and private bores. 
11
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How this plan was prepared 
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is underpinned by a detailed ‘Resilience 
Assessment’ that offers the technical evidence base for the plan. This assessment 
documents the impacts of drought in the region, past and future climate trends and 
details the local context that may influence specific vulnerabilities through drought. 
While informed by this large evidence base, the core of the plan, has been developed 
with the valuable input of community members, representatives and organisations, 
producers, industry representatives, service agencies, non-profit organisations, local 
businesses, and both local and state governments.
map
Resilience Assessment
→Literature analysis
→Review of plans, policies and strategies
→Regional characteristics
→Data on past drought and projected impacts
→Drought resilience indicators assessment.
building-user
Stakeholder engagement
→Online community and business surveys
→Community workshop sessions in Parkes,
Forbes and Condobolin
→Community drop-in sessions in
Peak Hill, Tottenham, Trundle, Lake
Cargelligo, Bedgerabong
→Targeted consultations and discussion
with community, industry and local service
representatives.
An understanding of local context and drought impacts was built around economic, natural environment and 
social characteristics, realising however that impacts are not  felt in isolation. The plan takes a systems-based 
perspective to capture the complex challenges of drought which  compound when they interact. While this 
formed the basis of the resilience assessment, supporting this was the consultation and engagement process 
which aimed to:
Engagement aims
→Build a story for the region for what drought
resilience entails, and how this should
be portrayed to those outside the region
particularly in metropolitan areas
→Leverage the local knowledge and
experience of past droughts across the
centres and villages in the region to
understand what worked, and what could
have been done better
→Identify the commonalities and difference
across the region which influence the
effectiveness of future actions
→Understand where the pressures come from
across the drought cycle, and within the
broader cycles of hazards and economic
changes
→Discuss how the region can be best
positioned to address drought resilience in
an integrated manner and build upon this
over time.
12
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

A stakeholder-driven approach
The consultation program that informed the 
preparation of this regional drought resilience plan 
involved a number of approaches which allowed the 
project to tap into key stakeholder representatives 
of large segments of the local population. 
comment-quote
“I can’t hope and pray anymore. 
I have to have a good business  
plan in place.”
Lachlan Shire primary producer
A focal point of the engagement process centred 
on targeted workshops, community drop-in sessions 
and online surveys, collating experiences, insights 
and views from a broad cross section of community 
members. We spoke with livestock graziers, crop 
growers, service providers, industry and community 
group representatives, First Nations organisations, 
subject matter specialists, local and state 
government agencies and more. 
This stakeholder input was used to develop a 
shared understanding of local drought resilience 
strengths and opportunity for continuous 
improvement, both on-farm and off farm. This was 
achieved through discussion on personal drought 
experiences, on previous practices and approaches 
that worked and those which were less effective. 
Discussion was had on what was needed into the 
future to better position the region collectively 
when the next dry period is upon us. This discussion 
focussed on actions and initiatives that were 
required in preparation for drought, the needs 
during drought and then recovery. 
This input was used to identify actions, projects 
and programs for enhanced drought resilience, 
contained in this plan. 
6 workshops across July 
and October 2024
Parkes
Condobolin
Forbes
5 Drop-in sessions
Peak Hill
Tottenham
Trundle
Lake Cargelligo
Bedgerabong
Online survey
Community
Business owners / operators
77 survey responses
40 workshop and drop-in 
session attendees.
13
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Participation
Participation in the formulation of the plan and generous contribution of time and insights was given by  
(but not limited to):
	
→Local primary producers
	
→Local business owners 
and operators
	
→Community members
	
→Progress associations
	
→Agricultural consulting 
businesses and enterprises
	
→Water industry representatives
	
→Education sector
	
→Community 
group representatives
	
→Condobolin Chamber 
of Commerce
	
→Forbes Business Chamber
	
→Royal Flying Doctor Service
	
→Central West Family Support 
Group Inc
	
→Lachlan and Western 
Regional Services
	
→Regional Development Australia 
(RDA) Central West
	
→Arts OutWest
	
→Meals on Wheels
	
→Local Aboriginal Land Councils
	
→Wiradjuri Dreaming 
Information Centre
	
→Country Women’s Association
	
→Lions Club of Forbes and District
	
→Department of 
Primary Industries and 
Regional Development.
Drought resilience ingredients
Through local engagement and consultation undertaken to develop this plan, a number of key ‘drought 
resilience ingredients’ were identified by stakeholders who contributed to the process. Key local aspirations 
identified included the following.
14
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Engagement outcomes and key community 
insights informing the plan
sheep
The rising cost of farming is adding to 
pressures outside of drought. Similarly to 
the cost of living felt by the rest of the nation, 
this cost of farming is rising, and this impacts 
decision making processes and capacity to 
prepare. While equity of farm enterprises may 
be strong, concerns around rate of return with 
the ability to service the debt is changing. 
Rising input costs, amidst uncertainty, is a key 
component of this and can impact capabilities 
to plan.
house-water
The compounding impacts from consecutive 
events, including flooding. Following the 
last drought there were several flood events 
experienced across the region. The cyclical 
nature of these hazards, and the pace at 
which they are occurring, creates a strain on 
communities and businesses. It also makes 
preparedness for drought more challenging. 
The compounding nature of hazard impacts 
our proactive planning capabilities and makes 
it difficult to create those buffers needed for 
times of drought. 
farm
The difference in decision making and 
perceptions across livestock and cropping. 
The region contains a mixture of enterprises, 
and there are differing views to how each 
is viewed through times of drought. This 
includes both inter-industry perceptions as 
well as perceptions of those outside the 
region. Both are critical elements as part of the 
state and nation’s food supply. 
tractor
Everyone has different circumstances 
and operating conditions which influence 
options and decision making. Whilst there 
are a range of on-farm alleviation measures 
that are commonly deployed when conditions 
start to change, like de-stocking or reducing 
the amount of seasonal crop put in, the 
unique circumstances and business operating 
conditions of individual enterprises may add 
or remove some options from being viable at a 
given point in time. What works for one will not 
necessarily work for another.
dollar
The intrinsic link between impacts felt 
on-farm and the ripple effects across 
communities and the local economy. The 
concept of ‘shutting the cheque book’ during 
the first signs of drought is a known sentiment. 
Many primary producers may reduce 
spending, which cascades across other 
businesses more broadly. When the farmers 
are doing well, the towns and villages are 
doing well and this relationship is symbiotic. 
group-arrows-rotate
Community initiative is a cornerstone for 
the region. With smaller populations, the 
local community often steps up to drive its 
own initiatives and support in times of need. 
There are demonstrated instances of this in 
drought; however, a recurring community view 
is that it is increasingly difficult to be proactive 
given ever-increasing administrative burden 
placed on those seeking to drive change or 
outcomes. This is represented in regard to 
administrative matters, associated insurance 
and liability of hiring spaces and venues, or 
supplying transport, for example.
Image: Tottenham Water Tower
15
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

music
The role of connection — most importantly, 
informal and organic socialising. Community 
events, or industry events with informal 
opportunities to socialise and chat are 
invaluable, particularly for mental health and 
general wellbeing. The approach may not 
necessarily be to communicate an event as 
specifically for mental health, but rather look 
to organically grow and provide a service add-
on to events for people to chat to each other, 
or create awareness of service providers.
location-arrow
A desire to own some of the messaging 
through drought, and portray the positives 
of the region. Commonly felt was that primary 
producers, and the region more broadly, are 
often portrayed as struggling, a result of poor 
decision-making or with no control of their 
operations under drought. While drought is 
clearly a significant challenge, many consider 
this as part of their usual business planning, 
demonstrating not only resilience but business 
acumen in how to respond. Similarly, how the 
region itself is portrayed can be damaging 
across sectors, particularly tourism. Arts and 
culture can play a role in supporting some 
of the messaging out of the region, with 
touring exhibitions from the organisation, Arts 
OutWest, just one example of community-led 
initiatives to address this. 
water
End of the line vulnerability. Communities 
located on the B-section line for water supply 
which runs north from Forbes, through 
Trundle, Tullamore to Tottenham, are reliant 
upon it for water supply. Pressures are placed 
on users along the line, with vulnerability 
increasing the further north it runs. Its age, 
design and capacity affects water security 
across these communities. 
list-check 
The paperwork, and navigation of some 
subsidy and support programs, creates 
additional resource and emotional burden. 
There is a feeling that some programs in the 
past, which were set up to support farmers 
through accessing funds and subsidies, were 
not user friendly. The time taken and stress 
of trying to navigate complex forms creates 
its own stressors, at times when capacity 
is already stressed. However, there was 
also some highly useful subsidy programs 
identified, like the transport subsidy. Limited 
subsidy or relief programs for in-town 
businesses also under stress was also an 
issue. Some of the services and programs that 
work need to be offered in perpetuity, or with 
assurance of local access when needed.
droplet
The decision on Wyangala Dam. The majority 
of those engaged feel the decision to not raise 
the dam wall creates a gap regarding water 
security. There is also a perceived lack of 
transparency of this decision. 
computer
Many farming enterprises are implementing 
resilience through their own business 
planning and risk management approaches. 
This includes clear feed budgets, underground 
storage of grain and fodder, business planning 
and networking of information. 
16
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

How our region is impacted by drought
Stakeholder discussions, local historical literature, research sources and survey feedback 
across the region identified the following key drought impacts:
family People and  
community impacts
	
→Tendency to withdraw 
more from community or 
perceived disconnection
	
→Health and wellbeing 
put aside to manage on-
farm needs
	
→Pressures associated 
with decisions 
on stocking and 
cropping rates
	
→Difficulties retaining 
certain professions, and 
skilled staff
	
→Retention of youth in 
the region
	
→Maintaining sport and 
recreational facilities, 
and difficulties fielding 
local sports teams
	
→Impacts on women
	
→False narratives within 
the media
	
→Children and youth 
missing out on activities
	
→Disproportionate socio-
economic impacts on 
First Nations peoples
water Environmental  
impacts
	
→Groundcover loss
	
→Dust storms
	
→Soil erosion and 
topsoil loss
	
→Tree and vegetation 
dieback in centres, 
and associated 
biodiversity impacts
	
→Reduced root zone 
soil moisture
	
→Weed spread for 
low quality fodder 
provided or other 
external movements
	
→Water and food 
availability for wildlife
	
→Impacts on or loss 
of fauna and flora, 
including from disease
	
→Surface water and 
groundwater availability
	
→Animal / stock nutrition 
	
→Biosecurity and pest 
outbreaks  
trees Economic  
impacts
	
→Reduced on-farm 
production and income
	
→Maintaining cash-flow 
and debt servicing
	
→Fodder and water 
availability, cost 
and quality
	
→Reduced discretionary 
spending in towns 
and villages
	
→Unemployment 
and under-employment
	
→Costs of water and 
rising demand
	
→Rising cost of inputs
	
→Business closure
	
→Meeting the eligibility 
thresholds for subsidies 
and relief arrangements 
	
→Employment losses 
which cascade into 
service and community 
losses 
	
→Pressure and cost 
of infrastructure 
maintenance 
	
→Interoperability of 
drought and flood relief 
and eligibility issues
shield Compounding external challenges
	
→Cost of farming from rising inputs
	
→Reduced telecommunication connectivity
	
→Reduced access to or reliability of 
electricity network
	
→Insurance access and flexibility
	
→Larger policy and infrastructure decisions 
	
→Farm and property amalgamations
	
→Cost of living pressures, which also can 
affect population mobility
	
→Housing pressure.
17
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Interconnected and cascading drought impacts
The impacts of drought don’t occur in isolation. Instead, they are interconnected across community and 
economic functions. This is intrinsically linked to the health of landscape, and the natural environment, 
from which agricultural production is generated. The value of agricultural and resource commodities to the 
local regional economy is significant. Communities and industries are water dependent at different scales. 
Emerging industries are also reliant on attracting visitors to region, and skilled professionals which can be 
impacted by direct or perceived impacts, or understanding of drought. 
Service provision in the region can both influence drought resilience, and its withdrawal can exacerbate its 
effects. Where centralisation of government services occurs and are anchored by services located in Dubbo 
or Orange, the ability to access services cascades into other socio-economic issues due to distance Where 
services are retained in region, socio-economic benefits are derived during drought in terms of greater 
community stability.
When we consider the linkages of key impacts, we can see how inter-dependent systems can be, and how 
impacts in one system can amplify or exacerbate impacts elsewhere. In the case of Parkes, Forbes and 
Lachlan, community consultation highlighted the strong inter-dependencies between drought impacts. 
Figure 3 — Interconnected community and economic impacts that are exacerbated by drought
Similar cascading impact relationships can be observed for other issues. Decreasing greenery in public 
spaces and reduced streamflow in creeks and rivers can impact on community through loss of access to 
recreation, and overall decreased wellbeing. Other cultural impacts are also associated, particularly for First 
Nations communities, with impacts on ability to partake in cultural activities and practices.
Likewise, the impact of feeding and watering of livestock means many farmers endure high workloads on-
farm which reduces ability to remain involved in other activities, including recreational activities, volunteering, 
attending events or tending to health care needs. 
The relationships between drought impacts and their causes is an important consideration as part of the 
development of this plan, aiming to focus on the causes rather than just addressing cascading symptoms. 
Reduced 








productivity 
Downturn in local 
employment
Workers leaving the 
area to ﬁnd employment 
Lower population 
=
Service  provision loss
Loss of skilled workers and certain 
professions (e.g. teachers & police)
Families of 
workers also 
leaving area
Further impact on service 
provision occurs 
Local communities 
experience hardship 
and instability
18
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought history 
No two droughts are the same. The impacts vary across the community, weather conditions, and there are 
often different macro influences and trends at play. Importantly individual circumstances also differ. What 
precedes and follows drought can also compound pressures, often the result of the compounding effect of 
other hazards.
Major droughts in Australian history have affected the Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan region, characterised by 
periods of low rainfall, leading to low soil moisture. The timeline below outlines these occurrences, and the 
referenced graph displays conditions over the past 100 years.
Figure 4 — Annual precipitation average across shires. Major historical drought coincide with periods of lower than average rainfall
1895 – 1902 
Federation  
Drought
1937 – 1945 
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009 
Millennium  
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019 
Tinderbox 
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
19
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Figure 5 — Soil moisture across each shire. Major historical droughts align with lower soil moisture levels
The below timeline illustrates the more localised impacts during the identified major drought periods. A 
comprehensive history of drought is located at Appendix A and within the Resilience Assessment. This data 
was drawn from historical climate records and weather events, as well as analysis from a variety of news 
sources that provided commentary on these events demonstrate that droughts and the history of the area are 
effectively intertwined. 
chevrons-right By 1903, drought conditions 
still affected the Parkes 
district with sheep still 
being hand-fed on 
imported feed.
chevrons-right Based on cattle and sheep 
deaths, it was the worst 
drought in Australia’s 
history. 
chevrons-right 1939 and particularly 1944 
resulted in below average 
rainfall in region. 
chevrons-right In 1945, the region, and 
Australia was struggling 
to meet its promised grain 
outputs to assist in the 
war effort. Severe dust 
storms were also plaguing 
the region.
chevrons-right 1982 resulted in 
significantly low rainfall 
across much of the region
chevrons-right In 1983, Lake Cargelligo 
was again isolated from the 
Lachlan River water system.
chevrons-right The significant dry period 
followed a wet 2016
chevrons-right By 2019, businesses 
were facing severe 
economic hardship.
chevrons-right The Wyangala Dam 
received its lowest two-
year period of inflows. 
chevrons-right Drought conditions became 
evident in 1912 in Parkes, 
interrupted by a wet year 
in 1916 before drought 
conditions returned in 
the late-1910s.
1914-1915
1895-1902
1982-1983
1937-1945
chevrons-right In 2002 and 2005,  
particularly low rainfall was 
received in the region.
chevrons-right By 2008, the region had 
been in severe drought for 
seven years. Many local 
businesses in the township 
of Forbes were reportedly 
relying on productive 
agricultural harvest.
1997-2009
chevrons-right By 1967, it was estimated 
that drought recovery for 
the region, and NSW, would 
take 4 years owing to the 
significant stock losses.
chevrons-right In 1968, Lake Cargelligo 
was isolated from the 
Lachlan River water system
1965-1968
2017-2019
Figure 6 — Drought timeline, regional impacts of note for each drought period.
20
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

History indicates the region experiences year-to-year fluctuations in soil moisture and precipitation with drier 
years often followed by significantly wet years, which has seen flooding. The late 1980s and 2010-2011 feature 
significant rain, whereas 1944, 1982, 2006 are some of the periods of unusual dryness, with the recent events 
of 2017-2019 displaying distinct drying, particularly for soil moisture.
A comprehensive synthesis of historic drought climate data specific to the region is included at Appendix A. 
An analysis of this was undertaken as part of the Resilience Assessment reporting that informs this plan.
A focus on the Millenium drought (1997-2009)
The region experienced a prolonged dry period, with particularly low rainfall averages in 2002 and 2005 
leading to water scarcity and agricultural challenges in the region. The drought is arguably the most 
scientifically studied drought in Australian history owing to the significant economic effects. 
The Millenium Drought’s severe effects on the entire Lachlan Valley exposed the lack of water security in the 
region. During the drought, all three shire councils were required to impose severe restrictions on domestic, 
commercial and industrial uses. Water dependent economic activities including mining and agricultural 
businesses were also severely impacted. 
Image: CSIRO Parkes Observatory
21
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Future drought
Agricultural commodities are the main driver to the regional economy, providing the 
highest contribution to employment and output across sectors. Other industry strengths 
like mining are also water dependent, though in different ways and to different degrees. 
Drought impacts the livestock industry across the 
inputs and values through the drought cycle, and 
ongoing decisions on stock management. Croppers’ 
decisions on planting are highly dependent on 
weather conditions and the associated input 
costs and opportunity costs that are linked to 
this. Because of these dependencies, and the 
many other interlinkages across the system, it 
is important to consider the projected impact of 
future climate changes to help us plan now for 
potential uncertainty.
The further in advance we plan, build capacity in our 
response and put in place redundancy measures, 
the more options we will likely have available to 
address issues down the track.
Future climate scenarios 
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) reporting, under all 
emissions scenarios considered, global surface 
temperature will continue to increase until at least 
the mid-century. Increasing temperatures and 
energy within the climate system are projected 
to result in widespread changes to weather and 
climate patterns including all elements of the water 
cycle, including drought.
Data is presented below for each shire, displaying 
drought related metrics that have been calculated 
from the regional climate model projections for two 
scenarios. These climate scenarios are based on the 
IPCC representative concentration pathways (RCPs) 
and are designed to explore a range of possible 
futures relating to greenhouse gas emissions, land 
use, and air pollution. The analysis is focused on 
projections to the near-term (2050) and mid-range 
(2070); with change shown relative to present 
day climate.
The highest Greenhouse Gas Emission (GHG) 
scenario is RCP8.5 and represents a high emissions 
scenario where GHG emissions continue to 
increase, and global mean temperature increase 
exceeds 4ºC. RCP4.5 is a moderate GHG emissions 
scenario where some mitigation of GHG emissions 
occurs, and global mean temperature increase is 
between 2-3ºC. RCP4.5 is currently considered by 
the IPCC to be our most likely scenario.
Current climate models do not account for global 
climate tipping points. This means that the effects 
of tipping points are typically not included in climate 
projections and impact assessments. Breaching 
global climate tipping points represents significant 
risks on top of the changes typically described 
in climate assessments. The effects of breaching 
certain tipping points may include abrupt changes 
to the El Niño Southern Oscillation, rainfall patterns, 
and rainfall variability that are not represented in 
climate model projections.
Drought climate indicators:
water Variable rainfall patterns, 
amplified under higher 
emission scenarios
sun-plant-wilt Small decrease in root zone 
soil moisture
temperature-arrow-up Increasing temperatures are 
likely to be the primary driver of 
increased frequency and severity 
of evapotranspiration and drought 
conditions 
heat Other climate and weather-
driven events like heatwaves 
and bushfires / grass fire may 
compound broader impacts from 
drought events.
On average, annual precipitation is projected to 
increase, with higher quantities in the near term 
before smaller quantities expected in the far term. 
Soil moisture is generally expected to decrease 
across scenarios, and shires. 
This small trend of an increase in rainfall for 
the region is not shared with other parts of 
NSW which will see much larger shifts and 
decreasing availability.
Frequency of hot days (>35ºC) and frequency of 
high fire danger days (Forest Fire Danger Index 
(FFDI) > 25) do not directly describe drought 
22
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

however, they are climate hazards which typically occur in conjunction with drought. Both extreme heat and 
bushfire weather risk are projected to increase by 2070 compared to the present day. This will increase the 
likelihood of compound events such as severe drought occurring in conjunction with heatwaves and bushfire/
grassfire.
Given that average annual rainfall is not decreasing as much as the rest of the state, the increase in drought 
severity will likely be driven by increased evapotranspiration due to increasing temperatures. 
The below tables display projected variables under Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) of 4.5 and 
8.5, under timeframes into the near and far term. 
Parkes
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
17%#
↑ 0.004 
mm^
↓ 0.010 
mm^
↓ 0.008 
mm^
↓ 0.020 
mm^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
522 mm
↑ 11 mm
↓ 1 mm
↑ 3 mm
↓ 14 mm
Days above 35oC
31
49 ↑ 18
56 ↑ 25
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI 
above 25
47
59 ↑ 12
69 ↑ 22
Forbes
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
14%#
↓ 0.004 
mm^
↓ 0.008 
mm^
↓ 0.006 
mm^
↓ 0.017 
mm^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
478 mm
↑ 11 mm
↑ 3 mm
↑ 9 mm
↓ 7 mm
Days above 35oC
32
49 ↑ 17
57 ↑ 25
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI 
above 25
47
58 ↑ 11
67 ↑ 20
Lachlan
2050
2070
Variable
Climate model 
reference period
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
RCP4.5
RCP8.5
Root soil moisture
14%#
↓ 0.003 
mm^
↓ 0.007 
mm^
↓ 0.004 
mm^
↓ 0.017 
mm^
Annual total 
precipitation (mm)
436 mm
↑ 10 mm
↑ 5 mm
0 mm
↓ 9 mm
Days above 35oC
36
55 ↑ 19
63 ↑ 27
Data unavailable
Days with FFDI 
above 25
61
73 ↑ 12
84 ↑ 23
# Mean water content as a percentage of capacity. 
^ Change (mm/yr) in relative soil water content of the 1976-2005 reference period’s relative soil water holding capacity.
23
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Annual Precipitation 
The following figures show the precipitation across the region using the reference period of 1976-2005 
and then to two timescales 2036 to 2065 (2050) and 2056 to 2085 (2070) under the moderate emissions 
scenario of RCP 4.5. The region is coloured to represent annual precipitation changes from dark brown 
(reduced) to dark green (increase).
Climate model reference period 
1976-2005
2050 (RCP4.5)
2070 (RCP4.5)
100 - 200
Precipitation Reference Period (mm)
200 - 250
250 - 300
300 - 350
350 - 400
400 - 500
500 - 600
600 - 700 
700 - 800
800 - 1,000+
Figure 7 — Annual precipitation changes across the region. Reference period to 2050, and 2070
Changing rainfall patterns and variability
Annual precipitation remains variable into the future, though trends indicate that average annual 
rainfall may not be decreasing as significantly in the Central West as compared to other areas of 
the state. 
Despite a projected increase in average annual rainfall under RCP4.5, the Parkes, Forbes and 
Lachlan Shires will continue to be susceptible to drought, and ongoing rainfall variability with a 
major driver of drought being a projected increase in temperatures including very hot days.
This increase in temperatures, both as averages and hot days can influence increased 
evaporation across the catchment. Although grain growers are skilled in managing in lower 
rainfall environments, profitability of these agricultural enterprises is greatly affected by frequent 
and more severe drier seasons.
This was evidenced by the 2017-2019 drought which was one of the hottest and driest periods 
on record in NSW. Changes to heatwave frequency and intensity led to higher vulnerability 
across the community and the environment. Earlier onset heat events (or ‘flash droughts’) 
commencing in the spring time are likely to be more damaging when combined with low soil 
moisture. This could make even moderate heat events more damaging, with severe impacts on 
pulse crops for food and stock feed amongst other crops.
In addition to rainfall amounts, the timing of rain is critical to different stages of 
agricultural production.
24
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Root zone soil moisture
Root zone soil moisture (RZSM) is presented as a percentage of total capacity during the baseline reference 
period and as a change of millimetres per year of the climate adjusted scenarios. 
During the reference period, both Forbes and Lachlan Shires had a root zone soil moisture capacity of around 
14%, while Parkes was slightly higher at 17%. Under a moderate emissions scenario, Parkes may see a slight 
increase in soil moisture in the short term (2050), but this will not continue in the longer term (2070). Forbes 
and Lachlan will see slight decreases under the same scenario and timescales. As for a high emissions 
scenario, all LGAs will see a reduction in soil moisture each year, the rate of which increases over the 
longer term.
Climate model reference period  
1976-2005
2050 (RCP4.5)
2070 (RCP4.5)
0
Root zone soil moisture reference period (%)
10
25
50
60
70
80
85
90
100
Climate-adjusted root zone soil mositure 
(mm/year)
-0.2
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
What does the climate data tell us?
The region will continue to be susceptible to the impact of drought. Major historical droughts over the past 120 
years have occurred in conjunction with low values of commonly used drought indicators including rainfall and 
soil moisture percentiles. 
Climate projections indicate an increase in drought risk, which worsens under long term trends. The higher 
emissions scenario presents potential for lower precipitation and notably lower soil moisture. However, 
compared to other areas in NSW, the region is potentially less impacted by declining precipitation rates, at 
least in the mid term. 
There are the drivers of increased frequency and severity of drought conditions, especially towards the latter 
part of this century. This is largely driven by temperature, evapotranspiration and reduced soil moisture.
Recent events, and historical trends in rainfall patterns show sharp extremes with dry years followed by 
significant rainfall, which has seen significant flood events. 
Figure 8 —Soil moisture changes across the region. Reference period to 2050, and 2070
Image: Forbes main street
25
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Trends, stressors and shocks
To support preparedness and planning for drought, we must also consider other trends, stressors and acute 
shocks, beyond the climate, that may amplify drought impacts into the future. This can influence our resilience 
to different conditions, circumstances and scenarios. It is also important in terms of governance arrangements 
and strategic priorities, to ensure broader actions are cognisant of interaction with drought in our communities. 
family
People and community
	
→Service availability, 
particularly health and 
community services
	
→Workforce shortages, 
and worker attraction, 
skills development 
and retention
	
→Demographic shifts 
in population (ageing 
population and 
youth retention)
	
→Loss of population 
	
→Housing availability and 
new dwelling supply
	
→Costs of living 
pressures and local 
discretionary spending
	
→Urbanisation 
and population 
mobility trends
coin
Economic
	
→Cost of farming with 
rising inputs
	
→Commodity prices, 
market volatility and 
interest rates
	
→Fuel prices and 
transport costs
	
→Rapid cycles between 
flood and drought
	
→Impacts of road quality 
on market access
	
→Policy changes 
between government, 
and assurance of 
certain funding
	
→Major project investment 
decisions, both private 
and public
	
→Changing farm 
enterprise ownership 
models and their scale
trees
Environmental
	
→Cumulative events 
across drought, flood 
and fire, as well as 
biosecurity 
	
→Widespread 
invasive species
	
→Feral animal numbers
	
→Land use conflicts, 
particularly on primary 
production areas
	
→Water management 
within the Murray-
Darling Basin
	
→Water infrastructure 
projects and 
funding decisions
	
→Water 
licensing arrangements
26
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought resilience in the region
There are many examples of individuals and communities in the region showing what it is to be drought 
resilient, whether through pre-planning on-farm, or community members stepping up to support others in 
smaller villages and across the main centres. While resilience is a feature of the region and its people, it 
remains useful to frame drought resilience factors to ensure how we plan and respond to drought covers all 
aspect of the system. 
Drought resilience can be considered against three macro indicators, each with their own respective factors. 
Considering how this plan can address all these factors ensures we can address all aspects of the system. 
money-bill
Economic 
Continuity
Employment
Diversity
flower-daffodil
Environmental 
Infrastructure and built assets
Natural processes
Land management
face-smile
Social 
Personal wellbeing
Decision making capacity
Community wellbeing
A snapshot of vulnerability and resilience to drought 
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences’ (ABARES) has developed an 
index that ranks remote, rural or regional agriculturally dependent communities (at the LGA level) according to 
their potential to be adversely affected by drought. 
The result is a snapshot based on drought exposure and drought sensitivity at the farm level (farm sensitivity), 
the reliance on employment in agricultural production industries (community sensitivity), the adaptive capacity 
of an LGA to drought based on economic diversity, and a final combination of the potential drought impact. 
It is important to note the data comprises data variables and indicators which have been combined and 
ranked. Scores are not necessarily representative of the magnitude of impact, rather it positions the sensitivity 
with respect to other LGAs assessed. There is a strong link to employment in agricultural production, 
particularly for community sensitivity which may not be representative of broader community sensitivity 
detailed throughout this plan. 
ABARES CVRDI scores - (based on data from ABS Census of Population and Housing 2021)
(measured from 0 [lowest] to 1[highest])
LGA
Farm  
sensitivity
Community 
sensitivity
Economic  
diversity
Potential 
drought  
impact
Parkes
0.28
0.17
0.61
0.30
Forbes
0.65
0.27
0.46
0.62
Lachlan
0.62
0.45
0.24
0.72
27
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The ABARES CVRDI scores indicate for the region:
	
→A range of lower to moderate farm based 
exposure, which is linked to both exposure to 
climate variability, and the effects that has on 
farm outcomes
	
→A low to moderate level of community 
dependence on agricultural activity in terms 
of employment.
	
→Some demonstrated economic diversity, 
particularly in Parkes, highlighted by strong 
mining industry and economic output
	
→A low to higher level of overall potential drought 
impact, particularly in Lachlan Shire noting 
it has a particularly strong agriculture sector 
with high value agriculture commodity output 
(while potential drought impact measures farm 
sensitivity and community sensitivity, whether 
there is lasting loss or harm depends on a 
community’s adaptive capacity).
While the region is susceptible to future drought 
impacts, and this is more apparent in the west for 
Lachlan Shire compared with the east, its economic 
diversity supports a level of adaptive capacity in 
some areas of the region. Levels of community 
connection and social capital, along with diversified 
economic development opportunities, offer key 
opportunities to aid immediate as well as long-term 
drought resilience.
28
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Drought resilience action plan
The drought resilience action plan for Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan has regard to:
	
→Stages of the drought cycle (which guide timing of investment across type of activity)
	
→Level of intervention (absorb, adapt or transform)
	
→The type of resilience capital (people and community, economic, environmental, infrastructure 
and governance).
It outlines specific and pragmatic actions that:
	
→Are drawn from local knowledge insights from consultation participants
	
→Provide the basis for anticipating, acting and advocating for drought resilience needs
	
→An approach that serves multiple stakeholders and supports opportunities for advocacy and funding and 
grant applications.
A program logic approach was used to match drought resilience needs highlighted through the engagement 
process with pragmatic and realistic actions to achieve change, at various scales. The resilience ‘theory of 
change’ approach is used to identify the degree of change achieved by the implementation of the action plan 
to help measure our continuous drought improvement journey. 
This scale also helps us to understand the level of effort and the potential timeframes associated with different 
actions, noting that many rely on future funding allocation. This action plan articulates those activities which 
are candidates for future drought resilience and drought relief funding by government, charity, philanthropic 
and industry bodies.
Timeframes for implementation is dependent on resourcing and funding availability. This plan is a ten-year 
plan to be reviewed after five years.
29
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ID
ACTION
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
diamond-turn-right People and Community
PR1
Identify public assets which serve to bring people together during drought times and identify facility upgrades, additions and equipment needed. Leverage 
grant funding for such upgrades where available
Councils
Absorb through 
immediate opportunities 
to maintain services and 
build support networks/
infrastructure
PR2
Advocate for and support the ongoing funding for the Country University Centre located in Parkes
Councils
PR3
Continue to support family support services across the region with a focus on early intervention programs
Councils
PR4
Continue to deliver the school attendance, academic development and meal preparation program in Lachlan Shire, as well a First Nations songs with youth 
programs to re-connect Indigenous youth with country and culture
Lachlan Shire Council 
PR5
Deliver grant writing training for community groups across the region and support a dedicated grant writing resource for Lachlan Shire Council
Lachlan Shire Council 
Adapt to strengthen 
community capacity
PR6
Develop and deliver capacity-building and support programs for persons aged 50-90 years including digital skills and access to digital support or assistance
Councils
Community organisations 
diamond-turn-right Economic
PR7
Invest in opportunities for one-on-one business continuity planning for rural enterprises and for in-town businesses, which include drought preparedness
Business owners and operators
Absorb to ensure business 
preparedness, and retain 
effective services
PR8
Advocate for improved funding cycle certainty for the Rural Financial Counselling Service
Industry groups
Councils
PR9
Invest in succession planning processes for rural enterprises and land ownership
Farm business owners
PR10
Obtain funding for shire or regional drought support officers to assist with navigating subsidy, relief and assistance applications, or support by the Rural 
Assistance Authority
Councils
PR11
Work with Training Services NSW to develop and implement strategies to attract and retain skilled workers, in contribution to limiting staff turnover and 
reducing loss of knowledge continuity over time
Councils
State government
Absorb to ensure business 
preparedness, and retain 
effective services
PR12
Invest in training programs to support accreditation of farmers and farm workers to enhance opportunities for supplementary work during drought periods (i.e. 
machinery accreditation, etc.) and to build capacity
State government
PR13
Advocate for investment in telecommunications and technology environment to expand coverage and network access across the region
Councils
Federal government
Telecommunications providers
PR14
Support small business owners to get online and develop websites for online sales, broadening their markets. Supplement this with training in social media 
marketing, advertising and design
Chamber of commerce
Business owners and operators
PR15
Explore university partnerships in agtech, research and processing to expand new ways to adapt to changing conditions
Industry groups
Tertiary education institutions
PR16
Work with the Bureau of Meteorology to re-instate seasonal information sessions on forecast outlooks and the data that informs it. In a climate likely to 
experience greater variation, the need for greater communications of localised weather and climate projections and data is essential to help industries and 
communities be better prepared and grow capability and capacity in interpreting information and data. 
BoM
Farm business owners and operators
PR17
Continue to expand economic diversification opportunities across mining, agricultural value adds, arts and culture, tourism through implementation of the Mid-
Lachlan Regional Economic Development Strategy and Parkes SAP
Councils
State government
Transform by building on 
existing strategic direction 
that supports community 
and economic resilience
Preparedness and recovery actions
30
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Preparedness and recovery actions
ID
ACTION
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
diamond-turn-right Environment
PR18
Prepare drought management plans for key recreational water bodies in the region and advocate for water allocations as part of the regional water strategy
Councils
Absorb through preparing 
our environmental assets
PR19
Support groundwater studies to examine aquifer attributes of the Lachlan Alluvium Groundwater water resource plan area 
Councils
Adapt through proactive 
measures that support 
environmental processes
PR20
Invest in water efficiency, treatment, water saving, recycling, storage and smart water approaches to support sporting fields and key recreational reserves, to 
maintain groundcover to support community activity for as long as possible during water deficient periods. Integrate these into Council’s IP&R documentation
Councils
PR21
Implement groundcover and canopy management and enhancement initiatives to reduce top soil loss, alleviate impacts of dust storms and flow-on health 
effects and heatwave mitigation, both on-farm and in urban communities
State government & Councils
Farm business owners and operators
PR22
Establish drought lots or smaller fenced paddock areas to manage stock rotation during drought
Farm business owners and operators
PR23
Support proposals for the conjunctive use of surface and ground waters that will maximise water availability during times of drought and low water availability. 
It is acknowledged the Lachlan Regional Water Strategy is under final development and will focus on improving the understanding of groundwater resources, 
including the interaction and connectedness between ground and surface waters for sustainable water use
Councils
Industry groups
State government
Transform through strategic 
planning and policy shifts
diamond-turn-right Infrastructure
PR24
Invest in on-farm fodder and water storages during good years and ensure storage is secure. Expand this to include on-farm water reticulation infrastructure, 
drought feedlots, and agtech
Farm business owners and operators
Absorb through 
immediate opportunities to 
strengthen preparedness
PR25
Investigate and invest in enhanced township and village water security needs including reservoirs and water storages, pumping and conveyance infrastructure, 
water recycling and / or bore field or bore improvement programs
Councils
Adapt through projects 
delivering improved water 
security and efficiencies 
PR26
Enhance water security for townships served by the B-Section Line in Parkes and Lachlan, supplied from Forbes, which experience water restriction in summer 
months when not in drought, the Albert reservoir being an example. This may include a stages refurbishment or replacement of the infrastructure. A revision of 
project costs and business case should be undertaken
Councils
PR27
Undertake upgrades to the Condobolin Water Treatment Plant
Lachlan Shire Council
PR28
Prepare a business case to expand the Recycled Water Rising Main to cater for additional commercial customers in Parkes Shire
Parkes Shire Council
PR29
Implement groundcover management initiatives to reduce top soil loss, alleviate impacts of dust storms and flow-on health effects and heatwave mitigation, 
both on-farm and in communities
State government
Farm business owners and operators
PR30
Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Shires support continued consideration of the raising of the Wyangala Dam wall to aid drought resilience for the catchment
Councils
State government
diamond-turn-right Governance
PR31
Develop, implement and continuously refine a spontaneous volunteer (and donations) management plan for each shire
Councils
Absorb with preparing 
coordination support
PR32
Explore options for planning proposals to amend Local Environmental Plans to incentivise rural value-add activities and opportunities for multiple on-farm 
income streams
Councils
Adapt through policy 
shifts advocated and led 
through government
PR33
Continuously improve community value capture policies which guide private sector civic investment into legacy projects and activities including community 
facilities, funded positions and programs
Councils
31
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ID
ACTION
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
diamond-turn-right People and Community
E1
Support establishment of local community food pantries
Community
Absorb through 
proven programs and 
addressing key barriers in 
the community
E2
Build awareness of the health impacts of dust storms and options to alleviate effects, and how to prepare for and clean up following dust storms
Councils 
State government
E3
A focus on community events which are free and family friendly. Leverage these opportunities to increase awareness of local services that are available 
for support
Councils 
Community
E4
Support targeted events like field days, programs like Active Farmers, which focus on shared knowledge and learning, or physical activity, with opportunity for 
casual socialisation. These events can be utilised to share information on support and assistance available
Industry groups 
Community
E5
Deliver mental health first aid programs for organisational staff who serve in frontline roles
Community groups
E6
Support transport costs for access to primary and allied health services to mitigate risk of deferral of health needs during drought
Community groups
E7
Subsidise or waive upfront costs for access to telehealth mental health services during drought to ensure ready access to critical support and mental health 
clinicians 
Councils 
State government 
E8
Continue to implement the ‘Why Leave Town’ programs that are in place to encourage and support local spending in each Shire
Councils 
E9
Identify rainwater-dependent localities for in-town clothes washing and shower facilities for surrounding farming communities and invest in communal facilities 
to help on-farm preservation of rainwater supplies for drinking and cooking
Councils 
Community
Adapt through broad 
action support direct 
community needs 
and maintaining of 
community functioning
E10
Provide places of respite (green spaces) in town and explore options such as free coffee and food on occasion to activate spaces and casual socialisation. 
Leverage these opportunities to increase awareness of local services that are available for support
Councils
E11
Direct funding for different forms of community events at different times of drought cycle and for individual cohorts (i.e. men, women, children, etc.)
Councils 
Community 
E12
Invest in arts and culture programs including travelling exhibitions both within and external to the region to share messages of drought that are designed by 
and for the region’s communities
Councils 
State government 
Not-for-profits 
Community 
E13
Invest in, support and/or promote arts and culture programs for children and youth in the region including visiting performances, workshops and events
Councils 
State government 
Not-for-profits 
Community 
E14
Consider initiatives to support community use of assets and facilities like (free access to) local pools and libraries for relief during droughts and heatwaves, 
and as an opportunity for casual socialisation
Councils 
E15
Support school excursion costs through available drought funds to support children and youth during drought periods
Councils 
E16
Support the coordination of drought assistance and support services. The influx of services into the region during drought can lead to duplication of services, 
lack of clarity with regard to support available and by whom, how to access assistance and referral processes
Service providers
Councils 
Endurance actions
32
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ID
ACTION
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
diamond-turn-right Economic
E17
Support implementation of evidence-based animal nutrition to strengthen livestock health and resilience
Farm business owners and operators
Absorb by immediate 
opportunities to inform 
business outcomes
E18
Develop and/or continue ‘spend local’ programs for each shire, which can guide spending cards/vouchers back into local centres and villages through 
approved retailers
Councils
Industry groups
E19
Promote access to drought preparedness tools and resources to support business decision-making processes and trigger points
Industry groups
E20
Increase support to local business chambers to enhance support available to local and small businesses during drought times. This support includes 
networking opportunities, training delivery and a focus on financial planning and continuity planning
Councils 
E21
Plan for and implement arrangements required for Council saleyards and their operations during drought, particularly with regard to taking animals in poor 
health to care for them with veterinary support (including burial pits which comply with biosecurity requirements). Fodder supply continuity for the saleyards 
must form part of pre-planning arrangements
Councils
Adapt through 
opportunities across 
sectors and supporting 
cash flow through 
local economy
E22
Explore the opportunity to establish local fodder banks drawn from locally sourced fodder in locations across the region
Community
E23
Develop a shared tourism communications plan, including the entire Central West region, to encourage and activate tourism opportunities during dry periods 
by promoting the region’s assets and endowments
Councils
CENTROC
E24
Implement a plan for water cartage for communities across the region, and advocate for subsidies water carting for stock and domestic supply
Councils
E25
Promote and continue to support the Culture Maps Central NSW as a key tourism opportunity during drought periods
Councils
CENTROC 
E26
Advocate for the simplification and streamlining of application processes for drought relief. Advocate for extension of selected relief to in-town businesses
Councils
E27
Explore opportunities for a road maintenance bore program across the shires to support road maintenance activities during drought periods, given the 
economic value of road access for stock and freight movement during drought
Councils
E28
Seek funding for community infrastructure projects and legacy projects during drought times to maximise funding benefit and as a potential local employment 
opportunity source
Councils
Transform through new 
programs and projects 
during drought
E29
Explore options to employ local farmers, contractors and labourers on a casual basis to deliver civic projects or works during drought periods, supplementing 
income (e.g. Forbes Farm to Trade Scheme)
Councils
E30
Advocate for a new contractor subsidy to maintain critical farm employees during drought, as an opportunity to stem a range of cascading on-farm and off-
farm impacts from drought-driven employment downturn on properties
Industry groups
Councils
E31
Consider establishment of Central West Farm Sitter program to enable property owners and managers to travel for medical visits, holidays, personal needs, 
etc. Social media platforms may assist
Community
Not-for-profits
Endurance actions
33
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ID
ACTION
STAKEHOLDER(S) 
IMPLEMENTATION 
PATHWAY
diamond-turn-right Environment
E32
Advocate for increased transparency and information sharing regarding operations of Wyangala Dam
Councils 
Absorb to build 
community understanding
E33
Work with Local Lands Services, Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development and Landcare to invest in weed and pest management on 
private lands during drought to supplement on-property incomes and improve environmental outcomes
Farm business owners and operators
State government 
Transform 
through partnerships
diamond-turn-right Infrastructure
E34
Identify community asset and ancillary facility upgrade needs, and implement enhancements to key public assets identified to support community cohesion
Councils
Adapt through 
opportunities to reinforce 
community support
diamond-turn-right Governance
E35
Develop a region-wide water consumption efficiency and restriction policy for towns and villages, in solidarity with the region’s production areas, in a manner 
that is consistent for all communities across the region, unless departure is required. Where this is the case, specific messaging should be developed to 
appropriately communicate why certain communities require a different approach. Triggers to enact the various stages of the policy are required
Councils
Adapt for consistent and 
coordinated governance 
for community
Endurance actions
34
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Implementation 
The Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan relies on 
collaborative implementation approaches. 
The action plan for drought resilience spans 
different functions of government, and guides 
stakeholders with actions that can make a 
difference. This includes short, medium and long 
term opportunities.
The action plan has been drawn together through 
community expression, existing initiatives and 
background data. It is noted that: 
	
→actions are purposefully listed with multiple 
stakeholders, and unspecified timeframes 
or funding to acknowledge that delivery is 
dependent on a range of variables 
	
→implementation will occur through participation 
of all stakeholders over time as priorities, 
resources and funding arise 
	
→as a regional plan, the actions are collective and 
collaborative 
	
→roles and responsibilities are flexible, including 
for local government role: the plan is owned 
by the region, and any stakeholder can start an 
action within their capacity; and 
	
→some actions are indeed underway by various 
stakeholders, the purpose of maintaining 
them in the action plan, is that the community 
has advised that the action is integral to 
drought resilience.
Governance structure
Implementation of the regional drought resilience 
plan is to be driven by a collaborative and multi-
disciplined drought resilience project control group 
(PCG). Membership will be deliberately broad to 
provide an integrated and coordinated approach 
to drought resilience efforts. Representatives from 
across community and industry will form part of the 
PCG. An elected representative from each Shire will 
form part of the PCG, alongside Council officers. 
This group will operate using a status system tied 
to the ‘prepare, endure, recover’ framework to 
transition priorities in lock-step with the transition of 
drought cycles. This framework approach is to be 
triggered by drought indicators. 
ROLES DESCRIPTION 
An advocate actively supports a position, 
action or policy. The task is outside the 
advocate’s jurisdiction, capacity or resourcing 
and advocacy is required to engage with those 
parties with capacity to deliver. For example, 
telecommunications advocacy.
A partner joins others in a common cause 
or action where roles and responsibilities 
are shared across areas of expertise. Each 
partner brings an element to the action for 
joint delivery. For example, region-wide 
strategic initiatives.
A lead is in control of an action. The action 
may still involve partners or other roles, but 
the action is reliant upon a lead party due to 
their technical or other expertise. E.g. Health or 
counselling matters.
An owner is the only party that can undertake 
or permit the action. E.g. local government as 
public asset owners.
A supporter is united with others in the 
need or benefits of the action but potentially 
does not have a major role. The action is led 
or owned by others. E.g. A supporter may 
provide assistance in kind, technical advice or 
donations to action leaders.
A stakeholder is anyone who has an interest 
in the project, program or action. Stakeholders 
will have varying degrees of involvement from 
owner to advocate and all points between.
A deliverer is responsible for implementation 
and outcomes of an action or funded program. 
e.g. Community agency delivering social 
aid programs.
A funder provides the funding arrangements. 
The party is not involved with scoping, 
executing or delivering the program but may 
require some outcome reporting or evidence. 
e.g. the government agency providing grant 
funding for programs and projects.
35
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The NSW Government’s ‘Drought Signals’, BoM, 
Farming Forecaster or other tools / indicators 
should be selected by the PCG for this purpose, 
in consultation with the Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development.
This will enable the PCG to adopt agile approaches 
and change priorities as needed depending 
on changing circumstances. For example, 
when drought indicators suggest a dry period 
has commenced, the status of actions to be 
implemented will move from ‘preparedness’ to 
‘endurance’. Despite this, all actions remain relevant 
in terms of maximising funding opportunities. This 
status-based approach simply enables the PCG to 
consider those actions which will generate more 
immediate outcomes, when needed.
A Chair of the PCG will be selected.
A PCG Terms of Reference is to be prepared for 
its membership to guide its function. The Terms of 
Reference could include: 
	
→Role and purpose and connection to the RDRP 
	
→Stakeholder and membership lists 
	
→Meeting arrangements, (potentially quarterly) and 
responsibilities of attendees 
	
→The circumstances of a quorum and decision 
making protocols 
	
→The election or rotation of a chair person 
	
→An action plan for the first 60 days or 12 months 
including delivery of the priority actions with the 
implementation funding; and 
	
→A process for reflection and nominating next 
priority actions.
	
→A Memorandum of Understanding may also 
be required.
PCG meetings should be held in different localities 
across the region over time.
Monitoring, evaluation and learning 
framework
Whilst the drought action plan incorporates a large 
suite of projects, activities and actions, some offer 
immediate opportunity, some are medium-term 
items and others are longer-term transformational 
opportunities. Not all actions can be focused on or 
delivered at once. The ‘prepare, endure, recover’ 
framework and status system approach, which will 
guide the PCG in terms of its implementation and 
coordination of activities and funding pursuits, will 
enable a flexible and agile approach as drought 
conditions change, guiding the focus. 
This system will:
	
→Maintain a focus on preparation as appropriate
	
→Provide regular opportunities to define when 
conditions are changing locally
	
→Catalyse a change in focus to respond to the 
needs of the changing conditions.
This ensures a level of agility is adopted with regard 
to the implementation approach.
Also, as immediate efforts in response to the 
action plan are delivered, broader efforts across 
collaborators is guided in its approach, underpinned 
by this plan which enables stakeholders to work 
towards and contribute to regional drought 
resilience outcomes, including those at the local and 
property level.
The drought resilience action plan also requires that 
a ‘lessons learned’ culture is adopted, ensuring new 
information, knowledge, approaches and science 
is rolled into implementation delivery as a guiding 
principle. This will mean that over time, the drought 
resilience action plan may be adapted to reflect 
new learnings and the adjustment of intervention 
pathways as required. The PCG is responsible to 
conduct an annual lessons learned review, with 
changes to inform action moving forward.
The drought resilience action plan has been 
thoughtfully designed to not only guide collective 
effort and action but to enable adaptation through 
ongoing monitoring, evaluation and learning. 
The regional drought resilience plan is a ten-year 
plan, to be reviewed after five years. 
An annual monitoring program to inform adaptive 
learning is outlined below. Addendums to this plan 
can be made, to reflect these learnings over time 
and ensure the document maintains pace with 
changing circumstances and maturation of drought 
preparedness activities.
36
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Tracking progress and reporting
Action-based project tracking against the drought resilience action plan, the principles and objectives of the 
plan should be undertaken on an annual basis. This tracking and reporting shall be the responsibility of the 
implementation PCG chair, unless otherwise delegated. 
Likewise, an annual evaluation process will be conducted by the PCG, guided by the evaluation questions 
that follow.
Key evaluation and learning questions
These key evaluation questions are high level questions designed to frame the analysis of progress and 
performance of the Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan against the above 
framework. These key evaluation questions may help to structure annual tracking and reporting.
PROPERTY
EVALUATION
Effectiveness and Outcomes 
What have been the outcomes (intended, unintended, positive and 
negative) of the plan implementation process and progress?
To what extent has progress contributed to or furthered the 
principles and objectives of the regional drought resilience plan?
Has the plan been used for or otherwise supported successful 
funding and grant applications?
To what extent have stakeholders outside the PCG responded to 
the plan’s content? 
Have any barriers or challenges been identified throughout the 
implementation of plan, and what solutions to address these have 
been identified?
Drought resilience maturation 
To what extent has efforts in implementing the plan contributed to: 
a. Creating stronger connectedness and greater social capital within 
communities, contributing to well-being and security? 
b. Empowering communities and businesses to implement activities that 
improve their resilience to drought? 
c. Supporting more primary producers and land managers to adopt 
whole-of-system approaches to natural resource management to 
improve the natural resource base, for long-term productivity and 
landscape health?
Stakeholder engagement 
In what ways are the PCG and other stakeholders collaborating 
and collectively contributing to efforts outlined by the action plan?
In what ways has the plan provided inclusive involvement across 
sectors, disciplines and communities?
In what ways has the plan been able to support individual 
stakeholder goals, objectives and aspirations with regard to 
drought resilience?
37
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

The reporting may be undertaken using a range of tools to capture experiences and perspectives from across 
the PCG, allied stakeholders as well as the communities of the Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Shires more 
broadly. These tools may include:
	
→Meetings and event data capture
	
→Targeted meeting / interviews with stakeholders
	
→Survey data
	
→Case studies and data from the PCG
	
→Media, including social media
	
→Funding and grant applications.
Achieving the plan’s outcomes
A further opportunity for the PCG to measure the contribution to or achievement of the plan’s outcomes is by 
using local data to assess specific outcomes. The data sources / indicators will need to be selected by the 
PCG, and can provide insights as to how the plan is tracking against the resilience theory of change.
Outcomes include:
THEME
OUTCOME
Social and community
Community connection and wellbeing is maintained
Economy
Reduced decline of gross regional product relative to:
	
→Non-drought periods
	
→Previous drought periods
	
→Other regions in NSW
Environment
Environmental degradation of landscapes and waterways is 
reduced throughout and emerging from drought
Governance
Drought resilience priorities are embedded across each Council’s 
Integrated Planning and Reporting Framework and informs the 
plans, strategies and efforts of allied stakeholders
Learning
Regular (annual) monitoring provides the ability for reflection and learning. The progress tracking and 
reporting methodology, using key evaluation questions, will present specific insights in terms of those 
opportunities to build in ‘lessons learned’ through engagement across stakeholders with a role in drought 
resilience. This can then be translated into opportunities for adaptive learning, as they arise.
These lessons should, on an annual basis, be contemplated with regard to the drought action plan to 
determine any relevant updates, new insights, intelligence and technologies that can be integrated to ensure 
the action plan keeps pace with a growing drought resilience maturation across systems and sectors.
This process will ensure the action plan remains a ‘living document’ that appropriately supports and services 
the needs of all stakeholders and importantly, those of the Parkes, Forbes and Lachlan Shire communities in 
preparation for, endurance of, and recovery from drought.
Concepts to guide adaptive learning as part of plan implementation are included at Appendix B. These items 
will help navigate maturation of this plan over time.
38
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Appendix A – Drought history
Precipitation and root zone soil moisture are considered as 
indicators of drought according to the Bureau of Meteorology’s 
Australian Water Resources Assessment Landscape (AWRA-L) 
service. Root zone soil moisture is a calculation of the upper and 
lower soil layers in the AWRA-L, which represents the water-
holding capacity of the top one metre of soil. Root zone soil 
moisture and precipitation rates are each useful indicators of 
future drought potential.
Past records for the region demonstrate a year-to-year 
fluctuation in precipitation and soil moisture across the region. 
The late 1980s and 2010-2011 feature significant rain, whereas, 
1944, 1982, 2006 are some of the periods of unusual dryness, 
with the most recent events of, 2017-2019 displaying distinct 
drying, particularly for soil moisture.
In all cases these drought events were characterised by 
protracted periods of low rainfall, leading to low soil moisture as 
illustrated below.
*Note that the data does not go back to the Federation drought of 1890-1902 
Figure 9 — Australian drought history timeline
In the below figures, these droughts are considered against a present-day baseline of 2002 to 2022.
1895 – 1902 
Federation  
Drought
1937 – 1945 
World War II 
Drought 
1997 – 2009 
Millennium  
Drought
1914 – 1915 
Drought
1965 – 1968 
Drought
2017 – 2019 
Drought
1982 – 1983 
Drought
1890’S
1900’S
1910’S
1920’S
1930’S
1940’S
1950’S
1960’S
1970’S
1980’S
1990’S
2000’S
2010’S
2020’S
2030’S
39
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1914 to 1915
Nationally, this drought was short but notable, primarily due to the failure national wheat crop. This drought 
was driven by a strong El Nino, with drought conditions first becoming evident in 1913. Rainfall rates were 
lower in 1914 and 1915. Rains improved in 1916 but began to decrease again over the subsequent years.
Figure 10 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1910 to 1918) 
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
40
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1937 to 1945 (World War II drought)
This drought period was characterised by several breaks, but significant periods of dryness. Rainfall rates 
were lower in 1937-1938 and 1940-1941. 1944 was the most notable year, with extremely low rainfall totals 
across the entire region.
Figure 11 ­— Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1934 to 1948)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
41
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1965 to 1968
The 1960s was generally dry across the continent. Drought developed in 1964 in northern New South Wales 
and had extended across most of the country by the following year. This was evident across the region, with 
lower rates of rainfall and soil moisture across much of the region.
Figure 12 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1962 to 1971)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
42
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1982 to 1983
Despite only being a year long, this was one of Australia’s most severe droughts in the 20th century. A very 
strong El Nino led to these drought conditions. The region experienced widespread dryness. 
Figure 13 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1979 to 1986
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
43
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

1997 to 2009 (Millennium drought)
The Millennium drought was a long-lasting period of dryness, most severe in densely populated areas of 
the south-east and south-west of the country. For the Parkes region, the beginning of this period is relatively 
unimpactful, as from lower levels in 1997, based on rainfall and soil moisture figures. It is not until 2001 when 
there is a dry spell into 2005, and then a severe dry year in 2006.
Editor’s note: The maps below show significant rainfall and higher soil moisture over this period, despite it being identified as a drought. 
This discrepancy is likely due to the reference period used to produce these maps (2002 – 2022) and that there was significant dryness 
in the latter half of that period. This result is then compounded by the short-lasting periods of rainfall decline during this long drought 
period (1997 – 2009). Therefore, leading to the appearance of increased rainfall and soil moisture compared to the reference period.
Figure 14 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (1994 to 2012)
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
44
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

2017-2019
Following a wet 2016, dry conditions returned in 2017 across south and eastern Australia. This was a 
sustained multi-year period of dryness, unprecedented in recorded history.1 A strong Indian Ocean Dipole 
was a significant contributor to dry conditions the second half of 2019, leading into significant 2019/2020 
bushfire season. The region was similar affected during this period, with widespread low rainfall and low 
soil moisture.
Figure 15 — Yearly precipitation (absolute), by LGA (2017-2019)
1 Bureau of Meteorology 2020, Special Climate Statement 70 update—drought conditions in Australia and impact on water resources in the Murray–
Darling Basin, 13 August 2020, http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs70.pdf
Precipitation
Soil moisture
-300+
Precipitation historical (mm)
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-25
-10
10
25
50
75
100+
-0.2
Historical root zone soil mositure (mm/year)
-0.1
-0.03 -0.02 -0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.2
45
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Appendix B — Concepts to guide 
adaptive learning
This appendix provides key aspects for consideration as part of learning processes 
throughout implementation of this plan, to guide further iterations and amendments 
to this RDRP. As drought resilience processes mature, the ability for further robust 
adaptation pathways to be implemented will emerge. 
The table below captures specific items identified for integration as part of future plan iterations. 
NO
ASPECT FOR CONSIDERATION 
Expansion of drought resilience relative to diverse stakeholder groups
1
Future plan updates should continue to seek engagement across the community, and build in and 
on top of existing processes to engage with less represented groups through implementation of 
the plan (including non-agricultural sectors and First Nations groups). 
Stakeholder engagement could be expanded to include direct participation of different drought 
vulnerable groups including gauging their capacity to participate and how best to engage with 
them moving forward. This information could be used to better target vulnerable residents and 
ensure adequate supports are in place to involve different community segments.
Expansion of resilience adaptation pathways
2
Further develop the theory of change to aligns the plan’s objectives and actions towards reaching 
its intended outcomes, including the degree to which the proposed actions contribute to adaptive 
and transformative actions. Subsequent plans may focus on opportunities that address adaption 
and transformation.
3
Expand on the interrelationships between economic, social and environmental factors across 
existing and updated documents, plans and strategies, and describe how these relationships 
influence potential cascading impacts of drought. There could be opportunity to link actions within 
the plan to these interrelationships to demonstrate multiple benefits from singular actions. 
3
Future plan updates could develop a suite of plausible future scenarios through a participatory 
process and based on climate, drought and other drivers of change. The development of future 
scenarios could consider how trends, shocks or stresses (including drought) will interact with and 
likely affect the region’s economic, social and environmental characteristics, and the implications 
for diverse stakeholder groups. This exercise will also assist these stakeholders to explore 
and identify actions and pathways that assist with building resilience under different plausible 
future scenarios.
Resilience action planning
4
Future updates to the plan could provide more additional details in the actions to enhance 
accountability and direction (next steps, responsibilities, measures of success)
5
Future updates to the plan could provide further links to key actions within the plan and how they 
address specific indicators of vulnerability and adaptive capacity. 
46
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan

6
Future updates of the plan could identify potential interactions or interdependencies between 
actions to provide more guidance for sequencing actions.
7
Future plan updates could provide additional detail to how actions, if implemented successfully, 
are likely to be effective in achieving specific resilience outcomes. Pursuing this may require 
shift in current action plan layout, to consider priorities or groups of actions which address an 
overarching outcome.
Implementation and governance
8
As implementation advances, expand the implementation content of the plan with respect to its 
governance arrangements and the function / operation of the PCG. Future updates of the plan 
could provide further detail on roles and responsibilities under working partnerships. 
9
Future plan updates could provide more explicit descriptions of what external support is required 
for successful implementation, including resourcing. 
10
Future plan updates could further define and build upon established structured learning 
processes, and utilise monitoring and reporting to inform any changes to priorities. A focus on the 
program logic, and the implementation pathways can underpin this focus. 
Monitoring, evaluation and learning framework
11
Further develop structured approaches to capturing lessons from performance measures, 
linked with monitoring in addition to lessons from annual evaluations currently identified in 
the MEL. Integrate lessons learned from the plan’s existing evaluation questions back into the 
plan’s actions.
Continue to enhance and mature the plan’s MEL processes over time as the plan transitions from 
foundational into a performance posture.
12
Further develop performance indicators tied to actions in the plan’s MEL plan. This will improve 
accountability by showing the degree to which proposed priorities and actions contribute to 
the plan’s articulated vision and outcomes. This could include using quantitative and empirical 
evidence for key economic and social variables over time. 
Resilience assessment
13
Ensure future iterations of the plan are qualified by a review of the Resilience Assessment 
components to identify key circumstantial changes which have occurred.
14
Continue to build upon and refine the program logic approach embedded within the Resilience 
Assessment that supported the development of the current plan, into a well-developed theory of 
change 
47
Parkes, Forbes, and Lachlan Regional Drought Resilience Plan