Jointly funded by the Australian Government and the 
NSW Government under the Future Drought Fund
Singleton, 
Muswellbrook 
Shire, and 
Upper Hunter 
Shire Councils 
Singleton, Muswellbrook,
and Upper Hunter
REGIONAL DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN

Ngayan marrungku paran wiyan Wanarruwa, mirumalikan  para ani parraykupa, ngatan ngayan marrung wiyan Ngarrakay 
paranpa yurakaykal ngatan pangaykal. 
We acknowledge the Wonnarua people, traditional keepers of this land, and we pay respects to their Elders, past and present.
Baiame Cave, Wonnarua/Wanaruah Country, Milbrodale (provided by Singleton Council, 2021)
CONTACT
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COUNTRY
SINGLETON COUNCIL 
12-14 Queen Street, Singleton 
PO Box 314, Singleton NSW 2330 
T 02 6578 7290
E council@singleton.nsw.gov.au
W singleton.nsw.gov.au
MUSWELLBROOK SHIRE COUNCIL 
Campbell’s Corner 
60-82 Bridge Street, Muswellbrook 
PO Box 122, Muswellbrook NSW 2333 
T  02 6549 3700 
E council@muswellbrook.nsw.gov.au
W muswellbrook.nsw.gov.au
UPPER HUNTER SHIRE COUNCIL
136 Liverpool Street, Scone 
34-40 Vennacher Street, Merriwa 
47 Mayne Street, Murrurundi 
PO Box 208, Scone NSW 2337 
T  02 6540 1100 
E council@upperhunter.nsw.gov.au
W upperhunter.nsw.gov.au
CONTENTS.
Acknowledgement of Country
2
Contact
2
Letters from the Mayors 
4
Glossary of Key Terms
6
Key Abbreviations
9
01	 ABOUT THIS PLAN
10
A Plan for Drought Resilience 
10
Regional Drought Resilience Planning  
Objectives and Purpose
12
02	 ABOUT THIS REGIONAL DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN
14
The Process Overview
16
What Brought Us Here?
18
Key Inputs 
20
Our Partners  
22
03	 OUR REGION
26
04	 DROUGHT AND OUR REGION
30
What is Drought? 
30
Drought Monitoring in NSW 
31
Stages of Drought 
31
A Long History of Droughts
32
What Will The Future Look Like?
37
05	 DROUGHT RESILIENCE CHALLENGES 
AND OPPORTUNITIES
40
Challenges
41
Opportunities
43
06	 A PLAN FOR DROUGHT RESILIENCE
45
Action Strategic Alignment 
48
Action Pathways 
52
How to Read an Action 
55
Action A: Comprehensive Drought  
Communication Plan
56
Action B: First Nations Land  
Management Practices
60
Action C: Supporting Our Community Groups
62
Action D: Ensuring Economic Prosperity  
as Our Region Transitions
66
Action E: Forward Planning and Helping  
Our Water Users Prepare for Dry Times
68
07	 MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND 
LEARNING
72
Achieving Our Goals 
72
Assessing Our Progress
73
Our Roles and Responsibilities  
73
Data Collection Tools 
74
Reporting and Accountability Obligations 
79
Risks in Effectively Delivering Our  
MEL Framework and RDR Plan 
80
References
82

LETTERS FROM THE MAYORS 
History shows that drought is a recurring event in Australia, but it’s almost 
impossible to predict when—and for how long—it will occur. Worse still, the 
impacts of climate change have injected further difficulties to being able to 
predict the severity of all weather events, including droughts. That’s why the 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan is so important. This collaborative approach 
with our neighbours in Muswellbrook and Upper Hunter LGAs aims to better 
equip our communities, our economies and our environment to bounce back 
quicker and stronger - especially when times are tough.
I acknowledge and thank everyone who has been involved in the development 
of this Plan, and look forward to the positive outcomes that will benefit our 
communities.
Cr Sue Moore
Mayor of Singleton
Our Upper Hunter Region has a remarkable landscape. 
As weather conditions become more unpredictable with climate change, it is 
imperative that our Region is well-equipped with the right tools and information 
regarding all facets of extreme weather management. 
The Regional Drought Resilience Plan is a forward thinking and collaborative 
approach for future environmental threats. As a direct result of the investment 
in this strategic drought plan, Upper Hunter communities will become stronger, 
allowing them the opportunity to flourish during these hardships and not rely 
solely upon our collective tenacity of spirit and resilience.
I wish to express my gratitude to those who contributed to this initiative. These 
collective insights and shared experiences will further safeguard us from the 
emotional, economic and environmental uncertainty that comes with such 
extremities that are commonplace within our country.
Cr Steve Reynolds 
Mayor of Muswellbrook
As a farmer, I still remember the toll the 2017 - 2020 drought took on all of us—not 
just on our land, but on our minds as well. Water carting, dry dams, the constant 
uncertainty—it wasn’t just a devastating time; it was mentally exhausting. That’s 
why this Drought Resilience Plan is so important to me. Working alongside 
Singleton and Muswellbrook councils, we’ve crafted a plan that draws from our 
own hard-earned experiences, not just to protect our farms, but to safeguard 
our well-being. I’m deeply grateful to our community for sharing your wisdom. 
It’s your insights that make this Plan truly effective, ensuring that when the next 
challenge comes, we’ll be ready—stronger, more resilient, and united.
Cr Maurice Collison 
Mayor of Upper Hunter 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
4
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
5

GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS
Absorptive capacity 
The ability of individuals and groups to continue without 
adapting or changing their behaviour in response to 
environmental and socioeconomic changes.1  
Adaptation
Adjustment or modification in natural and/or human 
systems in response to actual or expected shocks and 
stresses to moderate harm, reduce vulnerability and/or 
exploit beneficial opportunities.2  
Adaptive capacity
The ability of individuals and groups to adjust and respond 
to environmental and socioeconomic changes.2
Adaptive governance
Adaptive governance is defined by a focus on decentralised 
decision-making structures and procedurally rational 
policy, supported by intensive natural and social science. 
Decentralised decision-making structures allow a large and 
complex problem like global climate change to be factored 
into many smaller problems, each more tractable for policy 
and scientific purposes.3 
Blue-sky thinking 
Brainstorming without limits or being grounded in reality, 
opening possibilities for creativity without practical 
constraints. 
Co-design
The process of partnership, using participatory methods 
to develop project delivery and agree objectives and needs. 
A process of working together utilising generative and 
explorative processes.
Community-centred
An approach where the local and regional community 
work together to identify goals that are important to 
them, develop and implement plans to achieve those goals, 
and create collaborative relationships internally and with 
external actors - all while building on community strengths 
and local leadership.
Drought
Drought in general means acute water shortage. Drought 
is a prolonged, abnormally dry period when the amount of 
available water is insufficient to meet our normal use.4 
Drought in the Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper 
Hunter Region means a recurrent natural phenomenon 
compounding existing stresses causing extensive impacts. 
Drought is fully acknowledged across all three LGAs. 
Drought resilience
Drought resilience is a measure of a system’s ability 
to absorb, respond and recover to drought risks. In the 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Region, 
drought resilience means community resilience and 
empowerment to respond to and prepare for environmental, 
social, and economic challenges during times of drought.  
Economic resilience
The ability of the economy to absorb the economic impact 
of shocks and stressors without changing the economic 
status or outcomes.2
Environmental resilience
The ability of the natural environment to cope with a diverse 
range of shocks and stressors while maintaining natural 
processes and ecosystem services.2
Exposure
The presence of people; livelihoods; species or ecosystems; 
environmental functions, services, and resources; 
infrastructure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in 
places and settings that could be adversely affected.5
Feedback loop
Feedback loop is a process where the output of a system is 
fed back into the input, resulting in circular cause and effect 
that can either amplify or diminish the effects of droughts. It 
is used to visualise the interdependencies and interrelations 
of causes and effects across different systems.6 
Green drought 
Green droughts refer to instances when vegetation retains 
a green top, but growth is stunted, and soil moisture stress 
has been impacted for over a month.7  During a green 
drought there is insufficient rainfall to saturate the soil to 
generate runoff into rivers and dams. 
Governance
Governance is the structures and processes by which 
individuals, groups and agencies in a society share power 
and make decisions. It can be formally or informally 
institutionalised.2
Hunter Region 
Throughout this report, the word Region (capitalised) is 
used to refer to Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter 
Council areas. There is no set definition of what constitutes 
the Hunter, Greater Hunter, Lower Hunter, Upper Hunter, 
Hunter Valley, or Hunter region. Different entities use 
these terms, often interchangeably and often without 
clearly delineating exactly which LGAs they are referring 
to. Where this Plan references statistics, we have used the 
terminology from the originating report.
Intervention options
Alternative or complementary actions, projects, programs, 
policies, initiatives, and investments that are planned to 
bring about change in the system.8
Local knowledge
Local knowledge and First Nations knowledge incorporate 
elements of lived experience within a landscape, bearing 
witness to the operation of systems. It includes aspects 
of people, landscape, culture – how people interact with 
surroundings and as part of communities and processes.
Maintain 
Maintaining actions, or maintaining the system, refers to 
efforts to keep the Region (as it currently exists) the same 
i.e., maintaining the status quo. 
Megadrought 
Drought persisting multi-years and of extreme severity. 
Drought lasting decades.9  
Modify 
Efforts to modify the system. It refers to efforts working to 
adapt part of the system to meet newly defined goals. 
Planetary boundary 
The planetary boundaries concept, developed by 
Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, 
presents nine boundaries for safe operation, where 
humanity can develop and thrive for future generations. 
These include climate change, novel entities, biosphere 
integrity, land-system change, freshwater change, 
biogeochemical flows, ocean acidification, atmospheric 
aerosol loading, and stratospheric ozone depletion. All 
boundaries are assessed, and six of the nine boundaries 
have been crossed. Crossing boundaries means increasing 
the risk of generating large-scale abrupt or irreversible 
environmental changes.10  
Resilience 
The ability of a system to absorb a disturbance and 
reorganise, so as to maintain the existing functions, 
structure and feedback.11  Also see general resilience, 
specified resilience, economic resilience, environmental 
resilience, and social resilience. For the Region, community 
emphasised the need for proactive resilience, with the 
ability to “ride the wave” and “roll with the punches” to 
find a way to cope with financial, environmental, and social 
challenges arising during drought. 
Risk
The potential for adverse consequences for human or 
ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values and 
objectives associated with such systems.5 
Shock
Sudden, short-term events that threaten a city (or 
region). Examples include major storms, floods, bush 
fires, heatwaves, disease outbreaks, terrorism, and cyber-
attacks.12
Social resilience
The ability of the human society to cope with a diverse 
range of shocks and stressors while maintaining existing 
social and community functions.2
Stressor
An event that occurs gradually over a timeframe that 
causes an adverse effect, e.g., drought.2
Systems
The interaction of processes, networks, and inter-
dependencies across a complex ‘whole’. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
6
7

The Region
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Region. “The 
Region”, “Our Region” or variations of such have been used 
interchangeably throughout the Plan.
Theory of change
Refers to theories, causal mechanisms and assumptions 
that explain how and why outcomes and impacts will be 
achieved through use, implementation and production of 
proposed inputs, activities, and outputs.8
Threshold
The point at which a change in a level or amount a 
controlling variable causes a system to shift to a 
qualitatively different regime. Also referred to as a tipping 
point.13 
Trends 
Major global or regional influences that have driven change 
in the past and are expected to shape change into the 
future.14 
Transform 
Transformative actions aim to change the existing system, 
creating a new reality (also see Transformation). 
Transformation 
The process of radically changing or building a new system 
with different structure, functions, feedback, and identity.2
Trigger point 
A pre-agreed situation or event, that when met, activates 
a management intervention. Trigger points are usually 
defined in the planning phase. 2
Triple bottom line
A concept traditionally derived from accounting framework 
that demands organisations to meet the goal of sustainable 
development. This approach seeks to equally focus on 
economic, social, and environmental outcomes. 
Value add
The difference between the value of goods and the cost of 
materials or supplies used to produce them.15
Vulnerability 
The propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected.5
KEY ABBREVIATIONS
°C
Degrees Celsius
ABS
Australian Bureau of Statistics
BoM 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CBA 
Cost Benefit Analysis 
CBD
Central Business District 
CDI 
Combined Drought Indicator 
COVID-19 
Coronavirus disease 2019
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation
CSPs
Community Strategic Plans
DPIRD
Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development
FDF
Future Drought Fund
FIFO
Fly-In Fly-Out 
GL 
Gigalitre(s) 
GRP 
Gross Regional Product 
GVA 
Gross Value Added
IP&R
Integrated Planning and Reporting 
kL
Kilolitre(s) 
kL/y
Kilolitre(s) per year 
LALC
Local Aboriginal Land Council
LGA
Local Government Area
MEL 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning 
NEMA 
National Emergency Management 
Agency
NSW
New South Wales
PCG
Project Control Group
RAMHP
Rural Adversity Mental Health 
Program
RAPTA
Resilience, Adaptation Pathways, and 
Transformation Assessment
RCP
Representative Concentration 
Pathway
RDR Plan
Regional Drought Resilience Plan
RDRP
Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
REDS
Regional Economic Development 
Strategies 
SDGs 
Sustainable Development Goals 
SROI 
Social Return on Investment 
UFW
Unaccounted For Water
UHWUA
Upper Hunter Water Utilities Alliance 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
8
9

01
ABOUT  
THIS PLAN.
A PLAN FOR DROUGHT RESILIENCE 
Drought is a recurring event in Australia. 
Australian history is punctuated by periods of 
economic, social, and environmental hardship 
associated with these extended dry conditions, 
with the most severe living on in our memories 
through their names: the Federation drought, 
the Millennium drought, the 2019/20 drought to 
name a few. 
Droughts are difficult to predict with limited warning as to 
duration, severity, or extent. It becomes more challenging 
to simulate future drought conditions due to a lack of 
understanding around the contributing physical factors, 
including those of climate change. Their slow, chronic 
nature often means that by the time a drought is identified, 
the opportunity for implementing change (implementing 
mitigation or adaptation measures) is lost.
Droughts are expensive: the 2019/20 
drought cost $5.5 billion across NSW.16 
Farmers bear the brunt of drought impacts. Roughly 1 in 2 
farmers have thoughts of suicide or self-harm, and sadly, 
farming suicide rates are 59% higher than the general 
population.17 Often drought is accompanied by bushfires, 
which compound the impacts. When a drought breaks, 
often with flooding rains, the impacts linger for months, 
years or decades. Whilst traditionally viewed as an issue 
confined to communities dominated by farming and 
agribusiness, drought impacts ripple across numerous 
sectors: from water supply to regional towns, to the viability 
of local businesses, the amenity of recreational spaces, to 
our environmental and cultural heritage.
The cyclical nature of droughts suggests we will continue 
to face drought in the future. No two drought events are 
the same, and droughts in the future are projected to be 
harsher, longer, and more frequent. The most effective 
response to this rising risk is to strive for greater drought 
resilience. 
We want to avoid chronic stresses and episodic shocks 
degrading the performance of our community, our 
economy, and our natural environment. 
Figure 1.1 illustrates how the identification and 
implementation of actions which maintain, modify, or 
transform our Region, can limit the impacts of drought, and 
position ourselves to bounce back quicker and stronger. 
This can be achieved by building sustainable and diverse 
regional economies, thriving local communities, and 
enhancing our natural environments. 
Figure 1.1: Improving our prosperity through resilience (adapted from Fiksel, 2016)
TIME
COMMUNITY PERFORMANCE
Pathway to resilience
Traditional growth intent
Chronic stress
Episodic shock
Step-change
opportunity
ACTIONS to adapt 
or transform 
socio-economic 
and settlement 
systems to avoid or 
resist impact
ACTIONS to limit 
impact or shorten 
recovery from 
stresses or shocks
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
10
11
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

Key tools which support the delivery of the NSW 
Government’s vision for drought-ready regions include: 
•	Australian Government’s Drought Resilience Adoption 
and Innovation Hubs (including University of Southern 
Queensland, and Charles Sturt University)
•	NSW Government Department of Primary Industries 
DroughtHub which is an online drought assistance and 
information portal for NSW primary producers, and 
their Climate Vulnerability Assessments for horticulture 
and viticulture, broadacre cropping, forestry, extensive 
livestock, marine fisheries, and biosecurity risks. 
•	NSW Government AdaptNSW website, to inform and 
empower communities, businesses, households, and 
government to adapt to climate change.
These community based RDR Plans are designed to 
complement and build on the actions of the Federal and 
State governments. The purpose of the RDR Plans is shown 
in Figure 1.2. 
REGIONAL DROUGHT RESILIENCE  
PLANNING OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSE
The Commonwealth Government’s Future Drought Fund seeks to enhance the public good by building drought resilience in 
Australia’s agricultural sector, the agricultural landscape, and communities. The Fund is intended to deliver against three inter-
connected strategic priorities:
•	 economic resilience for an innovative and profitable 
agricultural sector
•	 environmental resilience for sustainable and improved 
functioning of farming landscapes
•	 social resilience for resourceful and adaptable 
communities.
One of the five focus areas of the Future Drought Fund 
is the Regional Drought Resilience Planning (RDRP) 
program. The objectives of the RDRP process are to:
 
01
Grow the self-reliance and performance of the 
agricultural sector
02
Improve the natural capital of agricultural 
landscapes for better environmental outcomes
03
Strengthen the wellbeing and social capital of 
rural, regional, and remote communities
 
 
In NSW, this program is jointly funded by the NSW 
Government and provides support for local governments to 
work together in a regional consortium to deliver a Regional 
Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan) unique to the regional 
community. 
Resilient regional communities are supported through 
a variety of other NSW government policies and plans, 
including their Regional Economic Development Strategies 
(REDS), the Department of Planning and Environment’s 
Regional Plans, and NSW State and Regional Water 
Strategies (see Table 6.2 in Section 6 for further linkages 
between this RDR Plan and other strategies).
Figure 1.2: Long term outcomes of the RDR Plan 
Source: Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 2020.18  
Stronger connectedness 
and greater social capital 
within communities 
contributing to wellbeing 
and security
More primary producers 
adopt transformative 
strategies and technologies 
to reduce financial exposure 
to drought
Communities implement 
transformative activities 
that improve resilience 
to drought
More primary producers 
preserve natural capital 
while also improving 
productivity and 
profitability
More primary producers adopt 
whole-of-system approaches 
to NRM to improve the natural 
resource base, for long- 
term productivity and 
 landscape health
More primary producers 
adopt risk management 
practices to improve 
their sustainability 
and resilience
LONG TERM 
OUTCOMES  
of the  
RDR Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
12
13

02
This Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR 
Plan) is a collaboration between Singleton 
Council, Muswellbrook Shire Council, and 
the Upper Hunter Shire Council. The Plan 
is designed to strengthen the capacities of 
local residents, communities, institutions, 
businesses, and systems to withstand the 
economic, social, and environmental challenges 
arising during periods of drought. 
By building resilience across the Region, we will ensure our 
community can grow and prosper before, during, and after 
dry times. By investing in resilience early, our Region reaps 
the benefits in good times, whilst becoming better adapted 
to the challenging experiences of drought in the future. 
ABOUT THIS 
REGIONAL DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE PLAN.
This RDR Plan is community 
owned and driven,  
co-designed with community 
leaders, residents, 
local businesses, and 
organisations. The input of 
local knowledge has provided 
the plan with a strong 
foundation, a shared vision, 
allowed for targeted efforts 
leveraging existing and new 
opportunities to strengthen 
community resilience.
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
14
15

Project Inception
Resilience Assessment
Establishment of the PCG
Regional Snapshot
Department of Primary Industries and 
Regional Development 
Singleton Council
Muswellbrook Shire Council 
Upper Hunter Shire Council
Demographics and Social Factors
Key industries and Economic Factors
Our Natural Environment
Local Plans & Strategies
A “What-If” Analysis
System Diagnostics
Previous Drought Impacts
Resilience Challenges
Resilience Opportunities
Future Drought Projections
Future Changes within the Region
THE PROCESS OVERVIEW
Stakeholder Engagement
Synthesis and Reporting
Stakeholder Mapping
Action Pathway
Stakeholder and Community 
Engagement Plan
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning 
(How We Will Learn)
Community Input
Outcomes
Actions
'Have Your Say' Survey
Street Talks
Targeted Interviews
Community Workshops
Action Detailing Consultation
Drought Impacts (Systems Diagnostics) 
including Challenges and Opportunities 
A Brighter Future (Strengths and Existing 
Services)
Vision and Ideas for the Future including an 
Action Long List (Our Preferred Options) 
Economy
Environmental
Social
Cross-Cutting
(Our Preferred Options)
16
17
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

WHAT BROUGHT US HERE?
Project Inception 
To collaborate across our Region, the Project Control Group (PCG) was formed, allowing for easy communication across 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Councils. 
Resilience Assessment
Regional snapshot
Key features of the Region were identified and assessed via 
desktop research and community engagement activities. 
This provided a baseline understanding for the Region and 
its resilience to drought events. Information accessed 
for this process was taken from public sources including 
Bureau of Meteorology (BoM), REMPLAN, IDCommunity, 
Census and other Australian Bureau of Statistics data, 
council data, and pertinent local/regional plans. These 
sources were utilised to consider the economic, social, and 
environmental resilience of our Region and fed into the 
technical desktop study (the Resilience Assessment) which 
considered community strengths and resilience before, 
during, and following past drought events. 
A ”what-if” analysis
The technical Resilience Assessment considered future 
drought scenarios for various climate conditions. Climate 
data for rainfall, hot days, heat stress, bushfire, evaporation, 
soil moisture, runoff, and erosion was obtained primarily 
from My Climate View, supplemented by data from the 
BoM and CSIRO. Data was obtained for an RCP 8.5 scenario 
for the Region. Historical and future climate projections 
for the year 2070 were considered, exploring what future 
drought and climate conditions could look like for the 
Region if climate changes were realised. By considering 
a possible “what-if” and the “worst case scenario”, our 
Region was able to explore plausible future pathways and 
measures to reduce stress and potential impacts. 
Stakeholder Engagement
Community input 
Our communities were the primary drivers of this Plan. This RDR Plan exists to serve our communities and our Region. To 
ensure engagement represented a diverse array of voices, a stakeholder mapping exercise was undertaken to identify 
individuals, groups, and businesses impacted by drought to ensure a collaborative approach to drought resilience was adopted. 
Using local knowledge, council databases, research, and PCG input, a long list of key stakeholders were identified, contacted, 
and recruited. These include, but were not limited to stakeholders in the following sectors:
Health 
(Rural Financial Counselling Services, Services Australia, 
pharmacies, not-for-profits, Farmgate counsellors, Rural Adversity 
Mental Health Program (RAMHP), Regional Services Support 
Network (RSSN), NSW Health and Public Health Network)
Water and Agriculture 
(Local farmers, water utilities, viticulture, Hunter Region Livestock 
Exchange, farm equipment manufacturers and suppliers, trades, 
equine studs, industry groups, and veterinarians)
Tourism 
(Wineries, wedding venues, florists, 
accommodation providers)
Environment and Culture 
(Landcare, Local Land Services, and Aboriginal entities etc.)
Industry 
(Mining, power, renewable energy, 
offset land managers)
Education 
(Schools, youth)
Local Businesses 
(Homewares, clothing stores, hospitality venues, real estate, 
charity organisations)
Through three rounds of community consultation guiding the RDR Plan development, surveys and workshops allowed 
residents to identify existing challenges and opportunities arising from drought. For full details of engagement, see Figure 
2 1. Community input directly shaped the Resilience Assessment, and vice versa, with research findings from the Resilience 
Assessment guiding engagement approaches and consultation activities. Desktop research informing the regional snapshot, 
history of drought and its impact, and the Resilience Assessment as a whole were used during engagement activities, guiding 
discussion questions and information presented to the public prior to activity commencement. This included drought 
projections and technical content that was easily consumable for our community.
Integrated learning and vision setting
Local voices and insights shared during consultation provided the opportunity to capture a shared community vision. 
Community input was refined through two rounds of engagement to understand past drought impacts, establish a list of 
current actions and initiatives, identify existing support services and systems which provide effective assistance, and detail 
the Regional challenges arising from drought. These lessons learned were captured within the Resilience Assessment 
and Stakeholder Engagement Outcome Support Report. Feedback was also provided to the Project Control Group (PCG) 
consisting of representatives from the NSW Government Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development 
(DPIRD), council representatives, and independent consultants, ensuring councils and DPIRD were aware of the desired vision 
for the Region and existing day-to-day challenges community faces during dry times.
After integrating various priorities and ideas across community, businesses, council members and council staff, key 
organisations, and service providers, the proposed vision for the Plan was tested with workshop participants in a third round of 
consultation. Identified goals for the Plan which aligned with Regional values and sentiment shared during previous workshops 
were identified and considered further within the Resilience Assessment and workshops. This step was critical in ensuring 
community input was woven throughout all aspects of the RDR Plan. 
Regional Drought Resilience Plan 
System diagnostics
From the future drought scenarios obtained during 
the Resilience Assessment, drought impacts to critical 
systems within the Region were considered. Combining 
local knowledge and scientific data, a clear understanding 
of historic impacts to social, economic, environmental, 
and governance spheres were obtained. From this, we 
were able to consider the implications for water capture/
storage, grazing industries, wine and tourism, people, and 
community. A systems map was created based on local 
knowledge and research accumulated around the Regional 
challenges and opportunities to bolster drought resilience. 
The interlinkages across these areas were considered, with 
drought impacts acknowledged as never occurring alone. 
A brighter future?
Ideas for a more drought-resilient future were considered 
by the community to imagine a better future. Ideas 
were canvassed during workshops, surveys, and phone 
interviews, with creativity and ‘blue-sky’ thinking 
encouraged. Particular focus on actions with maintaining, 
modifying, or transformative capability was encouraged to 
shift from the reactionary to preparation and pre-emptive 
approaches. As a locally-led Plan, sentiment from the 
Have Your Say Survey to “keep actions doable” were also 
acknowledged. Opportunities and possible future actions 
were captured within an action longlist. Key themes and 
ideas raised by the community across the Region were 
then utilised to group this longlist. Key themes included 
education and communication, financial and business, 
agriculture, social connection, environmental, governance, 
and industrial involvement. Ideas ranged from the 
development of a comprehensive drought communications 
plan, to bus tours across wine/tourism and grazing/equine/
cropping enterprises to allow for peer-to-peer learning. 
These potential actions were filtered into environmental, 
economic, and social pillars, to allow for prioritisation where 
long-lasting change was possible.
Our preferred options 
Following development of the action long list, further 
engagement was undertaken with collaborators and 
key stakeholders/community representatives to discuss 
potential action owners and prioritised actions based 
on community need, efficacy, whether the actions were 
implementable, or had the potential to build upon existing 
activities. This process was guided by councils and PCG 
representatives, resulting in a priority action list. Tangible 
and purposeful actions were further developed with 
self-identified action owners through a detailed process 
and development of implementation steps for each 
action. Round three engagement conversations allowed 
relevant stakeholders to map their vision for each action, 
encouraging ground truthing and practical steps to 
implement the action and empower stakeholder buy-in. 
By prioritising actions that addressed identified resilience 
challenges, which were canvassed during prior workshops, 
the project ensured each action was set up for success, 
creating a level of accountability. 
How we will learn
Monitoring and evaluation processes were developed 
in alignment with desired action outcomes to ensure 
continuous innovation and learning is fostered through 
intentional capacity building and education. This provides 
us with accountability and knowledge relating to our 
uncertain future. Together, this Plan will enable our 
community to concretely achieve a stronger drought 
resilient Region. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
18
19

Environment / Water 
Agri-business / Workforce 
Development
Agriculture
Wine / Tourism
Equine Industry
Social Cohesion
Mental Health
Mining and Energy Industry
Education / Youth
Thematic Approach
Where to Focus Effort
Establish Project Control Group 
(representatives from Singleton, 
Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper 
Hunter Shire Councils, and the 
Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development).
Engage with relevant Subject Matter 
Experts.
Resilience Assessment (local 
strategic context, environmental, 
social, and economic context, 
previous drought impacts, future 
drought projections, challenges, and 
opportunities). 
Stakeholder & Engagement Plan 
(key stakeholders, demographics, 
and how to involve them, including 
marginal and vulnerable groups such 
as First Nations, elderly, and persons 
with a disability).
Have Your Say Survey (generating 
project interest and ground-truthing 
the desktop study).
Project Inception 
Setting Project  
Foundations
Where: Singleton (including Hunter 
Regional Livestock Exchange), 
Muswellbrook, Aberdeen, Scone, 
Merriwa, Denman, and Jerrys Plains.
Who: Residents, farmers, agricultural 
services, business owners, retail staff, 
Aboriginal groups, and members of 
the Rural Support Services Network. 
What: Street talks, phone interviews, 
and group meetings. 
How: Discussion with residents on 
the ground canvassing drought 
impacts, community strengths, 
existing services, and ideas for 
actions across key areas: community 
and recreation, environment, local 
business and regional economy, 
utilities and infrastructure, cultural 
heritage, and vulnerable groups.
Round 1  
Engagement
Challenges and Opportunities
KEY INPUTS 
Existing bodies of work span governance and leadership, agriculture, and equine sectors, social, economic, infrastructure, 
environmental, climate change, demographics, and other scientific studies and research. This Plan sits alongside numerous 
policies and strategic plans ranging from local council level through to the international stage. These documents provided key 
inputs within the RDR Plan. 
Table 2.1: The Drought Resilience Planning Process in Detail 
Priority actions of this Plan have been mapped against these key inputs, demonstrating the strategic alignment of each action. 
Further mapping against the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction  
have been included to reflect the global scale of drought resilience work. This is further elaborated in the Action Strategic 
Alignment section. 
Vision, goals, and 
objectives
Process for drought 
resilience
Priority actions under 
economic, social, and 
environmental pillars, and 
cross-cutting
Monitoring, evaluation, 
and learning 
Synthesis
Regional Drought 
Resilience (RDR) Plan
Where: Virtual – online 
meetings, phone calls and 
emails.  
Who: Proposed action 
owners and key 
stakeholders. 
What: 
•	 Action rationale
•	 Implementation steps
•	 High-level cost 
estimates 
•	 Action leads and 
stakeholders
•	 Action outcome, 
key performance 
indicators, and 
evaluation
•	 Complementary 
actions and next steps 
where relevant
How: Council 
representatives 
prioritised actions 
based on local appetite. 
Subsequent online 
meetings, emails, 
and phone calls were 
conducted to co-design 
and detail the actions.  
Round 3 
Engagement
Action Detailing
Where: Singleton, 
Muswellbrook, 
Murrurundi, Gundy, 
Broke, and Sandy Hollow. 
Who: Key council 
representatives, industry 
and service provider 
stakeholders, community 
organisations, and 
community members.  
What: Thematic 
workshops with 
stakeholders in response 
to recognised future 
drought projections, 
and follow-up phone 
interviews targeting 
marginal and vulnerable 
stakeholder groups 
unable to attend in-
person workshops.
How: Facilitated 
discussions – review of 
ideas from round one, 
additional ideas, idea 
evaluation (effectiveness, 
feasibility, value for 
money, addressing root 
cause, capacity to deliver, 
supplementary and avoid 
duplication of efforts).
Long list of actions 
developed.
Round 2  
Engagement
Solutions for the Future
Plan Vision, Goals and 
Objectives 
Longlist of Actions
Priority Actions 
Complementary Actions
Next Steps
Outcomes
How to Get There
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
RDR PLAN
20
21
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

OUR PARTNERS  
This RDR Plan was developed in partnership between Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper 
Hunter Shire Councils, made possible by joint funding from the Australian Government’s Future 
Drought Fund and the NSW Government. As a community-centred Plan, a wide range of stakeholders 
and residents across our Region was engaged via a thoughtful and dedicated engagement approach.
This occurred via interviews, phone calls, surveys, 
workshops, street talks, and one-on-one meetings. From 
the community engagement, the mining and energy 
sectors were identified as facilitating community resilience 
through employment and economic spend within the 
Region. However, the same sectors are also a challenge for 
agriculture, wine, and equine sectors through competition 
for land and water. As the Region prepares for the inevitable 
transition away from mining due to Australia’s low carbon 
economy trend, this RDR Plan considers opportunity for 
renewables, establishing a diversified economy and skilled 
workforce. 
Figure 2.1 shows the breadth of engagement conducted for 
this Plan. Community members, business representatives, 
NSW Government representatives, service providers, 
charitable organisations, agriculturalists, and the three 
councils were engaged to ensure this RDR Plan was truly 
community-centred and focused. 
Many shared stories of hardship, comradery, and 
community spirit in spite of drought. Visions for a more 
resilient future were readily considered. 
While the focal point of this engagement was targeted 
workshops, interviews, and surveys, informal engagement 
was also conducted with a broad cross-section of the 
community, providing critical insights into local challenges, 
opportunities, and possible solutions or interventions 
to improve drought resilience of the Region. From the 
economic powerhouse of the Hunter Valley (Singleton and 
Muswellbrook) to the Upper Hunter, stakeholders included 
graziers, health providers, support services, local business 
owners, community organisations, and more. Participants 
shared their personal drought journey, whilst also sharing 
the drought journey of the Region. Figure 2.1 provides an 
overview of the community and stakeholder engagement 
undertaken, with the Engagement Outcome Summary 
Report providing a detailed overview of the engagement 
outcomes.
Figure 2.1: Engagement outcomes 
* Note, given surveys were completed anonymously, it cannot be determined the level of overlap that arose between 
survey participants and participation in the other engagement activities. 
** Note, some participants attended multiple workshops. 
Businesses consulted: 
•	Agricultural suppliers, agronomists, 
and stock and station agents 
•	Local small and medium businesses 
(including (but not limited to) 
clothing, discretionary groups, 
supermarkets, bakeries, boutique 
food/wine) 
•	Environmental services
•	Real estate agencies
•	Accommodation providers
•	Cleaning services
•	Regional Services Support Network  
•	Mining employees 
•	Key community groups and organisations 
such as Rural Financial Counselling Service
•	Visitor Information Centres 
•	Veterinarians 
•	Tavern owners 
•	Local residents 
•	Small acre farmers
•	Trade and hardware businesses
•	Butchers 
•	Bowling Club
•	Pharmacy
•	School Parent & Citizens (P&C) 
•	Pony Club
•	Chamber of Commerce 
•	Insurance providers, brokers, and 
accountants 
Street Walk 
Conversations 
100 participants
(March 2024)
Have Your Say 
Survey 
161 respondents* 
(Feb - Mar 2024)

The survey link was 
shared with a range 
of service providers 
and industry groups 
to maximise reach. 
Organisations Engaged: 
•	Environmental groups
•	Cafes, restaurants, and pubs
•	Emergency services
•	Drought Relief Coordinator
•	Local residents (young and old)
•	Farmers / graziers / equine studs
•	Tourism, wedding, accommodation, and 
viticultural representatives
•	Technical service providers
•	Health care representatives (not-for-profits 
and government authorities)
•	NSW state government organisations  
such as Reconstruction Authority
•	Rural Financial Counselling Service 
•	Rural Adversity Mental Health Program 
(RAMHP)
•	Farmgate  
•	Mental health organisations
•	Community organisations and charities
•	Where There’s a Will 
•	School groups
•	Progress Associations
•	Mining companies
•	Council representatives
Workshop and Engagement Invitations sent to:
•	Accommodation providers 
•	Tourism Associations
•	Wineries and viticulturalists 
•	First Nations
•	Education Providers
•	Farmers/ cropping / graziers
•	Equine (hobby and stud farms)
•	Mining and large industry
•	Veterinarians
•	Local small and medium businesses 
•	Manufacturing and Industries 
•	Country Women’s Association
•	Community Organisations 
Workshops
9 workshops
96 participants**
(Mar-Apr 2024)
Invitations
Including:
•	Farmers
•	Council Water Teams
•	Local Land Services 
•	Rural Adversity Mental Health Program
•	Local community groups e.g., Where There’s a Will, One Day 
Closer to Rain
•	Hunter Thoroughbred Breeders Association
•	Aboriginal entities (e.g., Wanaruah Local Aboriginal Land 
Council (LALC) and Wonnarua Nation Aboriginal Corporation)
•	National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA)
•	Disability and Aged Care Service Providers
Targeted Interviews
20 phone interviews
(March 2024)
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
22
23

The six main principles 
underpinning our engagement 
strategy for the RDR Plan are: 
01
Community-centred:
Place the community at the centre. 
02
Understand the context:
Taking time to review local 
documents to build local and 
regional awareness. 
03
Respect complexity: 
While rural areas can routinely 
experience long term drought 
conditions, with megatrends broadly 
applicable to the Region, local 
nuances and complexities should be 
considered at the heart of all work. 
04
Work in partnership:
Co-design is an important tool, 
working with openness and trust to 
foster strong relationship building. 
05
Communicate respectfully and 
inclusively:
Sensitive, simple and clear 
communication is essential to address 
people and ensure their time is not 
‘wasted’. Consulting with a diverse 
range of stakeholders to capture an 
array of voices allows for representative 
opportunities and actions. 
06
Recognise and build capability:
Enable meaningful comment 
and contributions to build on 
existing strengths and activities 
across the Region. 
Figure 2.2: IAP2 Framework.
The objectives of our engagement from the outset were:
Our engagement strategy for the RDR Plan was also informed by the internationally recognised approach developed by the 
IAP2 depicted in Figure 2.2. As far as reasonably practicable, the intention was to engage with community and stakeholders at 
the collaborate and empower end of the spectrum.
Foster co-designed, community-
centred planning, and collective 
ownership of the resulting plan to 
leverage existing strategic planning 
and avoid duplication of effort
Recognise the diversity of people, 
businesses and landscapes 
involved in agricultural production, 
including Indigenous groups and 
landholders
Harness diverse Region-specific 
knowledge and skills for a  
triple-bottom-line approach19 
Source: International Association for Public Participation
Increasing level of public / stakeholder impact on decisions
Provide 
information 
to improve 
understanding 
of issues and 
opportunities.
Inform
Seek feedback 
on alternatives / 
decisions.
Consult
Directly engage 
the public to 
incorporate 
their issues and 
concerns, and 
to understand 
aspirations.
Involve
Partner with 
the public in the 
development of 
strategies and 
actions.
Collaborate
Final decision-
making rests with 
the public.
Empower
01
02
03
04
05
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
24
25

03
Termed the ‘economic powerhouse’, Singleton, Muswellbrook, and the Upper Hunter LGAs are 
responsible for the supply of 60% of New South Wales’s (NSW) energy and resources, as well as 
providing these outputs into the global economy.20 Situated 90 minutes from Newcastle, and 3 hours 
from Sydney, our Region offers a unique blend of scenic country living and community spirit, with big 
city benefits.21  
Our Region boasts history, grazing, wines, dining, mines, 
equine, cropping, and defence. Across the three LGAs, 
our Region, shown in Figure 3.1, spans a total area of 
approximately 16,393.8km2 and is home to 55,163 people.
Resting on the traditional lands of the Wanaruah, Wonnarua 
people, our region has a rich cultural past. Wanaruah, 
Wonnarua People’s rich history is steeped in the land before 
time. Our Dreamtime - a sacred time during which the 
Hunter Valley was shaped by the great spirit Baiame.
In the Beginning, everything was sleeping, sleeping in 
chasms of eternity until the All Father Creation Spirit 
Baiame awakened and breathed life into the whole Valley 
creating mountains, plains, rivers, and all living beings. 
“The land held the key to life’s secrets. Man was 
bestowed with the wisdom to read the land, 
uncovering explanations for existence in every 
rock, tree, and creek. He did not possess the 
land; rather, the land possessed him. To know 
the land was to know life.” 22 
OUR 
REGION.
For Aboriginal people, the land embodies both a spiritual 
essence and a vital source for sustaining life. They nurtured 
this existence through a profound respect for the land, 
employing what we now recognise as traditional land 
management practices.
This sustainable approach provided a consistent source of 
nourishment while minimising environmental impact. By 
reestablishing and implementing these traditional land care 
methods, we can foster improved outcomes for both the 
environment and future generations.
The coloured lines represent the LGA boundaries.
Figure 3.1:  Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Map 
Source: WSP. 2024
Barrington Tops
National Park
Curracabundi
National Park
Wollemi
National Park
Yengo
National Park
Goulburn River
National Park
Towarni
National
Park
Lake
Liddell
Glenbawn
Dam
Williams
River
Lake
St Clair
Plashett
Reservoir
Merriwa River
Krui River
Hunter River
Goulburn
River
Growee River
Golden Hwy
Denman Rd
 New
England Hwy
Newcastle
Cassilis
Murrurundi
Broke
Putty
Jerrys
Plains
Aberdeen
Cessnock
Denman
Sandy
Hollow
Merriwa
Singleton
Army Base
Singleton
Muswellbrook
Scone
Legend:
Upper Hunter Shire Council
Muswellbrook Shire Council
Singleton Council
National Parks
living in our Region identify as 
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander, 
representing 9% of our population. 
As of 2024, 4,931 people
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
26
27

Table 3.1: Key Statistics 
Source: ABS Census 2021; unless otherwise stated
Demographic / Statistic
Singleton 
Muswellbrook 
Upper Hunter 
NSW Average
Traditional Owners
Wanaruah, 
Wonnarua 
Wanaruah, 
Wonnarua 
Wanaruah, 
Wonnarua
-
Major Towns and 
Localities
Singleton, 
Broke, Bulga, 
Jerrys Plains, 
Branxton 
(partly)
Muswellbrook, 
Denman, 
Sandy Hollow
Scone, 
Aberdeen, 
Murrurundi, 
Merriwa, Gundy, 
Cassilis
-
Area 23,24,25 
4,892.8 km2  
3,404.9 km2 
8,096.1 km2 
-
Population
24,577 
16,357 
14,229 
-
Population 65 years or 
older 
14.4%
15.0%
21.2% 
17.7%
Population growth by 
2036
28,60026 
20,32027 
16,18428 
-
Identify as Aboriginal or 
Torres Strait Islander
8.3%
11.7%
7.0%
3.4%
Median weekly income 
(personal) 
$819
$769
$751
$813
Percentage of households 
with a weekly income less 
than $650 
15.1%
18.9%
21.3%
16.3%
Unemployment rate
3.7%
5.1%
3.2%
4.9%
One or more long-term 
health conditions
29.4%
31.6%
30.5% 
27.0%
Volunteers 
14.7%
12.1%
16.5%
13%
Major industries across the Region  
Source: REMPLAN. 2024
Mining is the dominant employment industry in the Region, 
with thermal open-cut coal mines and underground mining 
operations located across the area. Many businesses and 
residents benefit from the salaries and spending generated 
by the mines. However, there are also many in the Region 
who are less well off: approximately 1 in 5 households in our 
Region has an income below $650 per week.29 This creates 
significant social differences across the Region: those 
on lower incomes have less capacity to invest in drought 
resilience with minimal financial bandwidth to withstand 
economic hardships associated with dry times. 
The mining industry operates within close proximity, and 
sometimes in tension30 with the Region’s town and rural 
residents and major employers. Muswellbrook Shire’s 
thoroughbred breeding industry extends in an arc from 
Denman to Sandy Hollow, along Bylong Valley Way to 
Widden and includes the two largest studs in the southern 
hemisphere. Bespoke dairy, olive oil, and beef businesses 
are located within a few minutes’ drive from coal mining 
activities, as are boutique wine and tourism businesses, 
who attract national and international visitors. 
Access to groundwater and Hunter River water is a topic 
of debate, with different viewpoints expressed across the 
Region. Only a small proportion of water rights are traded 
each year31, and the prices paid can be beyond the reach of 
many. As the world seeks to achieve the 2015 Paris Climate 
Agreement, demand for coal is likely to change in the future. 
However, opinions differ- some are optimistic about the 
future and longevity of the coal industry, others note that 
job losses are likely in the medium-term, whilst others 
are actively pursuing transition opportunities.32 Change is 
already underway. Some mines are naturally approaching 
the end of their life, with rehabilitation plans well underway. 
The 2023 closure of the Liddell Power Station has 
recently morphed into an opportunity, with a solar panel 
manufacturing hub announced in 2024. 
Generating $283.35 million in output, tourism is an 
important regional industry. Visitors are drawn to the wine, 
gourmet offerings, boutique accommodation, golf, and a 
plethora of activities and experiences.33 The health care 
and social assistance sector pays $62.19 million in wages 
and salaries, the highest of any sector in the Upper Hunter. 
However, this is more reflective of the number of people 
employed in aged care, health, and other services, rather 
than these roles having higher salaries for individuals.34 
The Hunter River is the lifeblood of the Region, providing 
water to many communities, agricultural enterprises, and 
industry. Glenbawn Dam and Glennies Creek Dams are our 
primary water storage reservoir but are also a favourite 
destination for camping and fishing. The Region is blessed 
with large tracts of nature, which support camping and 
hiking opportunities as well as habitat for iconic and 
endangered species such as the Regent Honeyeater, Swift 
Parrot, Wollemi Pine, and the Hunter Galaxis. Over 40% of 
the land in Muswellbrook LGA is National Park.35 The Upper 
Hunter is known for being the second largest producer of 
thoroughbred horses in the world, only behind Kentucky, 
USA Meanwhile, Singleton is a mosaic of many different 
environments, home to a number of Endangered Ecological 
Communities (EECs) providing habitat for various 
threatened flora, avifauna, chiroptera, and other mammals.  
Major Industry 
Value Added ($ million)
Jobs Supported 
Mining 
$6,875m
10,600
Health care and social assistance
$217m
2,459
Construction
$327m
2,435
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 
$373m
2,410
Retail trade
$202m
2,216
Education and training
$222m
1,900
Electricity, gas, water, and waste services 
$619m
1,034
Rental, hiring, and real estate services 
$700m
305
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
28
29

04
DROUGHT AND 
OUR REGION. 
DROUGHT 
MONITORING IN NSW 
The Enhanced Drought Information System (EDIS) is a 
publicly available drought monitoring tool that monitors 
seasonal conditions across NSW. Launched in March 
2018, EDIS is used across government and farming 
stakeholders to build drought risk awareness, emphasise 
drought preparedness, and improve confidence in drought 
monitoring and early warning. A key feature of EDIS is the 
development of the NSW Department of Primary Industries 
and Regional Development (DPIRD) Combined Drought 
Indicator (CDI).
The CDI integrates a range of data and model outputs in a 
framework that is useful for decision makers. It combines 
meteorological, hydrological, and agricultural definitions of 
drought (above) using indexes for rainfall, soil and water and 
plant growth. From these, a fourth index, drought direction, 
is utilised. EDIS is undergoing redevelopment to provide 
farmers with world-leading weather and climate data to 
enable better business decisions.
STAGES OF  
DROUGHT 
Used together, the indexes of the EDIS indicate the stages 
of drought, which are used in this Regional Drought 
Resilience Plan (RDR Plan).
The six stages progress from a non-Drought category 
where all indicators suggest good conditions for production, 
to recovery, through to a Drought Affected (weakening 
or intensifying) category, a Drought category, and into 
Intense Drought (Figure 4.2). 
Complementing the stages is detailed information on: 
•	 A technical and on-the-ground description of typical  
field conditions.
•	 A suggested on-farm response.
•	 A suggested advisory or policy response.
Figure 4.1:  Types of droughts and their definition38 
WHAT IS DROUGHT? 
As a land of extremes, Australia has highly 
variable rainfall records, with periods of 
extreme rainfall and periods of low rainfall. In 
simple terms, drought means an acute water 
shortage and a prolonged, abnormally dry 
period when the amount of available water is 
insufficient to meet our normal use.36 
Edwards et al. (2018) has four definitions of drought, which 
are meteorological, agricultural, hydrological, and socio-
economic (Figure 4.1). It is difficult to determine a start and 
end, or when the landscape, our people or the economy 
have recovered. 
Droughts can be exacerbated by high temperatures 
which increase evaporation, low or declining water tables 
and bushfires. They can last a single season or become a 
‘megadrought’ which may persist for many decades.37 As for 
other disasters, they are difficult to predict or compare with 
differences in seasonality, extent, duration, severity, among 
other variables all contributing to the drought experience. 
Meteorological drought, or a period of months to years with low rainfall.
01
Agricultural drought: short-term dryness in the surface soil layers (root-zone) at a  
critical time in the growing season.
02
Hydrological drought: prolonged moisture deficits that affect surface or subsurface  
water supply, reducing streamflow, groundwater, dam and lake levels.
03
Socio-economic drought: other effect of elements of the above droughts on supply  
and demand of economic goods and human well-being.
04
Figure 4.2:  Stages of drought in NSW
Source: EDIS
At least one 
indicator is above 
the 50th percentile
Non-Drought 
Phase
All indicators are 
below the 50th 
percentile but 
above the 30th 
percentile
Recovering 
Phase
At least one 
indicator is below 
the 30th percentile 
and the rainfall 
trend is positive 
over the past 90 
days
Drought Affected 
(Weakening) 
Phase
At least one 
indicator is below 
the 30th percentile 
and the rainfall 
trend is negative 
over the past 90 
days
Drought Affected 
(Intensifying) 
Phase
At least one 
indicator is below 
the 5th percentile
Drought 
Phase
All three indicators 
(rainfall, soil water, 
plant growth) 
are below the 5th 
percentile
Intense Drought 
Phase
01
02
03
04
05
05
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
30
31

A LONG HISTORY OF DROUGHTS
Federation Drought 
Known as one of the worst droughts across the country, 
Australian sheep and cattle farmers faced heavy cost 
burdens alongside a national wheat crop failure.39 
WWII Drought
Major waterways across NSW, Victoria, and South Australia 
were impacted. Our Region’s lifeblood, the Hunter River, 
stopped flowing in December 1944.39 Stock was severely 
impacted with NSW farmers losing over 10 million sheep 
across the state40 and hand feeding a common occurrence 
across our Region.41 
Millennium Drought 
This drought occurred from 1997 to 2009 in most areas, 
however, in the Hunter the drought was prolonged until 
2014. NSW experienced the lowest rainfall since 1865.42 
Media reports from the time indicate that the Millenium 
drought was mainly felt in our Region from 2006 through 
to 2014. Hunter politicians and locals were calling for the 
region to be “drought-proof” through infrastructure 
projects,43,44 such as the Tillegra Dam, which despite some 
periods of support, has never eventuated. With dams sitting 
below 50% for much of this period, water allocations were 
cut for agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, and industry.45
2018/19/20 Drought 
Described as the “worst drought in our living memory” 
the conditions were the driest and warmest conditions 
on record.46 The drought was widespread covering the 
majority of the State, as shown Figure 4.3. This drought 
caused many to face significant economic, environmental, 
and social hardships.
Figure 4.3:  NSW Combined Drought Indicator to 31 December 2019 
Source: NSW Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development. 202447 
“The Upper Hunter is getting half the rain it used to.”
Impacts of drought in our Region
Whilst no two droughts are the same, we know that drought 
will continue to impact our economy, our community, and 
our environment.
Financial and Infrastructure Impacts
In 2013, Singleton’s residential water consumption doubled 
during a period of very low spring rainfall. Whilst our yards 
are valued for their greenery and as a place to enjoy the 
outdoors, the downside were higher water bills and talk 
of ‘wasted water’.48 In contrast, the 2019 drought saw 
Murrurundi run out of water and some groundwater bores 
dry up. Water was trucked in daily, at a cost of $40,000 a 
month,49 with residents enduring level 6 water restrictions, 
3-minute showers, only two loads of washing a week, and 
reliance on bottled water for drinking.50 Kids couldn’t even 
enjoy playing under a sprinkler with their family, friends, 
and pets.51 Whilst the new pipeline from Scone and storage 
tank brought improved water security to Murrurundi, 
there are many villages and landholders still reliant on tank 
water. For these residents, water efficiency was and still is 
a daily necessity. Some landholders pinned their hopes on 
groundwater to supply their homes and their livestock. Yet 
there were stories of people spending $30,000 on water 
diviners and bore drillers, with no success.52 
Historically, travelling stock routes have been relied upon 
for grazing cattle during dry times. However, dry watering 
points have led to long wait times.53 Current management 
arrangements for stock routes further limits their use. A 
variety of viewpoints on the topic of transport subsidies, 
charity hay drives, and other forms of government and 
non-government assistance also exist across the Region. 
For some landholders, these forms of assistance, no matter 
how small, were seen as providing extremely beneficial 
support, financially and emotionally. In contrast, some 
felt that they were only token gestures, which did little to 
alleviate the hardships being experienced. Some residents 
expressed concern that the assistance wasn’t necessarily 
going to those most in need, with a perception that a 
percentage of recipients were ‘gaming the system’. Others 
believed that the tax rebates, low-interest loans, and grants 
were simply propping up enterprises that were otherwise 
unsustainable. For those with off-farm income, they were 
often caught in a dilemma. Their day jobs were providing 
an alternative source of income and potentially a financial 
buffer from drought, whilst at the same time, preventing 
them from accessing certain kinds of drought assistance. 
The diversity of viewpoints highlights the complexity and 
challenges surrounding provision of drought assistance. For 
some it is a lifeline that they seek to be available in future 
droughts and for others it is the opposite. 
History has also shown that our Region can be dealt double 
and even triple blows during and following a drought. In 
2007, dairy and cattle farmers along the Hunter River lost 
feedstock, equipment, fences, and other infrastructure 
when a flood rounded off a devastating drought.54 The high 
cost of production and low milk prices which have coincided 
with drought conditions are seen by many as being 
contributing factors to the decline in the dairy industry 
in our Region. Major droughts often result in an earlier 
start to the bushfire season, adding an additional worry 
to landholders’ minds throughout spring and summer. In 
2019/20 bushfires burnt throughout our Region. Even when 
the fire danger had passed, the perception that fires were 
burning nearby kept many tourists away. This was despite 
the best (and ongoing) efforts of our councils to promote 
our Region as still being open for business. The latest 
drought to affect our Region coincided with the COVID-19 
pandemic, and was followed by back-to-back disasters – 
bushfires, then flooding, landslips, and road closures. 
Another compounding impact of drought is the 
deterioration of unsealed roads and the requirement of 
large quantities of water to maintain them. This leaves 
councils, particularly the Upper Hunter which has just shy 
of 1000km of gravel roads, in an unenviable position given 
that water is precious for our community, but so too is 
decent road infrastructure. Other organisations have also 
faced tough decisions brought about by drought conditions. 
In 2018, the Department of Defence sought to cull about 150 
brumbies on the Singleton Army base with dwindling food 
and water supplies but faced substantial criticism.55 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
32
33

Agricultural Impacts
Pasture underpins much of the agricultural industry in the 
Region,56,57 with the species mix, growth, and quality all 
affected by the amount and timing of rainfall. When there 
is insufficient rainfall for pasture growth or runoff into farm 
dams, tough decisions are required on an almost daily 
basis. Whether to hold onto or sell off stock, where and 
how to source water for animals and humans alike, where 
to find fodder, and how much is too much to pay. Hand 
feeding stock and carting water is labour intensive and time 
consuming. With many of our rural landholders having day 
jobs off the farm or working shifts in the mines, this often 
resulted in a continuous procession of exhausting 12 to 
15-hour days. The severity of the last drought meant that 
many reached the point where they could no longer afford, 
or no longer find fodder to feed their animals. Then came 
the added problem of long wait times for the abattoir,58 or 
having to pay more on transport and yarding fees than was 
recouped in the sale.
Stock transport providers also experienced tensions with 
stock owners when stock was of too poor a condition to be 
transported. These factors and the timing of pregnant cows 
or recently born calves, can lead to animal welfare issues. 
With few viable options, shooting one’s animals can be the 
only option, which brings with it a heavy mental toll. Even 
those who wanted to sell up and move on did not find the 
path easy, with real estate agents noting fewer people were 
buying in the Region.59 
For others, the financial burden was exceeded by the deep 
emotional attachment they had with their herd of cattle 
or the horses they had owned and cared for, more as pets 
than as livestock. In the equine industry, selling up was 
often not an option, with bloodlines having taken countless 
years or decades to refine. Similarly, those with horse 
agistment businesses went to enormous lengths to keep 
their operations going, not willing to forgo their customer 
base. The dry, dusty, and hot conditions can increase the 
susceptibility of horses to viruses and diseases, reduce 
fertility, challenge the maintenance of trotting tracks 
and training venues, and limit the opportunities to safely 
transport horses to events or other locations. 
For the western parts of our Region, around Cassilis, 
dry conditions can prevent crops being sown, or cause 
substantial reductions in the harvest which make it difficult 
to break even. Impacts extend to the wine industry with 
harvest declines of 50% not uncommon.45 The harvest 
period can occur as much as four weeks earlier, and the 
typically hot conditions associated with drought require 
careful planning to avoid heat stress amongst harvest 
staff. The vignerons must adapt their processes to account 
for changes in the acidity, sugar content, colour, and 
alcohol content. Limited water is a particular challenge for 
an industry that relies on the cleanliness of winemaking 
equipment. The 2019/20 bushfires increased the risk of 
smoke taint  in grapes and ash fall; therefore, crops may 
not have been harvested or they may have been sold at 
a loss as feedstock to other industries. At the same time 
many tourists cancelled their travel plans in the false belief 
that the wine-growing region was directly impacted by 
bushfires.  
Whilst there is a perception amongst some that the mining 
industry is well provisioned with water, they are not immune 
from drought impacts. During a prolonged drought, a 
reduction in operations is likely, with the flow-on impacts 
to local employment and our economy.60 For our wine and 
tourism sector, the challenges are multidimensional. Being 
frugal with water was not something on the minds of most 
visitors, despite gentle prompts to be water-wise during 
dry times.61 Keeping the water flowing to their customers 
necessitates costly and regular water carting for those 
whose operations are reliant on tank water. The visual 
appeal of our Region is diminished when drought conditions 
turn the paddocks to dust, and the vines are no longer 
postcard perfect.
Community and Personal Impacts
It is therefore unsurprising that the top emotional 
challenges experienced by farmers is the financial burden, 
the impact of stock loss, the rebuild and recovery, the 
loss of control and family and personal trauma.62 With 
livelihoods at risk, this creates stress across all generations. 
Suicidal behaviour is known to increase by up to 15% during 
severe drought63 and in the period from 2016 to 2020, the 
Muswellbrook and Upper Hunter local government areas 
had one of the highest suicide rates in NSW.64 This stems 
from a culmination of factors: rising financial stress from 
drought impact (especially in combination with increased 
costs of living, risks of economic downturn) which inevitably 
leads to increased tension in the home environment. 
Elimination of discretionary spending means few to no 
social outings and a chance to take a break. Long hours 
of hard work for all members of the family, from school-
aged children to those who should be enjoying a relaxing 
retirement. A constant state of exhaustion from long hours 
which isn’t helped by having minimal water to freshen up 
with a shower or launder dirty clothes. 
Environmental Impacts
Drought impacts extend to the environment. Dry soils 
become brittle and erode, vegetation is lost, and air 
pollution from dust storms increases.65,66 A quote reported 
in the media referenced “one-inch cracks in the ground that 
go down probably half a metre”.67,68 Often dry conditions 
can allow weedy plant and pest species to proliferate, 
creating environmental harm, as well as additional stress for 
landholders with time, energy and money needed on pest 
control and weed management.  In 2006-07, the Glenbawn 
and Glennies Creek storage reached an all-time low of 
33% capacity.69 When the dam levels are low, campers 
and fishers note that algal blooms are more likely, and the 
invasive carp thrives, outcompeting the native fish.
Drought Strengths
Drought has also shown just how innovative, resourceful, 
and supporting our community can be. In 2018, the 
Muswellbrook and Upper Hunter Shire Councils launched 
their ‘We LIVE Here’ gift cards which channelled over 
$1 million to support local businesses.70 2019 saw the 
introduction of the ‘Spend in Singleton’ card, an initiative 
of Business Singleton and Singleton Council, to similar 
success. A Merriwa farmer launched the ‘One Day Closer to 
Rain’ Facebook page to provide a place for people to share 
how drought affects them. Whilst the sister page, Rural 
Cottage Crafts acts as a platform for rural and regional 
Australians, particularly women, to sell their home-made 
crafts. Local groups have rallied to provide community 
support, including: Muswellbrook Rotary Club raising 
$45,000 in 2018, local chapters of ‘Doing It for Our Farmers’, 
a pop-up pantry in Mayne Street, Murrurundi71, and 
volunteers from further afield such as the Rural Aid Farm 
Army. Even in these times of adversity, the resilience of our 
farmers shone through. Despite the drought being ‘the 
worst since 1870’, a Cassilis sheep farmer captured national 
attention. He laid out sheep feed in the outline of Australia, 
capturing stark images of his sheep flock being kept alive in 
a barren paddock.72 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
34
35

WHAT WILL THE FUTURE LOOK LIKE?
Whilst we can’t predict the future, there are projections and resources available, such as  
MyClimate View and the Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development’s Climate 
Vulnerability Assessment.
These provide an indication of the conditions our Region may experience in the future to prepare for future droughts. While 
predicting weather conditions involves significant uncertainty, general trends are provided below. These drought projections 
informed our community engagement material, shaping the questions asked and information sought from participants. High 
level overviews of the climate data were provided at the beginning of each workshop to ensure our community was informed 
and aware of the possible future reality our Region faces. Further information was available upon request.
Historical seasonal rainfall is highly variable across all parts 
of the Region. Within each season, there can be a five-fold 
difference between the rain received in one year and what 
is received in the next. This trend is set to continue in the 
future, with Figure 4.5 providing an example for Cassilis, 
which is a locality with a mix of grazing-reliant farms. 
With evapotranspiration expected to increase across all 
seasons73 this means more water will be lost from above 
ground storage, vegetation, pastures, and soil. So even if 
the same amount of rain is received in a season or year, it 
will be less effective in stimulating pasture growth and filling 
our on-farm or public water storages.
My Climate View 
A collaboration between Australia’s national science 
agency CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology, aiming 
to provide Australian farmers with tailored insights 
into their changing climate by presenting agriculturally 
relevant historical and future climate information in 
one place so farmers can explore local climate trends. 
My Climate data provides information for various 
agricultural commodities including beef, sheep, dairy, 
wine grapes, and cropping (wheat, barley, sorghum, 
lupins). The resolution of data from My Climate View 
is a 5km x 5km grid which supports the assessment 
of climatic variations across the Region. Despite 
having an agricultural focus, the datasets support 
analysis of drought impacts on agriculture, people, and 
infrastructure. 
NSW DPIRD Climate Vulnerability 
Assessment 
A climate vulnerability and opportunity assessment 
across NSW primary industries. This resource 
canvasses the resilience of extensive livestock, 
broadacre cropping, horticulture and viticulture, 
forestry, and biosecurity risk, providing information 
surrounding these industries. This is helpful in 
informing planning, risk management, and adaptation 
decision making.  
Feedback Loops
There were multiple drought impact pathways and 
feedback loops identified during the develop of this RDR 
Plan. A selection is shown in Figure 4.4. 
How to read Figure 4.4
Each colour within the below feedback loop represents 
a theme or cluster of related impacts, flowing from the 
starting trigger, drought conditions. Green boxes broadly 
categorise environmental considerations, pink show 
agricultural themes, yellow, economic and social influences, 
and purple, reasons for retaining stock despite difficult 
drought conditions that otherwise may result in destocking. 
This diagram should be read from the centre outwards, 
starting at the black box, “drought conditions”. 
Cascading events are reflected in the next box, with 
direction of flow reflected by the direction of each arrow. 
These arrows can be read as “resulting in” or “producing”. 
This map aims to provide a succinct story, reflecting voices 
heard across our community and informed by desktop 
research from the Resilience Assessment, demonstrating 
the systematic effects of drought. This systems map helped 
inform the Plan’s proposed actions by distilling key themes 
and stories, whilst providing specific points that may require 
intervention (thereby identifying critical points where the 
Plan’s actions can provide assistance).
Figure 4.4:  Selection of drought-related impact 
pathways and feedback loops for our Region.
Increase in invasive 
species such as 
carp
Less oxygen in 
waterways
Insufficient water 
collected in farm 
dams
Insufficient pasture 
growth
Reduced water 
allocations
Back to back 
disasters damage 
farm infrastructure
Insufficient water 
for farm animals
Insufficient feed for 
farm animals
Cost of living 
pressures (fuel, 
groceries, 
electricity)
Water purchased 
for farm animals
Feed purchased for 
farm animals
Increased time 
pressure on 
landholder
Increased cost 
pressure on 
landholder
Less money for 
farm improvements 
which improve 
drought resilience
Increased financial 
and emotional 
strain
Limited or no 
time for social 
interaction, 
fitness, hobbies or 
relaxation
Reduced 
groundcover, 
increased erosion
Dams silt-up, less 
able to store water
Increased pressure 
on the land
Mental health 
issues and 
relationship 
pressures
Instant asset 
write-offs 
potentially lead 
to short-term 
decision-making
Decline in native 
species
Algal blooms
Rainwater tanks 
run dry for rural 
landholders
Multiple reasons for landholders 
to retain horses, cattle or other 
farm animals, rather than destock
Emotional attachment to 
animals
Investment in building up an 
agistment business
Investment in genetics of 
horses or livestock
Limited livestock 
management experience
Reduced fodder 
production in 
Region
Water carted for 
human / domestic 
purposes
Fodder harder to 
source, transport 
and fodder prices 
increase
First Nations 
cultural impacts
Less or no runoff 
into rivers, creeks 
and dams
Degraded camping 
/ fishing experience
DROUGHT 
CONDITIONS
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
36
37

Figure 4.5:  Annual Rainfall, Historic Records, and Climate Projections (RCP 8.5) for Cassilis
Figure 4.6:  Heat Stress Days in the ‘Danger’ Category for Beef, Historic Records and Climate Projections  
(RCP 8.5) for Denman
Source: CSIRO & BoM. 2024.74 
Source: CSIRO & BoM. 2024. 75 
Droughts are often associated with El Nino conditions, creating above average temperatures. Extended periods of high heat 
increase evaporation, intensifying soil moisture loss and creating the conditions conducive to damaging bushfires.76 These 
conditions are dangerous for our wildlife and natural environments, as well as for our livestock. Figure 4.6 shows the projected 
increase in dangerous heat stress days, using Denman as an example, given the number of beef graziers in the area.
The current and projected changes for high heat days and heat stress conditions are shown in Table 4.1 for a selection of 
locations throughout our Region. Readers are encouraged to view the climate projections for their specific location and 
agricultural enterprise on the MyClimateView website. 
Table 4.1:  Heat Climate Projections under RCP 8.5 
Singleton
Denman
Scone
Murrurundi
Putty
Baseline
2050
2070
Baseline
2050
2070
Baseline
2050
2070
Baseline
2050
2070
Baseline
2050
2070
Number of days per 
year over 35oC
23
37
46
30
47
57
27
43
53
10
20
26
13
23
29
Number of days per 
year over 40oC
4
7
10
5
10
14
3
8
11
0
1
2
2
3
5
Heat stress days>
80
126 146
89
134 155
87
130 151
46
83
101
54
96
115
Note: Baseline data refers to the 1964-1993 average. 
> Heat stress days consider temperature-humidity index over a particular threshold (≥79), defined as ‘danger’ stress for beef production
Years
Rainfall (mm)
1960
200
500
800
300
600
900
400
700
1000
1100
2000
2040
1970
2010
2050
1980
2020
2060
1990
2030
2070
2080
Yearly data
Average
10th and 90th 
percentiles
Past
Future
Years
Number of days
1960
60
120
180
80
140
100
160
2000
2040
1970
2010
2050
1980
2020
2060
1990
2030
2070
2080
Yearly data
Average
10th and 90th 
percentiles
Past
Future
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
38
39
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

05
This section provides an overview of difficulties 
relating to drought and opportunities arising 
out of these challenges. These have been 
informed by our community engagement and 
desktop research conducted as part of the 
Resilience Assessment.
Challenges and opportunities identified as part of the 
desktop study, the Resilience Assessment, were validated 
and explored with stakeholders and community members. 
An amalgamation of engagement feedback and the 
Resilience Assessment are provided over page.
DROUGHT RESILIENCE 
CHALLENGES AND 
OPPORTUNITIES.
CHALLENGES
Every drought is different
No two droughts are the same, with a 
multitude of factors determining the severity 
of impacts. The extent of dry conditions 
beyond our Region, affects the availability and 
cost of purchasing fodder, finding somewhere 
to agist stock and the price paid for animals 
at the saleyards. Market prices fluctuate, 
affecting the cost of inputs like fuel and 
fertiliser. Other stresses add to the burden, 
such as cost of living pressures, interest rates, 
housing affordability and availability. When 
we look to the future, there is no such thing as a normal 
season. Rainfall is projected to be highly variable and hotter 
temperatures are likely to increase moisture loss from soil 
and pastures. When rain does fall, runoff into dams may be 
less than expected. Future droughts are likely to worsen, 
becoming longer, more intense, or more frequent. The 
ever-changing nature of droughts and possible future 
climatic conditions raises the imminent need for flexibility 
and adaptive management to ensure nimble responses. 
Forward planning and examination of known successes 
during past events builds the bank of knowledge held within 
our community.
Constrained funding for water  
infrastructure
Communities relying on water resources and 
availability are also placed under significant 
stress during drought. As an example, 
Singleton water planners expect that droughts 
resulting in a 25% decline in water allocations 
will result in unmet demand by 2032.77 Water 
prices increase, with many rural residents 
(not serviced by reticulated water systems) 
carting water to their properties, a costly 
exercise. Whilst subsidised, alongside other 
compounding stresses such as rising petrol prices, this 
places additional burdens on farmers, particularly given 
the quantities of water needed to be obtained for livestock 
consumption. All three councils face tensions, torn between 
revenue raised from water services, whilst maintaining 
efficient infrastructure and water saving initiatives, reducing 
water consumption. It must also be noted that while all 
three participating councils identified water infrastructure 
projects within the Regional Drought Resilience Planning 
program, securing funding for large scale projects is 
challenging. Whilst funding is constrained and resourcing 
challenges remain an ever-present challenge for the Region, 
actions working to improve water infrastructure would 
enhance regional water security. This could be supported 
by grant funding to allow for forward planning and water 
infrastructure upgrades. 
Ineffective water market
The Greater Hunter region’s water market is 
inefficient as only 10% of water is potentially 
available for trading.78 The water that is traded 
is mostly at a price beyond the reach of 
most within the agricultural industry. Whilst 
the mines largely rely on rainfall for their 
operations and some mines operate their 
own water-sharing program, they still hold a 
share of water entitlements: 95% of licences 
in Glennies Creek below Glennies Creek Dam, 
18% of the Lower Wollombi Valley, and 14% 
of the Hunter Regulated Alluvium groundwater sources.79 
Working to ensure fair water allocations and compliance 
across the Region are recommended in response to known 
water market challenges. 
Small lot sizes and farm profitability
Community frequently described the 
difficulties concerning sustainable farming 
practices and the ongoing viability of local 
farms. Small parcels of fragmented land 
constrain graziers, croppers, and other 
enterprises from generating a profit solely 
from agricultural endeavours. Many within the 
industry balance their farming commitments 
with part- (or full-) time off-farm work, 
providing a diversified income. However, this 
reduces the time and energy available to 
dedicate to management activities on their parcel of land 
or leads to lives becoming a physical and mental marathon 
of 12 to 15 hour days. Tax rebates further complicate the 
system, potentially creating incentives resulting in decisions 
which may not be financially sustainable in the longer term. 
For others, turning a profit is not a high priority, and their 
motivations are more around the lifestyle, living closer 
to nature, or perhaps having space between themselves 
and their neighbours. Many of our landholders are also 
relatively new to the land, meaning they don’t have access 
to decades of farming experience to call upon when times 
turn tough. Drawing upon local knowledge from those 
who have lived within the Region for numerous years 
would assist newcomers within our community. Likewise, 
benefits to social infrastructure can be realised. Maximising 
farming capacity and working to build spare capacity 
and redundancy will assist small farming operations in 
remaining viable during tough times.
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
40
41

Difficulty in turning a profit 
The Region has faced compounding disaster 
events from natural hazards. From drought 
(2017-2020), to bushfire (2019-2020), to flood 
(2021), the pandemic (2019-2021), more floods 
(2022), and a mouse and locust plague (2022). 
The back-to-back, unrelenting nature of 
these events provide minimal opportunities to 
recover, physically, emotionally or financially. 
Whether it is through loss of stock, poor or 
no harvests, damage to infrastructure or a 
backlog of maintenance, it is difficult to return 
to profit. The pricing regime of supermarkets was singled 
out by many landholders for being unfair and failing to value 
their constant hard work.80 Efforts to maximise community 
resilience, supporting mental and physical wellbeing will 
encourage the Region to take care of themselves during 
periods of difficulty. Actions and activities working to 
support community groups, likewise, ensure sufficient 
social infrastructure exists for the Region to lean upon 
during these challenging periods. Work bolstering the 
financial viability of farming operations (such as business 
and financial contingency planning) could also provide 
benefits.
Growing expectations on farmers
Farmers are facing growing expectations 
to do more. Transitioning towards carbon 
neutral farming, regenerative agriculture 
practices, and environmental accounting 
create extra burdens. Compliance and 
bureaucratic administrative requirements 
build further obligations on time-poor 
individuals. Furthermore, farm succession 
planning, navigating exit plans or transitions 
to the next generation to ensure security 
and involvement of younger parties can take 
years. This places additional strain during otherwise already 
difficult circumstances. Encouraging the uptake of social 
support systems (as simple as joining a friend for a cuppa or 
playing rugby at the local footy club) provides reprieve from 
these growing expectations. Clear lines of communication, 
leveraging knowledge already held within the community 
and supporting small business financial viability under this 
Plan are expected to bring additional benefits to the Region.
Farmer physical and mental wellbeing 
Following a disaster, it is said 1 in 5 farmers 
want to give up.81 During drought, primary 
producers handle heavy burdens. Between 
hand feeding stock, carting water, and 
providing for their households, many 
have limited time or money for social and 
recreational activities which provide a reprieve 
or mental break from the farm. These financial and time 
pressures can segue into mental health issues. 
This distress can cause increased risk of substance abuse 
and domestic violence. Farmer stoicism can also reduce 
the likelihood of someone reaching out for help. When 
they do, many face the difficult process determining which 
provider is appropriate. Even if they find the appropriate 
organisation, services may have long waiting lists, meaning 
necessary support is not available when needed most. 
Recognising the constraints poor mental and physical 
health holds upon farmers and their families, this Plan 
works to support community and facilitate fit-for-purpose 
social infrastructure to further the Region’s journey in 
improving mental health and wellbeing.
The mining conundrum 
Mining offers significant salaries and income 
to the Region, the highest of any employers.82 
However, some within the community 
raised significant concern regarding the 
fragmentation of land and environmental 
impacts of this industry. Some believe that 
valuable land is being lost to the mines or 
associated environmental offsets, reducing the land 
available for grazing, and even where land is rehabilitated, 
the quality of the pasture is seen to be inferior. As coal-
fired power stations close, and the energy sector moves 
towards renewables, the skills required by energy workers 
will change. Workers may need to upskill or re-skill. Uptake 
of opportunities arising during the mineral extraction 
transition will encourage and maximise the Region’s 
potential in remaining an economic powerhouse during 
this change. Leveraging existing opportunities, the mining 
industry provides additional means for the Region to build 
drought resilience, primarily through the provision of 
financial support and job opportunities. 
A fragmented communication landscape
Across the Region, feedback was received that 
the closure of locally run newspapers, such as 
the Scone Advocate, Hunter Valley News, and 
Upper Hunter News, had impacted the ability 
to tell local stories, and promote local events. 
This extends to the decline in people listening 
to radio. Whilst the younger generations 
have grown up with social media and are digitally savvy, 
many within our older cohort have not kept pace with 
these new communication modes. Connecting individuals 
to information, support services, and events is therefore 
challenging. There is no one best way for service providers 
to get their message out there, and no single option for 
community groups to offer their support and connect with 
members of their community. Recognising the dividing 
nature of this challenge, with young and elderly populations 
engaging with different methods of communication, actions 
within this Plan could focus on development of a universal 
communication method relating to drought. Incorporating 
drought considerations within planning policies, whilst 
leveraging knowledge already circulating across the 
community will allow for the formation of a comprehensive 
drought communications plan. 
Our landholders are resilient
A region is as strong as its people. Our 
community continues to show that we 
are tough, coping with additional burdens 
and challenges as they arise. We see our 
landholders using entrepreneurial insight 
and ingenuity. People can juggle caring for 
their land, running a business or working off 
farm, and maintaining family relationships. 
However, there is a limit, and rural residents 
don’t always ‘bounce back’ after difficulty. 
Such labels can also create pressure to ‘tough 
it out’. Opportunities exist to shift the focus to one which 
supports wellbeing at all times for happy, healthy and 
thriving individuals and for communities that care for one 
another and look after their mates. Leveraging our Region’s 
collective resilience, it remains critical that this Plan 
continues to support the community’s mental and physical 
wellbeing. Actions tailored towards financial pulse checks, 
supporting social infrastructure and community groups, 
and leveraging community knowledge will ensure that our 
landholders remain resilient in future drought events. 
Community spirit and volunteers
As a Region, we are blessed with a diverse 
and welcoming community. Through 
commitment, kindness, and teamwork, stories 
of compassion and camaraderie were heard 
throughout engagement conducted for 
this Plan. We are supported by numerous 
community facilities (like town halls, sporting 
facilities, and pony clubs), providing communal 
points of assembly. Organisations and social 
movements such as ‘Where There’s a Will’, 
‘One Day Closer to Rain’, ‘Cuppa and Connect’, 
‘Farmer Wants a Fish’, and ‘Our Shout’ are locally led 
initiatives already providing improved connection across 
the Region. Social infrastructure such as community 
halls act as “hubs” during drought, offering a communal 
location for locals to chat, and for service providers to 
meet with affected landholders. Actions tailored within this 
Plan should work to capitalise on this community spirit, 
ensuring community groups retain ongoing support and 
our community champions are supported in our collective 
drought resilience journey.
Transition to new and emerging 
industries 
Some mines and power stations in the Region 
are reaching the end-of-life, with their land 
being rehabilitated or transformed into new 
uses. This may free up ground and surface 
water entitlements for other uses and there 
is a strong desire among locals to know what 
will happen to water allocations and resources. 
Others see potential in using mining buffer 
land for other industries such as intensive 
agriculture. Shifts are also occurring across 
the globe as we transition to a lower-carbon 
economy. New and emerging industries are 
possible for our Region which may bring new 
employment industries and a need for workers 
with different skill sets. The proximity of our Region to the 
Port of Newcastle, Newcastle Airport and the Sydney 
market, is a source of opportunity to strategically optimise 
our agricultural outputs.83 Improving the economic viability 
of small businesses and leveraging our biggest industry 
for enduring community benefit would assist our Region. 
Actions leveraging opportunities from industry transitions 
will ensure the Region remains an economic powerhouse in 
years to follow mine site closures. 
Natural resource stewardship 
Caring for Country and optimising our 
existing natural resource management are 
opportunities to improve our long-term 
drought resilience.84 Building natural capital 
and strengthening the natural resilience 
and condition of the Region’s ecosystems 
will encourage ongoing environmental 
stewardship, benefiting both humans and 
wildlife/plants. Entities such as Local Land 
Services and Landcare are active in our 
Region, offering resources and promoting best 
practice in vegetation cover, pest and weed 
control, soil health, regenerative farming and 
water management. Environmental offsets 
and biodiversity conservation agreements 
provide further opportunities to demonstrate how much 
we value our natural environment. These approaches 
can achieve co-benefits, improving farm profitability, 
diversifying income sources, and providing opportunities for 
eco- and agri-tourism. Actions maximising water retention 
across the landscape, incorporating First Nations land 
management techniques, and maintaining healthy soils and 
native vegetation could be considered by the Plan to build 
the resilience of our natural assets.
OPPORTUNITIES
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
42
43

06
 Connecting people with resources
There are many data sources available to 
improve awareness of seasonal and longer-
term weather conditions and provide early 
indicators to assist in decision making. Local 
Land Services, Landcare, and Department of 
Primary Industries and Regional Development 
have a large array of information, webinars, 
events, and other resources to assist 
landholders. The key is to connect the 
audience with these resources, in a way that 
speaks to their motivations, and what they 
value most. Maximising clear lines of communication, 
ensuring community knowledge is leveraged and forward 
planning is utilised to reach a broad audience with available 
resources and support could be considered by this Plan as a 
potential action area.
First Nations land management 
The Region has a strong connection to 
Country, with First Nations people – the oldest 
continuing culture in the world – passing down 
cultural practices through the generations for 
more than 65,000 years. Opportunities arise 
in coordinated cultural burns and firestick 
burning approaches: reducing fuel loads, 
moderating weeds and pests, and helping our 
land to heal and regenerate. Embracing First 
Nations cultural land management has the 
potential to deliver cultural, social, drought and 
disaster resilience benefits. Actions raised within this Plan 
could consider a return to traditional land management 
techniques such as cool fire burns to regenerate flora, 
providing both environmental and social/cultural benefits to 
the Region. 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted by the United Nations in 2015 are a 
universal framework and blueprint to achieve a resilient and sustainability future for all. 
They have been widely adopted within the global community to guide the sustainable 
development process across environment, social, and economic pillars. SDGs have been 
utilised throughout this RDR Plan to demonstrate the linkages between the Region’s 
challenges, opportunities, actions, and the resilience and sustainable future pathways. 
Read more: https://sdgs.un.org/goals
The Program Logic in Table 6.1 describes our drought resilience journey. This starts with a shared 
vision, strategic objectives and goals and our pathway to change via priority and complementary 
actions to support the achievement of our desired short- and long-term outcomes. 
A PLAN FOR 
DROUGHT 
RESILIENCE.
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
44
45

Table 6.1:  Program Logic
Vision
For Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire and Upper Hunter Shire communities, drought resilience means 
we survive the negative impacts of dry times until they pass, ensuring we have opportunities to 
adapt and prosper. Our Region is future ready and has strategies in place in advance of challenging 
times, building upon existing strategies that have proven results. Our people and businesses are 
equipped with the knowledge and tools to adapt to changing circumstances. Our community is the 
foundation of our support network through their commitment, innovation, and resourcefulness. 
Our decision-making supports sustainable and healthy soil, water, and air. We approach our 
challenges in partnership, achieving strength in our unity. 
 
Strategic 
Objectives
Economic Resilience
Fostering innovation and collaboration 
to enhance productivity and 
competitiveness in transitioning 
industries as the Region supports 
and strengthens existing businesses 
to bolster economic stability and 
diversification in preparation for future 
dry times. 
Social Resilience 
Building upon existing social capital 
and attracting a diversity of culture 
and people to our Region to address 
inequalities and foster equal access to 
promote social mobility. Working to 
empower marginalised communities 
and vulnerable social groups, boosting 
mental and social resilience community-
wide during times of hardship.
Environmental Resilience
Ensuring awareness of, and 
implementing initiatives which 
protect our natural assets, 
promoting environmentally 
conscious behaviour across our 
community, businesses, and 
industries to ensure access and 
availability to natural spaces for 
years to come.
Goals
Economic Resilience
•	Diversify our farm enterprises 
and identify new agricultural 
opportunities
•	Leverage changes in our Region 
to diversify our economy and 
employment opportunities
•	Promote networking and 
collaboration among local businesses
•	Build the capacity of individuals and 
small business to take ownership of 
drought resilience
Social Resilience 
•	Promote mental and physical 
wellbeing across all generations
•	Support our community groups to 
expand their reach and realise their 
goals
•	Enhance utilisation of available 
support services and resources
•	Enhance connections and 
collaborations across community 
groups and support services   
Environmental Resilience
•	Ensure efficient water 
management especially in times 
of drought
•	Promote increased adoption of 
drought resilient and sustainable 
land management practices
•	Improve preparedness and 
planning for future periods of 
reduced water availability
Actions
Action D: Ensuring Economic 
Prosperity as Our Region 
Transitions
•	Complementary Action: Improving 
Small Business Financial Viability
Action C: Supporting Our 
Community Groups
•	Complementary Action: Facilitating 
Fit-for-Purpose Social Infrastructure
•	Complementary Action: Furthering 
our Community’s Journey to Mental 
Health and Wellbeing
•	Complementary Action: Leveraging 
the Knowledge Held Within Our 
Community
•	Complementary Action: Grant 
Writing Toolkit
•	Complementary Action: Leveraging 
our Biggest Industry for Enduring 
Community Benefit
Action B: First Nations Land 
Management Practices
Cross 
Cutting 
Actions
Action A: Comprehensive Drought 
Communications Plan
•	Complementary Action: Leverage Local Land  
Services Landholder Research
•	Complementary Action: Incorporate Drought 
Considerations into Planning Policies
Action E: Forward Planning and Helping Our 
Water Users Prepare for Dry Times
•	Complementary Action: Considering Social Value in  
the Integrated Planning  and Reporting Framework
•	Complementary Action: Improving Water 
Infrastructure to Enhance Regional Water Security
•	Complementary Action: Improve Awareness of 
Compliance Regimes for Water Taken from the  
Hunter River
To achieve this vision, actionable steps within the economic, environmental, and social spheres of 
influence were prioritised.
Short Term 
Outcomes
(≤ 4 years)
Economic Resilience
•	Thriving businesses who are well 
supported, minimising impacts of 
economic shocks or disruptions with 
minimal losses or sudden layoffs. 
This paves the way for economic 
diversification of the economy 
through attracting non-agriculture 
and mining-based businesses and 
employment opportunities 
•	Promotional support existing for 
“buy local” strategies that increase 
and sustain local businesses
•	Reduced widespread 
unemployment and associated 
social and economic impacts during 
turbulent periods of time 
•	Continued consumer confidence, 
leading to sustained spending levels 
during drought periods, which helps 
support businesses and economic 
activity 
•	Business owners actively 
pursuing opportunities to adopt 
better financial planning, income 
diversification, and utilisation of 
available grants, rebates, and 
financial support. This establishes 
widespread uptake of available 
training and grant opportunities, 
reducing cost pressures and 
creating widespread awareness of 
drought-preventative initiatives
Social Resilience 
•	Enhanced coordination and 
collaboration among government 
agencies, stakeholders, and 
communities to facilitate a cohesive 
and integrated approach to drought 
response and resilience-building 
efforts
•	Support for community groups 
resulting in delivery of social 
connection activities, reducing 
isolation and improving mental, 
physical, and spiritual wellbeing 
•	Improved collaboration and support, 
with mutual resource sharing, 
increasing community social 
cohesion and uptake/awareness of 
available services and initiatives run 
throughout the Region 
•	Cognisant community members 
who are aware of future drought 
impacts, with preparation and 
planning undertaken to ensure 
drought resilience during tough 
times 
•	Improved water management 
practices helping to ensure 
community water supplies are 
reliable and accessible during 
water shortage periods, therefore 
enhancing public health and 
wellbeing 
•	Provision of psychosocial support 
services to help individuals, families, 
and communities cope with the 
stresses of drought 
Environmental Resilience 
•	Maintained amenity and 
performance of recreational spaces 
and public open greenery, enabling 
residents to undertake activities 
which beneficially impact physical 
and mental wellbeing
•	Improved water efficiency with 
reduced reliance on non-potable 
and potable water supplies from the 
Region’s water storage dams and 
aquifers 
•	Bolstered traditional cultural 
caring methods implemented 
across the Region with improved 
environmental practices, resulting 
in reduced water stress during 
drought 
•	Instils a sense of shared 
environmental responsibility and 
natural resource stewardship 
through drought education, 
providing lasting positive impacts on 
local natural ecosystems
•	Implementation of short-term water 
conservation measures such as 
restrictions on non-essential water 
usage, promoting efficient irrigation 
techniques, and repairing leakages 
to preserve water resources 
•	Strengthening of drought 
monitoring systems and early 
warning mechanisms to provide 
timely information to stakeholders, 
enabling proactive drought 
response and management
Long Term 
Outcomes
(> 4 years)
Attaining our long-term outcomes hinges on the successful execution of each action, accumulating 
our short-term outcome successes, and thereby achieving our strategic priorities and goals. 
•	There is a common understanding and a shared vision in 
the Region managing drought risks and build community 
drought resilience 
•	The Region collaborates and works collectively within 
partnerships to build drought resilience across three 
pillars: economic, environmental, and social resilience
•	Measures are implemented to limit impacts of drought 
and better coordinate and respond to drought events and 
incidents 
•	Stakeholders and communities proactively share 
knowledge and lessons learned, taking actions that 
contribute to drought resilience 
•	A diversified local economy
Monitoring, 
Evaluation 
and Learning
To ensure our journey towards long-term outcomes remains on track, adaptable, and achievable, 
the Plan will employ robust monitoring, evaluation, and learning mechanisms.
This will provide valuable insights to refine our strategy and approaches to best suit our community and needs as required. 
Through the implementation of each action, it is expected that the RDR Plan will generate  
short-term outcomes that demonstrate progress towards our vision, strategic priorities, and 
goals. It is anticipated that the above actions will produce the following economic, environmental, 
and social resilience outcomes within our community:
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
46
47

ACTION STRATEGIC ALIGNMENT 
To ensure our Region is leveraging existing work and initiatives, it is helpful to consider how this RDR Plan aligns with existing 
policies, strategies, and legislation. Table 6.2 provides a quick overview of how identified actions brought forward from our 
community within this Plan align within the existing political arena. For example, our action “Ensuring economic prosperity as 
Our Region transitions” is highly relevant to and shares synergies with the Upper Hunter Destination Management Plan, which 
aims to build tourism and visitation to the Region. Our action aims to diversify the regional economy away from single sources 
of income (largely mineral extraction), while the Destination Management Plan works to diversify the economy through 
bolstering of the tourism industry. 
Meanwhile, documents such as the Australian Government Drought Response, Resilience, and Preparedness Plan 2019 have 
a broad applicability to our Plan. It is a pivotal document in establishing the drought preparedness and resilience scene across 
Australia and directly links into this Plan. This means all actions directly reducing drought’s influence on our Region are closely 
aligned with the intentions of this national plan. Supplementary actions, working to reduce co-stressors (such as boosting 
community resilience and improving economic resilience) are ancillary to the national plan. 
Each ‘•’ within Table 6.2 notes synergies between our Plan and the existing strategic policy sphere. 
Table 6.2:  How Our Actions Align with Strategic Policies and Strategies (Local through to International)
Relevant Policies and Strategies
Comprehensive 
drought 
communications plan
First Nations land 
management practices
Supporting our 
community groups
Ensuring economic 
prosperity as our 
Region transitions
Forward planning and 
helping our water users 
prepare for dry times
Singleton
Community Strategic Plan  
•
•
Local Strategic Planning Statement
•
•
Integrated Water Cycle Management Strategy
•
Climate Change Risk Assessment and 
Adaptation Plan
•
Sustainability Strategy 2019-2027
•
Council and Community Emissions Reduction 
Action Plan 2023 
•
•
Socio-Economic Development Strategy – 2020-
2024
•
•
Muswellbrook
2022-2032 Community Strategic Plan 
•
•
Local Strategic Planning Statement 2020 – 2040
•
•
Integrated Water Cycle Management Strategy 
•
Adverse Impacts Plan 2020 
•
Relevant Policies and Strategies
Comprehensive 
drought 
communications plan
First Nations land 
management practices
Supporting our 
community groups
Ensuring economic 
prosperity as our 
Region transitions
Forward planning and 
helping our water users 
prepare for dry times
Upper Hunter
2032: Community Strategic Plan   
•
•
Local Strategic Planning Statement
•
•
Integrated Water Cycle Management Strategy
•
Upper Hunter Destination Management Plan
•
Sustainability Action Plan
•
Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
•
Regional
Hunter Joint Organisation Local Disaster 
Communication Planning Framework
•
Upper Hunter Economic Diversification Plan
•
Hunter Regional Economic Development 
Strategy 2023 Update 
•
Greater Hunter Regional Water Strategy 
•
Upper Hunter Water Utilities Alliance 
(UHWUA) Drought and Emergency Response 
Management Plan 2022 
•
Destination Management Plan Hunter Valley 
Situation Analysis 2022 
•
Hunter Valley Destination Management Plan 
2022-2030
•
Hunter Regional Plan 2041 
•
State
NSW Water Strategy 2021 
•
•
NSW Waste and Sustainable Materials Strategy 
2041 
•
•
NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
•
•
20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW (20-
Year Vision) 2021 
•
Managing and Preparing for Drought 2018
•
•
NSW Climate Change Policy Framework 
•
Extreme Events Policy
•
NSW State Disaster Mitigation Plan 2024-2026 
•
•
•
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
48
49

Relevant Policies and Strategies
Comprehensive 
drought 
communications plan
First Nations land 
management practices
Supporting our 
community groups
Ensuring economic 
prosperity as our 
Region transitions
Forward planning and 
helping our water users 
prepare for dry times
National
Australian Government Drought Response, 
Resilience, and Preparedness Plan 2019 
•
•
•
National Drought Agreement 2018 
•
•
•
National Climate Resilience and Adaptation 
Strategy 2021-2025 
•
•
National Climate Risk Assessment First Pass 
Assessment Report 
•
The Second National Action Plan to Implement 
the National Disaster Risk Reduction Framework 
•
International
UNCCD Drought Resilience Technical Guideline 
•
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030 Action 1 – Understanding Disaster 
Risk 
•
•
•
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030 Action 2 – Strengthening disaster risk 
governance to manage disaster risk
•
•
•
•
•
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030 Action 3 – Investing in disaster risk 
reduction for resilience
•
•
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030 Action 4 – Enhancing disaster 
preparedness for effective response and to 
“Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction.
•
•
•
SDG 1: No Poverty*
SDG 2: Zero Hunger*
SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being
•
•
SDG 4: Quality Education
•
•
SDG 5: Gender Equality*
SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation
•
SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy
•
SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth
 
•
SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure
•
•
•
SDG 10: Reduced Inequalities
•
•
•
•
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities
•
•
•
•
Relevant Policies and Strategies
Comprehensive 
drought 
communications plan
First Nations land 
management practices
Supporting our 
community groups
Ensuring economic 
prosperity as our 
Region transitions
Forward planning and 
helping our water users 
prepare for dry times
International (cont.)
SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and 
Production
•
•
SDG 13: Climate Action
•
•
SDG 14: Life Below Water*
SDG 15: Life on Land
•
•
•
SDG 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions
•
SDG 17: Partnerships for the Goals
•
•
•
•
*Actions have been developed to align with the three pillars of resilience: economic, environmental, and social. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by the 
United Nations align with these three pillars, acting as a blueprint for peace and prosperity across our planet and people, both now and into the future. For homogeneity, 
challenges, opportunities, and actions have been linked to key SDGs to demonstrate the linkages throughout this RDR Plan. SDGs marked with an * do not align with the 
RDR Plan’s actions but have been included for entirety. 
The Sendai Framework focuses on the adoption of measures which prevent the creation 
of new risk, reduce existing risks, and increase resilience, which align with the objectives 
of this Regional Drought Resilience Plan (RDR Plan). Of the seven global targets to guide 
progress on the Sendai Framework, this RDR Plan will support six of the targets: reducing 
disaster mortality, reducing the number of people affected, reducing direct economic 
losses, reducing disaster damage and disruption of basic services, increasing the number of 
countries with local risk reduction strategies, and increasing the availability of and access to 
multi-hazard early warning systems. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
50
51

ACTION PATHWAYS 
Figure 6.1 demonstrates how the priority actions of this 
RDR Plan locate on the impact pathway spectrum. The 
impact pathway spectrum represents different activities 
that may help build resilience to drought in the Region 
and range from supporting or underpinning activities, 
enhancing adaptive capacity, improving performance, and 
reducing exposure. The actions developed in this Plan are 
spread across this spectrum to provide a comprehensive 
approach to address drought vulnerabilities and reduce 
drought impacts. The actions were developed, evaluated, 
and prioritised during the stakeholder and community 
engagement program using the approaches discussed in 
The Process section. 
In subsequent pages, action plans for the five priority 
actions are documented and include information to 
support funding endeavours, and recommendations 
for implementation. This includes action rationale, 
high-level estimated costs and implementation 
timeframes, implementation steps, potential benefits, and 
complementary actions. 
Please note the information provided within action 
plans, particularly timeframes and costs, are intended as 
preliminary estimates to be further developed in subsequent 
phases following the completion of this RDR Plan.
Figure 6.1:  Action Pathways
Figure 6.2:  RDR Plan Implementation Timeline
Complementary Action: 
Leverage Local Land 
Services Landholder 
Research
Complementary Action: 
Improving Small Business 
Financial Viability
Complementary 
Action: Facilitating 
Fit-for-Purpose Social 
Infrastructure
Complementary 
Action: Furthering our 
Community’s Journey 
to Mental Health and 
Wellbeing
Complementary 
Action: Leveraging the 
Knowledge Held Within 
Our Community
Complementary Action: 
Grant Writing Toolkit
e. Forward Planning and 
Helping Our Water Users 
Prepare for Dry Times
Complementary Action: 
Improve Awareness of 
Compliance Regime for 
Water Taken from the 
Hunter River
Complementary Action: 
Leveraging our Biggest 
Industry for Enduring 
Community Benefit
Complementary Action: 
Considering Social 
Value in the Integrating 
Planning and Reporting 
Framework
Complementary Action: 
Incorporate Drought 
Considerations into 
Planning Policies
d. Ensuring Economic 
Prosperity as Our Region 
Transitions
c. Supporting Our 
Community Groups
Complementary Action: 
Improving Water 
Infrastructure to Enhance 
Regional Water Security
a. Comprehensive 
Drought 
Communications Plan
Underpinning Activities
E.g. improvements to 
data, research, policies, 
strategies, collaboration 
with stakeholders or 
community engagement
Reduce Other Threats
Improve Performance
Minimise  
Drought  
Impacts
Address Vulnerabilities
Reduce Impact
Enhance Adaptive 
Capacity
E.g. diversifying business 
or landholder incomes, 
improving management 
of pests and weeds
Reduce Sensitivity
E.g. regenerative 
agriculture, rainwater 
harvesting, water 
efficiency measures, 
fodder and water storage
Reduce Exposure
E.g. land management 
decision-making, 
insurance and risk transfer 
mechanisms, augmentation 
of water supply via water 
recycling or reuse, business 
contingency planning
b. First Nations Land 
Management Practices
Source: Adapted from the National Environmental Science Program, Climate Systems, Interventions for Biodiversity Conservation
The prioritised actions for this RDR Plan have been tentatively mapped against the 1-year RDRP implementation timeframe. 
While these suggested timeframes indicate when each action could be initiated, it is important to note that the expected 
impacts of these actions (including some implementation) will extend well beyond the 1-year period. This approach ensures 
that we can achieve both immediate and sustained progress towards our resilience goals. 
Short Term 
0 - 3 months
ACTION D: ENSURING 
ECONOMIC PROSPERITY AS 
OUR REGION TRANSITIONS
Medium Term 
3 - 6 months
Medium-Long Term 
6 - 9 months
Long Term 
9 - 12 months
Complementary Action: 
Leveraging our Biggest 
Industry for Enduring 
Community Benefit
Complementary Action: 
Grant Writing Toolkit
Plan Development
ACTION C: SUPPORTING OUR COMMUNITY GROUPS
Complementary Action: Furthering our Community’s 
Journey to Mental Health and Wellbeing
Complementary Action: Improving 
Small Business Financial Viability
Complementary Action: Leverage Local 
Land Services Landholder Research
ACTION E: FORWARD PLANNING AND HELPING 
OUR WATER USERS PREPARE FOR DRY TIMES
ACTION A: COMPREHENSIVE DROUGHT COMMUNICATION PLAN
ACTION B: FIRST NATIONS LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Complementary Action: 
Improving Water Infrastructure to 
Enhance Regional Water Security
Complementary Action: 
Considering Social Value 
in the Integrated Planning 
and Reporting Framework
Complementary 
Action: Incorporate 
Drought Considerations 
into Planning Policies
Complementary Action: 
Facilitating Fit-for-Purpose 
Social Infrastructure
Complementary Action: 
Leveraging the Knowledge 
Held Within Our Community
1
RDR Plan Seed Funding
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
52
53

HOW TO READ AN ACTION 
Themes
A brief snapshot of the action’s theme. This Plan considers 
four key thematic areas: 
01
Environment
02
Social
03
Economic
04
Water
Additionally, each action has been aligned with the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to reflect 
international best practice. 
Rationale 
This section explains why the noted action appears within 
the final RDR Plan. It contextualises information heard 
from our community alongside how the action will promote 
drought resilience across the Region. 
Timeframe 
The estimated timeframe for action completion.
Estimated Costs 
Approximate, preliminary costing estimated for each 
proposed action/project, remaining subject to funding and 
resource availability. 
Action Owner 
The proposed lead coordinator who will drive action 
development.
Stakeholders 
Outlines who will benefit from this action and who is the 
intended audience and recipient of the project.
Steps for Implementation 
A suggested methodology from resilience specialists which 
can be used by action owners in conjunction with local 
knowledge and preferential steps to undertake each action.
KPIs 
Key performance indicators which provide a means to 
measure the success of each action. 
Linkages to Existing Strategies
1-3 highly relevant policies and strategies aligning with the 
detailed action, demonstrating how the RDR Plan action 
contributes to achieving the goals of an existing plan, or vice 
versa. Further strategic alignment is canvassed within Table 
6.2 above. 
Resilience Dividend
Expected benefits likely to arise as an action is carried out. 
This section reflects the positive benefits gained through 
project investment across projects designed to bolster 
drought resilience as opposed to business-as-usual. 
Complementary Actions
Further supplementary actions raised during engagement 
which complement the prioritised actions within this Plan.  
Collectively, the five priority actions and further complementary actions outlined within this section aim to 
provide our Region with a sound basis to achieve our vision to build a drought-resilient community. The actions 
outlined in this RDR Plan follow a consistent format, including the following information:
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
54
55
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ACTION A: 
COMPREHENSIVE 
DROUGHT 
COMMUNICATION PLAN
Theme:  Cross cutting
Rationale
A consistent theme heard throughout the engagement 
period and validated by the three councils was the strong 
need for a comprehensive and coordinated communication 
plan and approach to support improved dissemination 
of information across the Region. Feedback highlighted 
that there was limited understanding of, or consistency of 
information relating to available support, programs, and 
initiatives available to assist with drought preparedness 
efforts and how to access them. It was also evident that 
information needs to be tailored to different audiences and 
provided in multiple formats (both physical and digital) 
in easily accessible language. With growing expectations 
on farmers to meet new “climate-friendly” KPIs and 
to be drought forward-thinking, the overwhelming 
amount of information available across the Region 
presents challenges. For this reason, a comprehensive 
drought communications plan was recommended during 
engagement to address the fragmented communication 
landscape, connecting people with resources (an identified 
opportunity for the Region). 
This action contains several elements, each of which forms 
part of an overall Comprehensive Drought Communications 
Plan (Communications Plan) designed to address the 
challenges identified and increase preparedness for and 
resilience to future droughts. There is also the opportunity 
to leverage the Communications Plan with the Disaster 
Communications and Planning Framework and Toolkit 
identified by the Hunter Joint Organisation, which contains 
key communication resources and structures to assist with 
preparing communication collateral during disaster. 
This action would be implemented over time, with the 
opportunity for different elements to be delivered at 
different stages once the baseline and foundational 
elements have been achieved. Some of the elements will 
either maintain or modify the system, while others will be 
transformative, strengthening resilience and shifting the 
dial towards greater self-empowerment. 
Part A: Building Stakeholder Database 
The foundational element of the Communications Plan is 
the development of a Stakeholder Database. It was evident 
during the engagement process that there isn’t a consistent 
or consolidated process for recording stakeholder and 
community details. 
This makes it difficult for councils to contact groups of 
stakeholders and ensure that the people who need the 
information are receiving it. 
By developing a stakeholder database, using an established 
tool such as Consultation Manager, councils will be able to 
store stakeholder information and record when and how 
stakeholders have been engaged. Knowing who the key 
community stakeholders and champions are will also assist 
in coordinating and efficiently linking people in need to the 
appropriate available support. 
This element has the potential to transform the system, 
increasing the connection and partnerships between 
councils and the community, the depth of understanding in 
the community of information and support available, and 
subsequently increased drought resilience. This element 
will also support other council initiatives beyond drought 
resilience and preparedness. 
Part B: Leveraging Existing Channels and Events 
Engagement findings showed that there are existing 
communications channels, activities, and events which 
could be leveraged to avoid duplication of resources and 
funding. A key step in developing the Communications Plan 
will be to identify these existing channels, activities, and 
events that could be utilised to further promote drought 
preparedness and resilience. 
In terms of events, an integral step will be liaising with the 
key industries, such as wine, tourism, grazing and equine 
stakeholders, to identify opportunities to add value to 
existing events. This will avoid duplication and also assist 
people who are time poor to attend a range of industry 
events to receive multiple benefits in one event. 
These events will provide networking and connection 
opportunities, which are critical to maintaining positive 
morale and mental wellbeing. 
Councils already have established communications 
channels which can be leveraged to improve dissemination 
of information about drought preparedness. These 
channels include the rates notices, newsletters, council 
websites and social media pages. 
Once identified, these activities, events, and channels will 
be included in the Communications Plan and form part of 
the overall action plan to roll out throughout the Region. 
This element is expected to both maintain and modify the 
system, by utilising existing resources to raise awareness 
about drought resilience with a broader reach of  audience. 
Part C: Dedicated Information portal 
A key element of the Communications Plan is establishing 
appropriate avenues to share information across the 
Region. Feedback from the engagement found there is a 
disconnect between the information developed and the 
intended audience. There is a need for a ‘one-stop-shop’ 
of information that is accessible to a wide range of people. 
It is envisaged that a local drought portal could be created 
and embedded on each council’s website.  Local employers 
can act as a valuable conduit to disperse information.  This 
portal could also be embedded within the intranet pages of 
large local employers, should they wish to participate. 
The portal would include information about available 
services, training sessions and e-learning modules, 
amongst other general drought preparedness information. 
By embedding this information on intranet sites, which 
are high traffic sites for local employees, the information 
will be more widely accessible. This element will, in the first 
instance, involve collating information already available, 
followed by establishment of an online portal. Additional 
information can be added as it is developed or made 
available. This element is expected to modify the system, 
but may also contribute to transformation, as the portal can 
be scaled over time with additional functionality as funds 
are sourced. 
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Develop and issue an RFQ for a contractor to develop 
the Drought Resilience Communications Plan. 
2.	 Undertake a review of Consultation Manager programs, 
using lessons learned from other councils, before 
purchasing a licence to an appropriate program.
3.	 Utilise the services of the communications contractor to 
host a series of internal council meetings to determine 
existing stakeholder databases and establish a process 
for consolidation and migration to the new program. 
4.	 Hold a series of key stakeholder interviews to identify 
any gaps in the stakeholder lists. 
5.	 Undertake a review of online portal programs, using 
lessons learned from other councils, before purchasing 
a licence to an appropriate program.
6.	 Utilise the services of the communications contractor to 
host a series of internal council meetings to determine 
appropriate information for the online portal. 
7.	 Hold a series of interviews with key local employers 
about the best approach for embedding the portal on 
intranet sites. 
8.	 Work collaboratively with the communications 
contractor to develop the Communications Plan, which 
will include detail of key engagement activities and 
dissemination channels, stakeholder mapping, and key 
messages. 
9.	 Deliver engagement activities and information 
through the avenues and channels outlined in the 
Communications Plan. 
10.	 Monitor media coverage and analyse its impact and 
reach, making recommendations to stakeholders for 
improvement regarding engagement.
11.	 Develop a plan, with key responsibilities and actions, to 
manage updates to the Communications Plan to ensure 
the content remains current. 
12.	 Incorporate the Plan within Integrated Planning and 
Reporting documents and/or communications plans 
across each Council (where funding and resources are 
available). 
KPIS
1.	 Number of stakeholders added to the database. 
2.	 Number of stakeholders reached using existing 
channels. 
3.	 Number of existing activities and events leveraged to 
promote drought resilience and preparedness and 
participant numbers.
4.	 Number of social media posts, council website updates, 
and newsletters and rates notices distributed.
5.	 Number of visits to information portal. 
6.	 Number of downloads from information portal. 
7.	 Increased uptake of support and services. 
Timeframe
6 months to 1.5 years 
Estimated Costs
$50,000-$150,000
Action Owner
Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper Hunter 
Shire Councils
Stakeholders
Key stakeholder groups, such as the Rural Support 
Services Network, and community champions / 
organisations, local employers, landholders, and 
other community members / residents 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
56
57

Linkages to Existing Strategies 
•	 Community Strategic Plans (Singleton Community 
Strategic Plan, Muswellbrook 2022-2032 Community 
Strategic Plan and 2032 Community Strategic Plan 
(Upper Hunter)): These plans outline how Council 
will work with community to ensure consistency and 
informed decision making. A clear and comprehensive 
drought plan will work to fulfill the goals of this Plan. 
•	 Hunter Joint Organisation Local Disaster Communication 
Planning Framework: This communication framework 
is highly relevant to our RDR Plan, providing a possible 
template and key messaging tools that could be utilised to 
the RDR Plan’s advantage.
•	 Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-
2030, Action 1, Understanding Disaster Risk: As an action 
focused on ensuring clear lines of communication across 
Councils to maximise peer-to-peer learning, this works 
directly towards increasing the Region’s understanding of 
drought, a slow-onset disaster event. 
Resilience Dividend
•	 Social – increased understanding of support and services 
available, as well as improved social connections, with 
greater uptake and awareness of available support 
services offered across the Region (both physical 
health, mental, and financial supports), and increased 
attendance at events and activities. 
•	 Economic – increased financial sustainability of local 
residents, landholders and business owners through 
increased understanding of drought preparedness and 
resilience measures. 
•	 Environmental – increased uptake of preparedness 
measures, including sustainable land management 
practices through increased awareness of available 
support and programs.
Complementary Actions
Leverage Local Land Services Landholder Research
There is an opportunity to leverage the Local Land Services 
led research Hunter Land Management Framework: 
‘Paddock between the ears: leveraging social capital to 
build natural capital’, to gather a deeper understanding of 
the local farming community and whether the policies and 
interventions are performing as intended. Engagement 
findings indicated a lack of awareness of initiatives, activities 
and understanding, which validates the need to review how 
and who initiatives are targeted at.  
This complementary action involves organising a knowledge 
sharing session between Local Land Services, council 
representatives and other relevant stakeholders to discuss 
the findings from the research and cross map existing 
interventions and proposed new interventions with 
typologies identified through the research. 
This activity will help to target existing and new initiatives 
with the right stakeholder groups to be more effective. An 
appropriate approach for an adjusted approach would then 
need to be determined. 
It is important to note that the findings of the research 
are not currently available, and this action progressing 
would be contingent on accessing the information. If this 
complementary action can progress, it has the potential to 
transform the system. Receiving specific information about 
stakeholder groups and the ability to adjust approaches 
to ensure increased success of policies and interventions 
would significantly increase drought preparedness and 
resilience. 
Incorporate Drought Considerations into Planning 
Policies 
The Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter 
agricultural industry has changed significantly over recent 
years, with a shift away from large dairy, cattle, and 
grazing farms towards smaller farms. These smaller rural 
lots often do not provide a sufficient land area to enable a 
sustainable and financially profitable agricultural enterprise. 
Engagement feedback highlighted this shift with many of 
these lots referred to as hobby farms or lifestyle blocks. The 
Local Land Services research in Complementary Action: 
Leverage Local Land Services Landholder Research, yet to 
be publicly published, provides complementary evidence 
of this change in focus from rural land purely delivering 
financial returns to landholders seeking a range of tangible 
and intangible value from their land. 
This complementary action would involve conducting 
an informal review of existing Local Strategic Planning 
Statements for each council area. This would seek to 
identify how the planning mechanisms are interacting with 
agricultural financial and tax implications, such as primary 
producer status, which may be at odds with lot sizes 
incapable of delivering sustainable financial returns. For 
example, the question was asked during the engagement 
for this Plan, whether the approach to land use planning is 
setting people up for failure during drought. This informal 
review would seek to capitalise on the findings from the 
engagement conducted for this RDR Plan and the insights 
gained from the Local Land Services research. Review 
findings could then be incorporated into the councils’ 
respective Local Strategic Planning Statements when they 
are each up for renewal. 
This action may also be capable of identifying changes to 
land use planning, which also assist the Region in meeting 
the needs of a growing population, and other changes 
precipitated by the energy transition underway in the 
Region’s industry. This action has the potential to not only 
modify but also transform the Region’s systems and the 
way planning controls are developed and implemented 
across the Region. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
58
59
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ACTION B: FIRST 
NATIONS LAND 
MANAGEMENT 
PRACTICES
Theme:  Environmental 
Rationale
Identifying opportunities to collaborate with and learn 
from the First Nations community in the Region is key to 
improving drought resilience. Engagement with local First 
Nations stakeholders and community members identified 
multiple bespoke First Nations land management practices 
taking place across the Region, and there is an opportunity 
to adopt and expand these practices. With every drought 
different to the last, adopting a position of active listening 
to Country supports unique, respectful environmental 
protection.
Feedback highlighted that there are various First Nations 
land management practices currently conducted across 
the Region, but there is a lack of awareness amongst the 
broader community about what these practices involve and 
how they can be adopted. Nature resource stewardship 
was a key issue for many during workshops. Organisations 
and stakeholders who are already practicing cultural land 
management, including cool burning, identified during 
engagement sessions include Wanaruah Local Aboriginal 
Land Council and Wonnarua Nation Aboriginal Corporation 
who also works closely with Bindelong.
The critical component and first phase of this action is to 
work closely with identified stakeholders, such as those 
noted above, to determine how to engage and progress 
conversations about local First Nations land management 
practices, what they entail, the appropriateness of 
expanding the practices throughout the Region. It is 
important that the First Nations community is involved from 
the beginning, and that the most appropriate approach 
for this action is led by First Nations stakeholders. Once 
thorough and robust collaboration has been undertaken, 
this action would ultimately involve recognising the 
traditional land management practices in a formalised 
process that would allow widespread implementation and 
adoption.  
This action will not only help to increase drought resilience 
through improved land management practices, but also 
create linkages with the local First Nations community 
to strengthen community cohesion. There may also be 
opportunities to leverage funding options from other 
stakeholders, such as universities, to expand this action 
further. 
This action will seek to modify the system and has the 
potential to be transformative through the building and 
strengthening of relationships, as well as through the 
implementation of cultural land management practices to 
increase resilience throughout the Region. 
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Develop and issue an RFQ for a contractor to develop 
the Drought Resilience Communications Plan. 
2.	 Engage First Nations subcontractor to lead the 
engagement process with, ensuring time for meaningful 
consultation, First Nations in Wanaruah/Wonnarua 
Country and other stakeholders to capture projects 
currently underway in the Region. 
3.	 	Map a process for the implementation and adoption of 
First Nations land management projects throughout the 
Region incorporating research into what is being done in 
other areas of Australia.
4.	 	Engage with potential “early adopter” landholders to 
ascertain how First Nations land management can be 
incorporated into their own practices.
5.	 Deploy First Nations land management projects 
according to the agreed process.
Timeframe
1-2 years 
Estimated Costs
$50,000-$100,000
Action Owner
Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper Hunter 
Shire Councils
Stakeholders
Wanaruah Local Aboriginal Land Council, Wonnarua 
Nation Aboriginal Corporation / Bindelong
KPIs
1.	 Percentage of First Nations entities engaged across the 
Region. 
2.	 Number of First Nations projects identified. 
3.	 Number of First Nations projects implemented 
throughout the Region.
4.	 Number of “early adopter” landholders engaged.
Linkages to Existing Strategies 
•	 Singleton Council and Community Emissions 
Reduction Action Plan 2023: Adopting First Nations 
land management activities could improve land use 
emissions, improving the Region’s scope 1-3 emissions. 
Rehabilitation of mining land would also positively benefit 
the overall goals of this Plan. 
•	 NSW Climate Change Adaptation Strategy: A return to 
traditional land management methods has the potential 
to significantly reduce climate change risks to the Region 
including drought.  
Resilience Dividend
•	 Social – increased partnerships and collaboration 
between First Nations stakeholders and community 
members, councils, and the broader community. 
•	 Economic – increased financial sustainability of local 
residents, landholders and business owners through 
increased understanding of alternative land management 
practices to increase drought preparedness and 
resilience measures.
•	 Environmental – increased environmental prosperity 
through adoption of alternative land management 
practices to increase drought resilience. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
60
61

Rationale
For those living on the land or not connected to town water, 
drought can be like running a marathon. After a full day of 
work, energy needs to be found to drive into town to cart 
water for beloved horses, cattle, or other farm animals. 
Finding fodder is an exercise in perseverance, ringing 
around to find bales, then stomaching their ever-rising cost. 
Creative approaches, like buying juicing carrots each day 
from the supermarket can add a few more options to the 
feed equation. Many don’t think twice about the monetary 
cost and effort, such is the bond and connection they share 
with their animals. 
For those operating horse agistment businesses, or running 
dozens of head of cattle, the quantities of feed and water 
needed are even greater. Whilst selling off cattle is an option 
for some, for others it can be difficult to contemplate losing 
bloodlines which have taken decades of work. Agistment 
businesses are in a similar position, not wanting to forego 
their customer base which has taken similar lengths of time 
to build. 
Whilst these rural endeavours may be different, the people 
involved share a similar story of water and feed. Comfort, 
strength and hope can be gained by knowing that others 
are also doing it tough. Taking a break, catching up with 
friends, and engaging in an off-farm activity, can also 
provide a mental break. Even if it is just for a few short hours. 
The Region is blessed with many diverse and passionate 
community groups. The level of innovation and creative 
approaches being applied to age-old problems is 
astounding. Some operate online, providing a virtual space 
to share drought stories and a marketplace for locally 
made items. Others are helping build resilience through our 
rural women, our youth, or even via locally grown produce. 
Meanwhile the volunteers from the pony-clubs, sporting 
teams, creative and environmental pursuits, enable all age 
groups to stay physically and mentally active. These groups 
create a sense of place for individuals and families, helping 
to foster positive emotional bonds with their community 
members. These social connections create a space for 
people to talk of shared hardships, offering a reminder that 
one is not alone in their drought journey.
Volunteers from these community groups spoke of ways 
they would like to improve their group, or their offerings. For 
some it was about opening new chapters or widening the 
reach of their group, for others it was about ways to ease 
the burden on volunteers or deliver more to their audience. 
Volunteers typically wear multiple hats and are stretched 
thin. During a drought, attempts to fundraise mean asking 
more from the very same people trying to watch every last 
dollar they spend. 
However, during the engagement for this Plan, we 
consistently heard that these community groups can 
deliver substantial gains for relatively small sums of money. 
That is, the return on investment for social capital and social 
connections is immense. These groups can then continue 
and expand on their role facilitating local people achieving 
self-help during times of drought. The benefits extend 
beyond drought: these groups deliver support and other 
in-kind assistance, through floods, bushfires, or other times 
of adversity. This action will seek to develop and deliver 
a grants program for community groups. In the process, 
the action will encourage trust, information sharing, and 
stronger networks between community members, partners, 
local government, and government agencies. This action 
builds on existing community strengths, seeking to ease the 
burden on volunteers as a way to increase their capacity. It 
is anticipated that this will slowly modify the existing system 
and create transformative change by supporting bottom-
up change.
ACTION C: 
SUPPORTING 
OUR COMMUNITY 
GROUPS
Theme:  Social
Timeframe
Ongoing
Estimated Costs
$50,000-$100,000 to be shared amongst groups
Action Owner
Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper Hunter 
Shire Councils
Stakeholders
Community Groups. Businesses or industry groups 
who seek to support community resilience.
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Continuously scan for internal and external funding 
opportunities to support this action.
2.	 Develop a process, such as an expression of interest, to 
identify eligible groups and activities.
3.	 Incorporate considerations of diversity, equity, and 
inclusion (including varying levels of written and digital 
literacy) in the application and selection process.
4.	 Develop an evaluation framework, to develop a 
qualitative and quantitative evidence-base which 
demonstrates the tangible and in-tangible return on 
investment achieved by selected recipients. 
5.	 Deliver the grant program with a view to establishing a 
recurring program. 
KPIs
1.	 Number of applications received. 
2.	 Number and diversity of recipients.
3.	 Demographics of residents supported by the recipient 
groups. 
4.	 Value of in-kind contributions generated.
5.	 Levels of volunteering
Linkages to Existing Strategies 
•	 Community Strategic Plans (Singleton Community 
Strategic Plan, Muswellbrook 2022-2032 Community 
Strategic Plan and 2032 Community Strategic Plan 
(Upper Hunter)): As key documents promoting 
community leadership, this action works to facilitate 
greater community cohesion and improve government 
transparency to support community decision making and 
projects. 
•	 NSW State Disaster Mitigation Plan 2024-2026: 
Supporting Government’s commitment community 
safety and resilience, this action works to foster greater 
opportunities to build drought resilience and reduce 
disaster impacts.
Resilience Dividend
•	 Social – Research indicates that the strength of 
community connections and their access to informal 
support is a key determinant in how quickly a community 
can recover from a disaster, such as drought.85
•	 Economic – A connected community is capable of 
drawing from its own wealth of knowledge and abilities 
in improving their drought preparedness, reducing the 
resultant financial impacts.
Complementary Actions
Facilitating Fit-for-Purpose Social Infrastructure
In our communities, it is our social infrastructure, such 
as community halls, which play a key role in a resilient 
community. These facilities are the venues for large and 
small gatherings, from games nights to festive dinners and 
parties. They are a place to connect with neighbours and 
friends, share stories, have fun, and de-stress. In times 
of drought, and other hardship, these facilities are also 
a crucial location for information sharing. With a facility 
nearly in every town and village, they are the primary 
meeting place for our rural communities. Before and during 
droughts (and other disasters) they act as the central hub 
where service providers and government agencies can meet 
with, and link residents with resources and support. Yet 
many of our facilities do not meet the needs of today, often 
with no internet or disabled access, non-water efficient 
appliances and toilets. We need to establish a baseline for 
each of these community facilities, and a plan on how to 
bring them up to a standard which reflects their status 
as key social infrastructure. Whilst Singleton Council and 
Muswellbrook Shire Council have already started this 
process, the Upper Hunter Shire Council is keen to follow 
suit. There is recognition, that the three councils can 
achieve economies of scale by working together, buying in 
bulk, or organising upgrades in a single package of work.  
Furthering our Community’s Journey to Mental 
Health and Wellbeing 
Mental and physical health is a key concern for the 
community, with observations that drought family 
wellbeing is low and there is a sense of hopelessness within 
the community. For many, the prospect of drought is 
re-traumatising and causes significant stress. Helping the 
community to feel more mentally and physically prepared 
for drought and helping them to manage their wellbeing 
throughout drought is critical. 
Through the community engagement period several 
local community organisations and support services who 
contribute to improving community mental health and 
wellbeing were identified. One group in particular was 
Where There’s a Will, which ‘exists to create a new normal 
where enhanced mental health and wellbeing allows our 
Upper Hunter community to thrive and flourish’. 
Where There’s a Will has already developed a range of 
positive education and learning initiatives specifically 
designed to be implemented in local schools for students 
and teachers. This complementary action would focus 
on Where There’s a Will and their next steps in expanding 
their education program. It would involve engagement 
with the group to understand their action plan for future 
implementation of their program, and where the RDR Plan 
could assist in progressing the roll out of the program. 
This complementary action has the potential to modify 
the system in the first instance by building confidence, 
capacity and capability in relation to wellbeing, but may 
also transform the system by changing traditional attitudes 
towards mental health and wellbeing held and passed down 
through generations. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
62
63

Leveraging the Knowledge Held Within Our 
Community
Engagement feedback identified the desire for greater peer 
to peer learning, where the community can learn from one 
another what works and what can be improved. Peer to 
peer learning can also contribute to social cohesion and 
improved mental health and wellbeing. 
This complementary action would involve organising bus 
tours of key local industry enterprises, including tourism 
and accommodation ventures, winery operations, and 
cropping or grazing businesses. Participants can learn from 
each other, providing practical examples and advice to their 
peers, on what has worked to improve their financial viability 
or land management practices. For the wine and tourism 
industry, these tours would deliver co-benefits, improving 
the capacity of participants to cross promote each other’s 
offerings to tourists. It would involve leveraging already 
established activities which may be run by Landcare or 
Local Land Services. This action would aim to modify 
the system, promoting a proactive approach to drought 
resilience and business prosperity. 
Grant Writing Toolkit
Our community, business and environmental groups play 
a key role in helping our Region thrive. These groups spend 
countless hours fundraising, augmenting their finances with 
grants for specific projects, or equipment to support their 
activities. Each of our three councils already has a process 
in place to assist community, business and environmental 
groups find potential grant opportunities. Stakeholders also 
noted that there are other entities providing grant-writing 
support, however there is limited awareness of eligibility 
criteria and how to secure this assistance. Community 
volunteers expressed a desire for additional assistance via 
a grant-writing toolkit, which responded to a diversity of 
learning styles. Potential tool kit elements include in-person 
workshops, online or on-demand webinars, how-to-guides, 
information sheets detailing tips, tricks, templates, and 
sample responses and links to additional support. 
Leveraging our Biggest Industry for Enduring 
Community Benefit
Mining and associated  industries are a core part of 
our Region’s identity. As our largest employers, these 
companies directly and indirectly support many of the small 
and medium businesses in our area. Many of our Region’s 
mining companies have community support programs 
which provide grants, sponsorships, and other initiatives 
to assist local community groups and projects. Typically, 
these are conducted by individual companies, with no over-
arching regional approach. The mantra ‘working together 
to achieve more’ and ‘building on existing activities’ were 
two recurring themes of the community and stakeholder 
engagement conducted for this RDR Plan. An opportunity 
exists to leverage the existing relationships between the 
councils, local mining and associated companies (like the 
Upper Hunter Mining Dialogue, Transgrid, EnergyCo, 
Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC)), and the 
community. By working together there is potential to 
deliver some larger scale projects to achieve long-term and 
lasting social, environmental and/or economic benefits. 
A co-benefit of improved collaboration is to improve the 
two-way flow of information, particularly as it relates 
to rehabilitated and buffer land holdings as well as land 
managed for environmental offsets.  
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
64
65
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan

ACTION D:  
ENSURING ECONOMIC 
PROSPERITY AS OUR 
REGION TRANSITIONS
Theme:  Economic & Social 
Rationale
Mining is the dominant employer in the Singleton, 
Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter local government areas 
and occupies a significant land footprint. Historically, 
mining underpins our Region’s prosperity, and prior to 
that it was agriculture, with energy continuing to be a focal 
point. Over the past decade or so, we have seen the Ashton 
North East, Drayton, Muswellbrook Coal and Liddell open 
cut mines cease production. The Liddell Power Station 
was decommissioned in 2023. These closures are often 
accompanied by job losses however we have seen staff 
redeployed from operational roles into mine rehabilitation 
and closure activities. However, others leave the area or 
pursue fly-in-fly-out/drive-in-drive-out opportunities to 
remain working in the mining sector. Further mine closures 
are predicted in coming years and decades as coal seams 
are exhausted, creating challenges around land allocations 
and economic prosperity for the Region. 
However, out of closure can come opportunity to transition 
to new and emerging industries. In March 2024, the Federal 
Government unveiled their Solar Sunshot program, which 
will support the opening of a solar manufacturing facility at 
the Liddell site. During the engagement for this RDR Plan, 
community members and stakeholders spoke in positive 
terms of other potential uses for these former mining and 
energy sites. Future uses as diverse as water storages, 
pumped hydro ‘big-batteries’, to mountain bike parks 
were suggested. Others spoke of a desire to see the land 
returned to productive grazing or natural vegetation, and 
the potential for water entitlements from the Hunter River 
to be re-allocated. Each of these use cases has the potential 
to diversify the Region’s economy. This means new jobs and 
new skills need to be acquired, but also necessitates land 
use, workforce, and economic development planning to 
ensure the right mechanisms are in place to support these 
changes. Much of this work is underway. 
Beyond looking at what’s possible and how to develop a 
workforce to leverage these new opportunities, we need to 
understand what these changes might mean for drought 
resilience. We know that mining operations are vulnerable 
to extended dry conditions and may have to suspend their 
operations in a severe drought. So even in the absence of 
change, our economy would benefit from diversification. 
Will these new industries place additional strain on 
our water resources? Will the transition free up water 
allocations which can go back into our existing agricultural 
enterprises? Is there an opportunity for new agricultural 
endeavours such as intensive horticulture or value-adding 
through processing or manufacturing? Will the changes 
in our Region alter the forecasts for population growth 
and necessitate upgrades to our water infrastructure? 
Opportunities such as these offer the potential to address 
the deep-rooted challenges across the Region, such as 
the “difficulty in turning a profit”, as identified during the 
community engagement phases of the RDR Plan project. 
The Region’s transition will result in rapid transformative 
change in a relatively short period of time. This action is 
simply the first of many steps. It is about defining the issue 
as it relates to drought and water availability, aligning with 
work already underway and making recommendations 
to inform the next stage in the journey, packaged into an 
economic futures water considerations strategy. 
Timeframe
1-2 years 
Estimated Costs
$50,000-$100,000 (for phase 1 only – problem 
definition and recommended next steps)
Action Owner
Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper Hunter 
Shire Councils
Stakeholders
A comprehensive stakeholder mapping exercise 
forms part of the project implementation 
Steps for Implementation
1.	 Conduct a stakeholder mapping exercise to identify 
a comprehensive list of project stakeholders, sphere 
of control and influence, to determine desired level of 
project involvement.
2.	 Conduct future scenario planning to understand 
potential new and declining industries.
3.	 Map impact on water demand, potential for direct or 
indirect impacts on water availability, synergies and 
challenges with existing Integrated Water Management 
Plans.
4.	 Identify need for skill development to match with likely 
new or emerging agricultural industries.
5.	 Review existing planning policies to identify 
opportunities to attract or enable new industries.
6.	 Conduct community and stakeholder engagement to 
support steps 2 to 5. 
7.	 Provide recommendations for next steps which are 
within council’s control and sphere and influence.
8.	 Provide recommendations on partnerships, networks, 
and advocacy to further the Region’s transition planning 
objectives. 
KPIs
1.	 Engagement activities conducted.
2.	 Potential changes in industries and employment 
mapped.
3.	 Agricultural skill needs assessment completed.
4.	 Water demand implications assessed.
5.	 Strategic partnerships developed. 
6.	 Recommendations adopted. 
Linkages to Existing Strategies 
•	 Socio-Economic Development Strategy 2020-2024: 
Providing strategic direction to ensure resources improve 
the liveability of the Singleton LGA, this Action relates 
to this strategy and should be incorporated to ensure 
drought resilience is a key economic consideration.  
•	 20-Year Economic Vision for Regional NSW (20-Year 
Vision) 2021: The NSW Government is working to make 
significant investments including health and regional 
liveability. This action will go towards achieving the goals 
of this Plan. 
Resilience Dividend
•	 Economic – A diverse economy with substantial water-
independent industries will provide a financial buffer for 
the Region’s residents and businesses during drought 
conditions. 
•	 Social – Low unemployment, and a diversity of job 
opportunities for all skill levels, enables the community to 
be confident about their Region’s liveability now and into 
the future.   
Complementary Actions
Improving Small Business Financial Viability 
A consistent theme heard during the engagement period 
was the financial pressures experienced by small local 
businesses, including the increased cost of living and in 
particular, power prices. This was the case for tourism 
businesses, as well as agricultural enterprises which rely 
upon irrigation, with water pumps being energy intensive. 
Increased operating costs, reduces the financial buffers 
available to businesses to ride out the business downtown 
they may experience during a drought. We know that 
financial stress is a major contributing factor to declining 
mental health. 
This complementary action would involve desktop 
research to identify available technology options relevant 
for the key local industries (wine, tourism, or grazing), 
such as solar power and battery storage, electric vehicle 
parking stations, solar water pumping, or automated 
farm water management. This information would then be 
converted into resources, information packs, webinars, 
or other capacity building mechanisms. This would be 
complemented by information on available financing 
mechanisms, such as green loans and grants. The action 
would provide an opportunity for each of the three councils 
to explore whether Environmental Upgrade Finance, 
through providers such as the Sustainable Australia Fund, 
are a good fit for their council and community, and a 
mechanism to overcome the upfront costs associated with 
energy and water efficiency upgrades. 
This complementary action would aim to modify the system 
but could also contribute to council community emission 
reduction initiatives, which would have a transformative 
impact. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
66
67

ACTION E:  
FORWARD PLANNING 
AND HELPING OUR 
WATER USERS PREPARE 
FOR DRY TIMES
Theme:  Cross Cutting –  
Water Management 
Rationale
The three councils in our Region are responsible for 
operating the water supply schemes which service the 
major townships of Scone, Aberdeen, Merriwa, Cassilis, 
Murrurundi, Muswellbrook, Denman, Sandy Hollow and 
Singleton. In the 2019/20 drought, the northern parts of 
our Region were particularly affected by dwindling water 
supplies. Water restrictions were also introduced in the 
Upper Hunter, Muswellbrook and Singleton Shires in 
response to the community’s desire to ‘do their fair share’. 
Water was trucked into Murrurundi until a new pipeline and 
pumping stations were built to transfer potable water to the 
town from Scone. The experience during this last drought 
demonstrated that our community is supportive of water 
conservation measures in our homes, local businesses, and 
in public spaces. 
Action is already happening to improve the efficiency of 
our water supply system. Each of our Region’s councils 
have welcomed state government funding to deliver leak 
detection programs across the water network. Not only 
do leaks represent lost water in our system, but they also 
represent an increase in the cost of production, given that 
every drop of water supplied to our customers’ needs to be 
captured, treated, and pumped. 
Whilst there is an intention to improve water use efficiency 
in other areas, multiple barriers exist. For our largest water 
users, the frequency of meter readings is insufficient 
to detect leaks in a timely fashion or to enable adaptive 
management of their consumption. With water being a 
relatively cheap commodity for industry and business, it has 
also not seen the attention to detail, that has been placed 
on electricity consumption. As a result, many big users have 
limited awareness of how much water they are using in 
different parts of their operations, although this is less of an 
issue in the Upper Hunter Shire Council area. 
Population growth also creates notable challenges for 
the Region’s water security risks, with water considered 
an expensive commodity beyond the spare capacity of 
most within the agricultural space. This creates rebound 
effects within the water market, with possible savings 
created within one sector potentially resulting in increased 
consumption and expansion within another. Given the 
multiple pathways that could drive increased water 
consumption, this could lead to indirect impacts and 
substantial increases in demand on the potable, reticulated 
water system, at a time when the system is least able to 
cope. This is exacerbated by other factors  such as industry 
growth, or ageing infrastructure. 
Even our council facilities are not immune. We acknowledge 
the need to improve our own awareness of how water is 
being used in our own facilities which use large quantities 
of water. Once we know this information, we can develop 
a plan of action, making changes as finances allow. We 
also recognise the important role our local sporting fields, 
swimming pools, and community facilities play during 
times of drought. These are the places where our local 
community come to connect with friends and family, have 
fun, exercise, or simply take a break from the physical 
and mental demands of hand-feeding animals and other 
drought hardships. During the consultation for this Plan, we 
also heard how essential it was for residents to have access 
to a green or blue space, in the midst of dry, dusty and 
brown drought conditions. 
The 2019/20 drought prompted a review of our Region’s 
Drought Management Plan. In response to community 
feedback, we have simplified our water restrictions, and 
are keen to communicate these updates. We know that 
many in our community are already taking actions to 
conserve water, such as using water efficient front-loading 
washing machines. However, the online survey and street 
conversations undertaken for this RDR Plan indicate 
residents, particularly those connected to town water, 
would like to find out what other actions they can take 
before and during a drought. Information is also sought by 
those who rely on rain or bore water for their daily use. 
This action consists of four parts, which can be 
implemented individually or as a singular package. The 
action seeks to modify our existing approach to water 
efficiency across three target audiences: our local 
businesses who consume large volumes of water within 
their asset or facility, our council facilities which consume 
large quantities of water, and our community, whose use 
when combined, represents the largest overall usage 
category. This action aims to address the multi-layered 
challenges surrounding water consumption and demand 
during dry times. 
Steps for Implementation
Part A – Securing more granular data for our 
highest water users to improve interventions and 
management. 
Part A aims to identify water consumption patterns to 
enhance the effectiveness of drought management 
strategies through detailed data collection via analysis 
of available technologies. Given water constraints during 
periods of drought, this action is born out of the necessity 
for efficient and targeted management of water resources. 
Understanding usage patterns in greater detail is essential 
for devising effective interventions, allowing for precision 
and customised solutions. 
1.	 Conduct an analysis of available technology or other 
mechanisms which improve the frequency and 
granularity of water consumption data available for our 
Region’s highest water users. 
2.	 Conduct a multi-criteria analysis to evaluate the options 
against key factors, such as the capital and operational 
costs, maintenance and technical requirements, 
reliability, lifespan, and user-preferences.
3.	 Provide bespoke recommendations for each council, 
which reflect their current approach to water metering 
and other relevant factors. 
Part B – Supporting our highest water users 
establish a baseline for their consumption.
Part B increases transparency and accountability within 
our high-water users across the Region. Through enhanced 
monitoring and informed decision-making, comprehensive 
data understanding and availability will allow real-time 
monitoring of water usage, enabling quicker responses 
to emerging issues and trends. The action also works to 
facilitate tailored water conservation strategies specific to 
the needs and operational context of each water user. 
1.	 	Review and update where necessary the template for 
Water Efficiency Management Plans for organisations to 
complete to ensure consistency across the Region. 
2.	 Engage with high water users in relation to water 
efficiency management planning.
Part C – Developing Water Management Plans for 
councils’ highest water using assets.
To effectively lead change across the Region, Councils 
will also be developing Water Management Plans for their 
high-water usage assets. This facilitates transparency and 
proactive accountability across the Region, ensuring water 
saving efforts are tailored to each identified asset, efficiently 
conserving water and maintaining essential services. This 
aims to increase the spare capacity and response options 
available to Council during drought events. 
1.	 Audit high-water use council assets to understand 
where and how water is being used.
2.	 Identify existing water efficient practices in place and 
evaluate their effectiveness.
3.	 Identify and quantify options to improve water use 
efficiency, including any efficiencies in scale for adopting 
the same option across multiple assets within and 
across the three council areas. 
4.	 Develop a Water Management Plan, including a 
monitoring, evaluation, and learning framework, for 
each of the audited assets.
5.	 Implement the Water Management Plans as funding 
becomes available.
Timeframe
3-6 months
Estimated Costs
$50,000-$100,000
Action Owner
Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire, and Upper Hunter 
Shire Councils
Stakeholders
•	 Largest water users
•	 Council recreational and community facilities 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
68
69

Part D – Develop a Drought Communication 
Strategy
To facilitate best practice and efficient improvements 
across the Region, a Drought Communication Strategy 
is recommended. Effective communication is crucial in 
managing the broad array of challenges arising from water 
management during drought. This action aims to inform, 
engage, and mobilise the community and stakeholders to 
mitigate the worst of these impacts. 
1.	 Develop or update existing resources, such as 
fact sheets, short format videos or home water 
assessments, which articulate actions residents can 
take before and during a drought.
2.	 Develop key messages, collateral, and channels to 
support the communication of drought emergency 
response measures including:
a.	 Background and need for water conservation which 
reflects the various values the community places on 
water.
b.	 Details on each level of water restrictions.
c.	 What each council is doing to manage the water 
supply in their LGA.
d.	 The eligibility and process to obtain a water use 
exemption.
e.	 Where and how to access bulk water, for commercial 
carting operations and members of the public. 
f.	
Community feedback, queries and reporting of non-
compliance.
g.	 Where to find additional information.
3.	 Identify and include links to resources, in relation to 
actions local landholders can take before a drought, to 
provide water for their livestock, noting that this aspect 
of water management falls under the remit of NSW 
Local Land Services and NSW Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional Development, rather than 
councils. 
4.	 Articulate the role for councils’ reticulated water supply 
in supplying emergency water for livestock during a 
drought, where and how this water can be accessed and 
any other relevant information. 
KPIs
1.	 Number of high-water users engaged and percentage 
who baseline their operations. 
2.	 Number and type of council facilities audited and 
subject to a Water Management Plan.
3.	 Water efficiency measures identified and implemented.
4.	 Lessons learned from the evaluation of existing water 
efficiency measures.
5.	 Development of a Drought Communication Strategy
6.	 Number of resources and type of collateral developed.
7.	 Media enquiries, news stories, social media hits, website 
interactions relating to the project components or 
materials developed. 
Linkages to Existing Strategies 
•	 Integrated Water Cycle Management Strategy for 
each Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter LGA: 
Designed to encourage natural environmental water 
flows and water smart development, this action falls 
neatly within the remit of this existing strategy. 
•	 Greater Hunter Regional Water Strategy: Designed to 
manage the Region’s water needs and bolster future 
water security, this action will support the reduction of 
water consumption in line with this strategy. 
•	 NSW Water Strategy 2021: Working to improve the state’s 
water security, reliability, quality, and resilience, this 
action works to build upon existing work within this space, 
thereby supporting this strategy.  
Resilience Dividend
•	 Environment – Less water used in our network means 
more water available in the rivers, dams, and streams that 
our wildlife uses to survive, and we use for recreation, 
irrigation, and other uses. 
•	 Economic – Every drop of drinking water used in our 
network must be captured, treated, and pumped which 
is a cost born by our councils and our users. For the end-
user, saving water means saving money on water bills 
and, when water is heated, the savings in electricity can 
be substantial. 
•	 Social – The act of voluntarily reducing ones’ water 
consumption, sends a powerful message to those living 
on the land, or who are reliant on rainfall, that their 
community cares and is willing to work together through 
the hardships of drought.    
Complementary Actions
Considering Social Value in the Integrating Planning 
and Reporting Framework 
Communities (including residents, businesses, and 
landowners) relying on water resources and availability are 
placed under significant stress during drought, especially 
due to reduced water allocations and water restrictions. 
Improving water conservation behaviour in non-drought 
times is usually a good strategy to reduce reliance on 
potable water during droughts, however councils have 
noted that lower water usage may adversely impact council 
revenues from reduced water service charges. Council’s 
rates are regulated by IPART, and in general, councils are 
cognisant of the impact of raising water charges through a 
request for Special Variation in rates.
Muswellbrook Shire and Singleton Councils already 
incentivise potable water conservation by residents, with 
lower rates payable for residential water consumption 
usage under 350kL each year (under 450kL/y for 
Muswellbrook and 350kL/y for Upper Hunter). This tariff 
threshold of 350kL – 450kL each year is significantly higher 
than average household usage. In 2021-22, the average 
amount of water used by households fell by 3%, from 181 to 
175kL per household.86
This Action proposes a review of the residential water usage 
tariff thresholds and a cost benefit analysis of incentivising 
water conservation measures when offset against 
opportunities to defer capital and operating expenditures 
on water supply and treatment infrastructure.
The income that councils derive from water supply charges 
are ‘ring fenced’ for use on the operational, maintenance 
and capital expenditure needs related to those services 
and activities. This action recommends the conduct of a 
Social Return on Investment (SROI) Analysis in addition to a 
Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) to estimate the social value of 
further investment in water conservation campaigns during 
non-drought periods. This can include a consideration of 
the following questions:
•	 What is the forecast revenue impact from reducing 
residential water consumption of Tier 1 water users (0 – 
350 kL/y) by approx. 175 kL/y to align with NSW average?
•	 What is the forecast savings from deferring capex and 
opex savings on water infrastructure, due to reduced 
demand for water services due to water conservation 
behaviours?
•	 What is the social value (through financial proxies) that 
can be assigned to improved community resilience, to be 
incorporated in a business case for alignment with the 
IP&R framework?
Based on the outcomes of the business case, further 
consideration should be made on expanding the water 
savings campaign across all three council areas. 
Muswellbrook Shire Council has a community awareness 
campaign that encourage water conservation, Singleton 
encourages permanent Water Wise rules and Upper Hunter 
has adopted the ‘Blue House’ program. Further investment 
in these campaigns, and introduction of such a campaign 
to the Upper Hunter LGA, combined with a three-tiered 
rate tariff will incentivise water conservation behaviours 
and reduce reliance on potable water for non-potable uses 
during drought.
Improving Water Infrastructure to Enhance Regional 
Water Security
Throughout the engagement conducted for this Plan, it 
was apparent that residents take for granted that water 
will come out of their tap when they turn it on. In the last 
drought, Murrurundi residents experienced first-hand 
the devastating impacts to daily life which arise when a 
town runs out of water. The emotional toll on families, 
businesses, and even council staff was immense. Each 
of the three councils within this Region are required to 
manage the water infrastructure within their area. This 
infrastructure is a substantial network of pipes, pumps, 
and treatment plants, which enable water to be delivered 
to homes and businesses on the reticulated network. 
Whilst rainfall is free, the infrastructure is not, and neither 
is the maintenance, which runs into the millions of dollars 
each year. Each council has an Integrated Water Cycle 
Management Plan and like strategies for water security 
and the provision of appropriate, affordable, cost-effective, 
and sustainable urban water services that meet community 
needs and protect public health and the environment. 
These documents are dynamic and are reviewed by council 
and the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the 
Environment and Water. These evidence-based strategies 
identify key upgrades, modifications, and new pieces of 
infrastructure necessary to achieve water security in 
the short, medium, and long term. It is a priority for each 
council, and an expectation of their communities, that these 
water security works come to fruition. 
Improve Awareness of Compliance Regime for Water 
Taken from the Hunter River
The overwhelming majority of people and entities within our 
Region are doing the right thing, abiding by the rules and 
regulations which govern our water resources. However, 
there is a perception that a handful may be pushing the 
boundaries, or out-right flouting the rules and stealing 
water. A recurring theme evident in the community 
engagement conducted for this Plan, was the importance 
placed on fairness. This action will seek to leverage the 
Natural Resource Access Regulator’s education and 
engagement services to assist stakeholders, including 
council staff, water users, and the general public, improve 
their understanding of water law, the compliance regime, 
and roles and responsibilities. This action will seek to modify 
the system. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
70
71

07
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) Frameworks 
ensure existing programs can be assessed for their 
effectiveness and improved. By improving our drought 
resilience program, the Region will be able to further reduce 
future impacts from drought events, apply past lessons 
learned to maximise long-term sustainability, and ensure 
adaptive management. 
To optimise effective MEL outcomes, MEL activities 
should be embedded within Council governance models 
at every stage of the RDR Plan program cycle (from initial 
implementation to close out phases). The intention of this 
RDR Plan and the proposed MEL processes allows for 
regular review and update by the PCG consortium and 
implementation partners to reflect changes. Through 
active learning and adaptive governance, best practice can 
be followed and encouraged across the Region. 
This Plan’s MEL process can be incorporated within the 
Integrated Planning and Reporting and/or Community 
Strategic Plan reporting across each Council (where 
funding and resource is available).
As a living document, this RDR Plan and MEL process will 
be reviewed and updated as drought conditions across 
the Region change, and our communities grow in their 
understanding of our drought vulnerabilities. 
ACHIEVING OUR GOALS 
The Program Logic (in Section 6.1) describes the goals and 
strategic objectives, alongside what the Plan hopes to 
achieve over the short, medium, and long term. 
MONITORING, 
EVALUATION, 
AND LEARNING.
ASSESSING OUR PROGRESS
The Future Drought Fund’s Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Framework 2020 establishes the RDRP Program’s ongoing 
commitment to strengthened drought preparedness and resilience. In ensuring the Region achieves the intended goals of the 
Program, four focus areas should be considered and guide the program’s evaluation questions, as shown below. 
OUR ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
The Project Control Group (PCG) developed during the RDR Plan development phases of this project will continue to operate as 
a reference governance structure overseeing the RDR Plan implementation and ongoing development. The PCG is responsible 
for MEL processes through this framework. Key roles and responsibilities in relation to continued MEL are outlined within 
Table 7.2. It is expected that the PCG will remain in place, reconvening as required (expected to be quarterly, with a minimum of 
one meeting per quarter). 
Table 7.1:  Evaluation Focus (based on FDF’s MEL Framework)87 
Table 7.2:  PCG Roles and Responsibilities 
Continuous monitoring, evaluation, and learning responsibilities will be shared amongst the Council consortium. During the 
implementation phase, councils will discuss and select appropriate governance arrangements for each action depending on the 
nature and coverage of the required work and management effort.
Evaluation Focus 
Key Guiding Questions
Rationale/Appropriateness 
•	 To what extent are the RDRP programs aligned with the strategic objectives 
of the Funding Plan, and targeted at important needs? 
•	 What can be done to improve the appropriateness of the RDRP investments? 
Outputs/Efficiency
•	 To what extent are the RDRP program outputs being administered and delivered 
efficiently, and to the expected quality? 
•	 What can be done to improve efficiency of the RDRP investments? 
Outcomes/Effectiveness
•	 To what extent are the RDRP programs achieving their intended short-, medium-, 
and long-term outcomes (and any unintended outcomes)? 
•	 What can be done to improve the outcomes of the RDRP investments? 
Impact 
•	 What signs of progress are there towards long-term drought resilience? 
•	 What priorities and opportunities do the programs reveal for drought resilience, 
future Funding Plans and programs?  
Participant
Description of responsibilities 
Council consortium:
Singleton Council 
Muswellbrook Shire Council 
Upper Hunter Shire Council 
•	 Singleton Council will remain as the lead council within the Region’s consortium. 
•	 Maintain monthly meetings assessing ongoing performance, steering action 
implementation, and sharing MEL outcomes.
•	 Manage and maintain budgets, timelines, and critical decision-making functions.
Department of Primary 
Industries and Regional 
Development
•	 Following closure of the RDR Plan Development phase, it is expected that DPIRD 
will continue to be consulted throughout the implementation phase. The council 
consortium will continue to share lessons learned, MEL outcomes with DPIRD and 
other regions.
Any other individuals 
selected by the PCG 
•	 The selection process of suitable individuals is to be determined by the PCG. They could 
be key implementation partners, government departments/ authorities, community 
representatives, who will provide independent feedback and expertise provided on an 
as-need basis.
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
72
73

DATA COLLECTION TOOLS 
Collecting appropriate data and information throughout the delivery of RDR Plan is critical for a robust MEL process. Building 
on existing systems and processes at each Council (through the Integrated Planning and Reporting resources), tools and 
methods listed below were suggested to aid data collection and MEL reporting (Table 7.3). During the RDRP implementation 
phase, some lessons learned will be applied to update the tool list. 
Key principles from the FDF MEL framework were used to inform the design and delivery of all MEL activities for this Plan: 
•	 Utilisation-focused 
•	 Cost-effective
•	 Fit-for-purpose
•	 Transparent and accountable 
•	 Realistic timeframes and targets 
•	 Flexible88  
It is expected that these activities will provide the PCG with a deeper understanding of the successes of the RDR Plan and what 
can be improved. This works to ensure full and informed action planning for implementation of each action can be established. 
Table 7.3:  Potential Tools
Data source/tool Description 
Collection 
frequency 
Data availability 
End of activity 
assessment
At the end of each action or project element, request 
feedback from stakeholders (such as the Upper 
Hunter Mining Dialogue) and implementation 
partners (e.g., Bindelong). 
End of project 
element or end 
of action
Continuous and 
ongoing
Information 
Management 
System
Stores and enables analysis of basic information 
on participating stakeholders and community 
group members aligning with Council’s Information 
Management Policy (e.g., Muswellbrook’s Record 
Management Policy).
Ongoing
Real-time
Media 
monitoring and 
media analytics
Capture stories that are profiled in the media (e.g., 
the 98.1 Power FM radio station, Singleton Argus, 
Hunter River Times, etc.) about regional drought 
resilience and relevant actions. Capture insights from 
social media sites (e.g.,  Council Facebook pages) 
including engagement, reach, content performance, 
reactions, and audience demographics.
Quarterly
Available for traditional 
local media e.g. print 
(e.g., Singleton Argus), 
TV (e.g., the ABC) 
and radio (e.g., 2NM). 
Engagement tools 
embedded in social 
and online media.
Community 
surveys
Online or hard copy surveys sent to stakeholders and 
communities to gather feedback on the RDR Plan 
effectiveness (distributed within local community 
hubs such as the Singleton Library, Lioness Club 
of Muswellbrook, Muswellbrook Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry, Merriwa Country Women’s 
Association). Potential to include drought resilience 
questions within existing council surveys (e.g. 
Community Strategic Plans).
Annually
Annually, one month 
after survey closes
Monitoring visits
Targeted monitoring visits to interview relevant 
stakeholders and communities to gather feedback in 
written report to support data assurance.
Every 6 months 
One month after 
monitoring visit
Case studies of 
changes
Recording case studies of changes made and 
benefits accrued as a result of actions taken from the 
implementation of the Plan.
Annually
Annually
Self-evaluation
Self-reflection on progress to date, achievements 
and lessons learned by project leads and the 
Drought Resilience Project Control Group team, and 
implementing partners.
Quarterly
Quarterly, as a 
standing agenda item 
in scheduled project 
team meetings. 
Table 7.4:  Indicators for Regular Monitoring of the RDR Plan
Vision
For Singleton, Muswellbrook Shire and Upper Hunter Shire communities, drought resilience means 
we survive the negative impacts of dry times until they pass, ensuring we have opportunities to 
adapt and prosper. Our Region is future ready and has strategies in place in advance of challenging 
times, building upon existing strategies that have proven results. Our people and businesses are 
equipped with the knowledge and tools to adapt to changing circumstances. Our community is the 
foundation of our support network through their commitment, innovation, and resourcefulness.
Our decision-making supports sustainable and healthy soil, water, and air. We approach our 
challenges in partnership, achieving strength in our unity. 
Action
ACTION A  COMPREHENSIVE DROUGHT COMMUNICATION PLAN
Inputs / 
Activities
•	 Hire contractor 
•	 Develop Drought Resilience Communications Plan
•	 Consultation Manager program review 
•	 	Build stakeholder database
Short Term 
Outcomes
(≤ 4 years)
•	 Business owners across the Region actively pursuing opportunities to adopt better financial planning, income 
diversification, and utilisation of available grants, rebates, and financial support 
•	 Enhanced coordination and collaboration among government agencies (e.g., Hunter Local Land Services, NSW 
DroughtHub), stakeholders (e.g., Upper Hunter Community Services and Rural Support Services Network), and 
communities (e.g., residents) to facilitate a cohesive and integrated approach to drought response and resilience-
building efforts 
•	 Support for community groups (e.g., Murrurundi Pony Club) resulting in delivery of social connection activities, 
reducing isolation and improving mental, physical, and spiritual wellbeing 
•	 Provision of psychosocial support services to help individuals, families, and communities cope with the stresses of 
drought 
•	 Strengthening of drought monitoring systems and early warning mechanisms to provide timely information to 
stakeholders (e.g., local farmers), enabling proactive drought response and management
Long Term 
Outcomes
(> 4 years)
•	 The Region collaborates and works collectively within partnerships to build drought resilience across three pillars: 
economic, environmental, and social resilience 
•	 Stakeholders and communities proactively share knowledge and lessons learned, taking actions that contribute 
to drought resilience 
Drought 
resilience 
benefits
•	 Increased understanding of support and services available (e.g., Upper Hunter Family Support Service) 
•	 Improved social connection 
•	 	Increased uptake of support services (e.g., Mental Health Wellbeing Clinic Singleton) 
•	 Increased event/ activity attendance 
•	 Increased financial sustainability 
•	 Increased drought resilience understanding 
•	 Increased uptake of preparedness measures 
Outputs
•	 Stakeholder database 
•	 Dedicated information portal
Goals
•	 Promote networking and collaboration among local businesses (e.g., Broke Fordwich Wine and Tourism 
Association)
•	 Support our community groups to expand their reach and realise their goals
•	 Enhance utilisation of available support services and resources
•	 Enhance connections and collaborations across community groups and support services   
•	 Improve preparedness and planning for future periods of reduced water availability
Specific 
Indicators
•	 Number of stakeholders added to database 
•	 Stakeholders reached using existing channels 
•	 Number of existing activities and events leveraged to promote drought resilience and participant numbers (e.g., 
Cassilis Rodeo)
•	 Number of social media posts, council website updates, and newsletters (e.g., the Singleton Edit) and rates 
notices distributed
•	 Number of visits to information portal 
•	 Number of downloads from information portal 
•	 Level of uptake of support and services 
Assumptions
•	 Stakeholders are willing to collaborate and share information across the Region 
•	 People wish to be connected to available information and resources 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
74
75

Action
ACTION B  FIRST NATIONS LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
Inputs / 
Activities
•	 Hire First Nations consultation subcontractor 
•	 	Conduct meaningful consultation 
•	 Map methodology for implementation 
•	 Engage potential “early adopters” 
Short Term 
Outcomes
(≤ 4 years)
•	 Maintained amenity and performance of recreational spaces and public open greenery, enabling residents to 
undertake activities which beneficially impact physical and mental wellbeing
•	 Bolstered traditional cultural caring methods implemented across the Region with improved environmental 
practices, resulting in reduced water stress during drought 
•	 Instils a sense of shared environmental responsibility and natural resource stewardship through drought 
education, providing lasting positive impacts on local natural ecosystems
Long Term 
Outcomes
(> 4 years)
•	 Stakeholders and communities proactively share knowledge and lessons learned, taking actions that contribute 
to drought resilience (e.g., Hunter Local Land Services, Hunter Region Landcare Network) 
•	 The Region collaborates and works collectively within partnerships to build drought resilience across three pillars: 
economic, environmental, and social resilience 
Drought 
resilience 
benefits
•	 Increased partnership and collaboration 
•	 Increased financial sustainability 
•	 Increased alternative land management practice 
adoption 
•	 Increased drought preparedness and resilience 
measures 
•	 Increased environmental prosperity
Outputs
•	 First Nations cultural land management activities undertaken across the Region 
•	 Collaboration between First Nations stakeholders and community members 
•	 Cross-organisational collaboration 
Goals
•	 Build the capacity of individuals and small business to take ownership of drought resilience
•	 Enhance connections and collaborations across community groups and support services (e.g., Bindelong, 
Wonnarua Nation Aboriginal Corporation)   
•	 Promote increased adoption of drought resilient and sustainable land management practices
Specific 
Indicators
•	 Percentage of First Nations entities engaged across the Region 
•	 Number of First Nations projects identified 
•	 Number of First Nations projects implemented throughout the Region
•	 Number of “early adopter” landholders engaged (e.g., local farmers)
Assumptions
•	 First Nations people are willing to engage and share knowledge 
•	 Organisations already practicing cultural land management have capacity to train and undertake further work 
•	 Community members/ stakeholders are willing to adopt suggestions 
Action
ACTION C  SUPPORTING OUR COMMUNITY GROUPS
Inputs / 
Activities
•	 Identify funding opportunities 
•	 Develop evaluation framework 
•	 Deliver grant program
Short Term 
Outcomes
(≤ 4 years)
•	 Promotional support existing for “buy local” strategies (e.g., ‘We LIVE Here’ local investment cards) that increase 
and sustain local businesses
•	 Enhanced coordination and collaboration among government agencies, stakeholders, and communities (e.g., 
Mens Shed, Lions Club of Muswellbrook) to facilitate a cohesive and integrated approach to drought response 
and resilience-building efforts 
•	 Support for community groups resulting in delivery of social connection activities, reducing isolation and 
improving mental, physical, and spiritual wellbeing 
•	 Improved collaboration and support, with mutual resource sharing, increasing community social cohesion and 
uptake/awareness of available services and initiatives run throughout the Region 
•	 Provision of psychosocial support services (e.g., Upper Hunter Youth Services) to help individuals, families, and 
communities cope with the stresses of drought
Long Term 
Outcomes
(> 4 years)
•	 There is a common understanding and a shared 
vision in the Region managing drought risks and build 
community drought resilience 
•	 The Region collaborates and works collectively within 
partnerships to build drought resilience across three 
pillars: economic, environmental, and social resilience 
•	 Measures are implemented to limit impacts of 
drought and better coordinate and respond to 
drought events and incidents
•	 Stakeholders and communities proactively share 
knowledge and lessons learned, taking actions that 
contribute to drought resilience
Drought 
resilience 
benefits
•	 Strengthened community connection and access to information 
•	 Connected community capable of drawing on its wealth of knowledge and abilities in improving drought 
preparedness and reduced financial impacts 
Outputs
•	 Grant writing toolkit 
•	 Grant program
Goals
•	 Leverage changes in our Region to diversify our economy and employment opportunities
•	 Promote networking and collaboration among local businesses
•	 Build the capacity of individuals and small business to take ownership of drought resilience. 
•	 Promote mental and physical wellbeing across all generations
•	 Support our community groups to expand their reach and realise their goals
Specific 
Indicators
•	 Number of applications received 
•	 Number and diversity of recipients
•	 Demographics of residents supported by the 
recipient groups 
•	 Value of in-kind contributions generated
•	 Levels of volunteering
Assumptions
•	 Community willingness to collaborate 
•	 Community can do lots with limited funding
Action
ACTION D  ENSURING ECONOMIC PROSPERITY AS OUR 
REGION TRANSITIONS 
Inputs / 
Activities
•	 Stakeholder mapping 
•	 Future scenario planning around key and emerging 
industries  
•	 Mapped water demand impact 
•	 Existing policy review 
•	 Community and stakeholder engagement
Short Term 
Outcomes
(≤ 4 years)
•	 Thriving, supported businesses with minimal impacts from economic shocks or disruptions with minimal losses 
or sudden layoffs 
•	 Reduced widespread unemployment and associated social and economic impacts 
•	 Business owners actively pursuing opportunities to adopt better financial planning, income diversification, and 
utilisation of available grants, rebates, and financial support 
Long Term 
Outcomes
(> 4 years)
•	 A diversified local economy
•	 The Region collaborates and works collectively within partnerships (e.g., like the Scone Chamber of Commerce) 
to build drought resilience across three pillars: economic, environmental, and social resilience 
Drought 
resilience 
benefits
•	 A diverse economy with substantial water-independent industries providing a financial buffer for residents and 
businesses during drought conditions 
•	 Low unemployment, job opportunity diversity (for a range of skill levels), enabling community confidence, 
particularly around the Region’s liveability 
Outputs
•	 Identified transition opportunities attracting new 
industries (like the Hunter Energy Hub at the retired 
Liddell Power Station) 
•	 Next steps recommendations on partnerships, 
networks, and advocacy to further the Region’s 
transition planning objectives
Goals
•	 Diversify our farm enterprises and identify new agricultural opportunities
•	 Leverage changes in our Region to diversify our economy and employment opportunities
•	 Promote networking and collaboration among local businesses
•	 Build the capacity of individuals and small business to take ownership of drought resilience
Specific 
Indicators
•	 Engagement activities conducted
•	 Potential changes in industries and employment 
mapped
•	 Agricultural skill needs assessment completed
•	 Water demand implications assessed
•	 Strategic partnerships developed 
•	 Recommendations adopted
Assumptions
•	 Ongoing economic prosperity of the mineral extraction industry 
•	 Community desire to utilise coal mining funding 
•	 Willing support from community to transition to alternative industries 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
76
77

Action
ACTION E  FORWARD PLANNING AND HELPING OUR WATER USERS 
PREPARE FOR DRY TIMES
Inputs / 
Activities
•	 Technology analysis relating to water 
consumption data 
•	 Multi-criteria analysis and evaluation
•	 Water meter recommendations 
•	 Template Water Efficiency Management Plans 
•	 Council asset audits 
•	 Develop messaging and update existing 
communication resources relating to drought 
emergency response measures
Short Term 
Outcomes
(≤ 4 years)
•	 Maintained amenity and performance of recreational spaces and public open greenery, enabling residents to 
undertake activities which beneficially impact physical and mental wellbeing
•	 Improved water efficiency with reduced reliance on non-potable and potable water supplies from the Region’s 
water storage dams and aquifers 
•	 Improved water management practices helping to ensure community water supplies are reliable and accessible 
during water shortage periods, therefore enhancing public health and wellbeing 
•	 Instils a sense of shared environmental responsibility and natural resource stewardship through drought 
education, providing lasting positive impacts on local natural ecosystems
•	 Implementation of short-term water conservation measures such as restrictions on non-essential water usage, 
promoting efficient irrigation techniques, and repairing leakages to preserve water resources 
•	 Strengthening of drought monitoring systems and early warning mechanisms to provide timely information to 
stakeholders (e.g., local farmers), enabling proactive drought response and management
Long Term 
Outcomes
(> 4 years)
•	 There is a common understanding and a shared vision in the Region managing drought risks and build community 
drought resilience 
•	 The Region collaborates and works collectively within partnerships to build drought resilience across three pillars: 
economic, environmental, and social resilience 
Drought 
resilience 
benefits
•	 Less water utilised across the network meaning 
increased water availability for our natural systems 
•	 Water saving (and therefore monetary savings) 
•	 Collective efforts to reduce water consumption 
showing communal care for those living through the 
hardships of drought
Outputs
•	 Social value considered within the IP&R Framework 
•	 Improved water infrastructure 
•	 Improved Hunter River Water Regime Compliance 
•	 Drought Communication Strategy 
•	 Water Management Plans developed for councils’ 
highest water using assets 
•	 Established water consumption baselines 
•	 Granular water consumption data
Goals
•	 Ensure efficient water management especially in times of drought
•	 Promote increased adoption of drought resilient and sustainable land management practices
•	 Improve preparedness and planning for future periods of reduced water availability
Specific 
Indicators
•	 Number of high-water users engaged and percentage who baseline their operations 
•	 Number and type of council facilities audited and subject to a Water Management Plan
•	 Water efficiency measures identified and implemented
•	 Lessons learned from the evaluation of existing water efficiency measures
•	 Development of a Drought Communication Strategy
•	 Number of resources and type of collateral developed
•	 Media enquiries, news stories, social media hits, website interactions relating to the project components or 
materials developed 
Assumptions
•	 Stakeholder willingness to reduce water consumption
•	 Funding availability 
•	 Efficacy of existing drought related resources 
•	 Water consumption data and availability for baselining exercise 
REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY OBLIGATIONS 
Delivery of MEL processes for this RDR Plan will be informed by and aligned with the councils respective Integrated Planning 
and Reporting (IPR) Framework. Data will be collected during implementation of the RDR Plan, ensuring data collection is 
interwoven within PCG planning and review meetings to enable adaptive learning. Drought resilience will be canvassed as part 
of the Community Strategic Plans (CSPs) context. For example, drought resilience can be canvassed within the community 
engagement conducted for the development of the CSPs, and actions identified for the CSPs can be cross mapped for their 
alignment with drought resilience objectives. Incorporation of knowledge gained throughout implementation could be made 
with via the annual report, with mid-term progressions and end of progress tracked to maximise MEL processes. Recognising 
the differing maturity levels across councils, this may look different across each council within the PCG. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
78
79

RISKS IN EFFECTIVELY DELIVERING OUR MEL 
FRAMEWORK AND RDR PLAN 
The following risks have been identified as possible barriers to effective implementation of the Plan, based on key risks from the 
Future Drought Fund MEL framework for the RDR Plan in consultation with stakeholder input during the engagement program. 
Suggested risk mitigation measures will be dependent on Council resources and funding availability. 
Table 7.5:  Risks to Our RDR Plan Delivery
Risk 
Risk 
Rating Suggested Mitigating Measures 
Lack of resources, capability, 
appropriate government 
mechanisms to coordinate 
strategic planning activities 
and insufficient funding to 
implement planned actions 
High 
•	 Lobby government for ongoing seed funding 
•	 Develop long-term financial plans to ensure sustainable funding for planned 
actions
•	 Explore options for alternative funding sources such as grants 
Insufficient capacity of 
regional stakeholders to 
actively participate in the 
Plan
High
•	 Canvas potential action owners and ensure selected participants are aware 
of the project burdens (e.g., First Nations locals responsible for Action B – 
First Nations Land Management Practices) 
•	 Provide resources and funding where possible to support ongoing buy-in 
and support 
Insufficient feedback to 
community 
Medium 
•	 Develop annual MEL report to improve transparency of the RDRP program 
•	 Utilise existing communication channels (digital platforms such as council 
websites, mobile apps, social media, regular newsletters, community 
meetings) to provide forums for discussion and timely, transparent updates 
on council activities and decisions 
•	 Develop and utilise structured feedback mechanisms such as community 
surveys 
Actions identified by 
community within this Plan 
are insufficient in making 
positive drought resilience 
changes across the Region 
Medium 
•	 Implement MEL processes to proactively manage and adjust priority 
actions under the program to ensure actions are continually tailored to the 
needs of the Region 
•	 Continually update and conduct a detailed needs assessment to understand 
specific vulnerabilities and strengths of the Region (the Resilience 
Assessment) 
•	 Ensure actions are evidence-based, backed up by best practice and proven 
strategies that work within other Regions with similar challenges 
•	 Prioritise inter-regional collaboration to share knowledge, resources, and 
best practice 
There are insufficient 
learnings to inform future 
program design and 
implementation 
Medium 
•	 Establish clear objectives (following the SMART technique, specific, 
measurable, achievable, relevant, time-bound) for the RDR Plan and MEL 
framework 
•	 Measure identified KPIs aligning with each key priority action and track 
progress to measure success 
•	 Ensure sufficient regular data collection is gathered throughout the Plan’s 
implementation phase 
•	 Foster a culture of continued learning, utilise technology where possible, 
engage stakeholders, implement pilot programs, and document/report 
program activities, outcomes, and lessons learned 
PCG members are unable 
to agree on, or successfully 
implement lessons learned 
from MEL
Medium 
•	 The MEL framework articulates the governance responsibilities of each PCG 
member as part of this program. Regular monitoring and lessons learned 
is agreed to as part of membership to the RDRP program. Using agreed 
program-level MEL indicators aligned to the Region will ensure members 
are in the best position to agree on and implement MEL lessons learned
Risk 
Risk 
Rating Suggested Mitigating Measures 
Data used within the MEL 
process is unavailable (either 
does not exist, is restricted, 
or is not available within a 
timely manner) 
Data is of poor quality or is 
untrustworthy 
Medium
•	 High-level indicators have been selected based on their existence, ensuring 
data can be regularly monitored over the long-term. KPIs have also been 
elected based on this principle 
•	 Appropriate oversight from the PCG and FDF will maintain oversight of 
regular reporting made. High-level indicators have been selected and should 
be collected using standard methods of sufficient sample sizes 
Insufficient regional 
stakeholders are willing to 
cooperate with each other on 
drought regional resilience 
planning issues
Low
•	 Provide workshops and training to educate community on the Plan and 
ways to get involved (e.g., RDR Plan launch events) 
•	 Encourage community members to participate, with appropriate follow-up 
via stakeholder databases developed/maintained across the Region 
•	 Regularly update community on wins gained under the RDR Plan 
Program design is insufficient 
to give regional stakeholders 
opportunities to identify 
and communicate regional 
drought resilience needs
Low 
•	 Implement appropriate MEL processes such as community surveys, 
monitor media outputs and feedback received by stakeholders to 
proactively encourage community buy-in
Program fails to align with 
other relevant strategic plans 
across the Region 
Low 
•	 Implement appropriate MEL processes to ensure integration across each 
council (recommended within CSPs and IP&R Frameworks at a minimum)
Regional communities 
are not motivated to take 
ownership of completed 
Plans nor actively seek to 
implement them 
Low
•	 Provide workshops and training to educate community on the Plan and 
ways to get involved 
•	 Encourage community members to participate, with appropriate follow-up 
•	 Regularly update community on wins gained under the RDR Plan
Stakeholders and community 
are unwilling to share lessons 
learned with other regions 
Low 
•	 Regularly engage with the community to build trust and demonstrate the 
benefits of knowledge sharing 
•	 Be transparent around how shared lessons will be used positively to impact 
other regions 
•	 Share success stories from other regions that have benefited from shared 
lessons to illustrate tangible benefits 
•	 Develop and/or utilise user-friendly platforms (such as online portals, radio 
etc) to share lessons learned 
Insufficient opportunities 
for the Region to implement 
elements of the Plan 
Low 
•	 Ensure regular PCG meetings to identify stakeholders and regional 
collaborations allowing for resource and knowledge sharing 
•	 Regularly review Plan progressions and ensure inclusive participation is 
encouraged across the Region 
Region fails to continue 
to review, update, and 
implement its Plan
Low 
•	 Regular MEL meetings conducted by PCG members to ensure 
accountability and momentum gained during the RDRP process is 
maintained
These risks will be continually reviewed and updated during the implementation phase to reflect changes and identify further 
intervening measures to reduce residual risks to the RDRP program delivery. Risk ratings are defined below: 
High: High probability of occurring with significant negative impacts to the RDRP program delivery. 
Medium: Moderate probability of occurring with noticeable (though manageable) impact to the RDRP program delivery.  
Low: Low probability of occurring with minimal impact to the RDRP program delivery. 
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
80
81

REFERENCES
1	
Bene, C., Wood, R.G., Newsham, A. & Davies, M. 2012. Resilience: new utopia or new tyranny? Reflection about the potentials and limits of 
the concept of resilience in relation to vulnerability reduction programmes. IDS Working Paper, 405(006), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1111/j.2040-0209.2012.00405.x. 
2	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/
november/future-disaster-resilience>
3	
Brunner, R. & Lynch, A. 2017. Adaptive Governance. Climate Science. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.601
4	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2023. Understanding Drought. Australian Government. Accessed 22 Feb 2024.  <http://www.bom.gov.au/
climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.shtml>.
5	
IPCC. 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Accessed 22 Feb 2024.  <https://report.ipcc.ch/ar6/wg2/
IPCC_AR6_WGII_FullReport.pdf>.
6	
The Climate Reality Project. N.d. Climate 101: Feedback Loops & Tipping Points. Accessed 4 Apr 2024. <https://www.
climaterealityproject.org/sites/default/files/climate-101-tipping-points-and-feedback-loops-factsheet.pdf>.
7	
CSIRO. 2021. Facing the Future of Disaster Resilience. Accessed 21 May 2024. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2021/
november/future-disaster-resilience>
8	
Maru YT, Sparrow A, Butler JRA, Banerjee O, Ison R, Hall A, Carberry P. 2018. Towards appropriate mainstreaming of “theory of change” 
approaches into agricultural research for development: challenges and opportunities. Agriculture Systems, 165:344-353.
9	
Cook, B. et al. 2022. Megadroughts in the Common Era and the Anthropocene. Nature Reviews Earth and Environment, 3: 741-757.
10	
Stockholm Resilience Centre. 2023. Planetary Boundaries. Stockholm University. Accessed 4 Mar 2024. <https://www.
stockholmresilience.org/research/planetary-boundaries.html>.
11	
Walker, B., Holling, C., Carpenter, S. R. & Kinzig, A. 2004.  Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–ecological systems. 
Ecology and Society, 9(2): 5.
12	
Resilient Sydney. 2018. Resilient Sydney: A Strategy For City Resilience. City of Sydney. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.
cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au/-/media/corporate/files/2020-07-migrated/files_r/resilient-sydney-a-strategy-for-city- resilience-2018.
pdf?download=true>.
13	
Folke, C. et al. 2010. Resilience thinking: integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society, 15(4): 20. 
14	
Taylor, C.M. et al. 2017. Frequency of extreme Sahelian storms tripled since 1982 in satellite observations. Nature, 544: 475-478.
15	
NOAA. N.d. Frequently Asked Question (FAQ) Sheet for the Value Added Table. Accessed 22 May 2024. <https://www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/
st1/fus/FAQ_value_added.pdf>.
16	
Fleming-Munoz, D.A., Whitten, S. & Bonnett, G.D. 2023. The economics of drought: a review of impacts and costs. The Australian Journal 
of Agricultural and Resource Economics, https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8489.12527.
17	
National Farmers Federation. 2023. National Farmer Wellbeing Report 2023. Norco Foods. Accessed 8 Mar 2024. <https://norcofoods.
com.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/1212_Farmer-wellbeing-report_Navigation_FINAL.pdf?x64161>.
18	
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 2020. Future Drought Fund Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework. 
Australian Government. <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>.
19	
Future Drought Fund Farm Business Resilience – Program Framework (Appendix A), March 2021.
20	
Upper Hunter Region. 2024. About Up. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://upperhunterregion.com.au/about>. 
21	
Singleton Council. 2024. LGA Information. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.singleton.nsw.gov.au/Business/Doing-Business-in-
Singleton/LGA-information>.
22	
Miller, J. (1986). Koori: A Will To Win. Angus & Robertson Publishers.
23	
Data.NSW. 2020. Singleton Shire Council. NSW Government. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://data.nsw.gov.au/data/organization/about/
singleton-shire-council#:~:text=northwest%20of%20Newcastle.-,It%20is%20of%20area%204892.8%20sq,home%20to%20over%20
24%2C070%20people.>.
24	
Your Council. 2022. Muswellbrook. NSW Government. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.yourcouncil.nsw.gov.au/council-data/
muswellbrook-1696393585/>.
25	
Your Council. 2022. Upper Hunter. NSW Government. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.yourcouncil.nsw.gov.au/council-data/upper-
hunter-1696393585/>.
26	
Singleton Council. 2024. Singleton LGA Growth Infrastructure and Facilities. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.singleton.nsw.
gov.au/Development/Strategic-Planning/Land-Use-and-Development-Plans/Local-Strategic-Planning/Singleton-LGA-Growth-
Infrastructure-and-Facilities>.
27	
PHN. 2021. Muswellbrook LGA. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://hneccphn.imgix.net/assets/src/uploads/images/Muswellbrook-LGA-
Profile-2021_2021-10-05-000602_ugwp.pdf>.
28	
Primary Health Network. 2021. Upper Hunter Shire LGA. Accessed 27 Feb 2024. <https://hneccphn.imgix.net/assets/src/uploads/
images/Upper-Hunter-Shire-LGA-Profile-2021_2021-10-05-000636_lubp.pdf>.
29	
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2022. Singleton 2021 Census All Persons QuickStats. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.abs.gov.au/
census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA17000>; Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2022. Muswellbrook 2021 Census All Persons 
QuickStats. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.abs.gov.au/census/find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA15650>; Australian Bureau 
of Statistics. 2022. Upper Hunter Shire 2021 Census All Persons QuickStats. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.abs.gov.au/census/
find-census-data/quickstats/2021/LGA15650>.
30	
Sheather, M. 2019. Hunter Valley Farmer Takes on Mining Company – and Wins. NSW Farmers. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://www.
nswfarmers.org.au/NSWFA/NSWFA/Posts/The_Farmer/Environment/Hunter_Valley_farmer_takes_on_mining_company_and_wins.
aspx>.
31	
NSW Department of Industry. 2018. Greater Hunter Regional Water Strategy – Securing the future water needs of the Hunter, Central 
Coast and Mid-Coast areas. <https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/502557/greater-hunter-regional-water-
strategy.pdf>
32	
NSW Parliament. 2021. Briefing paper: Transitioning communities dependent on coal mining in NSW, Briefing Paper No 1/2021. 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/researchpapers/Documents/Transitioning%20Communities%20Dependent%20on%20Coal%20
Mining%20in%20NSW.pdf>
33	
REMPLAN. 2024. Economy, Jobs and Business Insights. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. <https://app.remplan.com.au/muswellbrook/economy/
tourism/output?state=VxVBSE!5xRjSlPy4Ijbq3wSzWXWGUXFxhpL1HenJnPI8NLNyhOhLBSjhDSpv4AcrZL>; REMPLAN. 2024. 
Economy, Jobs and Business Insights. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. <https://app.remplan.com.au/upperhunter/economy/tourism/output?
state=jm6MTq!jm6MTPNY2H0GLpDcbGw43ckFPhmDjcKL8Ljsa7m71hnhl8TVhWSyGd6FGjr>; REMPLAN. 2024. Economy, Jobs and 
Business Insights. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. <https://app.remplan.com.au/singleton/economy/tourism/output?state=Vyorc0!WYxzi9xgMu
4aNjLUlRM0ltKFnf74qidRrRaUvxJxdfAfVnhVfKI90aPTMob>.
34	
REMPLAN. 2024. Economy, Jobs and Business Insights. Accessed 22 Feb 2024. <https://app.remplan.com.au/upperhunter/economy/
industries/wages-salaries?state=p4QaFG!z4pYFyLbzSlJgZ1fRYbLxS0F1hVneUQ3Y39hW6J6juvhZXIyhRSWW50U2xz>.
35	
REMPLAN. 2024. Our Place – Our Community. Muswellbrook Shire Council. Accessed 22 May 2024. <https://app.remplan.com.au/
muswellbrook/community/summary?state=pxoBFAk2RTL1je2ta6qnN4ipt8t4kn>.
36	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2022. Understanding Drought.  <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/drought/knowledge-centre/understanding.
shtml>.
37	
Falster, G., Abram, N. & Wright, N. 2024. A 20-Year ‘Mega-Drought’ in Australia? Research Suggests it’s Happened Before – and we 
Should Expect it Again. Australian National University. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. <https://iceds.anu.edu.au/news-events/news/20-year-
%E2%80%98mega-drought%E2%80%99-australia-research-suggests-it%E2%80%99s-happened-%E2%80%93-and-we-should>.
38	
Edwards, B., Gray, M. & Hunter, B. 2018. The social and economic impacts of drought. Centre for Social Research & Methods. Accessed 16 
Apr 2024. <https://csrm.cass.anu.edu.au/sites/default/files/docs/2018/12/CSRM_WP5_2018_DROUGHT_2.pdf>.
39	
Bureau of Meteorology. 2024. Previous Droughts. Australian Government. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/
drought/knowledge-centre/previous-droughts.shtml>.
40	
Australian Institute for Disaster Resilience. N.d. Eastern Australia, 1937 Environment – Drought. Australian Disaster Resilience Knowledge 
Hub. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://knowledge.aidr.org.au/resources/environment-drought-eastern-australia/>.
41	
Trove. 1940. Hunter Valley Drought. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/17694560>.
42	
AdaptNSW. 2024. Climate Change Impacts on Drought. NSW Government. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.climatechange.
environment.nsw.gov.au/impacts-climate-change/weather-and-oceans/drought>.
43	
Sherval, M. & Greenwood, A. 2012. ‘Drought-proofing’ regional Australia and the rhetoric surrounding Tillegra Dam, NSW. Australian 
Geographer, 43(3): 253-271. 
44	
Hornery, S. 2011. 1163 – Tillegra Dam. Parliament of New South Wales. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/la/
papers/Pages/qanda-tracking-details.aspx?pk=21028>.
45	
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development. 2023. Hunter Regional Economic Development Strategy – 2023 Update. 
NSW Government. Accessed 27 Feb 2024. <https://www.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/Hunter-REDS-2023-Update.pdf>.
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
82
83

46	
NSW Department of Primary Industries and Environment. 2024. The 2017-20 Drought. NSW Government. Accessed 23 Feb 2024. 
<https://water.dpie.nsw.gov.au/allocations-availability/drought-and-floods/drought-recovery/2017-20-drought>.
47	
NSW Department of Primary Industries. 2024. Combined Drought Indicator. NSW Government. Accessed 23 Feb 2024. <https://edis.dpi.
nsw.gov.au/>.
48	
ABC News. 2103, 20 February. Dry spell prompts water-use spike. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-02-20/singleton-water-
use/4529308>
49	
Kelly, M. 2020. Water Pressure: The Endless Drought has Brought Murrurundi’s Residents to the Brink Physically and Mentally. 
Newcastle Herald. Accessed 23 February 2024. <https://www.newcastleherald.com.au/story/6282187/the-nsw-town-living-without-
water/>.
50	
Lapham, J. 2021, 28 October. Murrundi’s new reservoir secures water for future droughts. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-10-28/
after-drought-murrurundi-hopes-reservoir-secure-water-future/100575012>
51	
Connell, C. 2020. Murrurundi’s Taps Turned on in Drought-Ravaged Town Living for Years on Restrictions. ABC Upper Hunter. Accessed 
26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-05-29/murrurundi-taps-turned-on-in-town-with-highest-restrictions/12298474>.
52	
ABC News. 2019, 5 August. Drought-hit town of Murrurundi has three months of water left. What happens then? <https://www.abc.net.
au/news/rural/2018-08-05/the-town-about-to-run-out-of-water/10073762>
53	
ABC News. 2006, 3 May. Dry conditions take their toll in NSW. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2006-05-03/dry-conditions-take-their-
toll-in-nsw/1744750>
54	
ABC News. 2007, 12 June. Flood deals blow to drought-stricken farmers. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/search?query=drought%20
singleton>
55	
Notzon, N. 2018, 18 December. Animal welfare groups protest planned NSW brumby cull. <https://www.abc.net.au/listen/programs/
worldtoday/animal-welfare-groups-protest-planned-nsw-brumby-cull/10630826>
56	
https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/471024/Upper-hunter-region-agricultural-profile.pdf
57	
https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/471028/hay-hemp-profile-upper-hunter-region.pdf
58	
ABC News. 2013. Predicted Rain Welcomed by Farmers. ABC News. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-05-23/
predicted-rain-welcomed-by-farmers/4707748>.
59	
Connell, C. 2020. Murrurundi’s Taps Turned on in Drought-Ravaged Town Living for Years on Restrictions. ABC Upper Hunter. Accessed 
26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-05-29/murrurundi-taps-turned-on-in-town-with-highest-restrictions/12298474>.
60	
NSW Department of Industry. 2018. Greater Hunter Regional Water Strategy – Securing the future water needs of the Hunter, Central 
Coast and Mid-Coast areas. <https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/502557/greater-hunter-regional-water-
strategy.pdf>
61	
Spencer, E. 2023. NSW Households Urged to Reduced Water Use Before State Dips into Drought. The Guardian. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/nov/08/sydney-water-drought-warning-summer-water-restrictions>.
62	
Bernasconi, A. 2023. Hunter Valley, North West Cattle Farmers Consider Destocking as Drought Returns. ABC Rural News. 
Accessed 23 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2023-08-10/drought-conditions-in-hunter-valley-sees-farmers-
destocking/102702548>.
63	
ABC News. 2014. Upper Hunter and Liverpool Plains Drought Assistance. ABC News. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/
news/rural/programs/nsw-country-hour/2014-02-19/upper-hunter-and-liverpool-plains-drought-19-02-14/5269866>.
64	
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 2024. Deaths by suicide, Australia. < https://maps.arcgis.aihw.gov.au/portal/apps/
experiencebuilder/experience/?data_id=dataSource_10-18b35b9e8e8-layer-26-18b35b9ab66-layer-23%3A111&id=47b5b317d1074ad09d9
3e861a6ebfb55&page=Main&views=LayersTab>
65	
CSIRO. 2023. Understand the True Cost of Drought. Accessed 27 Feb 2024. <https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/articles/2023/july/cost-
of-drought>.
66	
ABC News. 2013. Dry Spell Prompts Water-Use Spike. ABC News. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-02-20/
singleton-water-use/4529308>.
67	
ABC News. 2014. Rain Eases Drought Pain. ABC News. Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-02-20/rain-eases-
drought-pain/5271308>.
68	
Williams, L. & Condon, M. 2023. Upper Hunter Farmers Hold Out for Rain as Dry Weather Takes Effect in NSW. ABC Rural News. 
Accessed 26 Feb 2024. <https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2023-06-09/upper-hunter-nsw-farmers-drought-concerns-dry-
weather/102454740>.
69	
Australian Government. 2019. Water Storage in the Hunter River Basin <https://www.bioregionalassessments.gov.au/assessments/15-
current-water-accounts-and-water-quality-hunter-subregion/15111-water-storage-hunter-river-basin>
70	
ABC News. 2018, 24 August. Local business boost initiative surpasses $1 million in the Upper Hunter. <https://www.abc.net.au/listen/
programs/upperhunter-breakfast/we-live-here-gift-card-milestone-upper-hunter-muswellbrook/101366308>
71	
Kelly, M. 2020. Water Pressure: The Endless Drought has Brought Murrurundi’s Residents to the Brink Physically and Mentally. 
Newcastle Herald. Accessed 23 February 2024. <https://www.newcastleherald.com.au/story/6282187/the-nsw-town-living-without-
water/>.
72	
ABC News. 2018. 29 July. Sheep line up for a feed in the shape of Australia at Cassilis property Dalkeith Olde. <https://www.abc.net.au/
news/2018-07-29/dalkeith-olde/10033966>
73	
Dowdy, A. et al. 2015, East Coast Cluster Report, Climate Change in Australia Projections for Australia’s Natural Resource Management 
Regions: Cluster Reports, eds. Ekström, M. et al., CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology, Australia.< https://www.climatechangeinaustralia.
gov.au/media/ccia/2.2/cms_page_media/168/EAST_COAST_CLUSTER_REPORT_2021updated.pdf>
74	
CSIRO & BoM. 2024. Past and Future Climate Detail. My Climate View. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. <https://myclimateview.com.au/climate-
data?commodity=Temperate%20Dairy&climateRisk=dairy-thi>.
75	
CSIRO & BoM. 2024. Past and Future Climate Detail. My Climate View. Accessed 22 Apr 2024. <https://myclimateview.com.au/climate-
data?commodity=Temperate%20Dairy&climateRisk=dairy-thi>.
76	
Papari, J., Sharples, J., & Perkins-Kilkpatrick, S. 2021, 29 January. How heatwaves and drought combine to produce the perfect firestorm. 
University of New South Wales. <https://www.unsw.edu.au/newsroom/news/2021/01/how-heatwaves-and-drought-combine-to-
produce-the-perfect-firesto>
77	
Fernandes, G. 2021. Draft Integrated Water Cycle Management Strategy. Singleton Council. Accessed 16 Apr 2024. <https://portal.
singleton.nsw.gov.au/RedDocServ24/default.aspx?DocID=3wubYthUwjg%3D>
78	
NSW Department of Industry. 2018. Greater Hunter Regional Water Strategy – Securing the future water needs of the Hunter, Central 
Coast and Mid-Coast areas. <https://www.dpie.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/502557/greater-hunter-regional-water-
strategy.pdf>
79	
Lock the Gate. 2014. Unfair Shares: How Coal Mines Bought the Hunter River. Accessed 5 Marc 2024. <https://www.lockthegate.org.au/
unfair_shares#:~:text=Water%20use%20and%20ownership,from%20various%20Hunter%20Valley%20sources.>.
80	
Brown, A. & Giannini, D. 2024. ‘Tilted Playing Field’ For Farmers Against Supermarkets. Hunter Valley News. Accessed 17 Apr 2024. 
<https://www.huntervalleynews.net.au/story/8547205/tilted-playing-field-for-farmers-against-supermarkets/>.
81	
National Farmers Federation. 2023. National Farmer Wellbeing Report 2023. Norco Foods. Accessed 8 Mar 2024. <https://norcofoods.
com.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/1212_Farmer-wellbeing-report_Navigation_FINAL.pdf?x64161>.
82	
St Hilliers. 2019. Singleton Building Refurb  & Maintenance, NSW. Accessed 5 Mar 2024. <https://sthilliers.com.au/current-projects/
singleton-building-refurb-maintenance/>.
83	
Singleton Council. 2024. Agriculture Opportunities. Accessed 28 Feb 2024. <https://www.singleton.nsw.gov.au/Business/Economic-
Development/Agriculture-Opportunities>.
84	
Day, S. 2019. Drought in Australia. Australian Government. Accessed 29 Feb 2024. 
85	
Australian Red Cross. 2012. Relationships matter: the application of social capital to disaster resilience. < https://www.redcross.org.au/
globalassets/cms-assets/documents/emergency-services/12-011-red-roundtable-report_v3-f-web.pdf>
86	
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2023. Water Account Australia. Accessed 7 May 2024. <https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/environment/
environmental-management/water-account-australia/latest-release#key-statistics>.
87	
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 2020. Future Drought Fund Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework. 
Australian Government. <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>.
88	
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment. 2020. Future Drought Fund Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning Framework. 
Australian Government. <https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/mel-framework.pdf>.
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
Singleton, Muswellbrook, and Upper Hunter Regional Drought Resilience Plan
84
85

Jointly funded by the Australian Government and the NSW Government under the Future Drought Fund
Supported by