You must be approved to produce your products domestically by your state regulatory authority before you can apply for export registration. They must approve you even if you’re only planning to produce products for export. Exemptions to this may be possible, contact your local State Food Authority.
Step by step guide to become export registered
Follow these steps to become export registered.
Step 1: Engage export facilitator
Engage with our Export Facilitator for support to become export registered.
Step 2: Submit application form
Complete and submit the EX26A registration application form online.
Step 3: Pay fees
You’ll need to pay the application fee even if you cancel your application. We’ll send an invoice to the address you gave in your application.
Step 4: Prepare your documents
You’ll need to prepare:
- a copy of your completed Approved Arrangement checklist
- a copy of your registration certificate from your state regulatory authority. You can include a copy of your last audit report
- details of the products you intend to produce for export
- a list of the countries you want to export to
- proof of payment of your application fee.
Step 5: Email your documents
Email your documents to us at dairyeggsfish@aff.gov.au.
Step 6: Review
We’ll review your application and contact you to discuss.
Step 7: Audit
We’ll arrange an audit of your proposed arrangement. Our audit team will visit your site to verify your systems and compliance. You may need to address any deficiencies identified at your audit and could require follow-up audits.
You may need to wait several weeks before we can confirm an audit date. Contact your Export Facilitator to help manage your planning.
Step 8: We issue registration certificate
If you’ve met all our requirements, we’ll issue your registration certificate.
Your certificate will show the types of operation that your establishment is registered for.
Step 9: Maintain your registration
Once you’re registered, annual registration fees apply.
For further information, you can refer to section 5.2 of Cost recovery implementation statement: dairy exports 2021
If you have questions that are not answered here, we’d love to hear from you. Contact us and we’ll be in touch.