Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Fresh beef and beef products are classified as risk food
This includes fresh raw (chilled or frozen) beef and beef products:
carcasses
whole muscle meat and bone-in cuts
ground (minced beef) and trim for grinding
offal
You can only import fresh raw beef and beef products that originate in a country:
with a satisfactory BSE risk status
covered by a recognised foreign government certificate.
Beef offal is not permitted to be imported due to biosecurity restrictions. Refer to BICON to review the
biosecurity import conditions.
Certification arrangements
Fresh raw (chilled or frozen) beef and beef products can only be imported from countries listed here.
Type of information To include
National competent
authority:
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Recognised certificate
title:
Veterinary certificate for meat products and by products derived from cattle of
all ages exported from Canada to Australia
ICS document code:
BSECERTCAN
Type of information
To include
National competent authority: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Recognised certificate title:
Export quarantine certificate for Beef from Japan to Australia
ICS document code:
BSECERTJPR
Type of information
To include
National competent authority: United States Department of Agriculture
Recognised certificate title:
Certificate for the Export of Fresh (Chilled or Frozen) 
Bovine Meat and Bovine Meat Products to Australia
ICS document code:
BSECERTUSA
Declaring certificates
When lodging a Full Import Declaration (FID), you must declare your certificate in the Integrated
Cargo System (ICS) by lodging the correct ICS document code and certificate number for the food.
See lodging declarations and documentation.
Community Protection (CP) question
You will need to answer this CP question when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: Are the goods raw minced/ground beef or raw beef intended for mincing/grinding (answer yes if
the goods are raw beef patties or burgers)?
Testing and inspection
We refer consignments of fresh raw (chilled or frozen) beef and beef products for analytical testing at
the rate of 5%. During inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment.
Table 1 shows the tests that will be applied and permitted results for each food type.
Table 1, Food type, test applied and permitted results
Food type
Test applied
Permitted result
Fresh raw (chilled or
frozen) beef
Escherichia coli
n=5, c=3, m=10, M=100 cfu/
g
Meat antimicrobial screen
Refer to meat and edible offal
Fresh raw (chilled or
frozen) beef
Escherichia coli
n=5, c=3, m=100, M=1000
cfu/g
Salmonella spp.

n=5, c=0, m=not detected in
25 g
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC)
Includes STEC O26, O45, O103, O111, O121,
O145, O157
n=15, c=0, m=not detected in
375 g
Meat antimicrobial screen
Refer to meat and edible offal
n = the number of samples to be analysed from a lot of food.
c = the maximum allowable number of defective sample units, that have counts between ‘m’ and ‘M’.
m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.
M = the level, which when exceeded (the level is greater than M), in one or more samples would cause
the lot to be rejected.
Food safety risks
Food Standard Australia New Zealand has given us advice that fresh raw beef and beef products present
a potential medium or high risk to public health for the pathogenic microorganisms Salmonella spp.
and Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC). The risk increases for ground product. To make
sure there are food safety controls in place to manage these hazards, imports must be:
covered by a recognised foreign government certificate
tested to verify these controls are effective.
Beef
Beef means the flesh, bone, offal or any other tissue of an animal in the subfamily bovinae.
Beef products
Beef products means food prepared from or containing beef, but does not include gelatine, collagen,
rendered fats, tallow or di-calcium phosphate.
Competent authority
The government authority or official body authorised by the government that is responsible for the
setting of regulatory food safety requirements and/or for the organisation of official controls including
enforcement.
Version history
Date
Amendment details
04/08/2025 Include USA and Canada certificate requirements, and minor amendments to clarify
scope.
• 
•

28/01/2022 First version of this webpage. Information previously contained in beef and beef products
webpage (Reference number BEF 11/2018).
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/beef-fresh