Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Cheese that supports the growth of Listeria monocytogenes
is classified as risk food
This is:
cheese that does not meet the criteria for cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes.
Soft and semi-soft style cheeses are generally considered to support the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes.
Exclusions
Raw milk cheese.
Food from New Zealand.
Criteria for cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes
Cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes is food that has one or more of
these parameters:
the cheese has a pH less than 4.4 regardless of water activity
the cheese has a water activity less than 0.92 regardless of pH
the cheese has a pH less than 5.0 in combination with a water activity of less than 0.94
the cheese has a refrigerated shelf life no greater than 5 days (includes frozen cheese that has a
refrigerated shelf life of no greater than 5 days once thawed)
the level of Listeria monocytogenes will not increase by greater than 0.5 log cfu/g over the stated
shelf life of the cheese.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Community Protection (CP) questions
You may need to answer these CP questions when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: Is the cheese made from unpasteurised milk? If yes complete the 'imported food inspection
scheme-importer declaration for cheese made with unpasteurised milk'.
IFIS: Is the cheese covered by an ‘Imported Food Inspection Scheme–importer declaration for cheese
that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes’?
Inspection and testing
We refer consignments of cheese for analytical testing based on whether it is a cheese that supports the
growth of Listeria monocytogenes or not.
Cheese that supports the growth of Listeria monocytogenes is a risk food and referred for testing
at the initial rate of 100% of consignments until compliance is demonstrated.
Cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes is a surveillance food and
referred for testing at the rate of 5% of consignments.
During inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment.
Table 1 shows the test that will be applied and permitted results for the food type.
Table 1, Food type, test applied and permitted result
Food type
Test applied
Permitted
result
Cheese that supports the
growth of Listeria
monocytogenes (risk food)
Listeria monocytogenes
n=5, c=0,
m=not detected
in 25 g
Cheese that does not support
the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes (surveillance
food)
Listeria monocytogenes
Note: An IFIS Importer declaration can be lodged for
this food to demonstrate it does not support the growth
of Listeria monocytogenes. Cheese imported without
the declaration will be referred as risk food.
n=5, c=0,
m=100 cfu/g
n = the number of samples to be analysed from a lot of food.
c = the maximum number of sample units that can be greater than ‘m’.
m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.
• 
•

Food safety risks
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice about the risk of cheese that
supports the growth of Listeria monocytogenes. This food presents a medium or high risk to public
health for Listeria monocytogenes.
Version history
Date
Reference
number
Amendment details
10/07/2018 CHE 07-2018
Amendments to introduce a voluntary IFIS Importer declaration.
08/03/2017 CHE 03-2017
Amends guidance to industry on lodging entries.
21/07/2016 CHE 07-2016
Clarified parameters for cheese in which the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes will not occur. Provided guidance to industry on lodging
entries for cheese in the Integrated Cargo System.
09/05/2016 CHE 05-2016
Changes the description of the food from ‘Soft, semi-soft and fresh cheese’
to ‘Cheese in which growth of Listeria monocytogenes can occur’.
Tests are no longer applied for E. coli and Salmonella.
01/05/2014 CHE 05-2014
Replaces Imported Food Notice 09/12 Tests applied to risk category foods
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/cheese