Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Poultry meat that is cooked and ready-to-eat is classified as
risk food
This includes cooked poultry meat that has undergone minimal processing steps, such as fillets or
pieces that have been:
sliced
diced
cut
marinated
flavoured.
Poultry includes fowls, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, pheasants, quails, guinea fowls, muttonbirds and
other avian species ordinarily consumed as food by humans. It does not include ratites (for example
emus and ostriches).
Other poultry meat products
Exclusions
Poultry meat that is retorted and shelf stable
Food from New Zealand.
Community Protection (CP) question
You will need to answer this CP question when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: Are the goods cooked poultry meat that is chilled or frozen and is ready to eat?
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Inspection and testing
We refer consignments of ready-to-eat cooked poultry meat for analytical testing. During inspection, we
will also conduct a visual and label assessment.
Table 1 shows the test that will be applied and permitted results.
Table 1, Test applied and permitted result
Test applied
Permitted result
Listeria monocytogenes
Note: An IFIS Importer declaration can be lodged for this food where it does
not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
n=5, c=0, m= not
detected in 25 g
n = the minimum number of sample units that must be examined from a lot of food.
c = the maximum allowable number of defective sample units.
m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.
Food safety risks
Food Standards Australia New Zealand has given us advice about the risk of poultry meat that is cooked
and ready-to-eat. These products present a medium or high risk to public health for Listeria
monocytogenes.
Glossary
Ready-to-eat
Food is ready-to-eat if it is ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold.
To avoid doubt, food is not ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold if, before it
is consumed, it requires further processing (such as cooking) to reduce any pathogenic microorganisms
potentially present in the food to safe levels.
Retorted
Animal products are retorted if they are heated in a hermetically sealed container to a minimum core
temperature of 100°C, obtaining an F0 value of at least 2.8.

Shelf stable
Goods are shelf stable if the:
goods have been commercially manufactured
goods have been packaged by the manufacturer
goods are in that package
package has not been opened or broken
goods are able to be stored in the package at room or ambient temperature; and
goods do not require refrigeration or freezing before the package is opened.
Version history
Date
Amendment details
23/01/2025 Added link to new Poultry meat and poultry meat products webpage.
16/08/2023 Updated to include note that IFIS importer declaration may be lodged where food does
not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
09/05/2023 Webpage updated to accommodate access to new markets.
10/11/2020 Broadened risk food to include all poultry species following publication of FSANZ risk
advice. New reference code applied to reflect this amendment.
29/09/2015
Description of food changed from ‘Cooked chicken meat’ to ‘Ready-to-eat cooked chicken
meat’ based on FSANZ risk assessment advice.
Information clarifies that biosecurity requirements restrict imports of this food from any
country other than NZ, which is recognised under the TTMRA.
01/5/2014
Replaces Imported Food Notice 09/12 Tests applied to risk category foods.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/cooked-poultry
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•