Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Human milk and human milk products are classified as
risk food
This includes:
Human milk
Human milk products such as fortifiers and formula derived from human milk.
Only human milk and human milk products covered by a recognised foreign government certificate can
be imported.
Current certification arrangements
You can import human milk and human milk products from the United States into Australia with this
certificate.
United States
Type of information
To include
National competent authority: United States Food and Drug Administration
Recognised certificate title:
Certificate to a Foreign Government: Food for Human Consumption
ICS document code:
USFDAHM
Declaring certificates
When lodging a Full Import Declaration (FID), use the correct ICS document code and certificate
number for the food.
• 
•

Community Protection (CP) questions
You will need to answer these CP questions when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: ARE THE GOODS HUMAN MILK OR DERIVED FROM HUMAN MILK?
IFIS: DO THE GOODS CONTAIN HUMAN MILK IN ANY FORM?
Inspection
We refer consignments of human milk and human milk products for inspection at the rate of 5%.
During inspection we will conduct a visual and label assessment. Labelling must comply with Standard
2.9.5 of the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code.
Food safety risks
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice on human milk and human milk
products for 30 potential hazards. Of the hazards assessed, 15 present a potential medium or high risk
to public health and safety.
To make sure there are food safety controls in place to manage the range of potential hazards for human
milk and human milk products, we require imports to be covered by a recognised foreign government
certificate.
Glossary
Human milk
Human milk means expressed milk collected from lactating women to be fed to infants that are not the
biological infants of the women supplying the milk.
Human milk products
Human milk products mean products derived from human milk that have been specially formulated to
meet the specific nutritional needs of infants such as fortifiers and formula.
Version history
Date
Reference number Amendment details
04/05/2023 HMN 05/2023
Updated to include US FDA certificate
28/01/2022 HMN 01/2022
First version of the webpage published on website

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/human-milk