Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
Food type
Novel food is food that does not have a history of use in Australia and requires assessment by Food
Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) to establish its safety before being sold as a food or as an
ingredient in a food.
In Australia and New Zealand, novel food and novel food ingredients are regulated under Standards
1.1.1 and 1.5.1 in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code (the Code).
If the novel food is not listed in Schedule 25 – section 2 of the Code, it is not permitted for retail sale or
to be used as an ingredient in a food for retail sale. An application to FSANZ to amend the Code is
required.
Novel food requires a pre-market assessment by FSANZ to determine whether it poses a risk to public
health. This process provides assurance on the safety of the novel food before it can be sold.
Find out more about novel food and how to submit an enquiry to FSANZ. This information includes
how to:
define what is a novel or non-traditional food
determine whether a food is considered novel
submit an enquiry to FSANZ’s Advisory Committee on Novel Foods (ACNF).
Inspection and testing
We refer consignments for inspection at the rate of 5%. During inspection we will conduct a visual and
label assessment under our Imported Food Inspection Scheme.
If the novel food is not listed in Schedule 25 – section 2 of the Code, imports of this food will be failed.
Importers will be directed to destroy or export the food at their own expense.
See also insects and arachnids and supplementary sports food for further information on specific goods
and ingredients that may be considered novel food.
• 
• 
•

Version history
Date
Amendment details
29/07/2024 First version of the webpage published on website.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/novel-food