Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Raw milk cheese is classified as risk food
Raw milk cheese is cheese that has not undergone a heat treatment step during production. Heat
treatment includes:
pasteurisation
thermisation with additional measures
high temperature curd cook with additional measures.
Only raw milk cheese that is covered by a recognised foreign government certificate can be imported.
See current certification arrangements.
Exclusions
Food from New Zealand.
Current certification arrangements
France – Roquefort cheese and Ossau Iraty
You can import raw milk cheeses Roquefort and Ossau Iraty from France into Australia with this
certificate.
Type of information
To include
National competent
authority:
Ministère de l’Agriculture et de l’Alimentation
Recognised certificate
title:
Health Certificate for the Export of Raw milk Cheese (Roquefort or Ossau
Iraty) from France to Australia
ICS document code:
SCER
• 
• 
•

United Kingdom – 12 kinds of raw milk cheese
You can import these raw milk cheeses from the United Kingdom into Australia with this certificate.
Appleby’s Cheshire
Appleby’s Double Gloucester
Hafod
Isle of Mull
Keen’s Cheddar
Kirkham’s Lancashire
Lincolnshire Poacher
Montgomery’s Cheddar
Sparkenhoe Red Leicester
St Andrew’s Anster
St Andrew’s Cheddar
Westcombe Cheddar
Type of
information
To include
National competent
authority:
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Recognised
certificate title:
Export of Raw Milk Cheese to Australia Health Certificate (includes
Supplementary Certificate: Export of Raw Milk Cheese from the United
Kingdom to Australia)
ICS document code:
RMCHCUK
Declaring certificates
When lodging a Full Import Declaration (FID), use the correct ICS document code and certificate
number for the food.
Inspection and testing
We refer consignments of raw milk cheese for analytical testing at the rate of 5%.
During inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment.
Table 1 shows the tests that will be applied and permitted results.
Table 1, Test applied and permitted result
Test applied
Permitted result
Salmonella
n=5, c=0, m=not detected in
25 g
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Listeria monocytogenes
Ready-to-eat food which does not support the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes
n=5, c=0, m=100 cfu/g
n = the number of samples to be analysed from a lot of food.
c = the maximum number of sample units that can be greater than ‘m’.
m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.
Food safety risks
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice about the risk of raw milk cheese.
This food presents a potential medium or high risk to public health for the pathogenic microorganisms:
Salmonella spp.
Shiga toxin producing Escherichia coli
Brucella spp.
Mycobacterium bovis.
To make sure there are food safety controls in place to manage these hazards, imports must be covered
by a recognised foreign government certificate. We verify these controls are effective by conducting
analytical testing. See current arrangements.
Glossary
Pasteurisation
Milk or dairy products used to make cheese or cheese products are pasteurised by:
heating to at least 72° C and retaining at this temperature for no less than 15 seconds
heating, using any other time and temperature combination of equal or greater lethal effect on
any pathogenic microorganisms in the milk or dairy product
using any other process that provides an equal or greater lethal effect on any pathogenic
microorganisms.
Thermisation with additional measures
Milk used to make cheese or cheese products has been processed by being held at a temperature of at
least 64.5°C for at least 16 seconds. The cheese or cheese product is stored at a temperature of no less
than 7°C for at least 90 days from the date of processing.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

High temperature curd cook with additional measures
Milk or dairy products used to make cheese or cheese products have been processed so the:
curd is heated to at least 48°C
cheese or cheese product has a moisture content of less than 39%, after being stored no less than
10°C for at least 120 days from the date of processing.
Version history
Date
Reference
number
Amendment details
21/07/2022 RMC 07‑2022
Updated with details of new recognised foreign government certificate for
12 kinds of raw milk cheese that can be exported under a new
arrangement with the United Kingdom.
04/08/2021 RMC 08-2021
Updated with title of new recognised foreign government certificate for
Roquefort and Ossau Iraty.
10/07/2018 RMC 07-2018
Updated to reflect the introduction of a mandatory IFIS Importer
declaration for cheese made from unpasteurised milk.
9/05/2016
RMC 05-2016
New risk food
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/raw-milk-cheese
• 
•