Depending on your payment arrangement with us, there are different payment options available:
- Pre-pay. If you have not been issued an account number by the department you will be required to pay before having a service provided to you.
- Post-pay. If you have an account number with the department then you will be able to pay after a service has been provided to you.
Transactions that are made on a weekend, national public holiday or after 6:00 pm (AEST) will be processed on the next business day. You will be issued with a receipt upon request, noting your financial institution will issue you with a receipt if you pay using BPAY® or electronic funds transfer.
Please note: If you reside outside of Australia you should consider international time zones and payment processing times to avoid making a late payment. We are not responsible for fluctuations caused by exchange rates.
1. Pre-pay
Unless you have been issued an account number by the department you will be required to pre-pay before having a service provided to you. Unless you make a high volume of payments to the department, you do not need an account.
If you are accessing a service online you will be instructed to make any applicable online payments during the service request process. You can use a credit card to pay using our secure online payment service.
Note: Some assessment or inspection services will only be provided once the minimum fee, as per the Biosecurity cost recovery implementation statements, has been paid in full. Clients must provide the receipt details as proof of payment to the department via the Cargo Online Lodgement System (COLS) using the active Lodgement Reference Number (LRN) or by calling ph. 1800 900 090. This will enable the department to promptly provide you with your next direction (if required) or a release of the goods from biosecurity control. Please note that your goods may continue to be held until such time as you have provided the receipt details via these approved channels.
Note: In limited circumstances when no invoice is provided (eg individuals exporting companion animals, carnet clearances) you may make a payment over the phone using your credit card by calling 1800 647 531.
2. Post-pay
If you have an account number with the department you will be expected to post-pay after a service has been provided to you.
When requesting or using a service you will need to quote your account number. After the service has been provided you will receive a Tax Invoice from the department via post or email that lists the charges associated with the service/s provided. If you are unsure whether you have paid a Tax Invoice you can check online using the department’s secure online payment service by quoting your Invoice Number.
You will have 28 calendar days from the invoice date to pay your Tax Invoice using one of the following payment methods:
- BPAY® – you can make a BPAY® payment using your financial institution. Credit facilities will not be accepted.
- Card payment – you can make a card payment online using the department’s secure online payment service by quoting your Invoice No. Note: you cannot use the secure online payment service to pay by credit card if your invoice number is alpha numeric e.g. ELS012345678901.
- Electronic funds transfer – you can make an electronic funds transfer using your financial institution’s banking service.
- Mail – you can mail your cheque along with your payment slip to the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
Please note: If you do not pay an Individual Tax Invoice within 28 calendar days you will incur late payment penalties. Consider your financial institution’s processing times to ensure payment is received in time.
Payment methods (post-pay)
3. BPAY®
You can make a BPAY® payment directly from your cheque or savings account using your financial institution’s internet or phone banking service. You will need the Biller Code and Ref number listed on your Tax Invoice or Overdue Notice.
4. Card payment
You can pay online using the department’s secure online payment service for payments between $0.01 and $250,000. Please have your card with you as you will be prompted for your cardholder number, cardholder name, card expiry date and card security code (CSC).
The card security code (CSC) is a unique 3- or 4-digit number printed on your card. With a MasterCard or Visa card, the 3-digit number is located in the signature panel on the back of the card. The 4-digit American Express card security code is located on the front of the card, above the card number on the right hand side.
The payment will be listed on your card statement as “Dept of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry”.
Overseas payers: Please note that you might need to notify your financial institution of a card charge from a foreign country before making a payment.
5. Electronic funds transfer (EFT)
You can make a payment using your financial institution’s internet banking service. The payment will be automatically allocated against your Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry account number.
You'll need our bank details. You can find them on your Tax Invoice or Overdue Notice.
Please note: You will need to include the appropriate reference your invoice number in the description field when making an EFT payment.
Overseas payers: Please note that you should use the Bank Identifier RSBKAU2S when making an EFT payment.
6. Mail your cheque
Cheques should be for an amount in Australian dollars and payable to 'Collector of Money'. Cheques should be crossed 'Not Negotiable' and must not be post-dated. Cheques from banks outside of Australia will not be accepted.
You must also detach and include the payment slip found at the bottom of the last page on your Tax Invoice or Overdue Notice.
Please mail your payment to:
Collector of Money
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Locked Bag 34, Kingston ACT 2604
Please note: Do not send cash through the mail.