Authors: Forest Economics program.
Summary
The wood volumes analysis was announced as a 2022 election commitment during a period of
uncertainty in the forest and wood products sector. Uncertainty was particularly acute for the
residential construction sector due to upheaval through the COVID-19 pandemic. The purpose of the
wood volumes analysis is to give confidence that Australians have sufficient access to forest and wood
products for the construction sector, from a range of sources.
Australia’s forest and wood products market has evolved over many decades, through a range of
government and industry-based investment. Australia’s forestry sector will continue to evolve, across
the plantation estate, the processing sector, technological innovation in global product availability and
the ability to use international markets across import and export markets.
Key findings
Australia has reliable access to both domestic and international markets for
structural timber
Domestic demand for structural softwood sawnwood may grow as much as 50% by 2050,
incentivising domestic innovation.

Domestic softwood sawlog availability is expected to increase 70% by 2050 – the largest volume
of softwood sawlog availability on record.
The ability to access imports is important to help manage the ups and downs in domestic
demand.
Wood product trade was affected by health-related restrictions during COVID-19, but trade
resumed as restrictions were eased.
Strong growth projected in average annual softwood plantation log availability
Global markets will remain viable to meet global demand, but will increase
in complexity
International markets will continue to be a reliable resource, with log availability to remain above
industrial roundwood consumption, globally.
The growth of global consumption is uncertain – the majority of studies suggest growth between
9% and 83% from 2022 to 2050.
Globally, log availability is above current consumption and expected to grow between 18% and
58% from 2022 to 2050.
Global demand and supply patterns will change beyond 2050, with likely plantation expansion
and product and technology advances.
Global log availability projected to stay above industrial roundwood consumption

Australia’s trade profile allows ad hoc peaks in demand to be met,
capitalising on global value chains
The international market provides benefits for the Australian forest and woods sector.
For construction related trade, accessing international markets is important to manage spikes in
domestic demand and to draw on a maturing market for a range of forest and wood products and
advanced manufacturing.
A diversified supply chain across both international and domestic markets enables risk mitigation
and continuity of supply.
Structural softwood sawnwood imports reflect new house commencements

Supporting documents
The Centre for International Economics (CIE) prepared this report for ABARES on modelling demand
for forest and wood products: Demand projections for forest and wood products - Literature review and
proof-of-concept model
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/forests/forest-economics/forest-economic-research/
australian-wood-volumes