You may need to submit an Imported Food Inspection Scheme importer declaration through Cargo Online Lodgement System (COLS). This applies to some food imports including for:
- cheese made from unpasteurised milk (mandatory)
- cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes (voluntary)
- ready-to-eat cooked crustaceans and crustacean products that do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes (voluntary)
- ready-to-eat processed finfish that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes (voluntary)
- ready-to-eat, heat-treated bivalve molluscs and bivalve mollusc products that do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes (voluntary).
- ready-to-eat cooked poultry meat that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes (voluntary).
We use this information when referring and testing food imports. This is part of our Imported Food Inspection Scheme (IFIS).
This is additional to information lodged as a Full Import Declaration.
What you need to do
Complete a separate form for each product. Each form must contain only one product from one producer, and the product description must match the commercial invoice (not including pack size).
Do not submit a form unless you are able to provide supporting evidence upon request.
The declaration must include an accurate description of the specific food, including the:
- commercial description
- name of establishment where the food was produced.
If you do not provide an accurate description, we will consider the declaration as invalid.
Your IFIS Importer Declaration must also meet our Minimum documentary and import declaration requirements policy.
Your declaration is valid for one year from the date it was signed.
Giving false or misleading information is a serious offence. You must maintain records of the information used to complete a declaration. We may ask you to present this information upon request when conducting compliance or verification activities.
This declaration must be completed for all cheeses made from unpasteurised milk, except for certain raw milk cheeses from France and the United Kingdom as these must be covered by a recognised foreign government certificate.
Unpasteurised milk cheese
Complete an IFIS importer declaration to show that the cheese being imported:
- is permitted
- has received an appropriate heat treatment during production.
Raw milk cheese
Raw milk cheese is made from unpasteurised milk that has not received an appropriate heat treatment during production. It must not be imported unless it is covered by a recognised foreign government certificate. See our requirements for raw milk cheese.
Certain kinds of raw milk cheese imported from France and the United Kingdom do not need an IFIS Importer Declaration. This is because we have negotiated a certification arrangement with France and the United Kingdom for the import of these raw milk cheeses.
Only applies to cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the cheese does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
See our criteria for cheese where growth is not supported.
Only applies to ready-to-eat cooked crustaceans that do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the cooked crustaceans do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
See our criteria for crustaceans where growth is not supported on the form.
Only applies to ready-to-eat finfish that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the finfish does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
See our criteria for finfish where growth is not supported on the form.
Only applies to ready-to-eat, heat-treated bivalve molluscs that do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the bivalve molluscs do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
See our criteria for bivalve molluscs where growth is not supported on the form.
Only applies to ready-to-eat, cooked poultry meat that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the cooked poultry meat does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
See our criteria for cooked poultry meat where growth is not supported on the form.
How to lodge
Lodge the IFIS Importer Declaration and related import documents in the Cargo Online Lodgement System (COLS).