Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
1 
Analysis of Farm Management Deposits 
Scheme key performance indicators 
2022–23 findings 
Financial Policy and Business Support Branch 
Background 
As part of ongoing monitoring and evaluation activities, the department developed revised key 
performance indicators (KPIs) for the Farm Management Deposits (FMD) Scheme following the 2021 
scheme evaluation: 
1) 
Long term, stable rolling averages or increases in number of FMD accounts and total FMD 
holdings. 
2) 
A ratio that shows a positive relationship, at an industry level, between changes in farm cash 
income and changes in FMD holdings. 
‘Industry level’ refers to industries for which ABARES collects farm cash income data for (beef, sheep, 
cropping, and dairy). 
The first KPI measures stability or growth in scheme uptake over time. Confirmation of stability or 
growth shows the scheme provides the agriculture sector with an effective financial buffer and an 
increased ability for primary producers to manage risks. A 10-year rolling average is used in the 
calculation to account for fluctuations in scheme use between seasons. 
The second KPI demonstrates that primary producers are using the scheme to suit their individual 
circumstances to manage financial risk and enhance their financial capacity. The ratio is calculated by 
dividing the percentage change in annual net FMD holdings by the percentage change in average 
farm cash income (FCI). The net change is calculated on the difference between 1 July and 30 June. 
The KPIs are calculated and considered annually, supported by ABARES analysis. 
KPI 1: FMD accounts and holdings 
At 30 June 2023, the 10-year rolling average of accounts remained stable, increasing by 0.1% to 
50,047. The 10-year rolling average of FMD account holdings increased in real terms by 3.5% to 
$6.84 billion, coinciding with continued strong seasonal conditions and farm performance across 
much of Australia in recent years (Figure 1). 
Note: The number of accounts does not indicate the number of primary producers participating in 
the FMD Scheme as a primary producer may hold multiple FMD accounts with different authorised 
deposit-taking institutions (ADIs).

Analysis of Farm Management Deposits Scheme key performance indicators: 2022–23 findings  
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
2 
Figure 1: 10-year rolling average of FMD account holdings (real terms) and number of FMD 
accounts, at 30 June each year 
 
Note: Dollar values are presented in real terms (adjusted to 2022–23 values). Adjusting to real terms removes the effect of 
inflation and allows financial values across different time periods to be compared in like terms. ABARES adjusts for inflation 
using the consumer price index supplied by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. 
Sources: Australian Agricultural and Grazing Industries Survey and Australian Dairy Industry Survey, and DAFF FMD statistics

Analysis of Farm Management Deposits Scheme key performance indicators: 2022–23 findings  
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
3 
KPI 2: Farm cash income and FMD holdings 
For 2022–23, a positive relationship between changes in farm cash income (FCI) and FMD holdings 
was observed for each assessed industry (Table 1). FCI decreased in 5 of the 7 industries. This 
coincided with a decrease in FMD holdings. FCI increased for two industries (cropping and dairy), 
coinciding with an increase in FMD holdings. 
Table 1: Ratio of annual percentage change in FMD holdings to annual percentage change 
in farm cash income (FCI), 30 June 2023  
Industry 
Annual % change in FCI 
Annual % change in FMD holdings 
Ratio of annual % change in FMD 
holdings to annual % change in FCI 
Beef 
−14.7% 
−1.3% 
0.09 
Sheep 
−20.7% 
−11.4% 
0.55 
Cropping a 
+11.8% 
+8.1% 
0.69 
Sheep-beef 
−26.0% 
−8.3% 
0.32 
Mixed livestock 
and cropping b 
−15.0% 
+6.2% 
0.32 
Total broadacre c 
−6.4% 
−1.4% 
0.22 
Dairy 
+19.3% 
+6.2% 
0.32 
a Cropping is reported as ‘grain’ in monthly FMD statistics b Mixed livestock and cropping is reported as ‘grain-sheep/beef’ 
in monthly FMD statistics. c Broadacre comprises: beef, sheep, cropping, sheep-beef, and mixed livestock and cropping.  
Sources: Australian Agricultural and Grazing Industries Survey and Australian Dairy Industry Survey, and DAFF FMD statistics 
In addition, ABARES used a log-log linear regression model to test that the relationship between FCI 
and FMDs holds over time and is statistically significant. ABARES conducted a log-log linear 
regression on data for broadacre, cropping, mixed livestock and cropping, beef, sheep, and sheep-
beef from 2002. A log-log linear regression is a statistical method that finds the relationships 
between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables. The inputs to the linear 
regression model were the dependent variable (value of FMD holdings) and the independent variable 
(value of FCI), by industry. The FCI data for these industries are sourced from Australian Agricultural 
and Grazing Industries Survey and Australian Dairy Industry Survey, which are run annually by 
ABARES. The value of FMD holdings was sourced from monthly data provided to DAFF by ADIs. 
The results from the model show evidence that a positive, long-term relationship exists at the 
industry level, excluding dairy, between FMD holdings and FCI. Previous ABARES analysis highlighted 
that individuals use FMDs to suit their particular circumstances, with usage varying by industry, 
location and farm size. Dairy producers typically experience more consistent cashflow than 
broadacre farmers, which may contribute to the way they use the FMD Scheme. 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2023 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of 
Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International Licence except content supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has exercised due care and skill in 
preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost 
incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent 
permitted by law.