(agvet chemicals) as part of the Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper. Our plan to build a 
This paper seeks your views on one proposed reform to the agvet chemicals system—changes to 
better align the assessment a chemical product gets when it is registered with the risk of using the 
product. The proposal supports the work of the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines 
Authority (APVMA) and the University of Melbourne’s Centre of Excellence for Biosecurity Risk 
This paper will be used as a basis for discussion at workshops to be held in Canberra, Perth, 
Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne from 27 October to 13 November 2015. If you are unable to attend 
The APVMA should regulate products according to risk where it is the best placed regulator for the 
job. Reviewing the scope of products regulated by the APVMA and revising the methods the APVMA 
uses for regulating access to the market may allow the costs of regulating these products to be 
Currently there are five pathways for prospective suppliers of agvet chemical to access the market 
for these products. The degree of regulatory ‘touch’ generally increases with each pathway, as does 
the cost of regulation. The current pathways include the ‘normal’ registration process, registration of 
Different regulation pathways allow for the regulatory burden associated with each pathway to 
match the risks posed by the product. The registration process is the most frequently used pathway. 
five classes of products have been excluded from being considered agvet chemical products 
only two standards for listed chemical products have been made, one of which has been used 
infrequently. Most of these products are registered via the normal registration pathway. 
It may be possible to revise the current regulatory pathways, or include new pathways, like the self-
registration of listed products or conditional or provisional registration. The goal of this process 
would be to improve the efficiency of the APVMA’s processes and better match the risk a product 

The APVMA currently regulates products that pose similar risks to products managed by other 
competent Australian regulators. For example, the APVMA regulates some general sanitiser 
products (including some pool chemicals) while other products used in the home that pose similar 
risks (like drain cleaners) are managed under other regulatory schemes. Some of the products the 
APVMA regulates have characteristics more in common with cosmetics, personal hygiene products 
It may be more appropriate for some classes of products to fall under different regulatory 
arrangements as those arrangements may better suit the risks posed by the products. 
We have heard that the chemicals and user industry groups strongly support regulating chemicals 
according to risk and strongly support having the APVMA focus its skill in regulation on products that 
pose the greatest risks. Stakeholders support an approach that embraces the work the APVMA is 
On regulation pathways, we have heard about some of the shortcomings of the existing approach to 
listed chemical registration. Industry and government stakeholders told us that the process for 
development of a standard for listed chemical products, including the consultation protocol, is too 
cumbersome and resource intensive for both the APVMA and the affected industry sectors. Concern 
was also expressed by some stakeholders that an increased APVMA focus on development of 
standards for listed products would detract from APVMA efforts on higher risk matters, contrary to 
Chemical manufacturing stakeholders and some producers noted the value a provisional registration 
pathway provides international regulators and that similar flexibility should exist within the 
Australian system. Provisional registrations (also called conditional registrations) allow a limited 
access to the market for products lacking information to address the statutory criteria completely. 
The access is conditional on the presentation, and acceptability, of the information at a later date. 
The market access allows some of the costs of the information generation to be offset. 
On regulation scope, chemicals industry stakeholders from the segments of the chemicals market 
that includes consumer goods and home and garden products strongly support revising the range of 
products regulated by the APVMA. Other chemicals industry businesses are concerned at having 
their products regulated under regulatory frameworks that are less efficient or more burdensome 
than exists currently. Some farm industry stakeholders do not support rationalising the range of 
products regulated by the APVMA. These stakeholders consider the APVMA would be the most 
appropriate agency to manage the risk posed by, for example, sanitisers and disinfectants used in 
The APVMA has engaged CEBRA to develop a risk framework to more transparently align the level of 
assessment with the risk of the product. Preliminary findings have noted that other regulatory 
regimes (such as therapeutic goods) offer a self-assessment pathway for some products. In the 
existing agvet chemical arrangement, self-registration could effectively operate between the existing 

This proposal would seek to support the work of the APVMA and CEBRA and be developed in two 
parts. In the short term, the measure would seek to simplify existing arrangements to improve the 
efficiency and increase their attractiveness to industry and the APVMA, and to introduce approaches 
for allowing for self-registration and provisional registration. Self-registration would be similar in 
approach to listed registration but incorporate standards where self-determination of compliance 
was straightforward and the risks posed by the product do not warrant direct regulatory 
engagement prior to market access. Some stakeholders favour a provisional registration model that 
bridges the space between permit and registration and adopts some of the features of international 
models. An analogy of provisional registrations would be provisional driving licences.  
The second part of the proposal would occur over the longer term. It would identify classes of 
products suitable for lower regulatory oversight and develop the standards or prescribed conditions 
allowing access to the appropriate regulatory approach. Products where the risks are relatively 
uniform or where a high degree of chemical similarity exists could be suitable for standardised 
companion animal health preventative care products, personal insect repellents, and pesticides 
Other classes of products, such as whole viable seeds, may best suited to exclusion from regulation 
We have been encouraged by stakeholder input on this measure to date and believe it is a reform 
We will be hosting a series of workshops for all interested stakeholders to attend and provide their 
views on the proposed reform measures. To attend one of these workshops please fill in a 
If you are unable to attend one of the workshops or would like to provide feedback separately, 
When providing your feedback you might like to consider addressing the following questions: 
 Do you support the proposed reform in its current form or would you like further detail? 
 If you don’t support it, could the reform be amended to achieve your support? If so how? 
Please provide your feedback by 30 November 2015 so we can consider it before finalising a policy 
paper outlining a comprehensive reform package. The final policy paper will be released for