Accord is pleased to provide comments on the Department’s efforts to improve the operational 
efficiency of the APVMA through its consultation on the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals 
Accord is the peak national industry association representing the manufacturers and 
marketers of formulated hygiene, cosmetic and specialty products, their raw material 
suppliers, and service providers.  Accord member companies make and/or market fast-moving 
consumer and commercial goods including hygiene, cosmetics and specialty products, 
sunscreens, food contact sanitisers, industrial and agricultural sanitisers, household 
pesticides, disinfectants and specialty commercial products.  Member companies include 
large global consumer product manufacturers as well as small dynamic Australian-owned 
businesses with 521 percent of members operating as SME (<200 employees).  A list of Accord 
member companies is available on our website: http://accord.asn.au/about/members. 
Approximately 232 percent of our members have dealings with the APVMA.  Most of which are 
small to medium enterprises operating in low margin businesses that are susceptible to input 
cost-pressures.  Products are either fast moving, low risk consumer goods or low risk, well 
characterised products which represent a low regulatory burden on the agvet sector and are 
Accord members have an interest in the efficient and effective operation of the APVMA in the 
administration of its legislation including implementation of reform initiatives.  As the ANAO 
audit3 found, there is room for improvement.  Accord has for many years been attempting to 
introduce reform to the regulation of dairy sanitisers.  Despite the APVMA receiving budget 
funding for reform to low risk products Accord has not seen anything meaningful by way of 
reform.  Accord was presented with a Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Code 
(Listed Chemical Product – Dairy sanitisers and cleansers) Standard in September 2016, but 
The development of the Standard was not undertaken in consultation with industry.  The result 
was poor.  Industry and APVMA should work collaboratively along with departmental policy 
staff with responsibility for reducing the regulatory burden on industry, to achieve meaningful 
3 ANAO Report No. 56 2016-17 Pesticide and Veterinary Medicine Regulatory Reform Australia Pesticides and 

Accord members continue to seek the development of a standard for dairy sanitisers modelled 
on the NZ group standards approach under Section 6E of the Agvet Code.  We welcome the 
opportunity to meet with departmental officers to further develop the reform option. 
In general, Accord is supportive of the proposed measures, although we note that they are of 
a minor nature.  Our comments and/or support for the proposals relevant to Accord’s 
Please do not hesitate to contact me on 02 9281 2322 or at dsabic@accord.asn.au should 

Supported – It is noted that this proposal should reduce the uncertainty for APVMA staff 
regarding CCI disclosure, however this possibly could have been addressed through 
appropriate administrative arrangements such as development of clear policy guidelines and 
standard operating procedures.  The use of CCI requires ongoing monitoring to ensure that 
even with the proposed changes that no unintended disclosure of CCI occurs and that CCI 
Proposal 3 – Increase the APVMA’s flexibility to manage minor errors in applications at 
Proposal 4 – APVMA amendment of the relevant particulars or conditions in a variation 
Proposal 6 – Enable a person to apply to vary the particulars of a label approval that is 
Not supported.  This appears to be a very specific requirement for a very small group of 
products.  While Accord recognises that antimicrobial resistance is a growing global concern, 
indeed the Communique from the recent G20 Forum of 7-8 July referred to global actions to 
tackle antimicrobial resistance.  The aim is to restrict the use of antibiotics through responsible 
and prudent use.  We do not consider that any one safety criteria should be given greater 
consideration than other safety factors and that appropriate risk analysis and management for 
the entire product lifecycle should occur.  If this proceeds, then the scope of application needs 
to be clearly defined to avoid products which are not the target of the requirement to be 
Proposal 9 – Including civil penalty provisions for false or misleading information 
Supported but any additional provisions should be consistent with the Government’s 
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014 (RPSPA) which provides the framework 
for standard regulatory powers to be exercised by agencies across the Commonwealth. The 
key features of the RPSPA include standard provisions in relation to monitoring and 
investigation powers, as well as enforcement provisions using civil penalties, infringement 
notices, enforceable undertakings and injunctions.  Implementation of the RPSPA supports 
the Government’s regulatory reform agenda as it simplifies and streamlines Commonwealth 
regulatory powers.  We understand that the provisions in the Biosecurity Act 2015 are based 
on the RPSPA and therefore Accord’s recommendation is not inconsistent with the intent of 
this reform.  We support the uniform adoption of the RPSPA by all Commonwealth entities 
with a regulatory function and support consistency of the Agvet Code provisions with the 
Proposal 10 – Minor technical amendments to the Administration Act and Agvet Code