Australian Dairy Industry response to Agvet Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
The Australian dairy industry is a $13.7 billion farm manufacturing and export industry. Australia’s 
The dairy industry is the backbone of many regional communities. More than 100,000 Australians rely 
on the industry for their livelihoods, including vets, scientists, mechanics, financial advisers and feed 
suppliers, while 38,000 Australians are directly employed on farms and in dairy processing. 
The dairy industry welcomes the chance to present this submission in response to the Department of 
Agriculture and Water Resource’s Consultation on the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals 
This is a joint submission from the Australian Dairy Industry Council (ADIC) and Dairy Australia. 
The ADIC is the national peak policy body for the Australian dairy industry and represents all sectors 
of the industry on issues of national and international importance.  Its constituent organisations – the 
Australian Dairy Farmers Limited (ADF) and the Australian Dairy Products Federation (ADPF) – 
represent the interests of dairy farmers, manufacturers, processors and traders across Australia. 
Dairy Australia is the national services body for dairy farmers and the industry. As an industry-owned 
rural research and development corporation (RDC), the remit of the organisation is to fund and 
manage pre-competitive activities that are important to the future of the industry but would not occur 
effectively or efficiently if the market were left to its own resources.  This is typically in the areas of 
research, development and extension (RD&E), industry capability, trade and regulatory support, and 

Australian Dairy Industry response to Agvet Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 
The Australian dairy industry supports the proposed changes to improve the operational efficiency of 
Access to safe and effective agricultural and veterinary chemicals is critical for Australian dairy 
farmers. An effective and streamlined regulatory system that minimises the regulatory burden of 
Therefore proposed measures that minimise the administrative burden including simplifying reporting 
requirements, and increasing flexibility to manage areas like: errors in an application, the granting of 
part of a variation application, or varying labels relating to a suspension, are welcome. Similarly 
proposals clarifying requirements and providing a broader range of sanctions are appreciated. 
The proposed legislation also includes the addition of the potential for human exposure to 
antimicrobial resistant microorganisms as a specific safety consideration that the APVMA must have 
regard to for chemical products and active constituents. Antimicrobial resistance is an issue the dairy 
industry takes seriously. We reiterate the importance of the prudent and responsible use of 
antimicrobials, and understand the importance of considering this as part of the registration process. 
The dairy industry would like to see more detail about how this would be done in practice before 
The kinds of operational efficiencies outlined here, and the reform program outlined in recent years, 
are laudable on paper and welcomed by the dairy industry. However actual change has been slow in 
The legislative measures proposed here will not address the capacity constraints and uncertainty that 
have hindered work on some of the bigger picture reforms and cultural shifts needed to truly impact 
Risk-based regulatory approaches - One way to streamline and invest in future efficiency is 
through risk-based regulatory approaches. Accordingly, in early 2016 the dairy industry 
discussed with the APVMA the idea that dairy sanitisers would be amenable to ‘regulation by 
standard’—one of a suite of lower regulatory approaches slated for implementation by the 
regulator that the dairy industry would welcome. However progress has been very slow. 
Development of guidelines - Another way to improve the application process is by providing 
guidance so that requirements for registering specific products are clear and low risk products 
have a streamlined pathway to pursue. Based on the high priority the dairy industry places on 
access to new teat disinfectants, we have been working with the APVMA for over two years 
on developing ‘Guidelines for data to support efficacy and safety of teat disinfectants’. These 
guidelines remain in an unsatisfactory ‘draft’ form.  Without clearly articulated guidance, the 
guidelines are not helpful to applicants and do not further efficiencies in an application 
With the APVMA move and associated uncertainty and capacity constraints we have struggled to get 
further action on these. While these may seem like very specific cases, they reflect two of the dairy 
industry’s key priorities for chemical innovation to respond to rapidly changing market and 
environmental requirements, with an associated cost burden for the industry with the current lack of 
progress. It is only through spending the time and effort to streamline processes in priority areas that 
the future burden of the chemical registration process will be significantly reduced. This work to 
improve the system, while not seen as ‘urgent’, must continue to be a priority and adequately