Grain Producers Australia  PO Box 3517 MANUKA  ACT 2603 
SUBMISSION 
GPA response to the consultation on operation of the amendments 
in the agricultural and veterinary chemicals legislation amendment 
act 2013  
Addressed to: 
ACIL ALLEN CONSULTING PTY LTD 
Level ONE 
15 LONDON CIRCUIT 
CANBERRA ACT 2600 
AUSTRALIA 
29 March 2019

2 
GPA response to the consultation on operation of the amendments in the agricultural and 
veterinary chemicals legislation amendment act 2013  
Thank you for the opportunity for Grain Producers Australia (GPA) to provide a response to the GPA 
consultation on operation of the amendments in the agricultural and veterinary chemicals 
legislation amendment act 20131.  The GPA submission is made on behalf of all our members 
including the State Farming Organisations. In some cases State Farming Organisations will make a 
separate submission to more clearly articulate state based concerns. 
Executive summary 
GPA provides the following overview of comments on the operation of the amendments in the 
agricultural and veterinary chemicals legislation amendment act 2013. Further clarification of the 
rationale behind these comments are contained within the body of the submission. 
The retraction of (Schedule 2 – 47A - Re-approval and Re-registration) from the 2013 Act - 
was an important outcome for technology access for Australian agriculture 
A number of important issues were not addressed or justified in the legislation amendment act 
2013 including: 
o 
Use of the Risk Analysis Framework to determine how the level of risk will be aligned 
to the required level of assessment 
o 
Justification for the introduction of a re-approval and re-registration scheme  
o 
Development of a minor use program. 
GPA considers as an outcome of the 2013 Act that the current timeframe for chemical 
reviews do not meet industry and community expectations.  
Significant delays for approval of new active products is a significant cost to industry with 
delays in access leading to combined productivity losses and accelerated impact of pesticide 
resistance. 
There is a need for pragmatic discussion on what legislative reform is required to speed up 
the APVMA assessment timeframe for new actives.   
The is a significant issue of increasing market failure of AgVet investment in Australia and this 
situation has not improved since 2014 since implementation of the 2013 Act. Commercial 
investment in new pesticide technologies compared to the USA and Canada appears to have 
become worse in recent years.  
There should be significant consideration of models based on international datasets if the 
case can be made for agro-ecological co-equivalence and similar good agricultural practice. 
There is an urgent need for the chemical industry to transform from current 19th century paper 
based systems into a 21st century smart digital agriculture system. Legislative reform is 
required that allows for the outcome of an electronic label. 
incentives to support increased AgVet investment into Australia to provide the tools and 
production capacity for industry to remain internationally competitive.  
GPA does not support removal of Part 3 of the AgVet Code to allow stakeholders to rely on 
commercial arbitration legislation as this would potentially lead to registrant uncertainty of 
maintaining CCL and data protection and a consequential loss of investment confidence in 
commercialising new AgVet technology in Australia. 
1 https://acilallen.com.au/AgVetreview

3 
Background: Grain Producers Australia 
Grain Producers Australia (GPA) represents Australia's broadacre, grain, pulse and oilseed producers 
at the national level. Grain Producers Australia works to foster a strong, innovative, profitable, globally 
competitive and environmentally sustainable Australian grains industry. Representing 5200 farm 
businesses, it strives to represent Australian grain farmers nationally and internationally in their 
contribution to sustainable development and society. 
Working with its members – state farm organisations and farmers across the grain production area of 
Australia - GPA advocates for sound outcomes that deliver a positive commercial result. GPA is a not-
for-profit company limited by guarantee. It is governed by a board, elected by its members. 
The objectives of GPA are to: 
Provide a strong, independent, national advocate for grain producers based on a rigorous and 
transparent policy development process. 
Engage all sectors of the Australian grains industry to ensure operation of the most efficient and 
profitable grain supply chain. 
Facilitate a strategic approach to research, development and extension intended to deliver sound 
commercial outcomes from industry research.  
The GPA policy council, is strategically focused on three pillars of economic development, social 
responsibility and environmental management.  
Our policy council includes representatives from State Farm Organisations including:  
Agforce Grains 
Grain Producers SA 
NSW Farmers Association 
Victorian Farmers’ Federation Grains Group 
Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association 
WA Farmers 
WA Grains Group 
GPA manages the biosecurity program for the grains industry through Plant Health Australia and is a 
joint Representative Organisation (RO) responsible for overseeing the performance of the Grains 
Research and Development Corporation (GRDC). 
GPA and AgVet chemicals  
GPA has been engaged for many years in cross industry discussion in relation to increasing market 
failure of commercial investment in agricultural pesticides and veterinary medicines (AgVet) in 
Australia.  
Key relevant GPA responses previously submitted include: 
Legislation Amendments Consultation Paper (7 March 2014)  
Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Removing Re-approval and Re-registration) Bill 2014 (17 
April 2014) 
2014) 
recovery at the APVMA final report (24 October 2014) 
GPA response to the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 (19 July 2017)

4 
GPA response to the consultation on Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment exposure draft (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018 (22 August 2018) 
GPA response to the Senate Committee on Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport on 
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 
2018 (19 December 2018). 
As detailed in previous submissions by GPA, it is recognised that Australia is no longer on the global 
priority list for pesticide and veterinary medicine investment in commercialisation as it was 20 years 
ago.  It is essential that unnecessary reviews and red tape does not further erode Australian AgVet 
investment and resulting productivity through reduced technology access.  It is important that APVMA 
reviews are based on science-based evidence where adverse events or new international scientific 
evidence calls for reconsideration of existing chemical actives.   
The Australian grains industry is not resourced to meet the potential significant cost of an 
unnecessary regulatory process where time bound compulsory re-registration is likely to result in 
commercial market failure for regulatory support of generic off patent chemical actives.  Australia is 
also missing out from productivity improvement through commercial investment in a large number of 
potential emerging biological, biochemical and biotechnology based AgVet technologies.   It is 
essential that Australian grain growers have access to the same pesticide technologies to remain 
internationally competitive with other overseas producers,   
reform, key changes in the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment Act 2013 
and subsequent reform bills do not address the declining commercial pesticide investment into 
Australia. While there is clearly many limitations of how the regulator can operate under the 2013 and 
subsequent AgVet Acts, GPA would like to commend the APVMA and its staff in supporting the 
Australian grains industry with effective and timely communication on key chemical access issues 
including permits and the ongoing product registration needs of the industry. 
GPA consultant on all AgVet chemical related issues, Dr Rohan Rainbow has previously facilitated 
Resources, APVMA and key registrant groups CropLife Australia and the Animal Medicines Australia 
to identify the major factors resulting in declining investment in Australia which include; 
Australia is a small market in a global context < 1.5% 
Since the last round of AgVet reforms in 2014 and 2017, Australia is continuing to experience 
difficulties with complex AgVet regulations, timeliness and costs relative to commercial return 
on investment 
Global multinational companies face a poor rate of return on commercialisation investment 
compared with major developing markets including Brazil and China. 
As detailed in previous 20142, 20173 and 20184 GPA submissions regarding AgVet chemicals 
regulatory reform, the outcomes for community and industry that need to be achieved through policy 
and legislative reform include; 
Increased national and foreign investment in Australia 
Increased agricultural profitability and sustainability 
Amendment (Removing Re-approval and Re-registration) Bill 2014 
3 GPA response to the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Operational 
Efficiency) Bill 2017 
4 GPA response to the Senate Committee on Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport on Agricultural and Veterinary 
Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018

5 
Increased delivery of a diverse range of foods to a multicultural community 
Increase productivity and scale of industries contributing to GDP and balance of trade 
Improving safety to community, environment and trade. 
Potential options for addressing increased investment in Australia have been identified which include; 
Improved prioritisation 
New incentives for investment 
Co-investment partnerships 
Increased clarity on benefits and return on investment  
Regulation co-equivalence opportunity 
Clarity of roles for commercial companies, RDCs and regulators 
Regulation reforms. 
GPA has reviewed previous February 2012 Grains Research and Development Corporation 
submissions to the 2013 AgVet Act and recognises that the reforms could have potentially improved 
efficiencies and reduced time frames for application assessments and chemical reviews. A wider 
range of enforcement tools should also have enabled the APVMA to better ensure compliance with 
regulations.  However GPA notes that data protection reforms to application processes could have 
removed some disincentives to seeking permits, re-approvals and re-registrations. The cost of 
generating data is likely to remain a disincentive for minor uses and generic products. More recent 
regulatory reforms detailed in the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendments 
(Operational Efficiency Bill 2017 and Streamlining Regulation Bill 2018) only address a small number 
of the issues identified, or in some cases created, through previous rounds of legislative reforms.  
There is clearly a need for further legislative reform to deliver technology access outcomes for 
Australian agriculture including grain growers.   
There is an urgent need for the chemical industry to embrace digital agriculture and automation 
technologies and new legislation must embrace these 21st century technologies and encourage the 
consideration of these systems by the APVMA. There is also an urgent need for reforms to enable 
electronic labels and for these changes to be reflected in state control of use legislation.  
Feedback on AgVet (Removing Re-approval and Re-registration) Act 2014 
GPA notes that the provisions establishing the re-approval and re-registration scheme only operated 
for a short time until they were repealed by the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment (Removing Re-approval and Re-registration) Act 2014 (Removing Re-approval and Re-
registration Act), The removal of Schedule 2 – 47A from the 2013 Act relating to varying duration—
decisions of foreign regulators was supported by GPA.  GPA had significant concern in 2013 that this 
section would have potentially forced the APVMA to consider a large number of such compounds 
upon the implementation of the EU hazard-based regulatory scheme, i.e., where use of a compound 
with dual applications may be prohibited in the EU on the basis of hazard-based policy rather than risk 
as considered in Australia. 
The repealing in 2014 of certain components of the 2013 Act removed legislation for an additional 
trigger for the APVMA to reconsider a chemical product when 2 or more of 7 nominated overseas 
regulatory authorities have prohibited the use of the chemical on safety grounds (Schedule 2 – 47A). 
There was additional concern for plant industries because these agencies cover both the crop and

6 
veterinary sectors and that problems may emerge for compounds with uses in both areas, e.g., 
deltamethrin, cyromazine or abamectin.  
The retraction of (Schedule 2 – 47A) from the 2013 Act was an important outcome for technology 
access for Australian agriculture and productivity impacts, as a large number of actives have been 
voluntarily withdrawn in the EU following the introduction of EU directive 91/414/EEC primarily due to 
manufacturer commercial considerations and market failure.  The value proposition and return on 
investment for companies to meet the costs of regulatory defence has resulted in some two thirds of 
pesticide actives in the EU being lost to agricultural industry not necessarily due to science-based 
human health or environmental concerns, but due to investment market failure and companies 
favouring products with a patent or higher investment return.  This includes actives in the UK that 
were included in the proposed regulations.  The highly subsidised agricultural industry in the EU has 
been able to absorb some of the impact of these decisions.    
GPA supports the government’s decision in repealing Schedule 2 – 47A from the 2013 Act, that 
APVMA reconsiderations are based on science-based evidence or adverse events for reconsideration 
of existing chemical actives, not on the basis of investment market failure.  The Australian grains 
industry and GRDC is not resourced to meet the potential significant cost of this market failure for 
regulatory support of generic off-patent chemical actives. 
Feedback on AgVet Chemical legislation amendment act 2013 
GPA would like to note that a number of important issues were not addressed or justified in the 
legislation amendment act 2013 that were identified in a 2012 Grains Research and Development 
Use of the Risk Analysis Framework to determine how the level of risk will be aligned to the 
required level of assessment 
Justification for the introduction of a re-approval and re-registration scheme  
Development of a minor use program. 
GPA provides a response under the suggested review themes; 
Theme 1: Application assessment efficiency and effectiveness 
The effectiveness of the ‘elapsed time’ model versus the ‘stop the clock’ model, and whether the 
elapsed time model can be made more flexible through broadening the scope of ‘time-shift’ 
applications. 
Timely chemical review by the APVMA is critical to both support producer access to new chemical 
technologies and also to meet community expectations and support consumer and market confidence 
when new science knowledge arises. GPA conducted a telephone interview survey of six 
multinational chemical companies in May 2017 focusing on direct impacts to the grains industry from 
the Federal Government APVMA relocation policy and resulting outcomes to the grains industry from 
impacts of APVMA staffing resources and delivery timeframes.  
The impact was estimated from combined impacts of delays to three products, two new fungicides 
and one new herbicide (noting all have now been approved and registered by the APVMA in early 
2018).  The estimates were based of the survey of chemical companies conducted by GPA in May 
delivery under the draft Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Agvet) Bill 2012 – 19 October 2012.

7 
2017 and potential impacts from use of these chemicals and risks (seasonal dependant) based on the 
resistance management benefits, severity of the issues that these products resolved and the resulting 
effective control of particular diseases and weeds.  GPA understanding from the survey is that these 
product registrations were delayed by one season for access by industry.  At the time of the survey, 
the companies were anticipating this could be two seasons.  The reference to impacts of further 
delays is also in reference to key new herbicide products for use in cereal production that due to the 
severity of herbicide resistance management, will have significant economic impact if there are 
registration delays; If the situation lasts for another 2 years with a delay of 12 months on major 
projects, GPA estimates the minimum impact through lost productivity and accelerated pesticide 
resistance evolution to the grains industry would be well over $1 billion. 
GPA estimates of values for the cost of herbicide approval delays are based on delays to a new 
grass/broadleaf herbicide for use in canola and future impact on a new MOA cereal herbicide 
scheduled for release on the 2020 season.  Estimated losses based on a GRDC review of weed 
economic impacts6 include: 
Herbicide resistance was estimated to cost $187 million in additional herbicide 
treatment costs, in addition to the costs of using extra integrated weed management practices 
Weeds in fallows are estimated to be costing more than $430 million through reduced crop 
yields 
Overall, revenue loss due to weed populations reducing crop yields was $33/ha, which is 
similar to the cost of some herbicide applications 
Yield losses due to weed competition from residual in-crop weeds were valued at $278 million 
The overall cost of weeds to Australian grain growers is estimated to be $3,300 million. 
2017 GPA estimates of disease impacts were based on delays to a new MOA canola fungicide for 
blackleg control, which is desperately needed, and a new cereal fungicide for resistant mildew control, 
also desperately needed.  Estimated losses based on a GRDC review of disease economic impacts 
include: 
Potential yield loss of 19.3% and present yield loss of 7% from powdery mildew in WA only 
based on a barley crop valued at $650 million (WA only) is equivalent to a $45 million loss 
and potential of $125 million based on 2012 figures7, however this situation has significantly 
worsened since six years ago, noting that resistance in powdery mildew in wheat in eastern 
Australia is also increasing.  2012 figures indicate potently losses of 58.9% and current losses 
in wheat of 16.4%8. 
Current losses from blackleg in canola is $76.6 million and potential losses of $331.3 million 
based on a crop value of $500 million9.  Without an effective alternative new mode of action 
fungicide for blackleg control, based on current resistance development to exiting registered 
fungicides, the industry is looking at this upper estimate of losses.  
The combined GPA estimate of economic impact of pesticide evaluation delays of $200 million was 
derived from these combined values of impact.  These estimates could potentially increase to $500 
million if resistance issues substantially increased.  GPA considers that the estimates previously 
detailed in the 2017 submission were conservative and could easily be higher than these estimates. 
GPA considers that the current timeframe for chemical reviews do not meet industry and community 
expectations. The proportion of pesticides approved by the APVMA before deadlines bottomed at 24 
6https://grdc.com.au/resources-and-publications/all-publications/publications/2016/03/impactofweeds 
7 https://grdc.com.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/204748/disease-loss-barley.pdf.pdf 
8 https://grdc.com.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0026/203957/disease-loss-wheat.pdf.pdf 
9 https://grdc.com.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0021/82641/grdcreportdiseasecostoilseedspdf.pdf.pdf

8 
per cent between April and June 201710, which has subsequently improved reaching 86% for the 
September 2018 Quarter11.  What is of significant concern are the delays to approval of new active 
products with only 44% of approvals being achieved against the legislated timeframes. There is a 
need for pragmatic discussion on what legislative reform is required to speed up the APVMA 
assessment timeframe for new actives.  This will continue to be a significant cost to industry with 
delays in access leading to combined productivity losses and accelerated impact of pesticide 
resistance. 
• Whether the amendments have assisted stakeholders with the application process. 
The additional disruption resulting from the APVMA relocation program Armidale has also clearly 
impacted on ability to deliver timely assessment outcomes, not only for registration of new chemical 
products but also ongoing review of prioritised chemicals. While assessment timeframes by the 
APVMA appear to be improving over recent months, registration timeframes specifically for new mode 
of action chemicals continue to be significantly delayed. Companies indicated they would like to be 
optimistic and recognise that there is still time for the APVMA to recover some of the impacts from the 
current situation. Consensus from company interviews is that that the delay situation impacting on 
new active approvals is likely to become much worse over the next 2 years - resulting longer-term 
impact is likely to result in reduced overall development investment in agricultural chemicals.  
Companies expect it is likely to take up to 5 years for the APVMA to recover from the current lack of 
technical staff resources, with all companies noting there is a global shortage of regulatory experts.  
There is a need for legislative reforms to more effectively enable access to these key skills and 
streamline the approval process. 
GPA has also made previous submissions to the APVMA providing feedback on model evaluation 
frameworks, which will assist with timely and efficient delivery of regulatory assessments12. There 
should be significant consideration of models based on international datasets if the case can be made 
for agro-ecological co-equivalence and similar good agricultural practice (GAP).  For example the 
APVMA currently proposes that a model would be considered inadequate if all parameter data is 
obtained from overseas studies, even though suitable Australian data is not available.  This decision 
especially in consideration of mechanistic models should only be made if there is clear case for 
requiring unique Australian data.  It would not be appropriate to require the significant cost to industry 
and registrants to re-generate uniquely Australian data if the justification for this is not warranted.  
GPA suggest that the reference to international data use in the evaluation framework is re-considered 
and should be discussed further with industry and registrants before finalisation. 
The Australian grains industry through levies paid to the GRDC has made significant investment in 
the development of a number of mechanistic models that have been designed to be used in future 
regulatory decisions by the APVMA. These models have been or are in development to be used as 
tools by producers to achieve effective and environmentally outcomes from pesticide use. It is 
important that the potential use of these models, both Australian and international is supported 
through legislation. It is essential that the APVMA utilises these models in their most effective way for 
prediction of outcomes, not just using them as tools to simplify regulatory decisions on labels, but also 
for use of these models as a reference tool and use guide on labels to improve industry best practice.  
Examples of these models include:  
GRDC Project UQ00047 An interim model for buffer zone reduction in pesticide application 
from ground sprayers Australian Ground Spray Calculator (AGSC) 
10 https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/conflict-of-interest-warning-as-mps-weigh-bid-to-ease-apvma-strain-20190201-
p50v31.html 
11 https://apvma.gov.au/node/39211 
12 GPA response to the APVMA Model Evaluation Framework – 3 October 2017.

9 
GRDC Project UQ00072 - Spray application management (DRT modelling, managing 
surface-temperature inversions and spray quality effects on herbicide efficacy) 
GRDC Project DAW00231 The study ‘Management of spray drift through inversion risk 
awareness 
GPA is also aware of private investment in risk assessment models that would significantly speed up 
the efficiency APVMA regulatory decisions.  An example of this includes; Pesticide Environmental 
Risk Assessment Model for Australia (PERAMA) by Australian Environment Agency Pty Ltd. This 
model is already used by commercial registrants to efficiently consider potential environmental 
terrestrial and aquatic impacts. There is a need to ensure that the APVMA adopts and uses these 
types of tools to speed up regulatory evaluation as an alternative rather than an addition to existing 
processes. 
For models such as spray drift reduction technology (DRT) models, these models should ideally be 
held by the APVMA and made available to registrants and industry producers as a reference for best 
practice use.  GPA is concerned that models may only be used as look-up tools, however into the 
future where automation and digital agriculture technologies will be significant enablers, models can 
be delivered as active on-line tools that can interact with future label guidelines. If there are legislative 
blockages to this pathway, the GPA would like to discuss the detail of these bottlenecks with the 
APVMA.   
GPA is concerned with the delays already experienced with assessment of the GRDC funded spray 
drift models which have been submitted to the APVMA, and also tabled and discussed at length 
through the National Working Party for Pesticide Applications. Appropriate use of this model by the 
APVMA and industry outcomes through application of DRTs by producers should already be in place.  
GPA is also concerned that outcomes of the spray drift review and consideration of application of this 
new model in regulatory decisions are not yet in place before the reviews of phenoxy herbicides 
including 2,4-D have are finalised.  It is essential that chemical review regulatory decisions are 
deferred until full consideration for decision on models submitted are finalised, including the new 
spray drift and DRT models. 
The APVMA should be able to maintain confidential commercial information (CCI) and data protection 
both for the data being assessed and the model itself.  It is essential that CCI and data protection is 
maintained to ensure that there is a business model for continuous improvement and updates of 
many of these models.  It is important that the APVMA considers proprietary models in the 
assessment framework. Where proprietary models would deliver significant improvement to 
assessment timeframes, the APVMA should seek a license to access these models, potentially on a 
fee for use basis.  
GPA supports the establishment of an approved list of models. Certainty of regulation will lead to 
improved confidence in investment.  Models considered in this list should include published public, 
restricted access models by legislation (as in the case of air inversion risk models) and commercial or 
proprietary models.  The list of models should not be restricted to only full public access models. In 
the case of the use of commercially developed or proprietary models such as PERAMA, the APVMA 
should be prepared to consider the use of these models for internal assessment on a commercial fee 
for use basis for regulatory evaluation, both for use by registrants in their applications and also by the 
APVMA in making efficient regulatory assessments, particularly if the models are validated and 
approved through the proposed evaluation framework.   
Label reference to producer use of models, which improve stewardship and use such as DRT models, 
would simplify future changes to regulatory outcomes and the need for continuous label change or 
improvement.  For example if a new DRT technology is established, validated and a revised model is 
approved by the APVMA, then both registrants and producers would benefit from faster access to the

10
validated legal use of a new DRT, while at the same time delivering faster access to environmental 
benefits from the use of these technologies.  It is essential that the APVMA consider how models can 
be effectively used under current AgVet legislation to deliver the key objectives of the organisation of 
production, trade, operator and environmental safety.  If there are legislative blockages to this 
pathway, the GPA would like to discuss the detail of these bottlenecks with the APVMA. 
• Whether there should be more flexibility in the time period used to rectify defects in applications. 
GPA recognises that submission of incomplete applications with significant defects creates significant 
challenges for the APVMA in meeting assessment timeframes. There is ongoing concern that some 
registrants use the resources of the APVMA in managing up through the submission process to 
address defects in applications.  Registrants should be utilising the preliminary assessment process 
to avoid this situation being a regular issue.  GPA agrees there can be a case in some situations with 
technically difficult applications for more flexibility in the time period to rectify defects in applications, 
particularly where the generation and assembly of this data requires significant industry coordination.  
However there is potentially a case to penalise registrants who regularly abuse the application 
process with regular submission of incomplete applications with defects to avoid APVMA resources 
being unnecessarily tied up addressing these issues.  
• Whether the preliminary assessment step should be retained. 
The preliminary assessment step should be retained as this has been an instrumental tool for industry 
managing key challenges of emerging pest management issues, including industry permits and labels 
for mouse management with zinc phosphide and late season weed management with glyphosate in 
barley.  GPA considers that the preliminary assessment step is an efficient mechanism to ensure 
completeness of applications leading to timely assessment. 
• The value and practical effects of the APVMA’s use of international assessments and data for 
assessing applications 
GPA understands that the APVMA has advised that they are already maximising the use of 
international standards, assessments and data in its assessments under the 2013 Act. There is 
clearly no need to introduce a legislative requirement in the 2018 Act reforms - Prescribing matters for 
the statutory criteria (Part 12 of Schedule 1 - Items 85 and 86) for compulsory consideration of 
international data. Registrants have the right to include international data to support label applications 
and the legislation should reflect the right for this data to be considered in a label application.  
The 2018 Bill details that the APVMA must rather than may have regard. The government in the 
2018 Act proposes to correct the anomalies in the statutory criteria by amending the AgVet Code to 
provide that: 
• regulations, if made in the future, may prescribe matters the APVMA must have regard to for 
the purposes of being satisfied that a label meets the labelling criteria, similar to the current 
regulation making powers in sections 5A to 5C of the AgVet Code 
• regulations, if made in the future, could prescribe that the APVMA must have regard to the 
matters in section 160 of the AgVet Code (overseas trials and experiments, which could include 
international standards, assessments and data)’. 
This change will unnecessarily increase the operational demands of the APVMA, requiring unsolicited 
review assessment under their normal assessment process.  The requirement for the APVMA to 
consider international data included in a label registration application should be based on the need to 
review data as submitted by the registrant. There are also sovereignty risks to creating legislative 
review triggers in Australia based on overseas information from this amended legislation.

11
• Any other issues (caused by the amendments) relating to the efficiency and effectiveness of 
assessments. 
There has been an ongoing need for legislation to support access to external assessors to enable the 
APVMA to meet its legislated assessment timeframes. More recently this initiative has been extended 
through further legislative reforms where GPA partly supports the proposed 2018 AgVet Bill reforms 
on accreditation of assessors (Part 5 of Schedule 1), however limitations of liability need to be 
recognised. GPA recognises that there has been an APVMA pilot study using external assessors. 
GPA considers that there is significant opportunity for implementation of third party APVMA approved 
certifiers rather than current APVMA monopoly; 
• This approach has been implemented successfully in New Zealand 
• The approach could be successfully implemented specifically for an industry led minor use 
program 
• Would go some way in addressing the current critical shortage of regulatory expertise at the 
APVMA 
There is a need for specific legislative instruments to protect the liability to these assessors with final 
decisions and liability risk being held by the APVMA. Limitations of liability from negligence will need 
to be in place, otherwise the cost of insurance premiums for external assessors are likely to be make 
the program unviable.   
A key deficiency in the 2013 Act was a lack of reform and improvement to the minor and emergency 
use program, which currently constitutes around 30% of all APVMA product approvals for use13. An 
effective minor and emergency use program is extremely important for the grains and other 
agricultural industries in addressing the needs of emerging industries and providing effective 
response to rapidly emerging pest and disease threats.  GPA considers the minor and emergency use 
assessment and approval mechanisms a critical program to ensure timely delivery of industry pest 
control measures. 
There has been considerable discussion between the grains, horticulture and emerging crop 
industries in regard to potential improvements in collaboration and coordination programs to manage 
minor use registrations. Reference to a list of industry priorities by the government should include the 
list delivered through the successful AgVet Collaborative Forum, currently supported by all plant 
industry RDCs.  A project and report funded by the Department of Water Resources through RIRDC, 
Delivery of Access to AgVet Chemicals Collaborative System – AgVet Collaborative Forum  
established this process and manages a current list of industry priorities and needs .  The process 
used to develop this list is largely based on the Canadian government minor use priority setting 
process, incorporating some of the process from the USA IR-4 minor use program.  Like these North 
underwrite an Australian minor use program such as fee waivers and discounts, particularly where 
generic compounds are involved. 
While there have been recent proposals for legislative change in the 2018 Act, the proposed 
approach which was removed from the Bill would likely have made market failure worse and more 
importantly, would have been hard to wind back the commercial impacts once implemented. GPA has 
previously suggested a number of incentive reforms likely to address market failure without any 
resulting additional cost to the government or regulators.  These include: 
I. 
Establish a points credit system for registrants who put minor use needs onto label being 
rewarded with an option for acceleration of an alternate registration evaluation priority, to 
13 https://apvma.gov.au/node/39216

12
incentivise commercial investment in industry priorities where market failure exists.  These 
credits could then be used to accelerate other applications being assessed perhaps even at a 
later time eg. 6-12 months later allowing the build up of credits; 
Would be a self-funding program by registrants 
Delivering minor use and new technology onto label to industry faster 
Encourages parity with international labels for agriculture. 
II. 
Adopt in new AgVet legislation and regulations improved data protection for emergency and 
minor use permits to improve the value proposition and incentive for commercial investment, 
encouraging contribution of exiting Australian and International data to these programs. In 
addition provide data protection incentives on existing registered labels encouraging 
investment in minor use through adopting a USA based system of 1 extra year for 3 minor 
use label extensions would; 
Be self funding program by registrants 
Potentially provide incentives for additional label registration of minor uses 
Improve product stewardship through company label communication 
III. 
Increase Federal Government support and legislative incentives to build on the AgVet 
Collaborative Forum - now established cross agricultural industry minor use program 
supported by all Australian plant industry RDCs resulting in; 
Improved priority setting and cost sharing 
Achieving Government, RDC and Commercial co-investment in data generation 
Achieving cost savings through cross industry efficiencies and international collaboration 
and co-investment with IR-4 USA and Canada. 
Theme 2: Reconsiderations (chemical review) 
• Whether the amendments, including the published work-plans and timeframes, have improved the 
transparency and predictability of reconsiderations. 
environmental credentials for the grains industry while delivering safe and effective agricultural 
chemical technologies for sustainable production.  GPA has made previous submissions detailing a 
best practice approach to environmental exposure assessments14.  It is important that legislations 
recognises that farming systems may change in time reflecting better practice and assessment should 
consider the current industry best practice standards. 
For example, GPA supports APVMA use of distributions for real-world rainfall and river flows for runoff 
modelling which will now allow significant refinement to aquatic exposure assessments and the use of 
data libraries, which have been developed for dryland cropping regions in Australia. GPA believes 
that the credentials of current grains industry best practice using both no-till and stubble retention as 
the dominant farming practice today should be recognised within the baseline assessment methods 
used by both the APVMA and Department of Environment.  
GPA requests the APVMA reconsiders its approach to recognising current industry best practice in 
making decisions under the legislation, using no-till and stubble retention as standard grains industry 
practice and also include these practices as the default for any regulatory consideration of industry or 
14 GPA response to call for public comment on proposed new APVMA framework for environmental exposure assessment.

13
commercial permits, labels or reviews related to Aquatic Exposure Estimates in Australian Pesticide 
Environmental Runoff Risk Assessment. 
Theme 3: Compliance and enforcement 
• Whether the amendments have improved compliance and enforcement. 
Amendments from the 2013 Act appear to have had limited change in outcomes of compliance and 
enforcement. While GPA is aware that the AMPVA has been proactive with registrants on managing 
product safety and compliance for sale and use, results supplied through the National Residue 
Survey15 have indicated that grain industry compliance with pesticide use and managing chemical 
maximum residue compliance and food safety for trade and export has been maintained at around 
99.8% compliance. Adverse spray drift events unfortunately continue, however industry improvement 
in stewardship this has been slowed by delays in finalisation of the APVMA spray drift review and 
implementation of the proposed stage 2 program incorporating label reference and producer access 
to a spray drift management tool provided by the APVMA. 
• Whether, as a legislative priority, AgVet legislation should be aligned with the Regulatory Powers 
(Standard Provisions) Act 2014. 
Aligning AgVet legislation with the Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions) Act 2014 would 
potentially improve the current monitoring and investigation powers to search and seize evidential 
material as well as inspect, examine, measure and test anything on the premises, as well as 
enforcement provisions through use of civil penalty provisions, infringement notices, enforceable 
undertakings and injunctions.  However the resourcing of capacity to deliver impact from these 
powers would be a significant undertaking and costly exercise to implement.  Such an alignment of 
regulatory powers should not be funded through the registrant cost recovery funding and levies and 
should therefore be manage through separate government appropriations. 
• Whether the AgVet Code should be simplified through greater use of conditions of registration to 
regulate the labelling of chemical products, and less reliance on specific labelling offences. 
There are significant risks to a more liberal approach through the use of conditions of registration to 
regulate the labelling of chemical products, rather than reliance on specific labelling offences. This is 
also complicated by the significant variance in state government control of use legislation across the 
commonwealth. GPA in a previous submission to the AgVet Chemical Task Group16 has identified 
risks from the use of agricultural chemicals on a commodity or situation that is not listed on the 
APVMA approved label or permit. 
GPA does not support the use of agricultural chemicals in grain commodities or situation that is not 
listed on the APVMA approved label or permit.  The proposed control of use guidelines will potentially 
increase investment market failure for registrant interest in supporting crop protection needs of the 
grains industry in minor commodities and also compromise the ongoing legal support of APVMA in 
providing permit approvals: 
The proposed ACTG approach will potentially reduce multinational chemical company 
confidence for investment into Australia; reduce commercial company interest in Australia 
through potential increased of off-label use and resulting stewardship risks, particularly for 
new products, which Australia clearly seeks.  This increased risk profile will also potentially 
further reduce Australia’s ranking for investment priority which has historically been based on 
a robust regulatory and industry stewardship program, while competing with investment 
opportunity in Asia and South America where return on investment is higher. 
GPA believes the proposed approach to off label use could put the APVMA where a permit is 
requested by the grains industry or an individual business to be in a position of contravention 
15 http://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/food/nrs 
16 GPA Submission to AgVet Chemical Task Group (ACTG) national harmonisation of off-label use proposal - 28
th February 
2018.

14
of the current AGRICULTURAL AND VETERINARY CHEMICALS CODE REGULATIONS 
1995 - REG 57 17 where it states ‘Subregulation (2) applies to the issue by the APVMA of a 
permit on application for a person to do, or omit to do, any thing which would, apart from the 
permit, be an offence against an eligible law of this jurisdiction’, Part 7 of the AgVet Code18 
provides that the APVMA may issue permits, allowing a person to do something or omit to do 
something in respect of an active constituent for a proposed or existing chemical product, or 
in respect of a chemical product, that would otherwise be:  
o 
an offence against certain provisions of the AgVet Code 
o 
an offence against the provisions of a law of a jurisdiction declared by a law of that 
jurisdiction to be an eligible law for the purposes of the AgVet Code or the AgVet 
Code Regulations 
o 
a contravention against certain civil penalty provisions of the AgVet Code.  
The proposed ACTG proposal for off-label harmonisation would result in the APVMA being 
unable to legally under the current Federal legislation19 to issue a permit for domestic use of a 
minor crop, even if part of the industry requires this for consumer confidence or discretionary 
request of a domestic market, such as Australian supermarkets as there would be no legal 
basis for this requirement. 
GPA believes the proposed ACTG approach would ultimately be a more expensive option for the 
grains industry to implement for minor commodities through the ongoing cost of residue testing 
through whole of industry managed QA programs. Minor and emergency use in the grains industry 
has been very effectively managed through the APVMA permit program. GPA sees the ACTG off-
label use proposal as a shifting of costs and responsibility from state and federal government to 
industry. The robust assessment through the permit program has ensured ongoing domestic 
consumer and export market confidence in Australian grain products.   
• Whether more measures should be included in disallowable legislative instruments made by the 
APVMA. 
The increased use of disallowable legislative instruments by the APVMA would be a good step 
forward for a science-based regulator that takes into account the best global knowledge on new 
technologies.  While Parliament would still have powers to disallow APVMA regulations, this approach 
would increase the flexibility and responsiveness to rapidly evolving technologies such as digital and 
automation technologies currently being considered for use by industry.   
There is an urgent need for the chemical industry to transform from current 19th century paper based 
systems into a 21st century smart digital agriculture system. There is a need for further legislative 
reform that allows for the outcome of the decision making process to result in an electronic label as an 
alternative to the current paper based output. Use of disallowable legislative instruments by the 
APVMA in this case would be an appropriate step forward until state control of use legislation can 
catch up. These changes should also be reflected in state control of use legislation to support the 
implementation of electronic labels.  This will allow for the future integration of label information into 
computerised spray control systems that will facilitate the integration of autonomous machine control.  
Theme 4: Improve consistency in data protection provisions 
• Whether the amendments have improved data protection and made the associated provisions 
easier to understand. 
GPA in previous submissions has proposed new incentives including options to reform data protection 
to address the significant issue of investment market failure of AgVet investment in Australia. The 
17 http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_reg/aavccr1995491/s57.html 
18 https://apvma.gov.au/node/984 
19 https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2016C00999/Download

15
impact of this declining investment is highlighted in table 1 comparing differences in pesticide 
technology access for Australian grain growers with the USA.  This data clearly identifies a significant 
problem from a lack of investment as growers are impacted by the ‘double whammy’ of lack of new, 
more advanced pesticide options delivering productivity outcomes, plus accelerated selection 
pressure for pesticide resistance due to a narrow pool of products. This situation has not improved 
since 2014 since implementation of the 2013 Act and commercial investment in new pesticide 
technologies appears to have become worse in recent years.  
Table 1. Comparison of first registered labels between Australian and USA.   
Grain crops highlighted in red 
Source: compiled by Kevin Bodnaruk AKC Consulting Pty Ltd for Horticulture Innovation Australia Limited 
support increased AgVet investment into Australia to provide the tools and production capacity for 
industry to remain internationally competitive.  
• Whether Part 3 of the AgVet Code should be omitted to allow stakeholders to rely on commercial 
arbitration legislation for persons to negotiate access to both protected information and information 
with limits on its use. 
GPA does not support this approach as this would potentially lead to registrant uncertainty of 
maintaining CCI and data protection and a consequential loss of investment confidence in 
commercialising new AgVet technology in Australia. This could also significantly increase legal costs 
to registrants of defending and maintaining labels to data protected products.  This cost would 
ultimately be borne by producers as end users. 
• Whether ‘protected information’ and ‘information with limits on its use’ should be consolidated. 
GPA did not support the protected information’ and ‘information with limits on its use’ legislative 
reforms in the 2013 Act. There is a need for incentives to reflect the amount of effort or cost to deliver 
technology for some industries.  There is also a need for incentive benefits that stretch data protection 
out to 3 to 5 years to be a higher bar of effort. There is also a need for additional limitation or 
protection period for the use of a chemical product on each entire crop or animal commodity group,

16
supported by the relevant industry through an identified priorities list.  Incentives must be linked in the 
legislation to a list of industry priorities.   
There are significant barriers to companies contributing protected data to minor and emergency use 
permits, particularly if this is new international data to Australia, which would not have already been 
protected through a label application process.  The potential opportunity for increased data protection 
would provide incentive for greater investment by commercial manufacturers in minor use programs in 
Australia and this would also potentially support a longer-term objective of an increased number of 
permits being transferred to label registrations.   
Theme 5: Legislation improvements 
• Whether the simplification and re-organisation of provisions has helped them to better understand 
the legislation. 
While the 2013 Act has continues to try and address improved understanding and clarity of legislative 
provisions, changes have continued to create uncertainty, which has been very concerning when this 
has impacted on confidence of investment in meeting Australia’s crop protection and animal health 
needs. For example, the 2013 Act introduced an alternative pathway to Category 25 applications [Part 
2 Division 3 Section 27 Applications (2) (a)]  which would allow third parties to apply to vary a product 
label with the consent of a registrant. What is unclear in the 2013 Act reforms is whether the data 
submitted would attract any data protection. If it does who gains the benefit, the data provider or the 
registrant giving consent? If there is no data protection then this needs to be clear in the legislation to 
avoid any confusion.  The potential for data protection would provide significant incentive for greater 
investment by commercial manufacturers in this program and this would result in an increased 
number of permits being transferred to label registrations. 
• Whether the redrafting of existing ‘legislative tests’ into the four ‘meets the X criteria’ tests in 
subsection 3(1) of the AgVet Code has assisted them to comply with safety, trade, efficacy and 
labelling criteria. 
environmental credentials for the grains industry while delivering safe and effective agricultural 
chemical technologies for sustainable production.  GPA has made previous submissions detailing a 
best practice approach to environmental exposure assessments20.  It is important that legislations 
recognises that farming systems may change in time reflecting better practice and assessment should 
consider the current industry best practice standards. GPA suggests that legislation recognises 
industry best practice such as the grains industry using no-till and stubble retention as standard 
industry practice and includes these practices as the default for any regulatory consideration of 
industry or commercial permits, labels or reviews. 
The reforms to legislative tests have not addressed the key issue of a lack of investment in new active 
products to comply with safety, trade, efficacy and labelling criteria.  The issue is that investment in 
new applications cannot be addressed through regulation, but rather requires incentives to facilitate 
fast tracked investment into Australia. To address investment market failure in the longer term, there 
is need for transformational change to AgVet regulation in Australia.  This should include 
consideration to full international co-regulation with a major technology development country.  A 
transition to this could be supported through an interim provisional and/or conditional registration 
process. This will increase multinational confidence for investment into Australia and also increase 
Australia’s ranking on investment priority compared with competing investment opportunity in Asia 
and South America.  This initiative would deliver; 
Consumer and government confidence in broader international standards 
Cost savings to Australia 
20 Response to call for public comment on proposed new APVMA framework for environmental exposure assessment.

17
Fastest possible technology access for agricultural industries 
Ensuring Australia is on the first priority commercialisation list. 
These options would capture not only minor uses, but also major uses where there is demonstrated 
market failure for investment and a need for additional investment intervention.  There is a need to 
expand the minor use definition to not only those industry needs that are of low economic value to a 
registrant but also for situations where there is insufficient approved options for pest management or 
where investment market failure occurs impacting on industry productivity. 
If Australia were to effectively collaborate with IR-4 in the USA, then there will need to be some 
government appropriation for an Australian equivalent.   An investment model, which is at odds with 
the USA system, would be a significant disincentive for international collaboration with Australia.  To 
address this, there is a need to consider amendment to regulations so that no fee is payable (or is 
reduced to a certain percentage) if the use qualifies as a priority by ‘written submission in a prioritised 
list by the government nominated representative peak agricultural industry organisation or relevant 
research and development corporation defined under the PIERD21 Act’. 
There are significant advantages of having industry-linked incentives in place as soon as possible to 
encourage industries to participate in priority setting process and additional industry and commercial 
investment.  This includes the USA IR-4 approach of priority review by the USEPA for support of key 
industry priorities.  Having these linked in the legislation, particularly in terms of fees and assessment 
timeframes would be an excellent initiative to deliver rapid benefits to industry and the community. 
Theme 6: Variations to relevant particulars and conditions 
• The value and practical effects of having multiple processes for varying relevant particulars and 
the effectiveness of existing processes for varying conditions, and whether there should be a 
streamlined means of varying conditions (recognising the technical assessment that can be 
required). 
The value and practical effects of having multiple processes for varying relevant particulars is best 
demonstrated in the grains industry through industry initiated discussion with registrants and the 
APVMA in managing risks of adverse spray drift events from 2,4-D herbicide.  Through discussion of 
all stakeholders, the APVMA has been able to vary conditions resulting in a positive outcome for 
producers resulting in significant reduction in spray drift risk. GPA has also recently supported Agvet 
2018 Bill reforms to enable label holders to make reasonable variations, reducing the regulatory 
burden on industry and the APVMA by allowing defined variations to the constituents in chemical 
products. 
• Whether AgVet legislation could be simplified by dealing with variations to approval and 
registration as new approvals and registrations. 
GPA does not support dealing with variations as a new registration, as many existing older products 
which have been on the market for many years while only requiring only a minor label variation could 
be potentially required to re-submit major data sets and meet new regulatory requirements which did 
not exist at the time of registration.  This in effect would discourage any label variations for product 
use improvement and would result in disinvestment by registrant in older generic off-patent products. 
• What mechanisms would stakeholders support for dealing cost-effectively with incorrect 
information in notifiable variations and prescribed variations? 
GPA supported the recent 2018 AgVet Bill reforms delivering options to implement computerised 
decision-making (Part 4 of Schedule 1), providing for internal review of an APVMA decision that is 
substituted for a computer-based decision, by providing for the APVMA to use computerised decision-
making.  This could be extended to more efficiently manage cost-effectively with incorrect information 
21 https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2013C00545

18
in notifiable variations and prescribed variations. GPA in its previous submissions suggested that 
these reforms should go further, highlighting the need for further legislative reform that allows for the 
outcome of the decision making process to result in an electronic label as an alternative to the current 
paper based output. 
Other comments for future AgVet legislative reform 
As detailed in previous submissions to the Department by GPA, agriculture is facing significant 
challenges in being able to deal with the future resistance threats and emerging plant and animal 
health issues.  Many agricultural industries, particularly grains will experience significant productivity 
losses in 8-10 years through the combined impacts of pesticide resistance evolution and the limited 
access to new technologies.  With a lead-time of 7 to 10 years to deliver a commercial technology that 
has already demonstrated proof of concept, Australia cannot afford an increased burden of 
unnecessary costs. 
Options that could be implemented through further legislative AgVet reform delivering productivity 
outcomes for industry including an improved approach to minor use and specialty needs of pesticide 
and veterinary medicines have been proposed following consultation with many RDC’s and peak 
industry bodies.  An option includes; 
Supported through legislation, establishment of formal collaboration with USA and Canada through 
IR-4 minor use programs, establish an Australian minor use program cost recovery model, which 
mirrors these overseas programs with supporting legislation to ensure efficiency of this program; 
• Delivering cost savings, which would need to be based on co-equivalence of cost recovery 
models for evaluation  
• Delivering technology to agricultural industries faster 
• Increasing international confidence of Australia as a cost effective investment option. 
GPA commitment to further reform discussion 
GPA is committed to further discussion with the Australian and state governments on the need to 
deliver transformational change delivering improved pesticide technology access and stewardship in 
the Australian agricultural industry.  There is commitment from GPA to work cross industry and deliver 
productivity outcomes to agricultural industries and the Australian economy and community. 
If you would like to discuss any of these comments and suggestions further in detail, please contact 
me on email andrew.weidemann@grainproducers.com.au or 0428 504 544. 
Yours sincerely 
Andrew Weidemann 
Chairman  
Grain Producers Australia