Page | 1 
Submission to the 
Working Holiday Maker Review 
1 September 2016

Page | 2 
NFF Member Organisations

Page | 3 
The National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) is the voice of Australian farmers.  
The NFF was established in 1979 as the national peak body representing farmers 
and more broadly, agriculture across Australia. The NFF’s membership comprises 
all of Australia’s major agricultural commodities across the breadth and the length 
of the supply chain. 
Operating under a federated structure, individual farmers join their respective state 
farm organisation and/or national commodity council. These organisations form 
the NFF.  
The NFF represents Australian agriculture on national and foreign policy issues 
including workplace relations, trade and natural resource management. Our 
members complement this work through the delivery of direct 'grass roots' 
member services as well as state-based policy and commodity-specific interests.

Page | 4 
Statistics on Australian Agriculture 
Australian agriculture makes an important contribution to Australia’s social, 
economic and environmental fabric.  
Social > 
There are approximately 123,091 farm businesses in Australia, 99 per cent of 
which are Australian family owned and operated.  
Each Australian farmer produces enough food to feed 600 people, 150 at home 
and 450 overseas. Australian farms produce around 93 per cent of the total volume 
of food consumed in Australia. 
Economic > 
The agricultural sector, at farm-gate, contributes 2.4 per cent to Australia’s total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The gross value of Australian farm production in 
2016-17 is forecast at 58.5 billion – a 12 per cent increase from the previous 
financial year.  
Together with vital value-adding processes for food and fibre after it leaves the 
farm, along with the value of farm input activities, agriculture’s contribution to 
GDP averages out at around 12 per cent (over $155 billion).  
Workplace > 
The agriculture, forestry and fishing sector employs approximately 323,000 
employees, including owner managers (174,800) and non-managerial employees 
(148,300). Approximately one quarter of all employees are working holiday 
makers. 
Seasonal conditions affect the sector’s capacity to employ. Permanent employment 
is the main form of employment in the sector, but more than 40 per cent of the 
employed workforce is casual.  
Approximately 60 per cent of farm businesses are small businesses. More than 50 
per cent of farm businesses have no employees at all. 
Environmental > 
Australian farmers are environmental stewards, owning, managing and caring for 
52 per cent of Australia’s land mass. Farmers are at the frontline of delivering 
environmental outcomes on behalf of the Australian community, with 94 per cent 
of Australian farmers actively undertaking natural resource management. The NFF 
was a founding partner of the Landcare movement, which recently celebrated its 
20th anniversary.

Page | 5 
Contents 
Statistics on Australian Agriculture ...................................................................... 4 
Contents ............................................................................................................... 5 
Executive Summary ............................................................................................. 6 
1.  
Introduction ................................................................................................. 7 
2.  
The Working Holiday Maker Program ........................................................ 9 
2.  
Australia’s competitive position in attracting seasonal and temporary foreign 
labour ........................................................................................................ 14 
3.  
Regulatory imposts on employers .............................................................. 20 
4.  
Exploitation of and protections for vulnerable workers .............................. 24 
5.  
Capacity to match employers with available workers ................................. 27 
6.  
Recent changes to the working holiday maker program ............................. 29 
7.  
Exchange rates, economic growth and employment rates in source nations 33 
8.  
Short-term and long-term agricultural and tourism labour needs ................ 42 
9.  
Opportunities to expand supply of seasonal and temporary foreign workers 
for the agricultural sector ........................................................................... 45 
10.  Consistent tax treatment between different classes of temporary work visa 
holders ...................................................................................................... 49 
11.  Conclusion ................................................................................................ 51 
12.  Summary of recommendations .................................................................. 52

Page | 6 
Executive Summary 
The 2015 Federal Budget announced that from 1 July 2016, all working holiday 
makers would be taxed as non-residents – that is, at 32.5% on all income.  
Currently, backpackers are treated as residents for tax purposes if they stay in 
Australia for more than six months. This gives them access to the tax-free 
threshold, low income tax offset (LITO) and a lower tax rate of 19 per cent for 
income above the tax free threshold up to $37,000. The budget measure is 
estimated to raise $540.0 million over the forward estimates. Reducing the tax 
payable to 19% would mean estimated revenue of $315.7 million over the same 
period. 
The Government has previously stressed that any revenue lost from the budget 
bottom line through changes to the ‘backpacker tax’ would need to be found 
elsewhere. Reversing the annual decline in backpacker numbers coming to 
Australia would generate over $300 million each year. For each $100 million in 
additional revenue needed, an additional 6666 working holiday makers is needed – 
an outcome that is readily achievable when one considers that a recent release of 
5000 visa places for working holiday makers from China was virtually filled 
overnight. 
Increasing the number of visitors to Australia is one solution and there are also 
others. Australian farmers are looking to this review to identify the solution that 
will best address deeply held concerns within the agriculture and tourism sectors 
about the impact of such a high rate of tax on working holiday makers.  
In the longer term, broader agricultural workforce supply issues must also be 
addressed. However, there are many complex issues involved in designing and 
delivering a sound agricultural workforce strategy for the future. It would be 
selling the sector short to attempt to achieve this in a matter of weeks.  
We look forward to continuing work with government to fix the ‘backpacker tax’ 
and establish a process for the development of a future agricultural workforce 
strategy in the months and years to come.

Page | 7 
1. Introduction 
Agriculture is a source of strength in the Australian economy, positioned to 
capitalise on growing global demand for safe, high quality food and fibre over 
coming decades.  
To achieve our vision, the sector needs regulatory and public policy settings that 
foster growth and productivity; innovation and ambition. This includes securing 
access to labour throughout the year and particularly at peak harvest times – we 
cannot achieve our productive potential without it. The agriculture sector is unique 
in its reliance on overseas workers: in 2015-16, around 92% or 33 362 working 
holiday makers worked on Australian farms, supporting strong growth in total 
annual farm production value of up to 8 per cent.  
Temporary migration for seasonal agricultural work is nothing new. It has a long 
tradition in many OECD countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada, the 
USA and New Zealand. Each of these countries have dedicated programs for 
seasonal agricultural migration: the United Kingdom was one of the first to 
establish a Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme in 1945. The scheme no longer 
operates, but 90% of UK fruit and vegetables are still picked and packed by 
overseas workers, mostly from the European Union.  In Canada, the Seasonal 
Agricultural Workers Program (SAWP) dates from 1966 and draws in workers 
from the Caribbean and Mexico. The US relies heavily on seasonal agricultural 
workers from Mexico. New Zealand now has a Recognised Seasonal Employer 
Scheme (RSE), and Australia has followed suit with the Seasonal Worker Program 
which is still in its infancy in relative program terms. 
In a survey of 535 horticultural growers in February 2016, 65 per cent of 
respondents indicated difficulty finding workers in their local area. The 
overwhelming majority of working holiday makers who undertake regional 
agricultural work do so because it gives them access to a second year visa – 
without this critical incentive, many will choose other forms of work and miss out 
on the unique experience of living and working on farms and contributing to local 
rural and regional economies.  
The problem with the ‘backpacker tax’ is that it will do just that. Working holiday 
makers will no longer see the value in regional agricultural work – and they won’t

Page | 8 
come. This will have a dampening effect on rural and regional Australia – in an 
environment where the number of working holiday makers is already declining on 
average by around 10-12 per cent each year.  
Our experience suggests that the looming backpacker tax is already changing 
behaviour. In a recent survey of 1434 working holiday makers, 52 per cent had 
decided not to stay working in Australia after 1 July 2016 and 84 per cent had 
heard of others changing their plans about coming to Australia. Similar surveys 
have recently been released with similar results. Overwhelmingly, working 
holiday makers are telling us they will leave if the tax rate is too high. A petition 
against the tax attracted almost 50,000 signatures in a matter of weeks. That alone 
should give government cause to reconsider.  
We need to encourage, not deter, working holiday makers to come and work on 
the farm, and we need to do this as soon as possible. This means abandoning the 
‘backpacker tax’ and finding a better way forward.  
The National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) will work cooperatively through this 
review and with government to identify that solution, whatever it may be. We did 
just that in the initial review, and we will continue until a solution is found. 
Because whatever the politics, farmers will always need access to overseas 
workers. Without these workers, who supplement our local workforce, Australian 
agriculture cannot capitalise on the opportunities ahead and one of the five future 
growth sectors of the economy will instead grind to a halt.

Page | 9 
2. The Working Holiday Maker Program  
There are two separate working holiday maker visa subclasses: the 417 visa 
subclass and the 462 visa subclass. The table below describes each visa subclass in 
more detail.  
Working holiday maker (417) visa 
Working holiday maker (462) visa 
12 month visa, must be aged 18-30, max 6 
months with one employer 
12 month visa, must be aged 18-30, max 6 months 
with one employer; must have done at least 2 years 
university study and have functional English 
2nd year visa if at least 88 days work done in 
regional agriculture, forestry and fishing, 
mining or construction 
No current option for a 2nd year visa. 
From late 2016, 2nd year visa will be open to those 
who work in Northern Australia in aged and 
disability care, agriculture forestry and fishing, 
mining, construction, tourism or hospitality for at 
least 88 days. Covers work in NT and areas of WA 
and Qld above the Tropic of Capricorn (north of 
Rockhampton). 
Can study for up to 4 months 
Can study for up to 4 months 
Applies to visitors from Belgium, Canada, 
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, 
Germany, Hong Kong, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Korea, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, 
Sweden, Taiwan, United Kingdom 
Applies to visitors from Argentina, Bangladesh, 
Chile, China, Greece, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, 
PNG, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, 
Spain, Thailand, Turkey, USA, Uruguay, Vietnam 
Tax: 19% + tax free threshold (residents);         
32.5% (non-residents) 
Tax: 19% + tax free threshold (residents);          
32.5% (non-residents) 
Subtle differences have a large impact on their level of contribution to Australian 
agriculture. For example, very few, if any, 462 visa holders undertake regional 
agricultural work because there is no option of a second year visa if they do. This 
may change if commitments made in 2015 are implemented to make 462 visa 
holders eligible for a second year visa after working in certain industries in 
Northern Australia. Even then, few 462 visa holders are likely to undertake 
agricultural work as they will also qualify for the second year visa by working 
instead in cafes and hotels. 
Working holiday makers now contribute over $3.2 billion to the Australian 
economy. In 2015-16, a total of 214,6431 working holiday maker visas were 
granted (417: 195,673; 462: 18,970. First year visas were down approximately 8% 
1 Working Holiday Maker visa programme report, 30 June 2014.

Page | 10 
(159,409) and second year visas were down 12% (36,264). This decline is costing 
the economy more than $320 million each year. 
Source: DIBP, Working Holiday Maker visas granted pivot table 2015-16 to 30 June 2016 - 
comparison with previous years 
There are 34 countries currently participating in the working holiday maker (417 
and 462) visa programs. Most 417 arrangements were implemented prior to 2005 
and provide for participation on an uncapped basis, with the United Kingdom the 
primary source of visa holiday makers, followed by Germany and France. Under 
the 462 visa subclass, participation is capped, with limits varying from country to 
country as agreed through bilateral arrangements. The largest cap applies to China 
(5000), followed by Chile (1500) and Indonesia (1000), as the table below shows. 
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
to 30
June
2016
WHM visa grants 2005-2016 
First year visas
Second year visas
Grand Total

Page | 11 
Source: Department of Immigration and Border Protection Working Holiday Maker Visa 
Programme Report 31 December 2015 
In 2015-16, around 92% per cent of working holiday makers (33,362) qualified for 
the second year visa through agricultural work. Working holiday makers earn an 
estimated average of $15,088.012 each year while in Australia and spend 
approximately the same amount, after tax, while they are here. Their average tax 
contribution is $1324.22. Their remaining earnings are largely spent on tourism 
(travel, accommodation, experiences). Older working holiday makers (ages 25-30) 
spend 70% more than those aged 18-19 years.3 
2 Figures provided by Taxback.com, reflecting analysis of 8378 working holiday maker tax returns 
to the end of July 2016. 
3 Tan Y, Richardson S, Lester L, Bai T and Sun L Evaluation of Australia’s Working Holiday 
Maker (WHM) Program 27 February 2009.

Page | 12 
 Working holiday makers 
2016 TY  
Average Gross Earnings:  
$15,088.01 
Average Income Tax Withheld:  
$2,778.30 
Average Post Tax Return Contribution: 
$779.54 
Average Tax on Departing Superannuation Claims*: 
$544.68 
Total tax contribution  
$1,324.22 
Total tax contribution – all working holiday makers 
$3.237b 
Total tax contribution – working holiday makers in the agriculture 
sector 
$503.3m 
Source: Taxback.com 
A survey4 of 1434 mostly working holiday makers after the 2015 Budget found 
that: 
 69% knew about how Australian taxes worked before they came here; 
 86% thought they were eligible for the tax free threshold;  
 52% had decided not to stay working in Australia after 1 July 2016; and 
 84% had since heard of backpackers changing their plans about coming to 
Australia. 
A second survey of 5000 working holiday makers in January 20165 showed 
similar results: 
 89% of respondents said if they knew about the backpacker tax before 
coming to Australia they would have considered going elsewhere; 
 90% of respondents said they would not do fruit picking / harvest / 2nd 
year visa work if taxed 32.5%; 
 89% of respondents said paying 32.5% would deter them from working in 
Australia altogether; and 
 95% of respondents thought the tax would deter future working holiday 
makers from visiting Australia. 
More recently, in the Northern Territory, a comprehensive survey6 to determine 
the extent of skills and labour shortages experienced by farm businesses and their 
level of reliance on overseas workers in March/April 2016 highlighted the 
contribution of the ‘backpacker’ cohort as a source of employees for the farm 
sector in the NT. According to survey results: 
4 Agrilabour Working Holiday Visa Tax Survey 2015. 
5 Working Holiday Jobs Working Holiday Visa Tax Survey 
 https://www.workingholidayjobs.com.au/working-holiday-visa-tax-survey/. 
6 Survey conducted by NT Farmers, in partnership with the NT Department of Business and 
Migration NT.

Page | 13 
 
Working holiday makers and other overseas workers make up approximately 
90% of the total NT agricultural workforce (approximately 2700 
backpackers) 
 
70% of employees in management and permanent positions are Australians 
or Permanent residents 
 
1 in 5 full time employees in management and permanent positions are 
overseas workers on an employer sponsored visa 
 
Jobs growth in the farm sector is expected, with 28% of farmers indicating 
they would have new full time positions available within 12 months. In the 
mango sector this increased to 37% 
 
The mango sector, which the NT is renowned for, expected an increased 
need of an average of four employees per farm and the melon sector, an 
average of 14 additional employees per farm 
 
The jobs are primarily casual farmhand/fruit/ vegetable pickers and fruit 
packing positions that are usually filled by overseas workers (i.e. 
backpackers and employer sponsored workers).  Farmers also indicated that 
these same positions had been the most difficult to fill in the last year and 
have concerns about whether they will be able to be filled if the backpacker 
tax is introduced 
 
62% of farmers believe that the backpacker tax will negatively affect the 
number of workers available to them 
 
50% of farmers expected the number of working holiday makers working in 
their business to reduce by 20-80% 
 
 40% of farmers indicated they would not be able to access workers from 
any other source to overcome the anticipated decrease in backpacker labour 
These studies confirm that the proposed change to the taxation status for working 
holiday makers is likely to be a major limiter to the productivity and growth of the 
farm sector. While the latter results are specific to the Northern Territory, similar 
results are likely to flow in all agricultural regions of the Australian economy.

Page | 14 
2. Australia’s competitive position in attracting seasonal and 
temporary foreign labour 
Remaining globally competitive is a challenge for Australian farmers in 
circumstances where Australia has some of the highest labour costs in the world, 
and one of the highest average annual wages in the OECD7. In 2015, Australia had 
the second highest real minimum wage in the OECD behind Germany.8  
Recent scrutiny on treatment of workers in the sector and high profile media 
attention has drawn attention to the conditions of employment on Australian 
farms, and not always in a positive light. Anecdotal reports suggest that reductions 
in working holiday makers from countries including South Korea may have been 
exacerbated by negative media stories about worker mistreatment. Similarly, the 
2015 survey referred to above found that 84% of respondents had heard of 
backpackers changing their plans about coming to Australia after becoming aware 
of the proposed ‘backpacker tax’. Addressing these issues is very important if we 
are to encourage greater participation in the working holiday maker program, 
including in the agriculture sector. 
As one of the more labour intensive industries within the agriculture sector, labour 
costs are of particular significance to the horticulture industry. As a result of 
higher labour costs, horticulture is relatively uncompetitive on the world market 
and must drive value through premium market niches. Much of horticulture is 
seasonal work – grapes, for example, or tree crops, have one harvest each year. 
Spikes in labour needs are difficult to manage, and must be ‘imported’ to 
supplement the small core workforce of local workers who prefer consistent work 
and tend not to choose an itinerant lifestyle following the harvest trail. 
Finding enough labour is an ongoing challenge, as is sourcing accommodation for 
harvest labour for short periods. This includes packing shed labour for perishable 
crops which operate within a small window of the calendar year. Without reliable 
labour, business confidence and global competiveness of agriculture plunges and 
affects exports as well as the domestic market. 
7  
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), (2015); Average 
Annual Wages <http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?queryname=343&querytype=view>. 
8  
OECD (2015), Real Minimum Wages, 
<http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?queryname=343&querytype=view>.

Page | 15 
According to statistics released by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and 
Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES)9 agricultural labour cost increases 
over the past five years have kept pace with the rising price of vegetables, while 
the price that farmers receive for fruit and milk has decreased. As the graph below 
shows, agricultural labour costs have risen faster than the price received by 
farmers for horticultural commodities covered by these statistics. 
Perhaps the only advantage of high labour costs for Australian farmers is that the 
earnings potential of farm employees is greater in Australia than it is in 
comparable countries overseas. The following table illustrates the position in 
Australia (both at 32.5% and 19%) compared to that of New Zealand and Canada. 
Comparative hourly rates (gross and net)  
Country 
Australia (32.5%) 
Australia (19%) 
NZ  
Canada 
Min. hourly 
wage 
$17.70 
$17.70 
$15.25 
$11.07 
Tax rate 
32.5% 
19% 
10.5% 
15% 
Net hourly 
wage 
$11.95 
$14.34 
$13.65 
$9.41 
9  
ABARES ‘Agricultural Commodities – vol 6 no 2 June quarter 2016. 
2011-12
1012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
Fruit Prices
181.4
156.5
158.8
170.4
170.5
173.5
Vegetable Prices
161.3
172.8
174.1
179.1
180.7
183.8
Milk Prices
139.5
134.7
171.6
162.5
144.1
140.7
Labour Costs
155.6
159.2
163.5
166.3
168.8
171.7
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Index of price 
Commodity Price and Labour Costs 
Index of Prices Received vs Labour Costs 
Fruit Prices
Vegetable Prices
Milk Prices
Labour Costs

Page | 16 
Comparative wages, entitlements and conditions 
In Australia, the national minimum wage is only one part of a complex web of 
support mechanisms for families with working parents. In addition to tax relief and 
child care subsidies, the safety net for employees is comprehensive and wide-
reaching. Most employees are covered by modern awards, supplementing the 
National Employment Standards (NES). The NES covers weekly hours of work, 
parental leave, annual leave, personal/carer’s leave, compassionate leave, 
community service leave, public holidays, notice of termination and redundancy as 
well as the Fair Work Information Statement. 
The wages of entry level employees are set at the national minimum wage in many 
modern awards, with other employees paid higher wages according to their level 
of responsibility, skill and experience. The Fair Work Act 2009 operates to ensure 
that enterprise agreements can never provide wage levels that are lower than those 
set by modern awards.10  
New Zealand also provides for minimum employment rights11, although at a less 
generous level than in Australia. They include annual leave, public holidays, sick 
leave, bereavement leave, parental leave, meal breaks, and jury service. Unlike 
Australia, there is no industrial award system. Enterprise agreements can be 
negotiated but are not compulsory. 
Minimum standards also operate in the various Canadian jurisdictions12, again at a 
lesser standard than applies in Australia. These standards cover issues such as 
hours of work and overtime pay, minimum wages, vacation time and vacation pay, 
public holidays, coffee and meal breaks, pregnancy leave and parental leave, 
personal emergency leave, family medical leave, termination notice and 
termination pay. In most provinces, farm workers have no entitlement to overtime 
or public holiday pay. 
Comparative superannuation or equivalent entitlements 
10 Fair Work Act 2009, s.206. 
11 Employment New Zealand Minimum rights of employees 
https://www.employment.govt.nz/starting-employment/rights-and-responsibilities/minimum-rights-
of-employees/. 
12 See for example, the Ontario Ministry of Labour’s guide to employment rights at 
https://www.labour.gov.on.ca/english/es/pubs/is_fn_esa.php.

Page | 17 
As the table below illustrates, Australia is the only comparable country where 
employers are required to make compulsory superannuation contributions on 
behalf of all temporary overseas workers.13 
Country 
Australia 
Canada 
New Zealand 
Scheme  
Superannuation 
Guarantee  
Registered Pension 
Plan 
Kiwisaver 
Features 
9.5% of ordinary time 
earnings 
Optional  
3% of gross wages 
Compulsory 
Optional  
Optional  
Employer funded, 
employees can make 
voluntary 
contributions 
Employer and 
employee 
contributions can be 
made 
If opt-in, 
contributions required 
by both employer and 
employee 
Promotional programmes and schemes to assist workers while in the country 
Resources to operate promotional and support schemes are limited at all levels of 
government and accordingly, the priority given to such schemes vary across 
jurisdictions. The Queensland Agricultural Workers Network is one such example, 
as are the Harvest Labour Service and the National Harvest Labour Information 
Service. These latter services operate through the Harvest Trail website14, 
connecting growers with work in the horticulture industry.  
Industry bodies self-fund and promote programs to industry and provide access to 
information and support for workers while in Australia. Industry best management 
practice programs are increasingly looking at how to promote sustainable 
workplace practices. The “People in Dairy” website15 is an example of a program 
that is likely to be adopted on a cross-sectoral basis to promote greater awareness 
and compliance with workplace laws. 
There are strong systems in place to enforce workplace terms and conditions under 
the Fair Work Act 2009. The Fair Work Commission oversees the making of 
modern awards and enterprise agreements. The Fair Work Ombudsman (FWO) 
educates employers and employees on their obligations under the Fair Work Act 
2009 and has statutory powers to enforce minimum wages and conditions of 
employment as well as other protections. In addition, migration inspectors 
13 Guest R, Comparison of the NZ and Australian Retirement Income Systems - Background paper 
prepared for the 2013 review of retirement income policy by the Commission for Financial 
Literacy and Retirement Income Griffith University, February 2013. 
14 https://jobsearch.gov.au/job/search/harvest . 
15 http://www.thepeopleindairy.org.au/ .

Page | 18 
appointed under the Migration Act 1958 have enforcement powers in relation to 
migrant visas and work rights. 
Where concerns arise about mistreatment of workers, they can be referred to the 
relevant authority or to a union representing the worker. Australian unions are 
strong and independent organisations with statutory rights under the Fair Work Act 
2009 to enter workplaces, hold discussions with employees, bargain on behalf of 
employees they represent and investigate suspected breaches of workplace laws. 
Unions are entitled to represent the industrial interests of workers who fall into the 
categories of work described in the relevant union rules. 
Costs and barriers to entry 
There are relatively few costs and barriers to entry to temporary and seasonal work 
for working holiday makers. Demand for employees is generally always high and 
those who want work can usually find it without too much difficulty. 
By contrast, the Seasonal Worker Program has a range of costs and barriers that 
operate as a major disincentive to use. Fundamentally, the program is under-
resourced – other than the cost of overseeing the program at the Departmental 
level, there is no funding provided in Australia to support uptake of the program. 
Employers wear all the cost of bringing workers to Australia, supporting them 
while they are here, providing pastoral care, and so on.  
Just the upfront cost to businesses to participate in the program are significant - 
approximately $2000 per worker. While much of this cost may be eventually 
recovered, the outlay has a large cashflow impact on farm businesses. As an 
example, employing 100 workers under the Program would require an outlay of 
approximately $200,000 before any work is done – or suitability for the work 
assessed. This requires a leap of faith from a price taking sector which is 
traditionally risk adverse and cost conscious. For Pacific Island employees, the 
cost of travel to Australia is significant in relative terms to their income at home, 
and the later decisions are made about approving visas and placements in 
Australia, the more expensive airfares become.  
Administration of the Program is currently managed by the Department of 
Employment. The Department is the decision-maker and the range of decisions it 
must make are broad – from who can access the Program, to when work is

Page | 19 
approved and how many workers are approved. In doing so, it is required to 
balance a broader range of public interest considerations in managing the Program 
than would apply to a private sector provider (for example, managing risks relating 
In a program that seeks to address acute labour shortages during periods of intense 
labour demand, this can lead to withholding of critical farm labour when it is 
needed most. The Department is placed in the position of deciding on the farm 
labour needs of individual businesses, despite its lack of familiarity with those 
unique farming operations. Inadequate resources, bureaucracy and lack of 
familiarity generally with industry operating practices and pressures can cause 
delays while information is gathered, analysed and decisions made. 
Other inflexible aspects of the program include the requirement to guarantee a 
certain level of work each week, which is sometimes interpreted as a requirement 
to provide a minimum level of income each week, whether or not the employee is 
a pieceworker paid on a ‘per bin’ basis. There is limited ability to vary start and 
finish dates in the event of natural disasters, such as floods and cyclones. Equally, 
repatriating workers found to be unsuitable on arrival in Australia requires 
negotiation with relevant Departmental officials and can take some time - if and 
once approved.  
These issues need to be addressed if the Seasonal Worker Program is to become a 
viable mainstream workforce solution for the agriculture sector.

Page | 20 
3. Regulatory imposts on employers 
Australian businesses face a distinct disadvantage in competing with international 
competitors when it comes to labour input costs. Australia has the highest 
minimum wage in the OECD, and some of the highest labour costs in the world. 
Flexible regulation and streamlined and efficient processes in place to manage 
workplace relations are critical in the Australian context to create an environment 
where Australian agriculture can be globally competitive. 
Small businesses, including on-farm and throughout the supply chain, face a 
minefield when it comes to employing staff, through a complex web of Federal 
employment, safety, migration and taxation laws, supplemented by State laws on a 
range of issues from training to workers’ compensation. Increasingly, the focus of 
government and regulators is on passing employer liability across the supply 
chain, so that it is no longer enough for employers to mind their own business – 
they must peer into the practices of others. Resources are critical to the capacity of 
an organisation to manage in this environment – and in the small or family 
business context, many ‘best practice’ ideals are unable to be achieved for want of 
time or money.  
Workplace Relations  
As the Productivity Commission recently noted in its draft report on agricultural 
regulation, labour costs, flexible workplace arrangements and the ability to access 
workers are important for the competitiveness of farm businesses.16 The NFF has 
previously outlined the extent of the regulatory impost of workplace laws on the 
agriculture sector – see our 2015 submission to the Productivity Commission’s 
review of Australia’s workplace relations framework.17  
Superannuation 
Overseas workers temporarily in Australia are entitled to have superannuation 
contributions made on their behalf into a relevant fund, as long as they earn the 
minimum amount each month. Superannuation can be withdrawn early by 
16 Productivity Commission Regulation of Australian Agriculture Draft Report at page 380. 
17 NFF A fair and reasonable framework - Submission to the Productivity Commission Inquiry into 
the Workplace Relations Framework 13 March 2015 
http://www.nff.org.au/get/submissions/4891.pdf .

Page | 21 
temporary residents leaving Australia as a Departing Australia Superannuation 
Payment, taxed at a rate of between 38% and 47%. 
The income threshold above which superannuation is payable ($450 per month) 
has remained static for almost 25 years and the current level bears no resemblance 
at all to the tax-free threshold. As a result, almost all temporary residents are 
entitled to superannuation, even though they would have been ineligible when the 
scheme was first introduced.  
In our view, this policy measure is worth reconsidering given the underlying 
purposes of superannuation to provide an adequate level of retirement income, 
relieve pressure of the Age Pension, increase national savings and create a pool of 
patient capital to be invested as decided by fiduciary trustees.18  Each of these 
objectives can be achieved without the need to extend the benefit to temporary, 
overseas workers. 
Work health and safety laws 
Regulatory burden is a significant issue in the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 
(WHS Act) and associated material, which together comprise an Act, Regulations, 
23 Codes of Practice and 46 Guidance Materials. These documents, and at least an 
additional 29 ‘fact’ or ‘information’ sheets provided to explain how to comply 
with the regulatory regime, are useful for safety management professionals, but for 
the small business person are simply another thing to ‘stay on top of’. And yet the 
regulatory regime requires, as part of the work health and safety duties, that all 
officers in a business or undertaking must maintain an ‘up to date knowledge’. The 
current settings in the WHS Act hinder the capacity of businesses to comply with 
their obligations, impeding employment.   
Migration laws and programs 
Migration programs provide an essential source of labour for many Australian 
farmers. The seasonal nature of agriculture, and its location in rural and remote 
areas of Australia, often makes it difficult to attract and retain Australian workers. 
18 The Treasury Charter of Superannuation Adequacy and Sustainability and Council of 
Superannuation Custodians http://www.treasury.gov.au/Policy- 
Topics/SuperannuationAndRetirement/supercharter/Report/Chapter-4.

Page | 22 
For many farm businesses, low margins limit the capacity to offer higher wages as 
a means of incentivising agricultural work.  
Work in agriculture ranges from highly skilled to unskilled. People working in 
agriculture are typically farm owners and family members, share farmers, itinerant 
workers, students and other local casual workers, grey nomads, skilled migrants, 
backpackers and foreign workers temporarily in Australia to support a better life in 
their home country.  
Labour shortages in the agriculture sector are nothing new. Reasons for chronic 
shortages are many and varied, but include: 
 Permanent departure from the industry following severe droughts; 
 Inadequate infrastructure, connectivity and resources in rural and regional 
areas; 
 Misconceptions about the nature of employment in agriculture; 
 Insufficient marketing of work within the industry and specific vacancies 
and opportunities; 
 Remoteness associated with work in the industry; 
 Limited attraction and retention strategies for existing staff; 
 Lack of support for formal training in agricultural industries; 
 Lack of commercial or other incentive for government and private sector 
recruiters to place agricultural work including short-term, casual and 
seasonal work; 
 Poor program design and restrictions on access to migration under the 
Seasonal Worker Program and the 457 visa program; and 
 Remuneration – the mining industry is a major competitor for the available 
labour pool and pays well above the average to address its own workforce 
supply issues. The capacity of the farm sector to compete at this level is 
severely limited by the price-taking nature of the industry.  
The labour market testing regime makes no acknowledgment of this circumstance. 
Instead, it applies across the board, to all sectors and industries seeking access to 
migrant workers, both in relation to the 457 visa program and the Seasonal Worker 
Program. Recent changes negotiated in the context of the China Australia Free 
Trade Agreement are likely to have increased the red tape surrounding labour 
market testing, by extending its reach even further.

Page | 23 
Labour market testing requirements, particularly for short-term migration 
programs, represent a large commitment for little return. Approved Employers 
under the Seasonal Worker Program prepare a recruitment plan for each group of 
workers they seek to employ, place job advertisements for a minimum 2 week 
period, and report back to the Department of Employment, which administers the 
Program, before proceeding to recruit from overseas.  
The requirement to advertise and offer work to Australian jobseekers before 
seeking to recruit foreign workers is problematic. Farmers are required to advertise 
jobs broadly, eliciting numerous responses from foreign workers and only very 
few from Australian workers. Each job application must be reviewed and 
responded to, requiring allocation of significant time and resources, when the 
reality is that most Australians are not looking for jobs that involve hard, physical 
work in rural, regional and remote areas. In some cases, our members tell us that 
Australian workers who have applied and been offered a job have refused the 
offer, advising that the application was only made to meet their job application 
quota for the month.

Page | 24 
4. Exploitation of and protections for vulnerable workers 
Evaluation of illegal labour hire practices  
When it comes to understanding the type of issues that arise in the use of 
contractors and labour hire companies, a few common features tend to stand out. 
These are: being asked to pay to get a job; handing over passports or bonds; and 
unreasonable deductions for travel and accommodation. In Ontario, Canada, this 
type of conduct is regulated by the Employment Protection for Foreign Nationals 
Act, 200919, which prohibits: 
 recruiters charging fees to foreign workers  
 passing on of most employer hiring costs to employees  
 taking a worker’s property (including passports and permits) 
 waiving of legal rights 
 repercussions against persons who ask about, or exercise, their rights. 
Some of these are also unlawful under Australian law, including by virtue of the 
Fair Work Act 2009’s general protections and Division 12 of the Migration Act 
1958 and the Criminal Code. 
Illegal conduct also involves workers acting in breach of their visa conditions, 
either through overstaying, unapproved work or exceeding maximum hours. This 
makes them more vulnerable to exploitation, as the threat of deportation looms 
large both from government and unscrupulous individuals. 
Employees of labour hire companies are entitled to the same benefits and 
protections as other employees under the Fair Work Act 2009. To the extent that 
these entitlements are not provided, there is a robust regulatory scheme in place to 
enforce them, including through the Fair Work Ombudsman and relevant unions. 
Non-compliance with laws and regulations 
The NFF is proud of our produce and our people. We believe in a fair days’ pay 
for a fair days’ work. We work hard to ensure that farmers in Australia understand 
their award obligations, including through the establishment of dedicated 
industrial relations advisory services for members. We have no sympathy for those 
19 https://www.labour.gov.on.ca/english/es/pubs/is_fn_epfn.php.

Page | 25 
who have a wilful disregard for the law, including Australian workplace and 
migration laws. These individuals drag the rest of the industry down, and make it 
harder for everyone else to compete. 
The agriculture sector has operated under regulated working arrangements for 
longer than any other industry in Australia, since 1907 when the Pastoral Award 
was first made. Overwhelmingly, Australian farmers do their best to comply with 
the heavy and ever-increasing regulatory burden in the sector, including in relation 
to modern award wages and conditions.  
Sometimes, of course, mistakes occur and are only addressed when discovered. 
Clearly, there are also some more serious cases, where individuals choose not to 
do the right thing. However, in our view, sometimes the extent of poor treatment 
in the sector can be overstated: 
 A review of data released by the Fair Work Ombudsman (FWO) outlining 
its exercise of powers under the Migration Act 1958 from 18 September 
2013 to 30 September 2014 identifies only 5 concerns about compliance 
with visa conditions that can be directly attributable to the agriculture 
sector, out of a total of 2311 cases.20  
 According to the FWO’s annual report for 2013-14, visits in August and 
September 2013 to strawberry growers in the regional Queensland 
identified underpayment of approximately 150 backpackers, in the order of 
$133,000 (an average of $886 per person). Three businesses were issued 
with infringement notices (on-the-spot fines) and 11 employers received 
letters of caution. 
 A recent underpayment identified by the FWO’s Harvest Trail audit in 
connection with the Seasonal Worker Program found workers had been 
underpaid approximately $770 each, because of a failure to pay penalty 
rates for piecework on public holidays. While unlawful, such 
underpayments are at the less serious end of the scale and were able to be 
resolved by sensible negotiation.  
20 457 Visa Monitoring - Details Report (18.9.13 to 30.6.14); 457 Visa Monitoring - Details Report 
(1.7.14 to 30..14) http://www.fairwork.gov.au/about-us/accessing-information.

Page | 26 
These figures are not perfect, but nor are they unusually high. The agriculture 
sector is committed to constantly lifting employment standards and has developed 
best practice employment guidelines.21 We work collaboratively with regulatory 
agencies and share information where we can.  
Certainly there are concerns in the community, including in the farm sector, about 
less reputable contractors who charge farmers for workers at the award rate of pay 
and then choose not to pass this on to their workers, or operate in the cash 
economy. Farmers, as beneficiaries of this labour, are ultimately responsible for 
breaches of migration law under the Migration Amendment (Reform of Employer 
Sanctions) Act 2013 and are increasingly vulnerable to prosecution for accessorial 
liability under section 550 of the Fair Work Act 2009 as the FWO steps up its 
efforts to ensure migrants receive their lawful entitlements. 
21 Australian Farmers Sustainable Contracting Guidelines 
http://www.farmers.org.au/content/nff/en/media-center/publications.html.

Page | 27 
5. Capacity to match employers with available workers 
How do farmers find workers? 
Farmers find workers in a variety of ways. A common method is through 
advertisements on seek.com.au, Gumtree or other online job platforms. Others 
employ workers directly, using local backpacker hostels as a hub for attracting and 
engaging potential workers. Many use contractors and labour hire companies to 
source workers, because outsourcing is the most efficient means of securing and 
managing a short term workforce. 
Employment can be a complex and time-consuming process, from recruitment and 
selection to processing of payroll. This is a necessary service to the sector and 
when done well, can create strong working relationships that last over many years. 
A good example is the Seasonal Worker Program, where labour hire operators can 
register to become Approved Employers. Those who are determined to participate 
in the Program work hard to develop relationships with the workers they recruit as 
well as the employers receiving workers from overseas. They provide the requisite 
pastoral care support service for their workers during their stay in Australia. This 
is particularly important to the agriculture sector, where recruitment of seasonal 
workers often coincides with the busiest times of the year, when there is limited 
capacity to devote to administration and extra-curricular activity. 
For farmers, this makes choosing good contractors essential – although in many 
regions, the reality is there isn’t much choice, and the only way to head off a 
harvest workforce crisis is to try and plan well in advance during quieter times of 
the year. Even with the best laid plans, things can go wrong and this can ultimately 
result in economic loss either to the farmer, or the worker, or both.  
How do workers find farms? 
Working holiday makers tend to use a variety of means to find farm work. 
Advertising on Gumtree is common, as is registration with other online job 
forums. Local churches, temples and backpacker hostels can help connect working 
holiday makers with farm work. Registering with labour hire companies is also 
common. Some workers just turn up at the farm gate and ask if there is work

Page | 28 
available, which creates hazards of its own in terms of biosecurity risks and the 
like.  
Regulatory arrangements in relation to the role of labour hire companies 
In our view, there are enough laws in Australia to articulate community 
expectation around how labour contractors behave when employing workers. 
However, compliance is not always strong and the NFF supports improved 
resources directed at improving compliance with Australian workplace and 
migration laws.  
Options to achieve better outcomes in connection with agricultural contractors 
include: 
 an Approved Contractor’s scheme for labour hire providers in Australia, 
where contractors can seek ‘Approved Contractor’ status from the 
Department of Employment by demonstrating sound business practices and 
a history of regulatory compliance. Such a scheme would allow farmers to 
make choices about using contractors who are committed to ethical 
workplace and visa practices; 
 a voluntary code for providers of contract labour, which focuses on 
protections for overseas workers; or 
 legislation similar to the model adopted in Ontario, Canada (discussed 
above). 
The NFF does not support a mandatory licensing scheme for labour contractors. In 
our view, this is unlikely to achieve the desired effect and may have unintended 
consequences, including an increase in the regulatory burden.

Page | 29 
6. Recent changes to the working holiday maker program 
In 2015-16, approximately 33,363 working holiday makers undertook regional 
agricultural work to qualify for their second year visa. This represents a 21% 
reduction over the last three years, from a high of approximately 42,274 in June 
2014.22 The sharpest drops were from Ireland (69% reduction), Taiwan (35%) and 
Hong Kong (32%). 
Access to a second year visa requires a minimum 88 days’ work in agriculture or 
other specified industry. This reflects government policy aiming to support 
regional Australia by helping to address ongoing agricultural workforce shortages.   
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
1-Jan-14
1-Jan-15
1-Jan-16
Second Year Visa Grants - July 2013 - June 2016 
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Hong Kong
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Malta
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Taiwan
United Kingdom

Page | 30 
Following regulatory changes introduced on 31 August 2015, regional agricultural 
work now only counts toward the ‘88 day requirement’ if it is paid, full time work. 
Pay slips must be provided to the Department of Immigration and Border 
Protection to support any application for a visa extension. The motivation behind 
these changes appears to be aimed at reducing opportunities for mistreatment of 
workers (for example, by taking advantage of unpaid labour and/or making other 
unreasonable demands). However, the changes have a number of adverse 
consequences for the agriculture sector, discussed in further detail below. 
The ‘88 day’ requirement 
The Department of Immigration and Border Protection’s internal Procedures 
Advice Manual provides guidance for officials on how to assess the 88 day 
requirement, including the following statements: 
“…in calculating 88 days of specified work, only full days of work are 
counted”; and  
“…the shortest period that may be counted towards the specified work 
requirement is one day of full time work (for that industry).  It is not 
acceptable to add two half days to make one full day of work, or to count 
one double shift as two full days of work.” 
The term “day” is not defined in migration legislation and the current approach 
excludes any part-time or casual work of less than 7-8 hours per day. Full time 
employees are entitled to count unpaid days attributable to weekends in the 88 day 
period, while part time and casual employees cannot. In our view, these changes 
unreasonably narrow the scope of the second year visa initiative.  
A better approach, if the payslip requirement remains, is to calculate work on an 
hourly basis, so that all hours worked by working holiday makers count toward the 
88 day requirement. This approach works for all industries, and ensures that 
working holiday makers are not unfairly disadvantaged by working on a part-time 
or casual basis, or on days when it rains, or is too hot, or when machinery breaks 
down (all common occurrences in the agriculture sector).

Page | 31 
The ‘payslip requirement’ 
The requirement that work undertaken by working holiday makers will only count 
toward the 88 day requirement if it is paid work has adversely affected on-farm 
training programs specifically developed over the years to help those seeking a 
second year visa to become ‘job ready’ for paid regional agricultural work.  
Many working holiday makers do not have an agricultural background and the 
capacity to participate in a short training program that helps them develop skills 
while being immersed in a rural setting prepares them for work on farms across 
Australia. In many cases training is provided free of cost, with board and lodging. 
Training participants are not paid for their time, and they are not required to work 
(that is, they can choose not to continue with their training at any time) – but they 
are given the opportunity to learn basic farm skills through ‘hands on’ experience. 
Until recently, time in programs of this kind counted toward the 88 day 
requirement. This encouraged take up of training programs, for the broader benefit 
of the agriculture sector. 
On-the-job training programs that educate participants in farm safety, 
communication, livestock care and safe handling and safe operation of machinery 
help build capability and confidence in an environment targeted to learning. Those 
who participate in training develop the skills needed to be both productive and safe 
on farms where they subsequently find work.  Training programs of this kind also 
create the opportunity for participants to live in country Australia, develop support 
networks that often endure throughout their stay and share in unique experiences 
such as sporting and recreational activities. Current training programs now report 
much lower participation rates as participants are unable to claim credits toward 
the 88 day requirement. Voluntary arrangements where farmers agreed to host 
working holiday makers for a period and provide on farm experience, board and 
lodging - but no employment - have all but disappeared as the focus of working 
holiday makers has turned to full time, paid work opportunities. This is a loss in 
terms of cultural exchange, as while no work was ever required, working holiday 
makers had a lot to gain from immersion in rural families and their communities. 
The working holiday maker visa program needs to change so that:

Page | 32 
1. all hours of regional agricultural work undertaken by working holiday 
makers; and 
2. work experience and unpaid training of up to four weeks for the purpose of 
ensuring working holiday makers are ‘job ready’ for regional agricultural 
work; 
each count toward the 88 day requirement. 
Without change, work in sectors where regular full time employment is the norm 
will gain a new competitive advantage over agricultural work which is highly 
variable and dependent on weather patterns. Fewer working holiday makers will 
be eligible for the second year visa, and the contribution they make to the 
Australian economy will decline even further. 
Harvest Labour Service 
The Harvest Labour Service (HLS) was initially established to assist growers to 
source staff for their harvest requirements. In recent years, the meaning of “harvest 
work” has narrowed, to the point where the HLS can no longer provide workers to 
work in planting or silviculture (the establishment and cultivation of forests) or 
where the crops to be harvested are not ‘horticultural crops’. These changes makes 
no sense at all. Harvest labour needs exist across the agriculture sector and not 
only in the horticulture industry. “Planting” is an essential aspect of the harvest 
process. Sandalwood growers, who operate in some of the remotest parts of 
Australia including Kununurra and the Northern Territory are particularly affected 
by the exemption of silviculture from the HLS and now find it much harder to 
source workers.  
The HLS was further restricted from 1 July 2015, when it became no longer 
accessible to labour hire companies. Reputable labour hire providers to the 
agriculture sector lost their access overnight, despite their strong record and level 
of engagement with the Department of Employment. These are the kind of 
businesses which should be supported in the provision of farm labour, not 
prevented from doing so. The HLS should be reviewed to ensure that it can again 
be used to provide labour for planting, silviculture and other harvest activities and 
so that reputable labour hire companies can access to the program.

Page | 33 
7. Exchange rates, economic growth and employment rates in 
source nations 
Australian agriculture’s exposure to changes in exchange rates 
Interest rates and the Australian dollar are two issues that have a significant impact 
on Australian farm incomes. Overnight, they can turn a profitable farm business 
into one that is leaking cash and wondering whether it will be able to make it 
through the next season.  In high turnover, low margin enterprises like farming, 
the difference between profit and loss can be finely tuned and can hinge on very 
small changes to factors such as these. 
Australian agriculture’s exposure to international markets is renowned, exporting 
around two thirds of all domestic production.  Appreciating exchange rates make 
exports more expensive on world markets, while at the same time making 
imported food and fibre cheaper.  At the same time, a higher dollar reduces the 
cost of imported farm inputs like fuel, fertilizer, tractors and machinery. The 
converse is also true – when exchange rates are low, the value of Australian 
products falls which makes our exports more competitive in world markets, but 
increases our costs of production at home. 
Farmers’ debt financing liabilities are also affected when banks pass on changes to 
the official cash rate through commercial loans. An ABARES report in 2011 
showed rapid increases in farm debt due to low interest rates, larger farm sizes, 
changing farm practices (from livestock production to cropping) and the impacts 
of drought. Since then, real farm debt per hectare has fallen to its lowest level in 
seven years, thanks to improvements in net-cash income per hectare for broadacre 
farm businesses – although the same cannot be said for all agricultural businesses, 
many of whom have seen sharp reductions in income (the recent dairy crisis is a 
good example).

Page | 34 
Index of Australian broadacre farms debt, equity, gross receipts and net-cash income, 1990–2013. 
Source: ABARES, AFI analysis.23 
Economic growth and employment rates in source nations which may affect 
Australia attracting seasonal and temporary labour 
Australia has a relatively strong economic position in comparison to many source 
nations participating in the working holiday maker program, as the following table 
and graph shows. Economic conditions in source nations can influence 
participation in the program, as the reduction in Ireland’s participation confirms. 
Improved economic conditions in Ireland are likely to be a substantial contributing 
factor to this result. It is not yet known what effect, if any, the recent ‘Brexit’ 
decision will have on working holiday decisions emanating from Europe and the 
United Kingdom.  
23 Tomlinson A Australian farm businesses could do better with different funding models 
Australian Farm Institute 
http://www.farminstitute.org.au/newsletter/2014/August_2014/August_2014_featurearticle.html.

Page | 35 
Countries participating in the WHM visa program 
Country 
GDP Annual 
Growth Rate24 
Unemployment 
rate25 
Population26 
WHM growth rate 
(last 12 mths)27 
Argentina 
0.49% 
9.3% 
43.8m 
40%, limit reached 
Australia 
3.1% 
5.7% 
24.3m 
n/a 
Bangladesh 
7.05% 
4.3% 
162.9m 
-66% 
Belgium 
1.4% 
8.5% 
11.3m 
3% 
Canada 
1.1% 
6.9% 
36.2m 
-1% 
Chile 
1.5% 
6.9% 
18.1m 
8%, limit reached 
China 
6.7% 
4.05% 
1.382b 
1st yr in program, 
limit reached 
Cyprus 
2.7% 
11.7% 
1.1m 
-31% 
Denmark 
0.3% 
4.2% 
5.6m 
6% 
Estonia 
0.6% 
6.5% 
1.3m 
-10% 
Finland 
1.3% 
7.8% 
5.5m 
-5% 
France 
1.4% 
9.9% 
64.6m 
-8% 
Germany 
3.1% 
4.2% 
80.6m 
-1% 
Greece 
-0.1% 
23.52% 
10.9m 
n/a 
Hong Kong 
1.7% 
3.4% 
7.3m 
-35% 
Indonesia 
5.18% 
5.5% 
260.5m 
169% 
Iran 
0.6% 
11.8% 
80.0m 
n/a 
Ireland 
2.3% 
8.3% 
4.7m 
-13% 
Israel 
2.9% 
4.7% 
8.1m 
n/a 
Italy 
0.7% 
11.6% 
59.8m 
-18% 
Japan 
0.1% 
3.1% 
126.3m 
7% 
Malaysia 
4% 
3.4% 
30.7m 
0%, limit reached 
Malta 
5.2% 
4.9% 
419,615 
-17% 
Netherlands 
2.3% 
6% 
16.9m 
9% 
Norway 
0.7% 
4.8% 
5.2m 
4% 
PNG 
9% 
2.5% 
7.7m 
n/a 
Poland 
3.1% 
8.6% 
38.5m 
0%, limit reached 
Portugal 
0.8% 
10.8% 
10.3m 
144%, limit reached 
Slovakia 
3.7% 
9.4% 
5.4m 
1st yr in program 
Slovenia 
2.5% 
10.8% 
2.0m 
1st yr in program 
South Korea 
3.2% 
3.6% 
50.5m 
-14% 
Spain 
3.2% 
20% 
46.0m 
20%, limit reached 
Sweden 
3.1% 
6.3% 
9.8m 
-7% 
Taiwan 
0.7% 
3.96% 
23.3m 
-17% 
Thailand 
3.5% 
1.01% 
68.1m 
7%, limit reached 
24 Trading Economics GDP Annual Growth Rate http://www.tradingeconomics.com/country-
list/gdp-annual-growth-rate. 
25 Trading Economics Unemployment Rate http://www.tradingeconomics.com/country-
list/unemployment-rate. 
26 Worldometers Countries in the world by population (2016) 
http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/population-by-country/. 
27 Department of Immigration and Border Protection Working Holiday Maker visas granted pivot 
table 2015-16 to 30 June 2016 comparison with previous years.

Page | 36 
Turkey 
4.8% 
9.4% 
79.6m 
0%, limit reached 
UK 
2.2% 
4.9% 
65.1m 
-6% 
Uruguay 
-0.5% 
7.5% 
3.4m 
121% 
USA 
1.2% 
4.90% 
324.1m 
4% 
Prevailing economic conditions in source nations are not, however, the sole 
influence on participation in the working holiday maker visa program. As the 
tables below show, results vary. In some countries with low growth (less than 3%) 
and high unemployment (more than 6%), the rate of participation has increased 
strongly (Argentina, Chile, Uruguay), but this is not the case for all. In 7 out of 12 
countries where these conditions were present, the rate of participation fell.  
Low growth, high unemployment 
(low growth = less than 3, high unemployment = 6 or more 
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 12 
mths) 
Slovenia 
2.50% 
10.80% 
1st yr in program 
Cyprus 
2.70% 
11.70% 
-31% 
Italy 
0.70% 
11.60% 
-18% 
Ireland 
2.30% 
8.30% 
-13% 
Estonia 
0.60% 
6.50% 
-10% 
France 
1.40% 
9.90% 
-8% 
Finland 
1.30% 
7.80% 
-5% 
Canada 
1.10% 
6.90% 
-1% 
Belgium 
1.40% 
8.50% 
3% 
Chile 
1.50% 
6.90% 
8%, limit reached 
Netherlands 
2.30% 
6% 
9% 
Argentina 
0.49% 
9.30% 
40%, limit reached 
Uruguay 
-0.50% 
7.50% 
121% 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
Among countries with high rates of growth (3% or more) and relatively low 
unemployment (less than 6%), growth has been strong in about 50% of cases 
(Indonesia’s rate of participation grew by 169%). China, Malaysia, Thailand each 
reached their agreed capacity, despite China only being in its first year of 
participation. The other 50% of countries in this category were using the program 
less (Bangladesh participation declined sharply, by 66%, although their overall 
participation in the program is relatively low).

Page | 37 
High growth, low unemployment 
(high growth = 3 or more, low unemployment = less than 6) 
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 12 
mths) 
Bangladesh 
7.05% 
4.30% 
-66% 
Malta 
5.20% 
4.90% 
-17% 
Germany 
3.10% 
4.20% 
-1% 
Malaysia 
4% 
3.40% 
0%, limit reached 
Thailand 
3.50% 
1.01% 
7%, limit reached 
Indonesia 
5.18% 
5.50% 
169% 
China 
6.70% 
4.05% 
Limit reached in 1st yr 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
Among countries with low growth and low unemployment, seven countries 
reduced their participation in the program while the participation rate increased 
strongly for three countries (Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) with two of these 
reaching capacity. 
Low growth, low unemployment  
(low growth = less than 3, low unemployment = less than 6) 
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 12 
mths) 
Slovenia 
2.50% 
10.80% 
1st yr in program 
Portugal 
0.80% 
10.80% 
144%, limit reached 
Uruguay 
-0.50% 
7.50% 
121% 
Argentina 
0.49% 
9.30% 
40%, limit reached 
Netherlands 
2.30% 
6% 
9% 
Chile 
1.50% 
6.90% 
8%, limit reached 
Belgium 
1.40% 
8.50% 
3% 
Canada 
1.10% 
6.90% 
-1% 
Finland 
1.30% 
7.80% 
-5% 
France 
1.40% 
9.90% 
-8% 
Estonia 
0.60% 
6.50% 
-10% 
Ireland 
2.30% 
8.30% 
-13% 
Italy 
0.70% 
11.60% 
-18% 
Cyprus 
2.70% 
11.70% 
-31% 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
Of only four countries with high growth and high unemployment, two reached 
their capacity (Poland and Spain), one was in its first year of participation 
(Slovakia) and one (Sweden) reduced participation.

Page | 38 
High growth, high unemployment 
(high growth = 3 or more, high unemployment = more than 6) 
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 12 
mths) 
Poland 
3.10% 
8.60% 
0%, limit reached 
Spain 
3.20% 
20% 
20%, limit reached 
Slovakia 
3.70% 
9.40% 
1st yr in program 
Sweden 
3.10% 
6.30% 
-7% 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
Highest rates of growth in participation were in Argentina, China, Indonesia, 
Portugal, Spain and Uruguay. Four of these are now at capacity while strong 
growth is likely to mean that the remaining two (Indonesia and Uruguay) also 
reach their cap in the next 12 months.  
Highest rates of growth 
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 12 
mths) 
Spain 
3.20% 
20% 
20%, limit reached 
Argentina 
0.49% 
9.30% 
40%, limit reached 
Uruguay 
-0.50% 
7.50% 
121% 
Portugal 
0.80% 
10.80% 
144%, limit reached 
Indonesia 
5.18% 
5.50% 
169% 
China 
6.70% 
4.05% 
Limit reached in 1st yr 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
As the table below shows, more than half of all 35 countries actively participating 
in the program are either experiencing growth in participation or have now 
reached their capacity. This will continue to constrain overall growth in the 
program in Australia unless current caps are lifted. 
Countries where participation is increasing or at capacity 
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 12 
mths) 
Malaysia 
4% 
3.40% 
0%, limit reached 
Poland 
3.10% 
8.60% 
0%, limit reached 
Turkey 
4.80% 
9.40% 
0%, limit reached 
Belgium 
1.40% 
8.50% 
3% 
Norway 
0.70% 
4.80% 
4% 
USA 
1.20% 
4.90% 
4% 
Denmark 
0.30% 
4.20% 
6% 
Japan 
0.10% 
3.10% 
7% 
Thailand 
3.50% 
1.01% 
7%, limit reached 
Chile 
1.50% 
6.90% 
8%, limit reached 
Netherlands 
2.30% 
6% 
9% 
Spain 
3.20% 
20% 
20%, limit reached 
Argentina 
0.49% 
9.30% 
40%, limit reached

Page | 39 
China 
6.70% 
4.05% 
1st yr in program, limit 
reached 
Slovakia 
3.70% 
9.40% 
1st yr in program 
Slovenia 
2.50% 
10.80% 
1st yr in program 
Uruguay 
-0.50% 
7.50% 
121% 
Portugal 
0.80% 
10.80% 
144%, limit reached 
Indonesia 
5.18% 
5.50% 
169% 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
More work also needs to be done to arrest rates of declining participation among 
the 15 participating countries shown in the table below.  
Countries where participation is decreasing  
Country 
GDP Annual Growth 
Rate 
Unemployment Rate 
WHM Growth Rate (last 
12 mths) 
Canada 
1.10% 
6.90% 
-1% 
Germany 
3.10% 
4.20% 
-1% 
Finland 
1.30% 
7.80% 
-5% 
UK 
2.20% 
4.90% 
-6% 
Sweden 
3.10% 
6.30% 
-7% 
France 
1.40% 
9.90% 
-8% 
Estonia 
0.60% 
6.50% 
-10% 
Ireland 
2.30% 
8.30% 
-13% 
South Korea 
3.20% 
3.60% 
-14% 
Malta 
5.20% 
4.90% 
-17% 
Taiwan 
0.70% 
3.96% 
-17% 
Italy 
0.70% 
11.60% 
-18% 
Cyprus 
2.70% 
11.70% 
-31% 
Hong Kong 
1.70% 
3.40% 
-35% 
Bangladesh 
7.05% 
4.30% 
-66% 
Source: Trading Economics and DIBP, NFF analysis 
The United Kingdom remains the primary source of working holiday makers 
coming to Australia. Despite its uncapped participation in the program, there has 
been a steady decline in the visa grant rate for travellers from the United Kingdom 
since 2012, coinciding with an increase in the non-resident tax rate from 29% to 
32.5%.28 A significant decline in the rate of participation is also evident after 2012 
in South Korea, Ireland and Taiwan. One possibility is that higher tax rates affect 
those who rely on the program as a work opportunity more than a holiday 
experience most. 
28 ATO Tax rates – non-resident https://www.ato.gov.au/rates/individual-income-tax-for-prior-
years/?page=2#Tax_rates___foreign_resident.

Page | 40 

Page | 41 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2010-11
2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16 to 30
June 2016
Trend WHM program participation by country  
Argentina
Bangladesh
Belgium
Canada
Chile
China, Peoples Republic of (excl SARs)
Cyprus
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany, Fed Republic of
Hong Kong (SAR of the PRC)
Indonesia
Iran
Ireland, Republic of
Israel
Italy
Japan
Korea, South
Malaysia
Malta
Netherlands, Kingdom of The
Norway
Not Specified
Not Specified
Poland
Portugal
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay

Page | 42 
8. Short-term and long-term agricultural and tourism labour 
needs 
There were 345,000 people employed in agriculture at the end of 2005. While in 
the two decades leading up to 2002, the sector was experiencing an overall upward 
trend in employment levels, severe droughts in 2002 and 2005 resulted in a 
significant reduction in employment from which the sector has never recovered. 
Drought is a regular feature of the agriculture sector, and as recently as this year 
we have seen a sustained four year drought start to break across large parts of the 
country. 
As the graph below demonstrates, employment levels are now below 300,000. As 
at August 2015, the total number of employees in agriculture, forestry and fishing 
was 298,400 (this figure appears slightly less than figures provided by the 
Department of Employment in connection with this review). 
Despite the downward trend in employment growth, the outlook for a number of 
agricultural commodities is strong. With the right regulatory environment, the 
agriculture sector can generate significant growth over the next decade, taking the 
stage as a $100 billion industry within the next 15 years. The Department of 
Employment’s Labour Market Information Portal forecasts projected growth of 
8.4% and 5.8% respectively in vegetable and fruit picking jobs to 2020. In our 
0.0
50.0
100.0
150.0
200.0
250.0
300.0
350.0
400.0
Nov-2005
Apr-2006
Sep-2006
Feb-2007
Jul-2007
Dec-2007
May-2008
Oct-2008
Mar-2009
Aug-2009
Jan-2010
Jun-2010
Nov-2010
Apr-2011
Sep-2011
Feb-2012
Jul-2012
Dec-2012
May-2013
Oct-2013
Mar-2014
Aug-2014
Jan-2015
Jun-2015
Employment in Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing

Page | 43 
estimation, this rate of growth is likely to continue for the foreseeable future as 
world demand for quality food and fibre rises among key trading partners and 
growth occurs in parts of the sector that are heavily labour intensive (horticulture 
being the primary example).  
Obtaining reliable agricultural workforce data to make more certain predictions is 
difficult. The Australian Bureau of Statistics only collects limited information on 
employment in agriculture, and even then, much of that is combined data which 
also includes the forestry and fishery industries. Unlike data gathered for analysis 
in other industries and sectors, agricultural statistics are sufficiently variable as to 
be unreliable from a statistical perspective. This reflects the nature of the industry, 
which is characterised by daily market and weather fluctuations, high turnover, 
brief periods of employment and a significant itinerant workforce. The agricultural 
census is due out next year and may shed further light on emerging trends in the 
sector. Additional workforce research by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural 
and Resource Economics and Sciences is also likely to assist in coming months. 
Labour shortages by occupation 
Managers, overseers and administrators make up over half of the agricultural 
workforce, and represent a major area in which there are labour shortages 
nationally. This area is particularly problematic because there is not only a lack of 
labour but a vast lack of skills to undertake the functions of these roles. 
Another key area facing significant shortages at a national level in the sector is 
labourers, transport and clerical workers. A notable proportion of this work is 
unskilled or involves a significant amount of unskilled work. 
Trades, professionals and paraprofessionals are the occupations facing the most 
severe labour and skills shortages. The shortage of shearers which has existed now 
for over 50 years is an ongoing challenge. Mobile plant operators and mechanics 
are always in high demand.  
Notable ongoing shortages for labour, by State and Territory, include the 
following: 
Queensland - fruit pickers, station hands and mechanics. 
New South Wales and the ACT – shearers, dairy operators, farm managers. 
Victoria – fruit pickers, dairy, shearers, production horticulturalists.

Page | 44 
Tasmania – dairy, station hands, shearers and shed staff. 
South Australia – shearers, shed staff and station hands. 
Northern Territory – mechanics, stockmen, station hands. 
Western Australia – station hands, plant operators.

Page | 45 
9. Opportunities to expand supply of seasonal and temporary 
foreign workers for the agricultural sector 
There are a range of options available to government to expand the supply of 
seasonal and temporary workers for the agriculture sector.  
Scrapping the backpacker tax 
The simplest solution to the looming workforce shortage created by the 
‘backpacker tax’ is to abandon the measure and revert to the arrangements in place 
prior to Budget 2014-15.  
Reducing the tax rate for backpackers 
In the first iteration of this review, the agriculture and tourism sectors proposed a 
flat tax rate for working holiday makers in the range of 15 to 19 per cent, with no 
tax free threshold (providing for net revenue of up to approximately $315 million 
in lieu of the forecast $540 million over three years). Taxation at this level would 
ensure that net earnings in Australia are more favourable than in New Zealand or 
Canada.  
The agriculture sector agrees that working holiday makers should pay some tax. 
However, the level of taxation should recognise that many working holiday 
makers make their home in rural communities for significant periods, and make an 
essential contribution to the agriculture sector which warrants more favourable 
treatment than the default rate for non-residents for all. 
A dedicated agricultural visa 
Current visa programs relied on to provide a large proportion of the agricultural 
workforce have competing policy objectives that dilute their value for the sector.  
The working holiday maker program is as much about the holiday experience as it 
is about the work. This has implications for the availability and reliability of 
agricultural workers, many of whom do not tend to stay in one place for an entire 
season. High turnover of staff at harvest time is a common experience. The density 
of available labour pools is also greater on urban fringes and in regional tourist 
areas (for example, the Whitsunday region and around Byron Bay).

Page | 46 
The Seasonal Worker Program operates in conjunction with Australia’s Labour 
Mobility Assistance Program, a developmental program aiming to boost economic 
growth in Pacific Islands and East Timor. As a result, it is heavily geared toward 
supporting and protecting workers and sending remittances home. This has 
implications for its suitability as a workforce program. 
Recognising that Australian agriculture will always rely to some degree on a 
migrant workforce means delivering a dedicated working visa for the agriculture 
sector (including the meat industry). This approach would: 
a. increase the pool of countries from which the agriculture sector can draw, 
targeting economic migrants who derive substantial benefit from income in 
$AUD; and 
b. be open to all workers with experience in agricultural machinery and 
technology, feed management, animal husbandry and sufficient English 
language skills to ensure a safe workplace. 
Increasing the caps 
Reversing the annual decline in backpacker numbers coming to Australia 
would generate over $300 million each year. For each $100 million in 
additional revenue needed, an additional 6666 working holiday makers is 
needed – as discussed earlier in this submission, opening up the working 
holiday maker visa program to China resulted in all 5000 available visa 
places being sought immediately. 
Other changes to the working holiday maker program  
Other options to grow the number of working holiday makers coming to Australia 
include: 
 increasing the eligible age for 417/462 visas from 30 to 35/40; 
 lifting country specific caps under existing 417/462 visa arrangements;  
 extending the period that a working holiday maker can work with one 
employer/employer group from 6 to 12 or 24 months; 
 clarifying the 88 day work requirement as discussed earlier in this submission; 
 expanding the capacity of the Harvest Trail Service to supply harvest labour;

Page | 47 
 reviewing current visa fees and multiple visa application issues to ensure that 
they do not act as a deterrent to working holiday makers coming to, or staying 
in, Australia (particularly in developing countries where the value of the 
Australian dollar is comparatively high); and 
 developing new tools to attract more overseas visitors in a joint initiative of 
the Government and industry. 
Streamlining the Seasonal Worker Program 
As it currently stands, the Seasonal Worker Program is not an adequate 
substitute for the working holiday maker visa program. While an evaluation 
of the Program in 2011 found that it can fill unmet demand for seasonal 
workers and provide a consistent, reliable, returning workforce that improves 
workforce planning and increases productivity, reform is needed if the 
Program is to deliver the level of affordability and flexibility the agriculture 
sector requires.29  
Reliable and productive labour is a key enabler of industry confidence and 
sustainability. Changes to promote greater use of the Program include: 
 adequate resourcing on the ground in Australia to support participating 
employers and workers; 
 a centrally managed fund for participant contributions from which workers 
can draw from to cover travel and accommodation costs; 
 shifting to an industry-owned model, with greater flexibility to 
manage periods of work.  
Improving local participation rates 
While the industry invests heavily in programs to recruit, train and retain 
skilled workers within Australia, closing the gap from the local workforce 
will take time and may never be fully realised. High rates of youth 
unemployment in areas where tourism and agriculture are key industries, 
such as Cairns, suggest that availability of entry-level work is not enough 
on its own to address labour shortages.  
29 TNS Social Research Final evaluation of the Pacific Seasonal Worker Pilot Scheme September 
2011

Page | 48 
Importantly, farmers are not responsible for solving Australia’s youth 
unemployment problems. Just like every other employer, farmers are 
entitled to expect that their employees will be ready, willing and able to do 
the work required. Where even one of these features is absent, the 
employment relationship is likely to fail. Ultimately, unemployment is a 
social policy issue and not one that private industry alone can address. 
Government programs including services provided through JobActive and 
the Youth PaTH program are important in seeking to address some of these 
issues, but they are no substitute for working holiday makers and other 
overseas workers who see value in regional agricultural work in a way that 
many unemployed Australians do not. They should be seen as 
supplementary programs, rather than any kind of viable alternative. 
Joint communication strategy 
Whatever solution is adopted, a joint industry and government 
communication strategy to help reverse the trend in declining numbers of 
working holiday makers is imperative. Communication should focus on 
key outcomes from this review which satisfactorily address widespread 
concern about the backpacker tax.

Page | 49 
10. Consistent tax treatment between different classes of 
temporary work visa holders 
There is no logical reason to conclude that all temporary work visa holders should 
be taxed in the same way. The nature and purpose of the various visa programs 
will indicate the appropriate approach to be taken in each case.  
As discussed above, the Seasonal Worker Program (416 visa), for example, is a 
foreign aid program designed to support economic development in the Pacific and 
in East Timor. While it helps address workforce shortages in Australia, it is 
primarily a developmental program. This explains its lower tax rate of 15%, which 
allows workers to send home remittances while covering their costs in Australia as 
well as government operating costs in Australia and diplomatic missions overseas.  
By contrast, Independent Skilled visas and the 457 visa program are long stay 
visas allowing skilled migrants to work for up to 4 years with one employer. Visa 
holders under this program stay in one place for long periods, being tied as they 
are to their nominated employer sponsor until an alternative sponsor is approved. 
They are likely to act much as Australian residents act, with a stable residence and 
community involvement for the duration of their stay. Frequently they seek to 
transition to permanent residency, an option facilitated through pathways to 
permanency embedded in the scheme. These characteristics suggest that the 
appropriate approach to taxation in the case of 457 visa holders is ordinary tax 
rules applicable to Australian residents (with rules for non-residents applicable 
where the sponsorship arrangement ends earlier than expected and the visa holder 
no longer has the intention of residing in Australia.  
The Safe Haven Enterprise Visa is another temporary visa program although 
different again, in that it has direct links to work in rural and regional Australia 
and allows visa holders to stay in Australia for 5 years, with the option to 
transition to permanent residency after that. As with the skilled visa programs, the 
nature of the program is likely to encourage behaviour on the part of visa holders 
more akin to the behaviour of Australian residents, and should be taxed 
accordingly. 
The working holiday maker program has dual purposes of facilitating cultural 
exchange and addressing labour shortages in specified industries, primarily

Page | 50 
agriculture. Working holiday makers are more likely to travel around Australia 
than their 457 visa counterparts, but they are under no compulsion to do so. Many 
choose to stay in one place for long periods – encouraged to do so by the 88 day 
incentive and recent initiatives announced through the Northern Australia White 
Paper, which would allow them to work for one employer for up to 12 months. 
Some working holiday makers choose to make their permanent home in Australia, 
either drawing from their existing skills or completing new qualifications so that 
they can access pathways to permanency under the 457 visa program.  
The appropriate tax treatment of working holiday makers is thus not easy to 
ascertain, from the point of view that there are a range of different ways the 
program is used by visa holders while in Australia. In our view, the level of 
taxation should recognise that many working holiday makers make their home in 
rural communities for significant periods, and make an essential contribution to 
the agriculture sector which warrants more favourable treatment than the default 
rate for non-residents for all.

Page | 51 
11. Conclusion 
Solving Australia’s agricultural workforce supply and demand constraints 
overnight is not a realistic aim. Labour shortages in the sector are as old as the 
sector itself - looking to the future, overseas workers will play an increasingly 
important role in filling this gap. As this submission demonstrates, the issues are 
many and varied, and involve complex policy considerations and political risk. 
Focusing on the broader issues distracts from the task at hand, which is finding a 
workable solution to reasonable but deeply-held concerns about the effect of 
‘backpacker tax’ on rural and regional Australia.  
A solution to the ‘backpacker tax’ needs to be found. As soon as that happens, the 
sector can return our focus to the development of a strategic agricultural workforce 
plan for the future.

Page | 52 
12. Summary of recommendations 
First and foremost 
The NFF recommends that the Government scrap the ‘backpacker tax’ and replace 
it with a 19% tax rate with no tax free threshold, as was proposed to the initial 
review of the tax in March 2016. 
Revenue lost as a result of this measure can be offset by: 
 Increasing the cap on working holiday maker visa grants for countries who 
have reached their capacity (Argentina, Chile, China, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Poland, Portugal, Spain and Thailand); and 
 Increasing the eligible age for 417/462 visas from 30 to 35. 
In the longer term 
We cannot solve the agriculture sector’s workforce supply constraints overnight.  
The agriculture sector needs resources to design and implement a sound 
agricultural workforce strategy for the future. The strategy should consider the 
following reform options: 
1. 
A dedicated agricultural work visa. 
2. 
Improving agricultural workforce data collection and distribution. 
3. 
Reforming working holiday maker programs so that: 
a. all farm work counts toward the 88 day requirement, including 
work experience and unpaid training of up to four weeks;  
b. employees can work with one employer or group of employers for 
12 or 24 months; 
c. sponsored employees have a pathway to permanency; and 
d. current visa fees and multiple visa application issues do not act as a 
deterrent to working holiday makers coming to, or staying in, 
Australia.

Page | 53 
4. 
Resourcing and recalibrating the Seasonal Worker Program to: 
a. improve support for participating employers and workers; 
b. establish a centrally managed fund for participant contributions; 
c. shift to an industry-owned model. 
5. 
Allowing the Harvest Labour Service to provide labour for 
planting, silviculture and other harvest activities, either directly 
employed or through reputable labour hire companies. 
6. 
Addressing poor outcomes involving labour contractors, either 
through: 
a. a voluntary approved contractors scheme; 
b. a voluntary code of practice for labour contractors; or  
c. employment protection legislation that prohibits charging of 
fees to overseas workers, passing on of unreasonable hiring 
costs and withholding of passports; and 
d. smarter use of technology, so that overseas workers have all 
the information they need before they set foot in Australia 
(pay rates, help lines, migrant worker fact sheets, secure 
visa details). 
7. 
Reviewing superannuation rules, including the income threshold 
above which superannuation is payable and whether it should apply 
to temporary residents. 
8. 
A new promotional strategy to attract more overseas visitors to 
Australia, beginning with a joint industry / government 
communication strategy to help reverse the trend in declining 
numbers of working holiday makers.