David Galeano leads ABARES research on natural resources. Prior to re-joining ABARES in May 2016, David led the social and economic work at the Murray-Darling Basin Authority with responsibility for implementing various aspects of the Basin Plan.
He also held senior positions at the Australian Fisheries Management Authority, leading the economic aspects of Commonwealth fisheries management. David also spent time at the Department of the Environment focusing on benefit cost analysis on environmental programs.
David began his career at ABARES as a graduate mainly working on fishery economics research. He has a degree in agricultural economics with Honours from the University of Sydney.
Kurt Hockey is responsible for the Agricultural Forecasting and Trade Branch in ABARES. Prior to joining ABARES he has worked in a range of economic and policy roles at the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, The Treasury, the Department of Industry, Science and Resources and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Kurt has a Master of Public Policy from the Australian National University and a Bachelor of Economics with Honours from the University of Western Australia.
The Agricultural Forecasting and Trade branch covers:
- Global agriculture and food modelling
- Agricultural forecasts and market analysis
- Climate and agronomy
- Analysis of emerging agricultural policy issues
- Conferences and events
- Agricultural workforce statistical analysis
Andrea joined ABARES in December 2024 and is responsible for the Farm Performance and Information branch. Prior to joining the Department Andrea held senior positions in the Behavioural Economics Team of the Australian Government (BETA) in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
While at BETA Andrea led the design, development and implementation of multiple trials, experiments and research projects across a range of diverse policy areas. She has previously held positions across the public and private sectors including at the Department of Communications & the Arts and Austrade.
Andrea has a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Canberra.
The Farm Performance and Information branch covers:
- Agricultural productivity analysis
- Farm surveys program
- Climate change and farm profitability
- Social sciences
Dr Tony Arthur was appointed ABARES Chief Biosecurity Scientist in 2024 and leads ABARES biosecurity research and analysis.
Tony has a broad background leading policy relevant multidisciplinary research in biosecurity systems, in established pest and weed management, and in sustainability in agricultural systems.
He has specialist expertise in the development and application of models, in statistics, and in integration of science and economic analysis. He holds a PhD in ecology from the University of Sydney and worked for CSIRO before joining ABARES in 2012.
The branch provides research and analysis that directly informs biosecurity policy and operational decisions across the biosecurity system.
Brad Carron-Arthur – Farm Survey
Dr Sandra Parsons – Invasive Species
Robert Kancans – Social Science
Stephanie Black – Fish and Forestry Economics
Dr Don Bromhead – Fisheries Science
James Fell – Trade and Global Change
Dr Jane Stewart – Forest and Land Sciences
Dale Ashton – Farm Performance
Linden Whittle – Land and Water Economics
Rob Walter – Agricultural Statistics Program
Dr Thomas Jackson – Agricultural Forecasts and Policy
Trent Kershaw – Digital Transformation Program
Lee Davis – Biosecurity Risk Modelling