1 in 5 Australian adults participate in recreational fishing every year, improving wellbeing and contributing 100,000 jobs and $11 billion to the Australian economy.
Most recreational fishing occurs in coastal waters and state and territory governments are responsible for day-to-day management. This includes the recreational components of some Commonwealth managed commercial fisheries, such as game fishing for tuna species.
You can find the recreational fishing rules for the states and territories on their websites:
The Australian Government, through initiatives such as the National Fisheries Plan, has an important stewardship role in helping to support the recreational fishing industry as a sustainable, long-term and valuable contributor to the Australian economy.
Recreational fishing in Australia
In 2023, the Australian Government published the National Social and Economic Survey of Recreational Fishers. The survey, jointly conducted by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES), the University of Canberra and the Australian Recreational Fishing Foundation (ARRF), provides the first up-to-date picture of the value of recreational fishing in Australia since 2001.
The survey found that one in five Australian adults participate in recreational fishing every year, improving wellbeing and contributing 100,000 jobs and $11 billion to the Australian economy.
Recreational fishers were found to have, on average, higher levels of wellbeing than non-fishers, and those who fish more often have higher wellbeing. Recreational fishing appeared to support positive social connections, nature connection, relaxation and can help achieve recommended levels of physical activity. The survey also showed that most Australians have a positive outlook on recreational fishing.
Read more: https://www.frdc.com.au/about-recreational-fishing/nrfs.
Tuna Champions
Tuna Champions is a targeted education program that promotes fish stewardship and best practice fishing to the recreational fishing sector. The program also focuses on improved handling practices of released fish to maximise survival rates.
The Tuna Champions program began in 2018. It was scheduled to run for 3 years focussing on southern bluefin tuna.
The 2021-2022 Federal Budget provides a further $900,000 to extend the program for another 3 years and to tuna species of interest to recreational fishers including southern bluefin tuna, yellowfin tuna, longtail tuna, albacore tuna and skipjack tuna.
To read more about Tuna Champions or to become a Tuna Champion visit the Tuna Champions website.