1
Industry Information Session 
2025-26 BMSB Seasonal Measures
01 September 2025
Candice Somerville
Assistant Director  |  Hitchhiker Pests Policy

2
Agenda
• Acknowledgement of country
• 2024-25 BMSB season review
• Measures for the upcoming BMSB season
• Questions
➢Target Goods, Countries and Dates
➢Containerised vs Break Bulk
➢BMSB Treatments
➢Safeguarding Scheme
➢NUFT and 120 hours
➢Verification Inspections
➢Sealing Declarations
➢In-transit & Rolled Policies
➢Emerging Risk Countries
➢UPEs and Concessional Tariff 99
➢Management of LCL/FAK Containers
➢ICS Reporting

3
2024-25 BMSB Season Review
BMSB Detections
2023-24
1 Sept – 19 June
2024-25
1 Sept – 18 June
Condition
Number of Detections
Biosecurity 
Intervention Point
Alive
21
12
Dead
151
164
Post Biosecurity
Alive
8
37
Dead
7
6
Total
187
219
46 AIMS entries 
with BMSB 
detections.
88,690 Total entries 
referred into AIMs
for BMSB. 
5,340 BMSB entries 
lodged through 
AEPCOMM.
2,859 consignments with 
a BMSB profile directed 
for inspection.
313 SPIs performed 
on Roll-On Roll-Off 
vessels.
104 Consignments 
directed for export for 
arriving non-compliant.
232 Registered 
AusTreat treatment 
providers.
66,396 Whitelisted 
consignments
treated offshore.
YSSB Detections
2024-25
1 Sept – 18 June
Condition
Number of Detections
Biosecurity 
Intervention Point
Alive
24
Dead
97
Post Biosecurity
Alive
2
Dead
0
Total
123

4
2025-26 BMSB Seasonal Measures
• Measures apply to goods shipped between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive) as sea cargo.
Any target high risk or target risk goods manufactured in, or shipped from a target risk 
country are subject to the BMSB seasonal measures:
➢Target high risk goods – mandatory treatment
➢Target risk goods – subject to random inspection
• Any vessel that berths at, loads or tranships goods from these countries are also subject to heightened 
vessel surveillance.
• Japan and Republic of Korea have been added to the emerging risk country list along with 
the United Kingdom and China.
• Airfreight from USA and China will now be subject to random verification inspections.

5
2025-26 BMSB Target Risk Countries
USA
Canada
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czechia
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kosovo
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Moldova, 
Republic of
Montenegro
Netherlands
North 
Macedonia
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
Poland
Uzbekistan
Heightened vessel surveillance only
Japan
China
Republic of Korea

6
Containerised vs Break Bulk
Break Bulk 
•
Includes all flat rack and open top containers.
•
All target high risk goods shipped 
as break bulk must be treated offshore.
•
No allowances will be made for untreated break 
bulk and goods will be directed for export.
•
Must be shipped on board within 120 hours of 
the completion of treatment (if treated in a 
target risk country prior to 1 December).
•
FCL containers (inc. SOCs) that have been 
modified, such as those used to house in-built 
power generators, portable workshops etc., are 
considered break bulk.
Containerised
• Refers to sealed six hard sided 
containers - general purpose/dry box.
• Refrigerated containers (operating or non-
operating) fall into this category and are subject to 
the measures.
• Has the option for onshore treatment.
• Must be sealed within 120 hours of treatment 
completion (if treated prior to 1 December in a 
target risk country).
• Hard top open tops (ISO22U6/ISO22UP, 
ISO42U6/ISO42UP and ISO45U6/ISO45UP) are 
deemed to be a sealed six hard sided container.

7
BMSB Approved Treatments
Offshore Treatment Providers
•
Four approved BMSB treatment types BMSB: 
•
All treatment providers in target risk countries 
that intend to conduct BMSB treatments must 
register under AusTreat.
•
Treatment providers in non-target risk countries 
that intend to conduct BMSB treatments are 
encouraged to register under AusTreat however, 
it is not mandatory.
•
All queries relating to offshore BMSB treatment 
requirements, methodologies and provider 
registrations and approvals to be directed to 
offshoretreatments@aff.gov.au. 
➢  Methyl Bromide
➢  Sulfuryl Fluoride
➢  Ethyl Formate
➢  Heat treatment
Onshore Treatment Providers
• Three approved arrangement (AA) classes support 
onshore treatment providers to manage BMSB: 
➢12.1 - Methyl Bromide fumigation 
➢12.2 - Sulfuryl Fluoride fumigation 
➢12.3 - Heat treatment
• Class 4.7 AA site:
➢Class 4.7 allows a container unpack within a secure 
environment to enable effective treatment of the goods. 
➢Requests must be sent by the treatment provider to the 
onshore treatments team via email 
(treatments@aff.gov.au). 
• To reduce delays at the border, the department 
recommends that industry treat offshore or pack 
containers to allow effective onshore treatment.

8
BMSB Safeguarding Scheme
The Safeguarding Arrangements Scheme (the scheme) offers an alternative clearance pathway for BMSB targeted 
goods shipped in a sealed six hard sided container from risk countries during the BMSB risk season, 1 September 
to 30 April. Safeguarding Arrangement applications will be open between 31 July 2025 and 30 January 2026.
•
To uphold the standard and effectiveness of the scheme, the department has introduced several mandatory and 
important changes for the 2025-26 BMSB (Brown Marmorated Stink Bug) season.
➢Key updates include a revised application form, and the introduction of the mandatory use of the Mitigation and 
Contingency Plan templates.
➢Each consignment must be accompanied by a completed safeguarding declaration covering all safeguarded goods 
within the consignment.
➢All entries containing safeguarded goods, will be directed for a document assessment at a 100% intervention rate.
➢Use of AEPCOMM to clear safeguarded goods is not permitted.
•
These changes will provide the department with a more in depth understanding and assurance when 
determining if the supply chain has the robust measures in place to prevent their goods from being exposed to 
and contaminated with BMSB and other exotic pests.

9
BMSB NUFT and 120 hour window
BMSB NUFT
Goods that can meet all the following criteria will not 
be subject to mandatory BMSB treatment:
➢
The goods were manufactured on or after 1 December? 
(manufacture must start from 1 December of the current 
BMSB risk season).
➢
The goods are classified under the following tariff chapters 
only: 82, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88 and 89?
➢
Evidence can be provided in the form of a BMSB NUFT 
(new, unused and not field tested) manufacturers 
declaration that the goods were manufactured on or after 
1 December?
•
NUFT declarations must state the manufacture 
start date - refurbishments are ineligible.
•
NUFT declarations can be used for FCL, LCL/FAK 
and break bulk (including open top and flat racks).
120 hour post treatment window
Goods treated in a target risk country are subject to the 
120 hour post treatment window when treated prior to 1 
December
➢Containerised goods must be sealed in the container.
➢Break bulk goods (incl. open top, flat rack and modified 
containers) must be shipped on board the vessel.
The ‘shipped on board’ date is considered the date listed as shipped or laden on board as per 
the ocean bill of lading. Original “ETDs” and “Gate in” dates and times are not acceptable. 
The 120 hours does NOT apply to:
➢Goods treated in non-target risk countries.
➢Good treated after 1 December.
120 hour transhipment window
Breakbulk goods that tranship in a target risk country 
prior to 1 December, are subject to the 120 hour window. 
Does not apply to sealed containers.

10
Verification Inspections
Random verification inspections for sea cargo
•
All goods sent for random verification inspection must be conducted at a 1.1, 1.3, 2.1 or 2.2 AA (where 
approved) in a metropolitan location. The container will be permitted to be dehired prior to inspection.
•
For entries with multiple containers, containers not selected for inspection will be permitted to be delivered 
and deconsolidated.
•
The department may permit inspections at a non-approved AA location / importers premises where containers 
can be unpacked with the appropriate equipment if required. For approval, please contact the Inspections 
Group in the corresponding regional office on 1800 900 090.
•
Inspections conducted at a non-approved AA location or importers premises, will be required to be completed 
as seals intact inspections under Biosecurity supervision.
Random verification inspections for airfreight
Random inspections will apply to target high risk goods shipped as airfreight from United States of America and 
China between 1 September to 30 April (inclusive). BMSB treatment of these goods will not be required.

11
BMSB sealing declarations
Sealing declarations will be accepted by the department to verify:
➢goods have been sealed in a six hard sided container in a target risk country prior to 1 September, 
➢goods have been sealed in a six hard sided container in a non-target risk country prior to being shipped from a target risk 
port at any time within the BMSB season, or
➢goods have been treated and sealed in a six hard sided container within the 120-hour post treatment window.
•
Sealing declarations must be completed by the exporter/freight forwarder/shipping company at the port of 
origin. Australian based importers/brokers cannot sign off on these declarations, and they will not be accepted 
by the department.
•
Sealing declarations cannot be used for open top, flat rack or modified containers.

12
In-Transit Policy
In-Transit Policy
Break bulk (including flat rack and open top containers) that were shipped on board on or prior to the relevant 
treatment provider being placed under review or suspended, or that have shipped on board a vessel within 120 
hours after the suspension (goods in-transit to Australia at the time of status change), will be permitted to 
discharge/unload on arrival only if there is an approved risk management plan (RMP) in place. This (RMP) will be 
in the form of an approved ‘In-Transit Application’. 
As part of the application requirements, the completed form must include: 
➢
A copy of the original treatment certificate. 
➢
A copy of the Bill of Lading that includes a shipped on board date. 
➢
Written evidence from the entity engaged to perform the tarping, confirming the tarping will be performed within 24 hours of 
discharge.  
➢
Written evidence from the wharf operator, confirming access will be provided to the 3rd party to allow tarping to be performed within 
24 hours of discharge.  
➢
Written evidence from the entity (AA class 4.6) engaged to perform the treatment, confirming the treatment will be performed within 
24 hours of the tarping being verified by a DAFF officer prior to movement to the nominated AA.

13
Rolled Goods Policy
In-Transit Policy
There are provisions in the measures that enable break bulk (including open top and flat rack containers) to be 
retreated onshore within 48 hours of arrival if they have exceeded the 120 hour post treatment window by less 
than 48 hours (making total post treatment window time 168 hours) due to being delayed in the load port by the 
shipping line. This will now be managed via a ‘Rolled Goods Application’. 
As part of the application requirements, the completed form must include: 
➢
A copy of the original treatment certificate. 
➢
A copy of the original booking that includes the intended shipping date. 
➢
Evidence from the shipping line that the goods were rolled to another booking. 
➢
Evidence of the rebooked voyage and actual shipped on board date. 
➢
Written evidence from the entity engaged to perform the tarping, confirming the tarping will be performed within 24 hours of discharge.  
➢
Written evidence from the wharf operator, confirming access will be provided to the 3rd party to allow tarping to be performed within 
24 hours of discharge.  
➢
Written evidence from the entity (AA class 4.6) engaged to perform the treatment, confirming the treatment will be performed within 24 
hours of the tarping being verified by a DAFF officer prior to movement to the nominated AA.

14
Emerging Risk Countries
The department has recognised the United Kingdom, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea as an emerging risk 
country only, therefore target high risk goods (with the addition of chapters 39, 94 and 95) that are 
manufactured in and shipped from these countries, will be subject to random inspections only. 
BMSB fumigation for these goods will not be required.  
However, if the goods were manufactured in a target risk country, then shipped to the emerging risk country for 
export, they will be subject to BMSB seasonal measures including mandatory treatment if they were shipped 
within season. 
Emerging risk only - Treatment not required
United Kingdom
Japan
China
Republic of Korea

15
UPEs and Concessional Tariff 99
Unaccompanied Personal Effects (UPEs)
Household goods and personal effects imported as unaccompanied personal effects (UPEs), and that are 
categorised as target high risk goods will not be subject to mandatory treatment requirements if they are 
imported as UPEs under the B534 form. However, goods that are required to be reported under a Full Import 
Declaration (FID), for example motor vehicles and motorbikes or goods not meeting UPE clearance requirements, 
will require mandatory BMSB treatment either offshore or onshore (if permitted). 
Describing the goods as UPEs in the description is not enough to deem these goods out of scope for BMSB, 
neither is providing the B534 that was lodged for the goods; they must be approved by ABF to be reported under 
the concessional tariff chapter 99. If ABF have not approved chapter 99 to be utilised for the whole consignment 
on a B534 form and the goods are reported individually on a FID, then for the purposes of BMSB they are not 
considered UPEs and are subject to the same BMSB seasonal measures including mandatory treatment as all 
other imports.
Note: This exemption is only for UPEs that meet the above criteria and is not applicable to any other goods 
reported under concessional tariff 99 (e.g., goods for diplomatic / government / military use etc). 
Carnets and diplomatic goods are not exempt from BMSB seasonal measures.

16
Management of LCL/FAK Containers
Less than Container Load (LCL) and Freight All Kinds (FAK) containers with target high risk goods that are shipped 
from target risk countries between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive) are managed at the container level for 
BMSB risk prior to deconsolidation.
All LCL/FAK containers with a Seasonal Pest hold (SP HOLD) in ICS are required to have a Master Consolidator 
(MC) declaration submitted declaring the BMSB risk status of the container via the MC online portal.
All MCs must register their company as a MC and identify individual users via a unique email address on the MC 
registration form. Each individual submitting declarations is required to have their own User ID and login. 
For all questions and information related directly to BMSB LCL / FAK declarations, assessments, directions and / 
or MC declaration lodgements, email BMSB Processing Team on BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au. Hitchhiker Pests 
Policy will not action any emails relating to MC declaration submissions or the assessment/release of associated 
containers and/or AIMs entries.
Authenticator Issues
Users that have previously registered, however, have changed phones or phone numbers, may have difficulties 
logging into the portal with their authenticator code. In these instances, please email HPP@aff.gov.au to get a 
reset of your login.

17
ICS Reporting
Amending the cargo type from LCL to FCL
Once a cargo type is declared as an LCL in the Integrated Cargo System (ICS), a Seasonal Pest Hold (SPHOLD) will 
be systematically applied. This hold will remain on the container even after an amendment has been made to the 
cargo type. If you originally declared your container as an LCL and then amend the cargo type to a FCL / FCX, 
please contact BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au with evidence of the correct container type (i.e., BOL), to have the 
SPHOLD lifted.
ICS amendments & late reporting
It is important to ensure all reporting has been done prior to unpack, as all goods will be profiled as they are 
reported and an SPHOLD can be triggered at any time during the reporting if the goods are subject to measures. 
Note: Amendments will cause the cargo to run through the profiles again which may result in containers out of 
scope having holds applied after they have been unpacked and delivered. If this is the case, please email 
BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au, and they will be able to evaluate the container and lift the hold if required.

18
Industry’s role in Biosecurity 
See. Secure. Report
• Working with offshore suppliers to manage not just BMSB risk, 
but all pest risks.
• Stay updated on the BMSB seasonal measures by visiting the following 
webpages www.agriculture.gov.au/bmsb.
• Subscribe to our Import Industry Advice Notices to get updates on changes 
to import requirements, including updates on Brown marmorated stink bug 
seasonal measures https://subscribe.agriculture.gov.au/subscribe.
Recommend watching webinar: Managing the risk of a serious hitchhiker pest.
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity/australia/public-awareness/webinar-series

19
Summary
Key changes
➢The addition of Japan and the Republic of Korea to the 
emerging risk country list.
➢Airfreight from the USA and China will now be subject to 
random verification inspections. 
➢Changes in the management of In-Transit and Rolled goods 
via a dedicated form.
➢Changes to the Safeguarding Scheme evidence requirements.
Questions:
➢Policy for Hitchhiker Pests: hpp@aff.gov.au
➢Safeguarding: safeguarding@aff.gov.au 
➢BMSB Treatments (including registration and approval
of offshore treatment providers): offshoretreatments@aff.gov.au