1 

OFFICIAL

OFFICIAL

The process for goods arriving during the Brown Marmorated Stink 

Bug season 

For the Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) risk season, seasonal measures will apply to targeted goods 

manufactured in and/or shipped from target risk countries between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive). 

Industry is strongly encouraged to have their target high risk goods treated offshore by a treatment provider 

registered and approved under AusTreat to avoid clearance delays. 

Managing goods on arrival 

Break bulk goods 

Mandatory offshore treatment of target high risk goods shipped as break bulk cargo is required. This includes goods 

shipped in open top containers or on flat rack containers or modified containers that are no longer sealed. Untreated 

cargo of this type will be directed for export. Where these goods are identified before a vessel’s arrival in Australian 

territory, they will be denied discharge from the vessel. 

Containerised goods 

Onshore treatment of target high risk goods shipped in sealed hard six-sided containers is permitted. 

Deconsolidation or removal of goods before treatment is not permitted. 

Untreated target high risk goods shipped as containerised cargo will be directed for export if the container cannot be 

treated at the container level, or if the importer has chosen to export the goods. 

Onshore treatment providers 

Onshore treatment of target high risk goods is permitted for goods shipped in sealed hard six-sided containers. 

Treatment must be conducted at the container level. Deconsolidation or removal of goods will not be permitted 

before treatment. 

Cargo shipped as break bulk or shipped in open top, flat rack or in modified containers cannot be treated onshore. 

Visit the department’s agriculture.gov.au/approvedarrangements webpage for a list of approved onshore treatment 

providers operating under an Approved Arrangement for onshore treatments that may be performed. 

Onshore verification inspections during the BMSB season 

All target high risk and target risk goods may be subject to random verification inspections and will be directed for 

onshore treatment if BMSB is detected. Treatment in lieu of inspection is not permitted. 

Where goods are shipped as break bulk, random inspections are required to be conducted at a Class 21.1 Approved 

Arrangement (AA) or Class 1.1 AA (where permitted). For goods shipped in flat rack and open top containers, 

inspections will be conducted at Class 1.1 and Class 1.3 AA. 

Containerised goods will be directed for an inspect unpack at an Approved Arrangement site. Inspections can be 

conducted at a Class 1.1, 1.3, 2.1 or 2.2AA.

2 

OFFICIAL

OFFICIAL

All random onshore verification inspections are required to be completed in a metropolitan location. 

All goods must still meet the standard import conditions in the department’s biosecurity import conditions database 

(BICON) for all other biosecurity risks. 

Using AEPCOMM for goods subject to the BMSB seasonal measures 

To assist industry in lodging declarations the BMSB hitchhiker pests BICON case has been updated to include 

Automatic Entry Process for Commodities (AEPCOMM) pathways and codes. Accredited persons must log into their 

BICON AEPCOMM user access accounts before entering the case name into the BICON search field. Details on 

AEPCOMM approved commodities and requirements can be found here. 

Booking or changing an inspection or to apply for an inspection at a non-AA  

Industry can book an inspection and provide further information regarding their goods via the Biosecurity Portal. 

For approval to have an inspection conducted at a non-AA or importers premises, please complete the ‘Request for 

biosecurity inspection at non-AA site’ form and email it to the regional Biosecurity office in the state/territory that 

the cargo is requested to be inspected. 

Note: Inspections conducted at a non-AA location or importers premises, will be required to be completed as seals 

intact inspections under Biosecurity supervision in a metropolitan location. 

See. Secure. Report.  

Seen something unusual? Report it, even if you are not sure. 

Pests and diseases can spread quickly over large distances, so it is essential that you report what you find as soon as 

possible. 

If you see something that could have entered Australia with imported goods, secure the goods and report it by 

phoning 1800 798 636 or completing the online form available on agriculture.gov.au/report. 

More information 

Visit agriculture.gov.au/bmsb for: 

• 

seasonal measures for BMSB. 

• 

preparing to import BMSB goods. 

• 

what happens to your goods on arrival? 

• 

a list of target risk countries for BMSB. 

• 

a complete list of goods categorised as ‘target high risk’ and ‘target risk’. 

Watch the hitchhiker pest webinar series available at agriculture.gov.au. 

Email HPP@aff.gov.au for policy related queries. 

Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on 

changes to import requirements, including updates to BMSB seasonal measures.