The Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) seasonal measures will apply to targeted goods manufactured in/or 
shipped from target risk countries shipped between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive). 
Any target high risk or target risk goods which are manufactured in/or shipped from the target risk countries will be 
subject to BMSB seasonal measures. Any vessel that berths at, loads, or tranships from the target risk countries is 
Heightened vessel surveillance applies to all roll-on roll-off (Ro-Ro) vessels that have berthed, loaded or transhipped 
from target risk countries (with the addition of China, Japan and Republic of Korea) between 1 September and 30 
June. These vessels will be subject to a mandatory seasonal pest (SP) inspection on arrival in Australian territory. This 
is only applicable to the Ro-Ro vessels themselves and does not apply to goods on the vessel. 
Goods that fall within the following tariff classifications have been categorised as target high risk goods and will 
Target high risk goods shipped as break bulk cargo, in open top containers, on flat rack containers, or in modified 
Untreated break bulk (including flat rack and open top containers) will be directed for export. Where these goods 
are identified before a vessel arrives in Australia, they will be denied discharge.

Goods that fall within the following tariff classifications have been categorised as target risk goods and although they 
27 – Mineral fuels, mineral oils, and products of their distillation; bituminous substances; mineral waxes 
28 – Inorganic chemicals; organic or inorganic compounds of precious metals, of rare-earth metals, of radioactive 
29 – Organic chemicals, including sub chapters I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XII and XIII 
49 – Printed books, newspapers, pictures, and other products of the printing industry; manuscripts, typescripts, 
56 – Wadding, felt and nonwovens; special yarns; twine, cordage, ropes and cables and articles thereof

All other goods that are not categorised as target high risk and target risk goods, BMSB seasonal measures do not 
apply. However, these goods may be subject to BMSB measures if they are part of a container or consignment that 
Importers should note the policy to allow onshore treatment of containers may result in increased clearance delays 
at the border. To minimise this, industry is encouraged to have their target risk goods treated offshore where 
Pests and diseases can spread quickly over large distances, so it is essential that you report what you find as soon as 
If you see something that could have entered Australia with imported goods, secure the goods and report it by 
phoning 1800 798 636 or completing the online form available on agriculture.gov.au. 
Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on