The Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) seasonal measures will apply to targeted goods manufactured in/or 
shipped from target risk countries shipped between 1 September and 30 April (inclusive). 
During the BMSB risk season, Less than Container Load (LCL) consignments and Freight of All Kinds (FAK) containers 
with target high risk goods will be managed at the container level. Deconsolidation or removal of goods will not be 
Seasonal measures apply to LCL/FAK containers that consist of goods that originate from or are  
shipped from a target risk country. This applies to any LCL consignment inside the FAK container that  
The Master Consolidator declaration form is a secure online form that can be accessed through the department’s 
Master Consolidators managing goods during the BMSB risk season must register with the department to receive a 
unique Master Consolidator Identification number (MC ID). Without this you will not be able to lodge LCL/FAK 
declarations for this season. Each Master Consolidator must use their own unique ID when lodging a declaration. 
Master Consolidators can register for a MC ID on the department’s agriculture.gov.au/bmsb webpage. Once 
registered, an automated email with MC ID and login details will be provided to the nominated contacts. 
Note: All users will need to download the Microsoft Authenticator app onto a portable device (i.e., phone, tablet 
Note: Once you are a registered user, your login will remain active. There is no requirement to re-register every year. 
All registration amendments including company details, company and user email addresses, new MC users or 
deactivation of existing accounts, can be sent to HPP@aff.gov.au using the Master Consolidator Registration form. 
Users that have previously registered, however, have changed phones or phone numbers, may have difficulties 
logging into the portal with their authenticator code. In these instances, please email HPP@aff.gov.au to get a reset 
Registered Master Consolidators must enter in relevant details about the LCL/FAK container/s being imported 
including incoming vessel information, declaration of target high risk goods, and supporting documentation for any 
Visit the department’s agriculture.gov.au/bmsb webpage to find how to complete the BMSB Master Consolidator 

Master Consolidators must complete the online declaration form discussed above prior to the arrival of the vessel in 
It is important that declarations are provided as early as possible. This will assist for timelier  
clearance of the container and to reduce the likelihood risk of Seasonal Pest holds delaying these 
If a declaration is not provided before arrival, the container will be held at the wharf under a Seasonal Pest hold 
(SPHOLD) until a declaration is provided. If there is no contact or declaration made by the Master Consolidator after 
35 business days of the consignment being lodged into Import Cargo System, the container will be directed for 
Once a declaration has been received and matched to the container details in ICS, if the container has been treated 
offshore, it will be permitted to deconsolidate as per normal processes. If the container has been nominated for 
onshore treatment, the container will be permitted to move immediately to an Approved Arrangement site for 
For all questions and information related directly to BMSB LCL / FAK declarations, assessments, directions and / or 
MC declaration lodgements, email BMSB Processing Team on BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au. 
Importers should note the policy to allow onshore treatment of containers is expected to result in increased 
To minimise clearance delays, industry is encouraged to have their target high risk goods treated offshore and at the 
Pests and diseases can spread quickly over large distances, so it is essential that you report what you find as soon as 
If you see something that could have entered Australia with imported goods, secure the goods and report it by 
phoning 1800 798 636 or completing the online form available on agriculture.gov.au/report.

Visit agriculture.gov.au/subscribe to subscribe to newsletter and Industry Advice Notices and keep up to date on