February 2026

Animalplan 2022 to 2027

Steering Committee Communiqué

The Animalplan Steering Committee combines government, industry and non-government organisation leaders to support projects and activities that strengthen Australia’s animal health system.

Key updates from the Animalplan Steering Committee and Secretariat

The Steering Committee members convened for the February 2026 quarter meeting. Discussions included updates on current Animalplan projects and activities, new project proposals and the Animalplan 2026 implementation plan.

The Secretariat published project updates from the November 2025 to January 2026 quarter on the Animalplan website.

The Secretariat published an Executive Summary Report of the Animalplan 2022 to 2027 mid-term review on the Animalplan website.

The next Animalplan Steering Committee meeting will be held in May 2026. The Secretariat will also then publish updates for the February to April 2026 quarter.

Project news – November 2025 to January 2026

New projects:

#72: CalfWays, Sustainable Dairy Calf Management Roadmap

This initiative aims to transform the management of dairy calves in Australia by 2035. It serves as an overarching framework to unify and strengthen existing initiatives by the dairy and beef industries and drive further innovation across both industries in sustainable calf management.

Updated projects:

#27: Emergency animal disease crisis management planning – The crisis management planning guidance materials are in the final stages of review. The project committee has agreed to hold an additional workshop in the first half of 2026 to support industry testing and upskilling.

#44: Australia’s Animal Sector Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) Action Plan 2023 to 2028

The Animal Health Committee AMR Task Group will continue for another 12 months.

A business case for sustainable funding to undertake national AMR priority actions and initiatives in the animal health sector is being developed for June 2026.

A monitoring and evaluation framework for the AMR Action Plan was completed and will be used to monitor progress towards the plan’s objectives.

The Traceability Grants Program – Round 4 was open from 12 January 2026 to 18 February 2026. The grant round will fund projects that meet the program objectives and focus on the strategy’s priority areas for action that require further investment, being:

Align processes and technologies to capture and use data for multiple purposes, such as regulators and feedback to farmers

Support industry to implement interoperable systems

Implement a communication and education campaign to strengthen awareness of agricultural traceability.

#64: Assessing the feasibility of testing trapped pooled insects for lumpy skin disease (LSD) virus

Work has commenced at the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP) to explore the feasibility of testing pooled mosquito samples as a potential diagnostic tool to support response activities in the event of an LSD outbreak in Australia.

Initial laboratory work has focused on optimising sample preparation and testing methods.

Preparatory work is also underway for the next phase, which will involve determining the lowest amount of virus that can be reliably detected in pooled mosquito samples.

How can you get involved?

Join the Animalplan stakeholder list to stay informed of new and existing projects.

Submit projects to increase national awareness and collaboration.

Read about Animalplan activities and projects to understand active research and identify opportunities for collaboration.

More information

Learn more about Animalplan.

Web www.agriculture.gov.au/animal-plan

Email animalplan@aff.gov.au