November 2025

Animalplan 2022 to 2027

Steering Committee Communiqué

The Animalplan Steering Committee combines government, industry and non-government organisation leaders to support projects and activities that strengthen Australia’s animal health system.

Key updates from the Animalplan Steering Committee and Secretariat

The Steering Committee members convened for the August to October 2025 quarterly meeting. Discussions included updates on current Animalplan projects and activities, new project proposals and 2026 Animalplan webinar topics.

The Secretariat published project updates from the August to October 2025 quarter on the Animalplan website.

A new publicly searchable database has been released. This showcases projects developed under Animalplan 2022-2027 and consolidates information previously published in the Animalplan progress reports into one easy-to-access public platform. Explore the projects and learn more on the Animalplan website.

The Animalplan Co-Chairs recently presented at the Animal Health Committee (AHC) face-to-face forum on 23 October 2025, providing an overview of existing co-investment pathways for Animalplan-aligned projects, and briefly discussing further opportunities with AHC members.

The next Animalplan Steering Committee meeting will be held in February 2026. The Secretariat will also then publish updates for the November 2025 to January 2026 quarter.

Project news – August to October 2025

New projects:

#66: Australian Animal Disease Genomics Initiative: Building the Molecular Blueprints for Animal Health

This is a national program using genomics to strengthen Australia’s capacity to understand, detect and manage animal diseases. Established through Bioplatforms Australia in collaboration with the animal health sector, the program operates through a reference genome library and an animal virome atlas.

#67: Enhancing rapid decision-support for emergency animal disease outbreaks – HASTE

HASTE strengthens Australia’s preparedness and response to emergency animal disease by creating a framework to test, evaluate, and continually improve epidemiological modelling that informs decision-making. This includes developing rapid-response modelling tools that minimise negative impacts and empower decision-makers to act decisively during animal biosecurity emergencies.

#68: National Laboratory Stockpile Workshop

This facilitated workshop was held to scope the requirement for a national laboratory stockpile arrangement for emergency animal disease (EAD) responses. Workshop participants worked through a scenario-based exercise to test the resource availability of mission-critical supplies and efficiency of sharing of supplies between jurisdictional laboratories to respond in the event of a large EAD outbreak. Ensuring we have these supplies on hand and within Australia will protect us in the event of supply chain disruptions internationally, supporting a rapid return to normal function.

#69: Development of proficiency testing program for high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatics within the Laboratories for Emergency Animal Disease Diagnosis and Response network – A roadmap

The project delivered a roadmap to guide the development of proficiency testing programs for high-throughput sequencing (HTS) and bioinformatics within the Laboratories for Emergency Animal Disease Diagnosis and Response network. The proficiency testing programs aim to support a nationally harmonised and quality-assured approach to the use of diagnostic HTS in support of EAD outbreak responses.

#70: National deployment of the Sample Tracking and Reporting System v2: Phase I

This project follows on from Project 5 and aims to deploy the Sample Tracking and Reporting (STARS) v2 in 3 jurisdictional animal health laboratories. This work supports improvements in laboratory interoperability by enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of data sharing and reporting, especially during the surge capacity response in EAD events.

#71: Development of national equine piroplasmosis molecular diagnostic test capability

This project follows on from Project 51 and aims to develop robust molecular procedures (e.g. PCR) for detecting Theileria equi and Babesia caballi, the causative agents of equine piroplasmosis (EP). This project supports faster diagnosis of EP by enabling essential testing for EP to be conducted in Australia and hence reduce the reliance on international testing, providing greater confidence in Australia’s equine health standards.

Updated projects:

#27: Emergency Animal Disease (EAD) Crisis Management Planning – the project team updated the Crisis Management Plan documentation from feedback provided at the August 2025 workshop, and the Crisis Management Planning Steering Committee met in October 2025 to make recommendations to guide the final phase of the project.

#32: Disposal priority project focusing on pyrolysis and composting as methods for large animal disposal – the project recently demonstrated that composting cattle and pig carcasses after mass mortality events is feasible, effective, and meets pathogen reduction requirements under Australian environmental conditions. This supports the use of composting as a biosecure and environmentally sound emergency disposal method.

#45: Alpaca National Livestock Identification System – the Australian Alpaca Association has now released a suite of educational material for alpaca owners covering how to use the National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) to track alpaca movements across their life to monitor disease control, biosecurity, market access and other industry-related purposes.

#49: NLIS Database Uplift project – the project has now progressed to the system build stage, focusing on developing a streamlined, user-friendly platform informed by stakeholder feedback, with ongoing stakeholder consultation and change management supporting a phased rollout and future biosecurity and traceability features.

#54: Improve national diagnostic capability for glanders – update to the project end date, extension from June to October 2025.

Newly completed projects:

#2: Evaluation of antibody-detecting immunoassays for lumpy skin disease in cattle and buffalo

#7: Lumpy skin disease testing capacity building in the Laboratories Emergency Animal Disease Diagnosis and Response (LEADDR) network

#55: Assessment and improvement of national bluetongue serological capability – a comparative study of commercial and in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ELISAs

#56: Improvement of serological testing for flaviviruses in Australian livestock

#57: Towards validation of a microRNA-based diagnostic test for Johne's disease

#59: Quality assurance for high-throughput sequencing HTS as an infectious agent discovery tool

#61: The Australian Biosecurity Genomic Database (phase 3)

#62: Building a sustainable national sample identification system for animal diagnostics – a pilot study using pre-barcoded sample collection tubes

How can you get involved?

Join the Animalplan stakeholder list to stay informed of new and existing projects.

Submit projects to increase national awareness and collaboration.

Read about Animalplan activities and projects to understand active research and identify opportunities for collaboration.

More information

Learn more about Animalplan.

Web www.agriculture.gov.au/animal-plan

Email animalplan@aff.gov.au