August 2025

Animalplan 2022 to 2027

Steering Committee Communiqué

The Animalplan Steering Committee combines government, industry and non-government organisation leaders to support projects and activities that strengthen Australia’s animal health system.

Key updates from the Animalplan Steering Committee and Secretariat

A mid-term review of Animalplan 2022 to 2027 was held at a workshop in June 2025. Attendees included the Steering Committee members, representatives from industry, government, and non-government organisations. Workshop attendees highlighted key activities, identified challenges and opportunities, and collaborated on future planning. The Steering Committee thanks all participants for engaging and will provide an update on the review soon.

The Steering Committee members convened for the August 2025 quarterly meeting. Discussions included an update on Project 63: Future of Australian Animal Health (2030-2035) and the outcomes of the Animalplan mid-term review.

The Secretariat published new-look information and updates on projects aligned under Animalplan, as part of the first phase to implementing a new project database. Find project updates from the May to July 2025 quarter on the Animalplan website.

The next Animalplan Steering Committee meeting will be held in November 2025. The Secretariat will also then publish updates for the August to October 2025 quarter.

Project news – May to July 2025

New projects:

#64: Assessing the feasibility of testing trapped pooled insects for lumpy skin disease (LSD) virus

To assess whether existing polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays available in jurisdictional laboratories can detect the presence of LSD virus in pooled insects.

Updated projects:

All projects under the Traceability Grants Program – Round 3 – are underway and have submitted their second progress reports, as required in their grant agreements.

The National Agriculture Traceability Grants Program project Brand Australia International Traceability Symposiums concluded in April 2025 following acceptance of its final report.

#44: Australia’s Animal Sector Antimicrobial Resistance Action Plan 2023 to 2028 – The Animal Health Committee (AHC) Antimicrobial Resistance Task Group has continued action on 3 tasks in the action plan that require government leadership. Tasks include development of a communication plan, surveillance policy advice, and consolidation of a list of prohibited antimicrobials for use in animals. Progress of all tasks will be reported in writing to AHC.

#48: National mandatory individual electronic identification for sheep and goats – Key implementation milestones and activities currently underway are outlined in the sheep and goat eID National Implementation Plan.

Newly completed projects:

#17: Feral pig modelling: enhancing decision making on emergency animal disease operations

#53: Defining an antimicrobial assessment framework for the Australian animal sector

#60: Materiality assessment for the Australian Beef Sustainability Framework

#63: Future of Australian Animal Health (2030-2035)

How can you get involved?

Join the Animalplan stakeholder list to stay informed of new and existing projects.

Submit projects to increase national awareness and collaboration.

Read about Animalplan activities and projects to understand active research and identify opportunities for collaboration.

More information

Learn more about Animalplan.

Web www.agriculture.gov.au/animal-plan

Email animalplan@aff.gov.au