The Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018
lapsed when parliament was dissolved in early 2019.
A new Bill, the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Australian Pesticides
and Veterinary Medicines Authority Board and Other Improvements) Bill 2019, revives the measures
from the lapsed Bill.
The lapsed Streamlining Regulation Bill was introduced into the Australian Parliament on
18 October 2018. Information about the lapsed Bill is available from the Australian Parliament website.
The measures in the lapsed Bill were intended to:
enable the use of new, simpler regulatory processes for chemicals of low regulatory concern (to
simplify the approval of active constituents and labels, and the registration of certain products
through prescribed approvals and registrations)
provide the APVMA and industry with more flexibility to deal with certain types of new
information provided when the APVMA is considering an application
provide for extensions to limitation periods and protection periods as an incentive for chemical
companies to register certain new uses of chemical products – particularly those uses (minor
uses) with insufficient commercial return for chemical companies to normally add to the product
label
support computerised decision-making by the APVMA
optimise risk communication about chemical products by improving the transparency of
voluntary recalls
harmonise the need to inform the APVMA of new information (where it relates to the safety,
efficacy, trade and labelling criteria) so that the same obligations apply to all holders and
applicants
provide a more practical mechanism for dealing with minor variations in the constituents in a
product, that normally occur in the manufacturing process
provide the APVMA with more proportionate options for dealing with false or misleading
information (suspension or cancellation of an approval or registration)
clarify what information must be included on a label (address an inconsistency in label
particulars)
allow the holder of a suspended product to address the reason for the suspension
fix anomalies in the regulation-making powers for the safety, efficacy, trade and labelling criteria
simplify the APVMA’s corporate reporting requirements
make minor and machinery changes, including removal of unnecessary and redundant
provisions.
Additional measures in the lapsed Streamlining Regulation Bill would have provided for a legislative
instrument made by the APVMA to prescribe a scheme that would allow applicants and the APVMA to
use accredited third party providers to undertake assessment services. This measure is not being
pursued in the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Australian Pesticides
and Veterinary Medicines Authority Board and Other Improvements) Bill 2019.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Background
Public consultation on an exposure draft of the lapsed Bill occurred between 11 July to 22 August 2018.
Following consultation, several changes were made to the lapsed Bill. These changes included:
omitting the proposal for provisional registration
simplifying the proposed legislation for accrediting persons and removing the aggravated offence
for contravening conditions of accreditation
aligning voluntary recalls more closely with the Australian Consumer Law
providing for internal review of an APVMA decision that is substituted for a computer-based
decision
simplifying the provisions for extending ‘data protection’ periods.
Submissions
A total of 17 submissions were received on an exposure draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary
Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018, including 3 provided in-
confidence. Links to the public submissions can be found below.
Download
Document
Pages File size
Accord Australasia Ltd PDF
4
1.5 MB
Animal Medicines Australia PDF
9
336 KB
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 
4
431 KB
Australian Veterinary Association PDF
12
192 KB
Brown Besier Parasitology Pty Ltd PDF
2
105 KB
Competitive Advantage PDF
14
143 KB
CropLife Australia PDF
13
2.3 MB
Dairy Australia PDF
9
696 KB
Grain Producers Australia PDF
18
2.1 MB
Horticulture Innovation Australia Ltd PDF
10
253 KB
National Farmers’ Federation PDF 
12
257 KB
Queensland Department of Agriculture and Fisheries PDF
3
377 KB
Veterinary Manufacturers and Distributors Association PDF
8
94 KB
Western Australian Farmers Federation (Inc) PDF
8
394 KB
Published submissions may not meet Australian Government accessibility guidelines as they have not
been prepared by the department.
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Consultation paper
Although the period for submissions has closed, the original consultation document and exposure draft
is still available to view through the links below. The consultation paper included details of the
proposed legislative changes when consultation commenced in July 2018.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Read the exposure draft
The exposure draft set out the legislative changes as proposed when consultation commenced.
Download
This publication was not prepared by the department and may not meet Australian Government
accessibility guidelines. If you require an accessible version of the publication, please contact the
department.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/ag-vet-chemicals/better-regulation-of-ag-vet-chemicals/streamlining/
public-consultation