The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is Australia’s largest public sector employer of
veterinarians.
If you are interested in an exciting, challenging and rewarding career, we encourage you to consider the
opportunities that the department can offer.
The work of the Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer and the department is critical to Australia’s
biosecurity system by protecting the health of our animals, people and environment from the problems
of animal pests and diseases.
This work includes:
developing national policies and strategies, and providing scientific advice that minimises the
potential impacts of diseases on Australia’s animal population
supporting and enhancing trade and market access for animals and animal products
liaising with public health, environmental and veterinary experts and agencies to advocate
cooperation between animal, human and environmental health fields.
This important work occurs around Australia in offices, airports, mail centres, shipping ports,
laboratories and abattoirs, and in various locations overseas.
The department recognises the importance of work/life balance and provides an excellent workplace
environment.
You can visit the jobs section on our website where all of our employment opportunities are listed when
they become available. The department's Graduate Development Program offers another entry point
into the department with a year-long program including training and development.
For the latest updates on the work of the Office of the Chief Veterinary Officer, please follow our Twitter
channel @ChiefVetAus.
You can also read more about the diversity of our work through the veterinarian profiles below.
Publication details
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
Veterinarian Profiles
See the diversity of our work through the experiences of our veterinarians
• 
• 
•

Joe, Veterinary Officer
Northern Australia Quarantine Strategy (NAQS)
Keeping a Top Watch in Australia’s north
‘As a veterinary officer for the Northern Australia Quarantine Strategy, I survey domestic and wild
animal populations in remote areas of the Northern Territory coast for exotic pests and diseases. I work
closely with Indigenous ranger groups, pastoralists, park rangers and the public to educate them about
these threats.’
‘My career highlights include securing an understanding with Bradshaw and Yampi Sound military
training bases which allows us to survey their land for exotic pests and disease. I’ve made lifelong
friends in Papua New Guinea, and have been involved in the set-up of the first Indigenous-run sentinel
cattle herd in the Northern Territory, and have trained other Indigenous rangers.’
‘Though we work behind the scenes, our work is very important, especially with trade and maintaining
Australia’s freedom of disease status. I’m privileged to be part of the program—the responsibilities that
come with it are huge when you really think about it.’

Murli, Principal Veterinary Officer
Implementing a better system for horse imports
‘My biggest career achievement has been managing the team which implemented the government’s
response to the Equine Influenza Inquiry. This involved changes to virtually every aspect of horse
importation to Australia, including implementing new import conditions, inspecting overseas pre-
export quarantine facilities and upgrading our own quarantine stations.’
‘Pay and working conditions made moving to the department very attractive. When I wanted to do some
volunteer vet work overseas, the department held a position for me and gave me several months leave
without pay. The department has trained me in management, leadership, exotic diseases, emergency
disease response, food safety, auditing and more.’
‘It can feel especially hard in private practice to change your career path. Being trained as a vet gives
you many skills and once you start looking you’ll probably find you’re suited to all sorts of areas.’

Sue, On-plant Veterinary Officer
Export Meat Abattoir
Protecting food safety and export markets
‘I work as an on-plant vet at an export abattoir. The role involves performing ante-mortem inspection of
animals, verifying post-mortem inspection procedures, overseeing animal welfare and checking that all
company activities comply with the relevant legislation.’
‘On-plant vets enable certification of Australian meat and meat products for overseas markets.
Although the work environment at an export abattoir can be challenging, I enjoy it because it’s a busy
and stimulating workplace.’
‘Always keep the department in mind as a career possibility. I live on a 20 acre hobby farm and have
chickens, ducks, sheep, two vizsla dogs and a cat. Pay rates, regular hours, and a variety of career
opportunities in country locations make it worthwhile.’
Sally, Principal Veterinary Officer
Making sure Australia is prepared for emergency animal diseases
‘I contribute to ensuring Australia will be able to respond effectively to any emergency animal disease
incursion. I work closely with states and territory governments, and industry - to support development
of good biosecurity practices and preparedness plans. There’s always something new and challenging to
work on and the flexibility and opportunities within the department all make it a great place to work.
Examples of my work include involvement in an African swine fever outbreak simulation exercise in the
USA, joining a task force to determine Australia’s preparedness to respond to a very large animal
disease outbreak, and responding to urgent requests from ministers for information on how we are
protecting Australia from diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease and lumpy skin disease.
With increasing global trade and travel comes increased disease risks, making the work of veterinarians
in the department vitally important. Our work protects Australia’s agriculture industries and many
other industries that rely on disease free animals and continued trade. This is important and rewarding
work.’
Sandeep, Veterinary Officer, Post Entry Quarantine (PEQ)
Welcoming dogs, cats and more
‘I feel my role is a big responsibility in assisting to keep Australia safe from exotic, pests and animal
diseases. There are thousands of dogs, cats, horses, poultry eggs, day old chicks, turkeys, pigeons, and
small number of alpacas and small ruminants imported into Australia every year. I get to see a large
variety of animal breeds and types of animals including military working dogs, show dogs, emotional
assistance dogs and highly valuable racing horses.

The two main aspects of my job are compliance and animal welfare. It requires me to split my time
between applying my veterinary knowledge both at desk and at the PEQ facility’s stables, kennels and
cattery. I ensure all the imported animals in quarantine are compliant with their import conditions. I
liaise with numerous stakeholders, such as importers, exporters, testing laboratories, overseas
competent authorities and many more to ensure non-compliances are resolved onshore.
At PEQ’s stables I oversee routine testing on imported horses, and I inspect, collect samples from, and
treat, the many dogs and cats who come through the quarantine facility. Animals are inspected
throughout their quarantine period, to ensure they are free from signs of any exotic diseases before they
are released into Australia. I also support other vets and biosecurity officers at PEQ and shares insights
with the policy team to improve import policies and processes. Doing a job that is of value is very
satisfying, and the most rewarding part of my role is reuniting animals with their families after a long
process that gives me a kind of satisfaction which is hard to explain.’
Jenny, Director - Offshore Program for Animal Health
Working with Australia’s near neighbours to protect animal health and food security
‘I work with veterinarians and animal health professionals in neighbouring countries including Papua
New Guinea (PNG) and Timor-Leste helping to improve animal health and production. Livestock have
a special significance which goes beyond their commercial economic value in these countries - pigs and
cattle are important in cultural exchange and often represent a family savings account for village
smallholders. Reducing exotic animal disease entry and spread, and strengthening disease response
capabilities is a win-win as it helps our neighbours and also reduces biosecurity risk to northern
Australia.
I consider myself lucky to have a job which combines my love of travel and meeting new people with
problem solving. It is never boring and there are always new challenges to work on along with other
development partners like the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. For example, our team
recently delivered a foot-and-mouth disease simulation exercise in PNG to help build their
preparedness – it was a great experience and generated a lot of enthusiasm for ongoing work from both
the Australian and PNG teams.’
There is a great variety of jobs for vets here, which I never realised until I joined the department, and it
also provides a good work-life balance with flexible hours and locations, which is important when
raising a family.’
Richard, First Secretary (Agriculture) – South Asia
Progressing Australia’s agriculture market access priorities in South Asia
‘I work as one of the members of the department’s Counsellor Network, as a First Secretary for
Agriculture for the South Asia region (India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bhutan and
Maldives). It involves a three-year posting to the Australian High Commission in New Delhi, where I
progress technical market access priorities for our agriculture sector, implement outcomes from our

free trade agreement with India and build co-operative relationships with influential government
officials and private sector partners.
I have been very fortunate to have a diverse career in the department, where I have worked as an
adviser to Dr Mark Schipp during his WOAH Presidency, facilitated imports and exports of animals and
their products, and led the development of Australia’s first national action plan for animal health,
Animalplan.
You never know where a veterinary career in the department will take you. My training has equipped
me with many transferable skills, such as leadership, complex problem solving, and international trade
relations, which has supported my contribution to the strategic direction of the department since
starting as a Graduate in 2015.’
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/animal/health/acvo/vet_careers