working closely with the Steering Committee and stakeholders to support the implementation of 

Animalplan 2022 to 2027 (Animalplan).

The Secretariat is responsible for a range of implementation work and reporting, including:

collating and publishing updates on the projects endorsed under Animalplan

managing correspondence and communications

organising Steering Committee meetings.

Find out more about the projects that sit under Animalplan in the project database.

Submit a project to Animalplan

Animalplan brings together projects and activities related to production animal health, to create a

central source of information, promote collaboration and reduce the risks of duplication.

Project teams and leads can submit proposals for consideration by the Steering Committee, and

endorsed projects are added to the Animalplan database. The project leads are contacted quarterly for

updates.

Contact the Secretariat to discuss your project idea and identify who to work with to refine it, where

appropriate. You can also work with the Secretariat to submit your project to the Animalplan Steering

Committee for consideration and endorsement.

Please note that Animalplan is not a direct funding body but does provide national profile, an agreed

framework to promote alignment of project activities and a central coordination point.

Animalplan Mid-Term Review

On 18 June 2025, DAFF brought together key stakeholders for a mid-term review of Animalplan. The

session gathered representatives from across key government agencies, peak industry groups and non-

government organisations involved in implementing Animalplan.

The workshop provided progress updates on key activities, explored emerging opportunities and

challenges and offered a collaborative forum to identify practical solutions.

The mid-term review aimed to support the effective implementation of Animalplan by:

strengthening engagement between key organisations

broadening stakeholder understanding with Animalplan, its purpose and opportunities

identifying if Animalplan is achieving its objectives and addressing identified challenges

exploring any need to amend objectives and activities that may not be achieving Animalplan’s

intended outcomes

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

identifying any gaps to ensure these are addressed where possible, including assigning

responsibility to any new activities or actions arising from the workshop discussions.

For more information on the workshop outcomes, refer to the Executive Summary Report.

See more

Contact us

For more information, please contact the Animalplan Secretariat.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/animal-plan/secretariat

•