The ‘Have Your Say’ online feedback survey for the proposed draft Ethyl formate fumigation conditions and supporting approved arrangement updates (Classes 12.4, 4.6 and 4.7) closed at 5:00 pm (EST) on 6 July 2026.
Thank you for providing your valued feedback. For further information, please contact AA.Canberra@aff.gov.au or visit the department's ‘Have Your Say’ page for Ethyl formate fumigation conditions and approved arrangement updates (Classes 12.4, 4.6 and 4.7).
For more information about Brown Marmorated Stink Bug (BMSB) seasonal measures, please visit the department's Seasonal measures for Brown marmorated stink bug (BMSB) page.
Approved arrangements, previously Quarantine Approved Premises and Compliance Agreements, are voluntary arrangements entered into with the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
These arrangements allow operators to manage biosecurity risks and/or perform the documentary assessment of goods in accordance with departmental requirements, using their own sites, facilities, equipment and people, and without constant supervision by the department and with occasional compliance monitoring or auditing.
See. Secure. Report.
The department has developed a video explaining how to manage pests and diseases that may be present in imported goods and containers at approved arrangement sites.
If you hold an approved arrangement or work on a site that holds an approved arrangement, make sure you know and comply with your conditions when handling imported goods and understand what to do when you identify a potential biosecurity risk.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Approval and maintenance of an arrangement
To enter into an approved arrangement, and maintain your approved status, you will need to make an application and prove that you can meet requirements set by the department.
Application process
If you are interested in entering into an approved arrangement, you will need to make an application to the department.
As part of this application you must prove that you have met the requirements for the type of arrangement you are proposing, including the fit and proper person test.
Requirements for operating an approved arrangement
Requirements for approval of an arrangement, and the maintenance of approved status, are determined based on the class of approved arrangement.
The class type applied to your approved arrangement is a category based system that reflects the:
- activities that take place at the site
- any risks associated with those activities.
Training and accreditation
You may be required to meet training and accreditation requirements before your proposed arrangement is approved by the department. Accreditation must be kept up to date to maintain your approved status.
Managing compliance
The process for assessing and monitoring compliance in an approved arrangement, and handling of cases of noncompliance, is outlined in the Approved arrangement general policies.
Approved sites
If you need to make use of an existing approved arrangement site, the department maintains a list of sites that have an arrangement with the department.
Revocations, changes and variations to broker approved arrangements
If you need to revoke or change your current broker approved arrangement, depending on the type of change, you may be required to complete an application.
Changes and variations to an approved arrangements
If you need to make a change to or vary your current approved arrangement, depending on the type of change, you will be required to complete an application.
Suspending or revoking an approved arrangements
If you have an existing approved arrangement, you must notify the department if you are planning to suspend all operations, some operations or if you wish to revoke your arrangement.
Third party assessors
Containment approved arrangement sites (class 5, 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4) must meet the design and construction aspects of the Australian/New Zealand Standards AS/NZS 2982.1:1997 (Laboratory Design and Construction) and AS/NZS 2243.3:2002 (Safety in Laboratories Standards.
Compliance with these standards is assessed by a departmental approved third party assessor.
Fees
Fees and charges apply to different stages of an approved arrangement including:
- new approved arrangement applications
- approved arrangement management
- approved arrangement audits (includes pre and post approval).
Further information
The department provides guidance for participants in approved arrangements to help them comply with operational requirements. This includes:
Contact us
For more information about approved arrangements, email aa.canberra@aff.gov.au.