2022-2027
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
PURPOSE
Australia’s fourth national strategic plan for aquatic animal health, AQUAPLAN 2022-2027, was jointly 
developed by industry and governments. It outlines priorities and activities to improve aquatic animal 
health management in Australia. Implementation of AQUAPLAN is a joint industry and government 
responsibility. This document outlines how AQUAPLAN will be implemented and has been endorsed by 
industry and governments. 
SCOPE INCLUSIONS
The objectives and activities of AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 address issues associated with infectious 
diseases of aquatic animals, including finfish, molluscs and crustaceans. The plan addresses aquatic 
animal health issues that may affect aquaculture, commercial fisheries, recreational fisheries, the 
ornamental fish industry, the environment.
Pillar 1: Shared Ownership and Collaboration
AQUAPLAN represents shared priorities among 
investors in aquatic animal health to achieve a common 
vision. This pillar aims to cultivate shared ownership of 
the plan to achieve its vision and outcomes.
Pillar 2: Sustainable resourcing
AQUAPLAN is designed to attract funding for specific 
activities and in some cases in-kind resources from the 
aquatic animal health community. This pillar aims to 
secure resources over the life of the plan and match 
available resources to priorities. 
Pillar 3: Strong and efficient coordination
AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 has seven objectives, each with 
supporting activities that will be progressed over five 
years. This pillar aims to support strong and efficient 
coordination to monitor and evaluate each activity and 
overall progress towards achieving AQUAPLAN’s vision.
Pillar 4 Demonstrating and realising benefit
To create lasting change and improvements in the aquatic 
animal health system outputs of AQUAPLAN need to be 
extended and adopted by their end-users. Demonstrating 
return on investment and sound evaluation of outcomes 
will be essential to secure ongoing investment. This pillar 
aims to realise and demonstrate benefit. 
AQUAPLAN webinar series
Annual AQUAPLAN workshop
Activities jointly led by industry and 
governments, in collaboration 
with experts.
Direct funding is secured
In-kind resources are secured and 
applied in a sustainable manner.
Biannual activity reporting
Project plans for each activity that 
include monitoring, evaluation, and 
communication. 
Activities are not considered complete 
until they have been evaluated and 
efforts have been made to extend and 
encourage adoption by end-users.
Mid-term and end of plan reviews.
THE FOUR PILLARS OF AQUAPLAN IMPLEMENTATION
Pillar
Purpose and Aim
Key performance indicators
$

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
All activities in AQUAPLAN will be collaborative, cultivate ownership and will aim to realise benefit 
for the aquatic animal health community. Aquatic animal businesses and farms, universities and 
research institutes, laboratories and scientific organisations, aquatic veterinarians and aquatic 
health consultants, state and territory and commonwealth governments all have a role to play in 
achieving AQUAPLAN’s vision. 
Responsibilities: Progress, monitor, discuss, prioritise and 
implement AQUAPLAN, and in doing so: 
•	 Guide implementation and represent industry and governments 
shared interests.
•	 Oversee and attend annual AQUAPLAN workshops
•	 Contribute biennially to prioritisation and monitoring of activities
•	 Champion AQUAPLAN and communicate relevant outcomes 
within organisations, members and networks.
Responsibilities: Lead and drive activities of AQUAPLAN, and in 
doing so:
•	 Consult relevant collaborators to develop a project plan that 
includes communication, monitoring and evaluation plans and 
seek collaborator support before progressing 
•	 Source activity funding (if applicable) or other necessary 
resources to support activity delivery 
•	 Report biannually on activity progress to the AQUAPLAN 
executive office and other interested groups as appropriate 
•	 Communicate, evaluate, and extend activity outcomes as 
identified in the project plan
Responsibilities: Central coordination of AQUAPLAN 
implementation, and in doing so:
•	 Coordinate AQUAPLAN implementation in consultation with 
industry, governments, activity leads and collaborators and other 
aquatic animal stakeholders 
•	 Report on progress biannually to all stakeholders 
•	 Assist activity leads (e.g. to source funding or write project plans)
•	 Lead mid-term and end of plan reviews in consultation with 
stakeholders 
Industry
Governments
AQUAPLAN 
Activity leads
AQUAPLAN 
Executive Office
Researchers
and Collaborators
Responsibilities: Active role in supporting delivery of AQUAPLAN 
activities, and in doing so:  
•	 Engage in activities and AQUAPLAN implementation as 
appropriate (e.g. providing expertise)
•	 Understand the needs of end-users to deliver activities