Australia's National Strategic Plan for Aquatic Animal Health 
 
 
 
Mid-term review  
December 2025

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 2 of 16

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 3 of 16 
Executive summary 
Purpose: A mid-term review of AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 has been completed by aquatic animal 
industries and governments. Implementation progress was reviewed and clear 
recommendations for the remainder of the plan agreed. 
Overall Progress: Seven of 28 projects have been completed and a further 19 activities are in 
progress. Eight of nine key performance indicators (KPI) for the Implementation Plan are being 
met, eight of nine KPIs of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan are being met, and seven of ten 
KPIs of the Communication and Engagement Plan are being met. AQUAPLAN owners (i.e., 
aquatic animal industries and governments) are confident in AQUAPLAN’s ability to achieve 
meaningful outcomes and in the cross-sectoral collaboration required to achieve this. 
Key Achievements: 
• 
Collaboration and shared leadership – AQUAPLAN activities demonstrate strong co-
design and ownership between industry and government, contributing to successful 
delivery. Of the 30 industry and government stakeholders who participated in the mid-term 
review workshop, 87% agreed/strongly agreed that there is willingness for collaboration 
across sectors to implement AQUAPLAN effectively. 
• 
Implementation success – Most activities are progressing well, with completed and 
ongoing projects collectively driving progress toward AQUAPLAN’s strategic objectives. Of 
the 30 industry and government stakeholders who participated in the mid-term review 
workshop, 100% agreed/strongly agreed that they are confident in AQUAPLAN achieving 
meaningful outcomes. 
• 
Communication led by webinar series – The webinar series has become a central 
mechanism for engagement, extension, and adoption, supporting implementation and 
stakeholder connection. 
Priority Actions for 2025-2027: 
• 
Leverage and strengthen communication and engagement – Build on the success of the 
webinar series as a central platform for engagement, extension, and adoption. Broaden 
AQUAPLAN’s reach by utilising existing communication channels through Fisheries 
Research and Development Corporation (FRDC), Seafood Industry Australia (SIA), and 
industry newsletters, and assess whether any gaps remain in current communication and 
engagement efforts to ensure all stakeholder groups are effectively reached.  Develop 
AQUAPLAN communication templates that can be used by activity leads. 
• 
Reconsider enterprise and regional biosecurity priorities – Engage with end-users on 
Objective 2 activities (2.1–2.3) to ensure alignment with current sector needs and available 
resources, and determine approaches for targeted implementation. Prioritise continuous 
improvement (activity 2.3) and defer activities 2.1–2.2 until lead sectors can be identified. 
• 
Enhance extension and adoption mechanisms – Strengthen approaches to ensure 
AQUAPLAN outcomes are well understood and applied by end-users (including at the 
operational level), particularly through Activity 7.2 and broader communication and 
engagement efforts.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 4 of 16 
Introduction 
This is the fourth of Australia’s national strategic plans for aquatic animal health, and the first to 
incorporate a mid-term review. The inclusion of this review reflects AQUAPLAN’s strong 
emphasis on shared ownership, measurable impact, and demonstrating return on investment. 
The mid-term review is designed to be efficient and purposeful, providing a timely opportunity to 
reflect on progress and ensure AQUAPLAN remains responsive and effective for the remainder 
of its implementation period. 
Purpose and objectives 
The mid-term review brings together aquatic animal industries and governments to: 
• 
Assess implementation progress of AQUAPLAN 2022-2027, and 
• 
Agree on clear, actionable recommendations for the remainder of the plan. 
Objectives 
1. Evaluate progress across AQUAPLAN activities and identify areas requiring further 
attention. 
2. Review implementation of supporting plans, including:  
o 
The Implementation Plan, 
o 
The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, and 
o 
The Communication Plan. 
3. Based on findings from Objectives 1 and 2, develop practical recommendations to guide 
implementation through to 2027. 
4. Reinforce shared ownership and build momentum for the remainder of the plan. 
Review method 
• 
Desktop review of AQUAPLAN implementation progress. 
• 
Stakeholder workshop (11 November 2025) to discuss findings and agree on 
recommendations. The workshop included: 
o 
Current industry and government context 
o 
Updates on AQUAPLAN activity progress 
o 
Mid-term review initial findings & recommendations (discussion and Mentimeter 
feedback) 
Of stakeholders who participated in Mentimeter (10 government, 15 industry, 5 
other), 69% agreed/strongly agreed that workshop objectives were met, 100% 
agreed/strongly agreed that they are confident in AQUAPLAN achieving meaningful 
outcomes and 87% agreed/strongly agreed that there is strong willingness for 
collaboration across sectors to implement AQUAPLAN effectively (13% neutral).

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 5 of 16 
• 
Mid-term review report (this report) to document progress and capture agreed 
recommendations. The report has been informed by the desktop review and stakeholder 
workshop and was prepared by the AQUAPLAN executive office at DAFF (Katie Scutt, 
Ingo Ernst, Ben Crowe). A draft of the report was reviewed by the stakeholder workshop 
facilitators, Tracey Bradley (DEECA) and Julie Petty (Seafood Industry Australia). The 
report has been revised based on stakeholder comments prior to finalisation.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 6 of 16 
Progress against objectives 
Objective 
Status 
Mid-term review considerations 
1. Border Biosecurity & Trade 
 
 
       
On track. 
2. Enterprise & Regional 
Biosecurity 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Activities 2.1–2.3 – activities have either not commenced or progressed slowly. 
Industry consultation indicates that needs may have changed for some sectors. The 
mid-term review workshop indicated that the priority of activities 2.2 and 2.3 are at or 
above the average priority of all activities. 
Activity 2.6 – consider activity approach given development of national freshwater 
pest plan/strategy.  
3. Surveillance 
 
 
  
On track.  
4. Diagnostic Capability 
 
 
 
 
  
On track.  
5. Emergency Preparedness 
 
 
 
 
  
On track.  
6. Veterinary Medicines 
 
 
 
Activity 6.3 – consider priority in context of activities 6.1 and 6.2. Consider 
participating sectors and developing projects that provide sound return on 
investment.  
7. Research & Innovation 
 
 
 
Activity 7.2 – high priority as outcomes from this activity can be foundational for 
extension and adoption of all AQUAPLAN activities and aquatic animal health and 
biosecurity research generally.  
Legend: 
 Complete | 
 In-progress | 
 Yet to commence 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 2.6 
3.1 3.2 
3.3 
4.1 4.2 
4.3 4.4 4.5 
5.1 
5.2  5.3  5.4  5.5  
6.1 6.2 
6.3 
7.1 7.2 
7.3

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 7 of 16 
Implementation performance 
1. Implementation plan  
Pillar 1: Shared Ownership and Collaboration 
AQUAPLAN represents shared priorities among investors in aquatic animal health to achieve a common vision. This pillar aims to cultivate shared ownership of 
the plan to achieve its vision and outcomes 
KPIs 
 
Outcome 
1.1 AQUAPLAN webinar series. 
 
Sixteen webinars of the regular series (Activity 7.3) have been held with an average attendance of 
46 attendees and 15 unique presenters. Webinars have covered subjects relevant to all AQUAPLAN 
objectives. Of six webinars that have been evaluated an average of 94% of respondents agreed that 
their knowledge on the subject matter was increased, 78% agreed that they will apply new 
knowledge to their day-to-day work, and 96% agreed that the webinar had met their expectations. 
A forward program of webinars has been established to facilitate regular information sharing, 
broader coverage of activities and encourage participation, with six webinars held in 2025. Six 
webinars (additional to the 16 of the regular series) have been held as part of Activity 1.1. and will 
be evaluated separately as part of that activity. 
 
1.2 Annual AQUAPLAN workshop. 
 
Workshops have been held in February 2023 (AQUAPLAN launch), April 2024 (AQUAPLAN annual 
workshop) and November 2025 (mid-term review workshop).  
 
1.3 Activities jointly led by industry and 
governments, in collaboration with experts. 
 
There is a high degree of joint leadership, collaboration or consultation as appropriate for the 
nature of different activities. Twelve activities of a strategic nature (e.g., activities 2.4 
Translocation, 3.1 National Surveillance Strategy) have joint leadership arrangements through 
industry-government steering groups or working groups. Seven activities of a technical nature (e.g., 
3.3 Passive surveillance sensitivity, 5.1 Priority disease list) have been led by experts with 
collaboration/consultation arrangements suited to the activity. The remaining nine activities have 
either not commenced or are early in development.  
 
Pillar 2: Sustainable resourcing  
AQUAPLAN is designed to attract funding for specific activities and in some cases in-kind resources from the aquatic animal health community. This pillar aims 
to secure resources over the life of the plan and match available resources to priorities. 
KPIs 
 
Outcome 
1.4 Direct funding is secured. 
Direct contributions to aquatic animal health and biosecurity initiatives total $1,853,727 across 
nine directly funded projects, supporting key AQUAPLAN activities including enterprise and

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 8 of 16 
regional biosecurity planning, diagnostics, surveillance, simulation exercises, and access to 
veterinary medicines. The majority of direct funding has been provided by the FRDC. 
 
1.5 In-kind resources are secured and applied in 
a sustainable manner. 
 
Substantial in-kind contributions have been made to support project activities, reflecting strong 
engagement across government, industry, and other stakeholder groups in planning and 
implementation of activities. Few estimates of in-kind contributions have been provided by activity 
leads. However, for 14 activities where estimates were provided, in-kind contributions total 
approximately 1,486 person-days1. 
 
Pillar 3: Strong and efficient coordination  
AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 has seven objectives, each with supporting activities that will be progressed over five years. This pillar aims to support strong and efficient 
coordination to monitor and evaluate each activity and overall progress towards achieving AQUAPLAN’s vision. 
KPIs 
 
Outcome 
1.6 Biannual activity reporting. 
Not 
met 
Four AQUAPLAN activity progress reports have been published with targets met in 2023 (launch 
year, 1 published) and 2024 (two published). Only one progress report will be published in 2025.   
 
1.7 Project plans for each activity that include 
monitoring, evaluation, and communication. 
 
An AQUAPLAN activity project plan has been developed to support project planning, including 
monitoring, evaluation and communication. Where funding has been sought from the FRDC, the 
FRDC project plan templates have been used. Twenty activities have project plans developed, 
either through the AQUAPLAN template or via FRDC processes. The remaining eight activities have 
either not commenced or are within the planning phase. 
 
Pillar 4: Demonstrating and realising benefit  
To create lasting change and improvements in the aquatic animal health system outputs of AQUAPLAN need to be extended and adopted by their end-users. 
Demonstrating return on investment and sound evaluation of outcomes will be essential to secure ongoing investment. This pillar aims to realise and 
demonstrate benefit. 
KPIs 
 
Outcome 
1.8 Activities are not considered complete until 
they have been evaluated and efforts have 
been made to extend and encourage 
adoption by end-users. 
 
Several completed projects (e.g., 3.1 national surveillance strategy; 5.1 priority disease list; 5.5 
disease investigation guide) have been extended extensively through websites, webinars, 
conferences, newsletters and social media. Evaluation is occurring in context appropriate ways. 
Routine evaluation is occurring for ongoing activities (e.g., 7.3 webinar series) and rigorous 
evaluation is occurring for activities where it is integral to the activity (e.g., 5.3 sector specific 
exercises).  
 
 
1 Note: Underestimation of in-kind investment

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 9 of 16 
 
1.9 Mid-term and end of plan reviews. 
The mid-term review is underway (this document). 
 
2. Monitoring and Evaluation plan  
Monitor and prioritise  
The AQUAPLAN executive office will monitor progress of AQUAPLAN together with stakeholders. The aim is to ensure AQUAPLAN produces meaningful 
outcomes to improve aquatic animal health. 
KPI 
 
Outcome 
2.1 Each calendar year, annual priorities for 
AQUAPLAN activities will be set. 
 
Prioritisation has generally occurred based on appropriate sequencing of activities to consider 
dependencies and competing priorities for available resources (e.g., in-kind and direct funding). For 
example, Activity 3.1 National Aquatic Animal Disease Surveillance Strategy was completed prior 
to activity 3.2. sector specific surveillance plans. The mid-term review will consider priorities for 
the remainder of the plan’s implementation.  
 
2.2 A mid-term review will examine progress 
and confirm priorities for the second half of 
the plan’s term. 
 
The mid-term review is underway. Key components of the review: desktop review of progress, 
stakeholder workshop for priority setting, report with agreed recommendations.  
 
Resource  
AQUAPLAN has been designed to attract resources, both direct and in-kind, by establishing agreed national priorities for industry and governments. 
KPI 
 
Outcome 
2.3 Activity leads will be responsible for seeking 
resources for their activities.  
 
Activity leads have successfully sought the required resources with several activities provided 
direct funding through the FRDC. For example, activities 5.3 (exercises), 4.1 (future diagnostics), 2.4 
(translocation), and 5.5 (outbreak investigation guidelines). 
 
2.4 The AQUAPLAN executive office can assist 
activity leads to identify funding sources. 
 
 
Assistance has generally not been required. However, the AQUAPLAN executive office has provided 
advice on funding application development for several projects.  
 
2.5 Progress towards attracting funding towards 
priority activities will also be monitored to 
ensure difficulties are identified and 
resolved early. 
 
As part of the biannual progress reports, activity leads provide information on direct and in-kind 
resources and indicate any challenges in resourcing where assistance may be required.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 10 of 16 
Report  
Reporting and engaging with all stakeholders about AQUAPLAN implementation will be conducted as per the AQUAPLAN Communication and Engagement Plan. 
KPI 
 
Outcome 
2.6 Activity leads will provide biannual progress 
reports which will inform AQUAPLAN 
updates to all stakeholders. AQUAPLAN 
executive office will coordinate this 
process. 
 
 
Activity leads have provided activity progress reports as requested. 
 
2.7 The AQUAPLAN executive office will provide 
annual AQUAPLAN implementation 
progress reports to all stakeholders. 
 
Annual updates on AQUAPLAN implementation are shared at annual stakeholder workshops 
(March 2023, April 2024, November 2025) and published on the DAFF website. 
 
 
 
Evaluate  
The impact of AQUAPLAN will be evaluated 
KPI 
 
Outcome 
2.8 Longitudinal impact surveys, a mid-term 
review, and end of plan review. These will 
involve all stakeholders and will be led the 
AQUAPLAN executive office. 
 
 
Impact surveys: Survey 1 complete and published. Survey 2 pending (early 2026). 
Mid-term review: In-progress. 
End of plan review: Pending. 
2.9 Activity leads will develop evaluation plans 
for each AQUAPLAN activity. Activities will 
not be considered complete until this has 
occurred. 
Partially 
met 
Evaluation plans are included as part of activity planning. To-date, activity level evaluation has not 
been closely monitored by the AQUAPLAN executive office; however, evaluation is occurring in 
context appropriate ways. Broad AQUAPLAN impact is being measured through the longitudinal 
impact survey project.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 11 of 16 
3. Communication and engagement plan  
Objectives  
The Communication and Engagement Plan aims to: increase awareness and understanding of AQUAPLAN, encourage involvement in and support of AQUAPLAN 
activities, provide progress updates on activities, communicate and encourage uptake of outcomes. 
 
KPI 
 
Outcome 
3.1 Activity project plans (Start of each activity)  
 
 
As mentioned above under KPI 1.7. 
 
3.2 Activity progress reports (biannual) 
Partially 
met 
 
As mentioned above under KPI 1.6. 
3.3 AQUAPLAN workshop (annual)  
 
 
As mentioned above under KPI 1.2. 
3.4 AQUAPLAN webinar series (at least 4 times 
each year) 
 
 
 
As mentioned above under KPI 1.1. 
3.5 AQUAPLAN newsletter (bi-annual)  
Not  
met 
This communication mechanism was intended to advise stakeholders of progress and outcomes of 
specific AQUAPLAN activities. Participants of the mid-term review workshop did not highlight an 
AQUAPLAN newsletter as a priority mechanism. 
 
3.6 AQUAPLAN website (biannual/more often 
as required)  
 
Not  
met 
As mentioned above under KPI 1.6. 
3.7 Committee reports (as required)  
 
Numerous reports have been provided to both industry (e.g., industry association R&D or 
biosecurity subcommittees, SIA Aquaculture Committee) and government committees (e.g., 
SCAAH, Aquaculture Committee, Australian Fisheries Managers Forum, Animal Health Committee) 
on the progress of specific activities or on AQUAPLAN more broadly. 
 
3.8 Conference and industry meeting 
presentations (Ad hoc)  
 
The 2025 FRDC Aquatic Animal Health and Biosecurity conference featured 10 presentations with 
linkages to AQUAPLAN. Presentations have been provided to other industry meetings on specific 
activities (e.g., APFA conference – activities 3.3, 5.3)

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 12 of 16 
Objectives  
The Communication and Engagement Plan aims to: increase awareness and understanding of AQUAPLAN, encourage involvement in and support of AQUAPLAN 
activities, provide progress updates on activities, communicate and encourage uptake of outcomes. 
 
3.9 Other newsletters or articles (ad hoc)  
 
These are infrequent, however, some articles have been published in newsletters as appropriate 
such as the FRDC stakeholder newsletter, health highlights newsletter.  
 
3.10 
Media releases (ad hoc) 
At launch and some activity specific promotion. Note: this is not expected to be a primary 
communication mechanism.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 13 of 16 
Key Findings of the review 
What’s working well 
• 
Collaboration and shared leadership: AQUAPLAN activities that are complete or 
underway demonstrate strong co-design and shared ownership between industry and 
government partners.  
Mid-term review workshop participants emphasised collaboration and partnership between 
industry and government as the primary strength of AQUAPLAN implementation, including 
co-design and shared responsibility to lead activities. Several participants noted that 
engagement and shared responsibility has led to genuine needs being addressed. Progress 
on translocation, emergency simulation exercises and the actions arising from simulation 
exercises were noted as important outcomes.  
• 
Webinar series: The webinar series has emerged as a central mechanism for 
communication, engagement, extension, and adoption of AQUAPLAN activities. It covers a 
broad range of topics directly linked to AQUAPLAN activities and objectives, and plays a key 
role in supporting implementation. The series provides a consistent and accessible platform 
for sharing activity outcomes with end-users, enabling routine extension and adoption. It 
also fosters ongoing dialogue between stakeholders, helping to build awareness, 
understanding, and momentum across the aquatic animal health sector. 
Mid-term review workshop participants noted that webinars were an effective 
communication strategy for sharing information and engaging stakeholders. 
• 
Impact survey: The stakeholder impact survey provides valuable insights into how 
AQUAPLAN is perceived and the outcomes it is delivering. It serves as a key tool for 
measuring overall success from the perspective of those involved in or affected by 
AQUAPLAN activities. As surveys are conducted over time, the ability to compare results will 
offer a meaningful view of progress, trends, and areas for improvement, helping to inform 
future planning and decision-making. 
• 
Implementation plan KPIs: Most key performance indicators across the implementation 
plans are being met, contributing to the successful delivery of AQUAPLAN. This is the first 
time in-kind funding contributions have been estimated. It is recommended to continue 
refining this approach to more accurately estimate the true co-investment in AQUAPLAN.  
• 
Activity delivery: Of the 28 AQUAPLAN activities, seven have been completed and a further 
19 are currently underway, leaving two yet to commence. While each activity is delivering 
outcomes at the individual level, their collective contribution is what drives progress toward 
AQUAPLAN’s broader objectives.  
Mid-term review workshop participants noted progress on translocation and actions arising 
from simulation exercises as important outcomes.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 14 of 16 
Case study: Objective-level outcomes – Objective 5: Emergency Preparedness 
Objective 5 of AQUAPLAN focuses on strengthening the capacity and capability of industries 
and governments to respond rapidly, appropriately, and collaboratively to aquatic animal 
disease emergencies. The activities under this objective work together to strengthen national 
preparedness. 
A key achievement is the development of the National Priority Disease List (activity 5.1), a 
jointly agreed framework that directs preparedness efforts and investment toward the most 
critical diseases. Action Plans (activity 5.2) are being developed for each priority disease to 
support a systematic and collaborative approach to preparedness, guiding resource 
allocation and response strategies. To test and refine preparedness arrangements, 
Simulation Exercises have been conducted (activity 5.3) – two technical exercises have 
already identified response gaps and informed improvements, with planning underway for a 
third exercise. 
Efforts to modernise Contingency Planning are also progressing (activity 5.4), with updates to 
AQUAVETPLAN manuals aimed at improving usability – essential for rapid decision-making 
during disease emergencies. New Disease Investigation Guidelines have been developed 
(activity 5.5) to support early detection, diagnosis, and response to emerging or unknown 
diseases, further strengthening national biosecurity. 
Together, these activities have driven improvements in Australia’s aquatic animal health 
emergency response capability. 
 
Challenges and opportunities 
• 
Communication plan: While some activities (e.g., webinar series) are performing well, 
three of the 10 KPIs are not being met. There may be scope to optimise communication and 
engagement efforts to better meet the plan’s objectives.  
Mid-term review workshop participants indicated that they actively promote webinars, 
share AQUAPLAN information, and present updates at conferences and meetings. The key 
ways mid-term review participants report supporting AQUAPLAN are through 
communication pathways—attending webinars and sharing updates to extend reach—
demonstrating shared ownership of communication and extension of AQUAPLAN activities.  
There is potential to extend AQUAPLAN’s reach by using established communication 
channels (e.g., FRDC, SIA, and industry newsletters). Workshop suggestions to leverage 
communication efforts and extend reach emphasised the need for targeted and accessible 
communication materials such as one-page infographics and social media posts. Other 
suggestions include podcasts or short videos however these would require use of existing 
communications capability and channels as they would be more resource intensive. An 
AQUAPLAN newsletter was not identified as a priority and it is recommended that this not 
be pursued.  
• 
Objective 2: Enterprise & Regional Biosecurity: Activities under Objective 2.1–2.3 have 
either not commenced or progressed slowly. Industry consultation indicates that needs may 
have changed for some sectors. The relative priority of these activities were rated as 
average, or slightly above average when compared to the priority of other AQUAPLAN

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 15 of 16 
activities (3 equals average priority). Training for continual improvement (activity 2.3) was 
the highest relative priority based on current industry sector needs (e.g., with many sectors 
already having developed sector-specific biosecurity plans). 
Activity 2.1: Sector-specific biosecurity plan writing workshops = 2.9 / 5 
Activity 2.2: On-farm biosecurity support program  
 
    = 3.0 / 5 
Activity 2.3: Continual improvement training program  
    = 3.4 / 5 
Participants noted that continual training is the foundation of effective biosecurity, on-farm 
support turns training into tangible outcomes and higher-quality plans, and plan-writing 
workshops must produce auditable outputs that deliver a clear advantage. It was noted that 
there are differences in the level of sector advancement in adoption of biosecurity, so sector 
needs will differ. There is a need for management buy-in through a strong value proposition, 
and ongoing engagement and updates to sustain adoption. 
• 
Enhancing extension and adoption: Activity 7.2 presents an opportunity to strengthen 
approaches to extension and adoption, ensuring AQUAPLAN outcomes are well understood 
and applied across sectors. 
Workshop participants identified the key ingredients to ensure AQUAPLAN activities have 
impact. Relevance to stakeholder needs was the primary response, with related factors 
including practical implementation, buy-in, collaboration and communication of outcomes.     
Recommended strategic priorities for 2025-2027 (mid-
term review objective 3) 
1. Reconsider enterprise and regional biosecurity priorities (mid-term review objective 1) 
Review the relevance and priority of Objective 2 activities (2.1–2.3) to ensure alignment with 
current sector needs and available resources and determine whether adjustments are 
needed to support progress. 
Action 1. Activity leads (peak industry bodies) and collaborators (state, territory and 
Commonwealth governments) to tailor all enterprise biosecurity activities by sector 
needs to develop meaningful projects for activities 2.1–2.3. 
 
Action 2. Explore commencing with Activity 2.3 (continuous improvement) as a higher 
priority, acknowledging this can provide a foundation for other activities, underpinned 
by industry management buy-in. 
 
Action 3. Defer activities 2.1 and 2.2 until an activity lead (peak industry body) can be 
identified. 
2. Leverage and strengthen communication and engagement (mid-term review objective 2) 
Optimise communication and engagement efforts to ensure all stakeholder groups are 
effectively reached, noting a particular pathway of communication won’t be suitable for all 
engagements. Build on the success of the webinar series as a central platform for 
engagement, extension, and adoption. Broaden AQUAPLAN’s reach by utilising existing 
communication channels through FRDC, SIA, and industry newsletters.

AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 mid-term review 
 
Page 16 of 16 
Action 4. Activity leads to prepare concise communications materials that can be used 
to leverage existing communication channels (e.g., FRDC and SIA newsletters, social 
media channels) and increase engagement in AQUAPLAN webinars. Consider 
innovative communication formats such as short videos and including images of 
people. AQUAPLAN Executive Office to provide support. 
 
Action 5. AQUAPLAN Executive Office to continue to refine systems for efficient and 
meaningful implementation of the communication, engagement, and implementation 
and monitoring and evaluation plans. For example, biannual activity updates, in-kind 
contribution estimation.  
 
3. Enhance extension and adoption mechanisms (mid-term review objective 1 & 2) 
Strengthen approaches to ensure AQUAPLAN outcomes are well understood and applied by 
end-users, particularly through Activity 7.2 and broader communication and engagement 
efforts. Communication with end-users from project inception to completion with a 
foundation of addressing a true need is a core element of success. 
Action 6. Activity leads and collaborators to embed within projects extension and 
adoption strategies identified as part of AQUAPLAN activity 7.2 (pending), ensuring 
opportunities for output adoption and maximising return on investment.  
Conclusion 
AQUAPLAN is making strong progress toward its 2027 targets, with most activities either 
underway or completed. Twenty three of 28 key performance indicators within the 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation and communication and engagement plans are 
being met. Continued success will depend on refining enterprise and regional biosecurity 
priorities, optimising communication and engagement strategies, and strengthening extension 
and adoption mechanisms to ensure all stakeholder groups are effectively reached and 
outcomes are broadly adopted. With these targeted adjustments, AQUAPLAN owners report 
confidence in cross-sectoral collaboration and 100% confidence that AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 is 
on track to achieving its objectives by 2027 (mid-term review objective 4).  
Next Steps: 
• 
Review and endorsement of this mid-term review document by AQUAPLAN owners. 
• 
Finalise mid-term review document and publish on the DAFF website. 
• 
Circulate a mid-term review summary that can be shared more broadly. 
 
Contact: aquaplan@aff.gov.au 
_____________________ 
This report includes information drafted using generative Microsoft 365 Copilot to streamline content creation. All 
outputs have been critically reviewed to ensure accuracy and relevance during 2025.