Previous projects
Nine projects received funding and have now all been successfully completed.
Central Queensland University
Next Generation Farm Safety
This was an integrated program to improve farm safety awareness and practices for the next generation of farmers – with a focus on primary and secondary school students, teachers and parents. The project delivered teacher professional development webinars, developed online games, safety roadshows for students, and farm safety family field days. Together, families developed a shared understanding and positive attitude towards farm safety, leading to increased understanding and uptake of safe practices.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): 310,942
Cotton Australia Limited
Changing Culture and Improving Farm Safety for Queensland Cotton Growers
The project supported cotton farming businesses in Queensland to learn how to use a practical and compliant work health and safety system. The project provided participating businesses with face-to-face workshops, webinars, access to an online portal, and follow-up one-on-one coaching. With improved systems and recordkeeping, participants gained confidence to improve and implement work health and safety systems and practices in their businesses.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $156,510
Rural Edge Australia
National Online Farm Safety Training
This project aimed to increase engagement and uptake of farm safety practice through online farm safety short courses. The project supported farm business managers to make a start in the development of their farm safety plan through completing a risk register. Materials developed for this project will be used for ongoing training on farm safety.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $261,048
University of New South Wales
Co-designing game-based farm safety education for adolescents
This project developed an online farm injury prevention and safety education al game called Calm Your Farm, freely available at www.calmfarm.education . This game targets secondary school-aged adolescents and features four courses – vehicle , workshop, water, and paddock safety. The interactive game-based learning focuses on injury risk reduction strategies and are mapped to national, state and VET curriculums . The website also provided lesson plans for teachers to use.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $172,500
AgForce Queensland Farmers Limited
Be safer today to see tomorrow
This project delivered a series of farm safety workshops to broad acre producers in Queensland. Workshop participants engaged with a professional safety systems trainer and guest presentations on key local and regional safety subjects. Workshop components included property risk assessment, risk mitigation options, inductions, safety planning meetings and work safe procedures, safe vehicle and equipment use, and mental health and wellbeing.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $99,000
NT Cattlemen’s Association Incorporated
NTCA Safer Stations Initiative
This project provided activities and educational resources to increase farm safety knowledge among remote communities, particularly young children living on pastoral properties. The program provided hands-on activities - through WHS booklets, cartoon videos, and school visits - to help kids identify and manage safety hazards and risks on station. It aimed to inspire young children to be ‘Station Safety Champions’.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $150,000
Primary Producers SA Incorporated
SA Food and Fibre Education Hub Farm Safety Module
The project designed farm safety educational activities and materials targeting Year 5 and Year 7 students and teachers. This included video materials about safety for Grain, Livestock, Horticulture, Winegrape, Forestry and Dairy producers . The project delivered on- farm excursions for students and professional development days for teachers to help them teach and engage their students in risk management in primary production . A farm safety module was developed and delivered to 15 schools in South Australia.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $120,000
Primary Industries Education Foundation Australia Limited
Future Farm Safety for Life
This project developed Future Farm Safety teaching resources to support teachers to promote and teach farm safety in the classroom. It aimed to ensure students become safety focused when on farms and see situations through a safety lens to prevent farm accidents. The program was designed for Years 9-10 students, with content also relevant for Years 7-8 students. The comprehensive education resource is downloadable at https://www.piefa.edu.au/future-farm-safety-for-life .
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $240,000
Grain Growers Limited
The Safe Use Machinery Portal and Masterclass Series
This project developed a Safe Use Machinery online portal and delivered a suite of free, accessible and simple to use resources and tools for farmers to use . Masterclass webinars were conducted, recorded and made available online. P ractical learning videos and downloadable resources on farm safety are available on the Grain Growers website at https://www.graingrowers.com.au/courses/farm-safety.
Grant Amount (excluding GST): $90,000