1 | P a g e 
Note from the Chair 
This RAWS update is provided for information and comment.  It was agreed that updates on a regular basis would 
be valuable and could be used not only to inform of developments, but be used a more broad based 
communication tool. It is most important that countries provide information that can be included in future updates 
so that a comprehensive picture of developments and key issues in the region is available.  The Secretariat is 
seeking the views of RAWS Coordination Group members on the nature, content, and timing of updates. 
Gardner Murray 
Chairman 
RAWS Coordination Group 
Introduction 
The RAWS-News is designed to keep countries in the OIE Asia, Far East and Oceania Region fully informed of 
OIE animal welfare developments in general, and progress of the Regional Animal Welfare Strategy (RAWS) in 
particular. The Chair of the OIE Animal Welfare Working Group, Dr David Bayvel from New Zealand, confirms that 
the Working Group and OIE Headquarters in Paris fully supports the initiative and leadership being shown by the 
Region and that the RAWS is providing a valuable model for other OIE Regions to follow in drawing up similar 
strategies. This second issue includes details of current animal welfare developments in Australia, and other 
countries are invited to submit similar updates for inclusion in future issues. 
At the first meeting of the RAWS Coordination Group in April 2011, members recognised the importance of 
effective communication and agreed to the Secretariat circulating a quarterly newsletter to help achieve this. The 
Secretariat would appreciate feedback from member countries on the format and content of this newsletter, as well 
as suggestions and updates on animal welfare developments for inclusion in future issues. Your input should be 
provided to Ms Rhiannon Coulton by email at rhiannon.coulton@daff.gov.au.  
RAWS Developments 
The OIE Regional Commission endorsed the establishment of a Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Coordination 
Group (Coordination Group), responsible for guiding the implementation of the RAWS. The first meeting of the 
Coordination Group was held on 19-20 April 2011 in Bangkok, Thailand, and the report of this meeting is available 
on request. Australia agreed to provide initial funding and secretariat support to the Coordination Group and is 
currently assisting in the organisation of a second meeting, scheduled for 29 November 2011 in Tokyo, Japan. 
The Coordination Group will use this opportunity to endorse a revised RAWS Implementation Plan. This document 
will be printed and available online and in hard copy. A further meeting of the Coordination Group is tentatively 
scheduled for April 2012.

2 | P a g e 
RAWS Coordination Group participants 
for the RAWS to be translated into Indonesian, Malay, Thai and Tagalog. Hardcopies of these translations were 
distributed at the April 2010 RAWS Workshop and are available upon request. The Regional Animal Welfare 
Strategy (English version) can be downloaded from: http://www.daff.gov.au/animal-plant-
health/welfare/regional_animal_welfare_strategy_for_asia,_the_far_east_and_oceania 
If you would like to request a copy of any of the above mentioned documents, please direct your request to 
Rhiannon Coulton at rhiannon.coulton@daff.gov.au.  
A course in practical animal handling and welfare in the Asia, the Far East and Oceania (AFEO) region was 
supported at the RAWS meeting in April 2010. The Pilot course took place on 5-6 October 2011 in the Malaysian 
district of Kluang. The pilot course was a great success, with the 13 participants participating in interactive 
demonstrations, classroom activities and practical animal handling sessions. Feedback was positive and indicated 
that holding similar courses in other AFEO countries may be of benefit in promoting OIE welfare concepts within 
the region.  
Course participants and trainers 
Training with sheep

3 | P a g e 
OIE Welfare Guidelines 
The 178 Member countries of the OIE have endorsed and published animal welfare guidelines for land/sea/air 
transport, slaughter for human consumption and killing for disease control, on humane dog control (in support of 
efforts to control rabies), the welfare of farmed fish during transport and slaughter and the use of animals in 
research and education. These guidelines were adopted over the period 2005 - 2010 and are available on the OIE 
website (www.oie.int).  
The OIE Third Global Animal Welfare Conference 
The OIE Third Global Animal Welfare Conference entitled ‘Implementing the OIE standards – addressing regional 
perspectives’ is to be held on 5-9 November 2012 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Up to 400 participants are 
anticipated and will include OIE representatives, animal welfare NGOs, international industry organisations, 
veterinarians and research institutes. The conference aims to support the implementation by Members of OIE 
animal welfare standards, with particular attention to relevant strategies and tools, including at the regional level.  
OIE Collaborating Centre 
The joint New Zealand-Australia proposal to expand the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) Collaborating 
Centre for Animal Welfare Science and Bioethical Analysis at Massey University in New Zealand was endorsed at 
the OIE General Session in May 2009.  
The primary role of the centre is the provision of expert scientific, bioethical and educational advice for the OIE. 
Other roles will include the provision of scientific and technical training, the organisation of appropriate scientific 
meetings, and the coordination of scientific and technical studies in collaboration with other organisations and 
other animal welfare experts in Australia and New Zealand where relevant. 
The third face to face meeting of the Collaborating Centre Management Committee was held in Wellington, NZ on 
26-27 October 2011. Representatives from MAF, DAFF, Massey University, AgResearch, University of Melbourne, 
CSIRO and the University of Queensland attended. 
More information can be found at: http://animalwelfare.massey.ac.nz/oie.html and a flyer is available from DAFF 
by contacting animal.welfare@daff.gov.au  
Developments under the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy  
AAWS 5th National Workshop 
The 5th Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) National Workshop was held at the Menzies Hotel, Sydney on 
2-4 August 2011. There were approximately 120 attendees representing stakeholders from industry, government 
and animal welfare bodies.  
The Workshop was a valuable opportunity for AAWS stakeholders to engage in the launch and delivery of Phase 
2 of the AAWS and the revised National Implementation Plan. DAFF Secretary, Dr Conall O’Connell attended the 
Workshop on Day 1 to formally launch the Strategy. The revised Strategy includes a 4th goal around engagement 
in international partnerships to improve animal welfare.

4 | P a g e 
AAWS 5th National Workshop participants holding revised AAWS 
Animal welfare research, development and extension (R,D&E) strategy 
Through the Primary Industries Ministerial Council (PIMC), the Australian, state and Northern Territory 
governments, rural R&D corporations, CSIRO, and universities are jointly developing the National Primary 
Industries Research, Development and Extension (RD&E) Framework to encourage greater collaboration and 
promote continuous improvement in the investment of RD&E resources nationally. 
Australia has recently developed the Animal Welfare RD&E Strategy (the Strategy), which is a component of the 
National Primary Industries RD&E Framework. The purpose of the Strategy is to develop national arrangements to 
deliver strong collaboration amongst existing RD&E provider groups, and effective partnerships between investors 
and providers. 
At this stage, the Strategy is confined to the welfare of farm and production animals. However, it provides a flexible 
framework to enable RD&E interests and objectives of other animal groups to be incorporated in the future. 
Welfare Standards and Guidelines 
The development of national animal welfare standards and guidelines is a priority activity under the Australian 
Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS), and an important step towards achieving nationally consistent animal welfare 
regulation. Government, animal use industries, and animal welfare groups support the development of standards 
that are underpinned by national consistency, scientific soundness, appropriate consultation and legal 
enforceability.  
The Land Transport Standards and Guidelines have been endorsed and are awaiting implementation into 
legislation. Sheep, cattle, horses and exhibited animals (zoos) standards and guidelines are currently in the 
drafting phase. Once draft standards and guidelines have been developed a Regulatory Impact Analysis will be 
undertaken which will ensure that the economic and social costs and benefits of the regulatory proposals are 
examined fully. Public consultation will then be undertaken. Comments from this process will be considered and 
adjustments to the standards and guidelines made prior to seeking endorsement by the Commonwealth, and state 
and territories governments. 
Livestock exports 
Industry, including adapting and implementing a supply chain assurance framework to all markets for the export of 
Australian livestock to improve traceability through the supply chain. Reforms will be implemented on both a 
domestic and international level to ensure Australian livestock exported for slaughter are treated at or above 
internationally accepted animal welfare standards.

5 | P a g e 
Windows SharePoint Tool 
This online collaborative service, launched under the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy and known as 
SharePoint, is now available for RAWS members. This tool facilitates easy distribution of announcements and 
materials, a calendar to advise of upcoming meetings, seminars, workshops, conferences and events, discussion 
areas and much more. 
EU-Australia Animal Welfare Cooperation Forum 
agreement with the EC in September 2008 under the high level Australia-EU Partnership Framework.  
A meeting of the EU-Australia Animal Welfare Cooperation Forum was held via video-conference on 15 April 
2010. The meeting discussed European Commission and DAFF welfare activity and priority updates, strategic 
issues and trends including the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines, the EU Compliance and 
Enforcement Strategy and recent animal welfare research, and cooperation opportunities including natural disaster 
planning and international capacity building.  
The forum provides a regular platform for information exchange and cooperation on animal welfare issues of 
operational and strategic importance to both participants. 
New Zealand Animal Welfare Publication 
Issued three times a year, Welfare Pulse is of special relevance to those with an interest in domestic and 
international animal welfare developments.  The ninth issue included articles on: The Code of Welfare for 
Transport issued within in New Zealand, Pest control for the 21st century, Animals in research - a scientists’ 
perspective and the Launch of the veterinary toolkit.  Electronic copies are available at: 
http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/regs/animal-welfare/pubs/welfare-pulse 
Key Events 
Event 
Date 
Location 
RAWS Coordination Group Second Meeting 
29 November 2011 
Tokyo, Japan 
RAWS Coordination Group Third Meeting 
TBC April 2012 
TBC 
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy Annual Workshop  
TBC August 2012  
TBC  
OIE Collaborating Centre Management Committee Meeting 
TBC October 2012 
Melbourne, Australia 
OIE 3rd Global Animal Welfare Conference 
5-9 November 2012 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
Contacts 
Jim Paradice  
Manager, International Animal Welfare  
jim.paradice@daff.gov.au  
+61 2 6272 5532 
Rhiannon Coulton  
Policy Officer, Animal Welfare 
tim.lester@daff.gov.au 
+61 2 6272 5032