1 | P a g e 
 Note from the Chair 
The Regional Animal Welfare Strategy has been a catalyst for training opportunities, 
strategy sharing and the development of regional priorities. Now the RAWS is 
changing in line with progressing national standards, regional priorities and global 
policy developments through the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE). Moving 
into 2013, a revised RAWS (2012-15) will be made available that canvasses the 
progress that has been made, builds on the strategy’s successes and identifies 
further opportunities for improvements to animal welfare. Although the RAWS is 
progressing, the strategy’s core function of providing an overarching framework and 
guidance for countries in the Asia, Far East and Oceania region, remains unchanged. 
Regional animal welfare improvements will require shared responsibility between governments, the community, 
welfare organisations, industry, and scientists. To continue constructive and positive engagement, the fourth meeting 
of the Coordination Group will be held on 9 November 2012. This meeting will focus on issues including the 
development of RAWS Coordination Group, provide updates in animal welfare activities in the region, review and 
update the Regional Strategy document and the RAWS Action Plan. 
Gardner Murray 
Chairman 
RAWS Coordination Group 
Introduction 
The RAWS-News October 2012 edition focuses on updating members about country animal welfare activities and 
initiatives as well as progress of the RAWS. The Secretariat encourages RAWS participants to contribute to future 
editions of RAWS newsletter. For your contribution to future editions of RAWS newsletter, please provide your input 
to Ms Lee-Ann Swift via email at animal.welfare@daff.gov.au.  
Country Highlights 
Australia Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) national workshop 
The 6th Australian Animal Welfare Strategy national workshop was held in 
September 2012 in Canberra. Over 130 key stakeholders and experts attended 
this workshop. The workshop celebrated the good progress in implementing the 
high standards in animal welfare practice and agreed on the need to produce a 
‘State of the Nation’ report on animal welfare in Australia as a benchmark. This 
report will allow Australia to measure progress and improve animal welfare in the 
future. A communiqué on from Dr Gardner, Chair of the Australian Animal Welfare 
Advisory Committee is available at 
http://www.australiananimalwelfare.com.au/news/state-of-the-nation-report-key-to-
future-welfare-of-animals.  
Case studies under the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy include; the 
development of national animal welfare zoo standards, caring for dogs in 
Indigenous communities and the benefits of de-sexing, taking control of feral cats, 
low stress handling of sheep and Iki Jime technique to humanely kill fish with the 
added benefit of maintaining the eating quality of caught fish (Iki Jime link; 
http://www.fishingworld.com.au/news/aussies-leading-the-way-in-fish-welfare). 
Video clips of the case studies can be found on You Tube at 
www.youtube.com/user/AusAnimalWelfare

2 | P a g e 
Australia’s new transport standards come into effect  
New national standards for the transport of livestock have been developed to protect the welfare of animals, and for 
the first time these standards will be the same in all States and Territories. 
The Australian Standards & Guidelines for the Welfare of Animals – Land Transport of Livestock (LTS) was 
developed by industry, welfare organisations and government through the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy.  
The new standards will bring consistency to the way livestock are transported across Australia and they aim to 
ensure good welfare practices for all livestock journeys. 
Brochures explaining the changes have been distributed through industry networks, and detailed information on how 
the standards apply to different livestock species can be found at www.livestockwelfarestandards.net.au  
Thailand’s research collaboration with European Union (EU) 
A specific request from the Department of Livestock Development (DLD) to the European Commission DG SANCO 
has been made on the research collaboration project between the EU and Thailand on the welfare of commercial 
poultry in Thailand. The project objective is to develop the research methods for establishment of poultry welfare 
standards that are appropriate to the environment and conditions of Thailand and similar countries of ASEAN. 
Following the request, the mission of an EU expert (Dr. Mohan Raj) to Thailand was conducted from 10-16 June 
2012 to analyse the organisation of poultry production and official controls in Thailand in relation to the animal 
welfare and to draft the Terms of Reference (ToR) of the EU-Thailand research project on the welfare of commercial 
poultry in Thailand. The EU expert visited the commercial poultry farm and slaughterhouses. The draft ToR defined 
the study outlines in respect of transportation of broilers to reduce the incidence of death on arrival at slaughterhouse 
and pre-slaughter electrical stunning parameters to be complied with the animal welfare and Halal requirements and 
produce acceptable quality of carcass and meat. It has been proposed to the DG SANCO, EU for consideration of 
implementation in 2013. The project is regarded as a continuous training on animal welfare in Thailand. 
Thailand’s legislative developments 
The Bill on Cruelty Prevention and Animal 
Welfare Management has been approved by 
the cabinet. It is now in the process to be 
considered for approval by the parliament. 
Additionally, the legislation for the use of 
animals in scientific work is being drafted. 
Meanwhile, the Ethics for Use of Animals in 
Scientific Work, which is stipulated by the Office 
of National Research Council of Thailand, is 
applied in every institution where using animals 
for research and education.

3 | P a g e 
Education of animal welfare in Chinese Universities 
To strengthen awareness of animal welfare, the undergraduate Nanjing Agricultural University edited the textbook 
‘An Introduction to Animal Protection’ (Edited by Lu Chengping). By now, several universities, including China’s 
Agricultural University, Nanjing Agricultural University and Shandong Agricultural University, have set up animal 
welfare curriculums or have added the content of animal welfare in the continuous education. 
Capacity building for animal welfare in Indonesia 
The directorate of Veterinary Public Health and Post-Harvest along with the Indonesian Council of Ulama/MUI 
organised Halal slaughter training in February 2012. Workshop for animal welfare auditor and animal welfare officer 
in supply chain slaughter houses were held in May 2012. 
New Zealand’s revised code of welfare for meat 
chickens 
A new code of welfare has been issued for meat (broiler) chickens in 
July 2012, to replace the previous 2003 code. Unlike the previous code, 
this code includes standards for chickens with access to the outdoors, 
whereas the old code only covered fully-housed chickens. Also, it now 
requires farmers to manage stocking density on the basis of the 
environment where the chickens are kept in (eg. air temperature and 
quality, humidity, litter quality) as well as the need for space and access 
to food and water. The chickens still have to stay within a maximum 
stocking density. 
The minimum standards in the code cover stockmanship, food and 
water, shelter for chickens outdoors, housing and equipment, 
contingency planning, lighting, ventilation, temperature, litter 
management, stocking densities, meeting behavioural needs, physical 
handling, catching, loading, transport, managing health and injury and 
emergency humane destruction. The code also suggests indicators that 
farmers and inspectors can use to determine whether the standards 
have been met, and recommendations for best practice. 
The code is available online at www.biosecurity.govt.nz/regs/animal-
welfare/req/codes/meat-chickens or by request to 
animalwelfare@mpi.govt.nz.  
Toolkit for New Zealand farmers involved in animal welfare investigations 
A ‘Farmer Representative Toolkit’ has been published for people within the farming community who may be asked by 
their industry body, by the Ministry for Primary Industry (the animal welfare regulator), or directly by a farmer, to help 
improve animal welfare conditions on a farm. The toolkit was developed by the Ministry for Primary Industries along 
with several industry organisations and farmer representatives. It encourages leaders in agriculture to help identify, 
refer and resolve situations of poor animal welfare. It gives basic information to help them decide on how to deal with 
a case, what to take to a farm visit and what to look for. It highlights potential causes of animal welfare problems, and 
gives some guidance on how to deal with farmers to help them in the short and long term.  
Copies are available from www.biosecurity.govt.nz/regs/animal-welfare/pubs/other-useful-resources

4 | P a g e 
Appointments 
New Delegate confirmed for New Zealand 
Matthew Stone, Director Animal and Animal Products in the Ministry for Primary Industries, has been appointed as 
New Zealand’s permanent delegate to the OIE, replacing Barry O’Neil. He has also been appointed as Secretary 
General for the Asia, Far East and Oceania Regional Commission. 
Appointments to the OIE Animal Welfare Working Group 
Dr Sira Abdul Rahman has been appointed by the OIE as chair of the OIE Working Group on Animal Welfare. The 
RAWS thanks Dr David Bayvel for his time in this position and congratulates Dr Rahman on his new position. The 
RAWS looks forward to continuing the strong ties between the RAWS and the OIE Working Group on Animal 
Welfare. 
Congratulations to the delegates (name in Bold) appointed to the OIE Working Group on Animal Welfare. 
Back Row: Prof. David Fraser; Dr Derek Betton; Dr Alex Thiermann (OIE staff); Prof Hassan Aidaros; 
Dr Peter Thornber; Dr Vincent Guyonnet; Dr Andrea Gavinelli  
Front Row: Dr Mariela Varas (OIE staff); Dr Sira Abdul Rahman (Chair); Dr David Bayvel (new WSPA member); 
Dr Marosi Molomi; Dr David Wilkins (retiring WSPA member) 
Absent from the photo: Mr Luc Mirabito

5 | P a g e 
Key Dates 
Event 
Date  
Location 
RAWS coordination group meeting 
9 November 2012 
Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia) 
Third OIE Global Conference on Animal Welfare  
6-8 November 2012 
Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia) 
Newsletter Contacts 
Jim Paradice  
RAWS Secretary 
Manager, International Animal Welfare  
jim.paradice@daff.gov.au  
+61 2 6272 5532 
Lee-Ann Swift  
RAWS secretariat 
Policy Officer, Animal Welfare 
animal.welfare@daff.gov.au  
+61 2 6272 3484