1 | P a g e 
Note from the Chair 
Welcome to the RAWS-News February 2012 edition. A number of developments in 
animal welfare have occurred in our region since the last edition. The second meeting 
of the RAWS Coordination Group was held in Tokyo on 29 November 2011. This 
meeting coincided with the OIE‟s national animal welfare focal points seminar held in 
Japan from 30 November to 2 December 2011. One of the key themes that emerged 
from the Tokyo meetings was that in country progress is being made on a number of 
animal welfare fronts. In addition, the Coordination Group decided to merge and 
update the current RAWS and RAWS Implementation Plan documents and develop a separate Workplan, and will 
work towards improving linkages with animal welfare focal points. These and related matters will form the basis for 
discussion at the RAWS Coordination Group Meeting planned for 3-4 April 2012 in Bangkok, Thailand.  
I remind you that the RAWS News is a broad based communication tool to inform readers and promote animal 
welfare initiatives in the region. I urge everyone to contribute so that we can gain a comprehensive picture of 
animal welfare developments and key issues in the region.  
Gardner Murray 
Chairman 
RAWS Coordination Group 
Introduction 
The RAWS-News February 2012 edition focuses on updating members about country animal welfare activities and 
initiatives as well as progress of the Regional Animal Welfare Strategy (RAWS). The Chair of the RAWS 
Coordination Group, Dr Gardner Murray, encourages members to contribute to future editions of the RAWS-News, 
for the benefit of all members and other interested parties. Please provide your input to Ms Rhiannon Coulton by 
email at rhiannon.coulton@daff.gov.au.  
RAWS Developments 
The second meeting of the Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Coordination Group (Coordination Group), which is 
responsible for guiding the implementation of the RAWS, was held on 29 November 2011 in Tokyo, Japan. In 
plenary discussions it was agreed there would be merit in combining the RAWS and the RAWS IP into a single 
document titled “The RAWS and Implementation Framework.” The Secretariat is currently working to implement 
this recommendation, with a view to completion prior to the next Coordination Group meeting. The report of this 
meeting is available by contacting the RAWS Coordination Group Secretariat at rhiannon.coulton@daff.gov.au.  
This second meeting of the Coordination Group was held back to back with the Seminar for OIE National Focal 
Points for Animal Welfare held 30 November to 2 December 2011. Mr Jim Paradice and Dr Gardner Murray gave 
a presentation on the RAWS AFEO on Day 2 of the meeting, discussing the RAWS Work Plan, roles and 
responsibilities and direction for the future.  
The third meeting of the Coordination Group is scheduled for 3-4 April 2012, to be held in Bangkok, Thailand.

2 | P a g e 
RAWS Coordination Group Meeting 2 – OIE Regional Representation for Asia and the Pacific, University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan 
Seminar for OIE National Focal Points for Animal Welfare 
The OIE Regional Representation for Asia and the Pacific organised the Seminar for OIE National Focal Points for 
Animal Welfare in Tokyo from 30 November to 2 December 2011, back to back with the Regional Animal Welfare 
Strategy Coordination Group Meeting (RAWS).  
A total of 52 participants attended the seminar, including National Focal Points or their proxies from 26 members 
in the region and a wide range of resource persons, including the President of the OIE Animal Welfare Working 
Group, an OIE Collaborating Centre representative, and representatives of non-governmental industry and animal 
welfare organisations with which the OIE has cooperation agreements.  
The focal point seminar included small working group sessions. Discussions included: engaging government 
commitment to improve animal health as a first step to improve animal welfare; increasing community awareness 
of the wide benefits of promoting animal welfare, such as food safety; taking advantage of support offered by OIE 
Standards and the OIE Collaborating Centre, including training courses and twinning arrangements; developing 
appropriate domestic laws and regulations consistent with the OIE Standards; and sharing the same goals rather 
than harmonizing legislation among members.  
Working Group 1 with moderator Professor David Mellor

3 | P a g e 
Working Group 2 with moderator Professor Mohan Raj 
Working Group 3 with moderators Dr Alexandre Bouchot and Dr Ian Dacre 
OIE Third Global Conference on Animal Welfare 
The OIE is organising a Third OIE Global Conference on Animal Welfare, to be held in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) 
on 6-8 November 2012. The main objective of the Conference is to support the implementation by Members of 
OIE Animal Welfare standards, with a focus on addressing regional specificities and expectations. 
OIE Collaborating Centre  
The Third Meeting of the OIE Collaborating Centre on Animal Welfare Science and Bioethical Analysis was held 
on 26-27 October 2011 in Wellington, NZ. Representatives from MAF, DAFF, Massey University, AgResearch, 
University of Melbourne, CSIRO and the University of Queensland attended. 
The Center pledged its continued support for the RAWS and has submitted a twinning application to the OIE with 
the aim of supporting implementation of the OIE Regional Animal Welfare Strategy for Asia, The Far East and 
Oceania through 2 work programs focussing on assisting implementing of OIE standards on transport and 
slaughter.

4 | P a g e 
More information can be found at: http://animalwelfare.massey.ac.nz/oie.html and a flyer is available from DAFF 
by contacting animal.welfare@daff.gov.au  
Developments under the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy  
Australian Animal Welfare Advisory Committee 
The Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) is a government program that draws together a wide range of 
stakeholders to achieve sustainable national animal welfare outcomes. 
The AAWS is overseen by a newly appointed, skills-based Advisory Committee charged with driving the 
implementation of the AAWS. 
The 15-person committee is chaired by Dr Gardner Murray and comprised of a mixture of stakeholder 
representatives and experts in various fields of animal welfare. 
Members of the new Australian Animal Welfare Advisory Committee (AAWAC) were selected because of their 
skills, knowledge and experience across a wide range of stakeholder groups, and their ability to steer complex 
animal welfare issues and policy development to a successful conclusion. 
The inaugural meeting of the AAWAC was held on 13-14 October 2011 in Sydney and met again on 14-15 
February 2012 in Melbourne. It will report annually on its progress and achievements against the National 
Implementation Plan.  
Welfare Standards and Guidelines 
The development of national animal welfare standards and guidelines continues to be a priority activity under the 
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS), and is an important step towards achieving nationally consistent 
animal welfare regulation. The Land Transport Standards and Guidelines have been endorsed and are expected 
to be implemented into legislation during 2012. Sheep, cattle, horses and standards and guidelines are currently in 
the drafting phase. 
The Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Exhibit Animals (Zoos) has been drafted and a 
Regulatory Impact Analysis is in the process of being developed. Because of the complexity of the operations, 
situations and animals involved in the zoo industry, the standards and guidelines have been organised into two 
parts: a general set of standards applying to all facilities keeping animals for display purposes, and a series of 
taxon-specific standards for the particular welfare requirements of different species. The first of the taxon 
standards covers koalas, wombats, crocodilians, macropods (kangaroos and wallabies) and ratites (ostriches, 
emus, cassowaries and rheas). 
Once a Regulatory Impact Analysis has been completed the standards will be sent to the Primary Industries 
Ministerial Council for endorsement. It is anticipated that these standards and guidelines will be ready to be 
referenced in state and territory legislation late 2012.  
Australia’s Livestock Exports 
To ensure animals are being treated in line with international standards, animal welfare has been put front and 
centre through the implementation of the export supply chain assurance system (ESCAS).This is the single 
implement these important changes.

5 | P a g e 
The government accepted all of the independent Farmer review recommendations as well as the findings of the 
Industry-Government Working Groups (IGWGs). The Farmer review recommends that the ESCAS apply to all 
existing Australian markets for the export of animals for slaughter by the end of 2012. 
Improved Animal Welfare Program 
announced the Improved Animal Welfare Program (IAWP), a $10 million funding allocation over four years ending 
in June 2015.  
The funding is available in order to improve animal welfare outcomes in Official Development Assistance (ODA) 
eligible countries that import livestock from Australia. The details of any programs delivered through this 
assistance program will be settled with eligible nations. ODA eligible countries include Indonesia, Vietnam, the 
Philippines, Jordan, Turkey, Mauritius and others.  
Windows SharePoint Tool 
Mr Jim Paradice provided RAWS Coordination Group members with a PowerPoint presentation on SharePoint at 
their second meeting in November 2011. All Coordination Group members should by now have received their login 
details. Please login to SharePoint at your earliest convenience and refer to the PowerPoint presentation for 
guidance on how to access relevant RAWS documents. If you have any problems please contact Ms Rhiannon 
Coulton at Rhiannon.coulton@daff.gov.au.  
Animal welfare contribution recognised in New Zealand’s New Year’s 
Honours 
Dr David Bayvel has been made a Companion of the Queen‟s Service Order in recognition of services to the state, 
in the New Zealand New Year‟s Honours list 2012. David has made a significant contribution domestically and 
internationally, including through his part in developing animal welfare policy and practice in New Zealand, 
fostering international relationships and involvement with the OIE in its global leadership role in animal welfare.  
David retired from the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry in 2011 and has been succeeded by Dr Mark Fisher. He 
continues to chair the OIE‟s animal welfare working group but has handed over responsibilities as New Zealand‟s 
national focal point for animal welfare to Dr Kate Littin (MAF). Dr Andrew McKenzie, former Chief Executive of the 
New Zealand Food Safety Authority, and likewise well known and highly respected on the domestic and 
international fronts, was similarly recognised as a Companion of the Queen‟s Service Order. 
Country Highlights 
The following information has been taken from the Final Report of the RAWS Coordination Group’s 2nd Meeting.  
The Malaysia Animal Welfare Advisory Committee (MAWAC) 
This committee with advisory roles is now officially formed with the Minister of Agriculture and Agrobased Industry 
as Chair and his deputy as Vice Chair. Members include the Town council, Professional registered body, NGO`s 
and the University. The Department of Veterinary Services Malaysia will provide the secretariat support. The

6 | P a g e 
MAWAC will advise on animal welfare issue, initiate efforts in responsible pet ownership and mediate on animal 
welfare issue during the interim period to the new Animal Welfare Act. The first meeting of MAWAC was held on 
18 December 2011. 
Training in Thailand 
Animal welfare training was delivered to both public and private sectors. Four training courses were conducted for 
the DLD officers; one for the officers responsible for poultry farm inspection (155 persons), one for the veterinary 
meat inspectors (56 persons) to inspect poultry welfare at slaughterhouses and the other two for the officers 
responsible for certification of local abattoirs (200 persons).  
Three training courses were conducted for private personnel; one for veterinarians (95 persons) who will be 
poultry farm veterinarians, one for personnel of broiler farms (83 persons) who will be Poultry Welfare Officers at 
the farm and the other one for quality control personnel of poultry slaughterhouses (26 persons) who will be 
Poultry Welfare Officers at the slaughterhouse.  
Standards for Animal Welfare in China 
In 2011, China animal welfare working group edited the Good Practice for the Welfare of Farm Animals including 
animal production model code for the welfare of animal (pig, dairy cattle, poultry), the land transport and slaughter 
of pig/poultry/cattle transportation and culling for the purpose of disease control.  
In 2012, animal welfare working group will draft the animal welfare standard with the reference of Good Practice 
for the welfare of Farm Animals. 
World Society for the Protection of Animals  
Government Initiatives in Thailand 
WSPA has held a stakeholder meeting on 13 February 2012 gathering various sectors working with animals and in 
disaster management in Thailand. The objective of the meeting is to form a working group aimed to improve 
disaster interventions for animals and better animal welfare in the country. The organizations aimed to be in the 
working group include Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation (DDPM), Department of Livestock 
Development (DLD), Thai Red Cross, a representative from all 6 accredited veterinary schools in Thailand, Thai 
Veterinary Council, Thai Veterinary Medical Association (TVMA), and Veterinary Practitioner Association of 
Thailand (VPAT). The feedback of the meeting was well received. The next step is for the stakeholders to fill in 
their roles in the Incident Command System (ICS) adjusted by WSPA and then the working group will be 
discussing towards setting up a committee and work plan.  
Training in the Philippines 
During 29 January 2012-3 February 2012, World Society for the Protection of animals (WSPA) has hosted 
Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS): Training of Trainers in Manila, Philippines. Participants 
including WSPA staff were invited from 5 different countries in the region- India, Vietnam, Indonesia, Thailand and 
Philippines. The training was to equip participants to be able to conduct a 3-day LEGS training in their own 
countries aimed to build capacity to support the saving of lives and livelihoods among livestock owning 
communities affected by disasters.  
para

7 | P a g e 
Collars Not Cruelty Campaign 
WSPA launched its global „Collars Not Cruelty‟ campaign, to promote the control of rabies through mass 
vaccination of dogs without culling, on World Rabies Day (28 September) 2011. The five-year programme will 
include working with governments and other stakeholders in the Asia Pacific region, to promote and implement 
this scientifically proven and economically viable, humane alternative for rabies control. The programme couples 
sound animal welfare principles with a holistic approach to ensure a humane and sustainable outcome, consistent 
with the OIE‟s Regional Animal Welfare Strategy. Further updates about specific initiatives planned will be 
provided in a future issue of the Update. 
Key Events 
Event 
Date 
Location 
WSPA - Asia-Pacific Regional Overview Meeting 
Early March 2012 
Sydney, Australia 
RAWS Coordination Group Third Meeting 
3-4 April 2012 
Bangkok, Thailand 
Australian Animal Welfare Strategy Annual Workshop  
TBC August 2012  
TBC  
OIE Collaborating Centre Management Committee Meeting 
TBC October 2012 
Melbourne, Australia 
OIE 3rd Global Animal Welfare Conference 
5-9 November 2012 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
Contacts 
Jim Paradice  
Manager, International Animal Welfare  
jim.paradice@daff.gov.au  
+61 2 6272 5532 
Rhiannon Coulton  
Policy Officer, Animal Welfare 
rhiannon.coulton@daff.gov.au 
+61 2 6272 4628