The Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) entered into

force on 5 July 2020. The agreement put in place reduced tariffs for exports of citrus fruit. Quota is

available on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the access amount is exhausted.

Quotas under the IA-CEPA cover:

lemons and limes

mandarins, clementines, wilkings and similar citrus hybrids

oranges

Key dates to remember

1 January—New quota year commences

31 December—Quota year ends

Current quota usage

The quota usage tables show the amount of quota available and the total quantity of quota shipped by

Australia for IA-CEPA products. The tables are updated regularly.

Apply for an IA-CEPA quota certificate for citrus

Exporters will need to apply to export citrus to Indonesia at the reduced tariff rate.

To apply for a quota certificate an exporter must:

lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system,

EXDOC.

complete and submit the IA-CEPA horticulture TRQ certificate application using the online

submit button on the last page of the form.

Once we have approved the application, we will email the quota certificate to the email address

provided on the completed TRQ certificate application. IA-CEPA quota certificates cannot be amended

so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the shipment after the

certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a replacement certificate

issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details on the certificate.

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered

amount is $86 per certificate issued.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Read the detail

See Appendix 2-A.1: Tariff rate quotas of the IA-CEPA for:

a list of eligible products

the quantity for each quota year

the in-quota tariff rate

Legislation

The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for citrus

to Indonesia.

Data collection

We report on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/indonesia-quotas/citrus

• 

• 

•