The Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) entered into
force on 5 July 2020. The agreement put in place reduced tariffs for exports of feed grains.
The quota usage tables show the amount of quota available and the total quantity of quota used by
submitting the completed PDF form using the online submit button on the last page of the form
specify the date range within which the applications for tariff rate quota certificates will be made

Exporters must notify the Quota Unit if a contract is cancelled. If notification is received that a contract
is cancelled the reservation will be cancelled and the quota will be returned. Exporters cannot apply for
another reservation for 4 weeks, unless at least 75% of the reservation has been used. If there is quota
submitting the completed PDF form using the online submit button on the last page of the form
If an exporter has not used their reserved volume after the final day specified in the contract, the Quota
If an exporter doesn’t use any of their quota reservation for a contract they will not be able to apply for
Exporters should make sure to vary or cancel any reservation to avoid an exclusion.
Once an exporter has a valid reservation they can then apply for a quota certificate.
lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system,
complete and submit the IA-CEPA feed grains TRQ certificate application using the online submit
Once the Quota Unit has approved the application, a quota certificate will be emailed to the address

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export
Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules
2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered
IA-CEPA quota certificates cannot be amended so if there is a change to the exporter, importer or
quantity of the shipment after the certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be
cancelled and a replacement certificate issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas - Feed Grain Export to Indonesia) Rules 2021 govern the rules
The Quota Unit reports on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/indonesia-quotas/feed-grains