meats 1 and 2. These quotas were put in place by the Japan–Australia Economic Partnership

Agreement (JAEPA) and allow Australian exporters to export specific quantities of preserved meats 1

and 2 product at reduced tariff rates.

Access to these quotas is on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has

been exhausted. The amount of quota available for preserved meats 1 is now set at 2,700 tonnes. The

amount of quota available for preserved meats 2 increases annually (check out the total volume of quota

agreed on all Japan quotas until 2024).

Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff

rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under both the JAEPA and

the CPTPP agreements.

Key dates to remember

10 March—Department accepts applications for the new quota year

1 April—New quota year commences

31 March—Quota year ends

The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for JAEPA products. The

tables are updated regularly.

To apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of prescribed meats 1 or 2 product, an exporter must 

lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system, EXDOC.

The RFP must include the correct AHECC codes and the quota indicator must be ticked. The quota

certificate will be emailed to the address stored for the exporter in the Exdoc system. Exporters can

update their details by contacting the EXDOC Help Desk.

To complete the RFP you may need to refer to the eligible AHECC codes.

When the RFP reaches ‘complete’ status in EXDOC, the data will come through to the Quota Unit. Once

the application is approved, the Quota Unit will email the quota certificate directly to the exporter.

JAEPA certificates cannot be amended so if an amendment to a prescribed meats 1 or 2 RFP is made in

Exdoc that changes the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of product, the original certificate

will be cancelled and a new certificate will be issued and emailed.

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered

amount is $36 per certificate issued.

The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 govern the rules around quota for

prescribed goods to Japan. Exporters should be familiar with these rules.

• 

• 

•

JAEPA eliminates or reduces barriers to trade in goods between Japan and Australia. JAEPA entered

into force on 15 January 2015. More information on the broader outcomes of the agreement can be

found on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s website.

The Quota Unit collects and manages the data presented on this website for commercial and

government use. The data comes from the RFPs received by the department.

Contact us

Get updates about Japan quotas directly by joining our subscription list. Simply email the Quota Admin

with your name and the word ‘subscribe’ in the heading.

For queries or assistance with JAEPA preserved meats 1 and 2 quotas, contact the Quota Unit:

Phone: 02 6272 4068

Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/japan-quotas/japan-preserved-meat-

quotas-1-and-2