quotas were put in place by the Japan–Australia Economic Partnership Agreement (JAEPA).

Australian exporters can export a specific amount of honey to Japan on a first-come, first-served

(FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has been exhausted.

The amount of quota available changes annually for honey (check out the total volume of quota agreed

on all Japan quotas until 2024).

Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff

rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under both the JAEPA and

the CPTPP agreements.

Key dates to remember

10 March—Department accepts applications for the new quota year

1 April—New quota year commences

31 March—Quota year ends

Current quota usage

The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota shipped by Australia for JAEPA products. The

tables are updated regularly.

Apply for a JAEPA quota certificate for honey

Note: You can only apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of honey within 21 days of your

product leaving Australia.

To apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of honey to Japan en exporter will need to:

To complete the application it may be necessary to refer to the eligible AHECC codes.

Once the application is approved, the Quota Unit will email the quota certificate directly to the email

address provided on the application form.

JAEPA certificates cannot be amended so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or

quantity of the consignment the original certificate will be cancelled and a new certificate will be issued

and emailed.

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered

amount is $86 per certificate issued.

• 

• 

•

Historical quota usage

Legislation

The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 govern the rules honey, which is defined as

a non-prescribed good. Exporters should be familiar with these rules.

Background to JAEPA

JAEPA eliminates or reduces barriers to trade in goods between Japan and Australia. JAEPA entered

into force on 15 January 2015.

Data collection

The Quota Unit collects and manages the data presented on this website for commercial and

government use.

Contact us

Get updates about Japan quotas directly by joining our subscription list. Simply email the Quota Unit

with your name and the word ‘subscribe’ in the heading.

For queries or assistance with the JAEPA honey quota, contact the Quota Unit:

Phone: 02 6272 4068

Email: quota.admin@awe.gov.au

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/japan-quotas/japan-honey-quotas