These quotas were put in place by the Japan–Australia Economic Partnership Agreement (JAEPA) and

allow Australian exporters to export specific quantities of poultry to Japan at reduced tariff rates.

Access to this quota is on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the available quota amount has

been exhausted. The amount of poultry quota available increases annually (check out the total volume

of quota agreed on all Japan quotas until 2024).

Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff

rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under both the JAEPA and

the CPTPP agreements.

Key dates to remember

10 March—Department accepts applications for the new quota year

1 April— New quota year commences

31 March—Quota year ends

The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for JAEPA products. The

tables are updated weekly.

To apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of poultry, an exporter must lodge a request for

permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system, EXDOC.

The RFP must include the correct AHECC codes and the quota indicator must be ticked. The quota

certificate will be emailed to the address stored for the exporter in the EXDOC system. Exporters can

update their details by contacting the EXDOC Help Desk.

To complete the RFP exporters may need to refer to the eligible AHECC codes.

When the RFP reaches ‘complete’ status in EXDOC, the data will go through to the Quota Unit. Once

the application is approved, the Quota Unit will email the quota certificate directly to the exporter.

If an amendment is made to a poultry RFP that changes the exporter, importer, product type or

quantity of product the original certificate will be cancelled and a new certificate will be issued and

emailed.

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered

amount is $36 per certificate issued.

The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 govern the rules around quota for poultry

to Japan. Exporters should be familiar with the rules.

• 

• 

•

JAEPA eliminates or reduces barriers to trade in goods between Japan and Australia. JAEPA entered

into force on 15 January 2015. More information on the broader outcomes of the agreement can be

found on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s website.

The Quota Unit collects and manages the data presented on this website for commercial and

government use. The data comes from the RFPs received by the department.

Contact us

Get updates about Japan quotas directly by joining our subscription list. Simply email the Quota Unit

with your name and the word ‘subscribe’ in the heading.

For any queries or for assistance with the JAEPA poultry quota, contact the Quota Unit:

Phone: 02 6272 4068

Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/japan-quotas/japan-poultry-quotas