The Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (IA-CEPA) entered into

force on 5 July 2020. The agreement put in place reduced tariffs for exports of live male cattle. The live

male cattle quota is managed on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the access amount is

exhausted.

Key dates

1 January—New quota year commences

31 December—Quota year ends

Current quota usage

The quota usage tables show the amount of quota available and the total quantity of quota shipped by

Australia for IA-CEPA products. The tables are updated regularly.

Apply for an IA-CEPA quota certificate for live male cattle

Exporters will need to apply to export live male cattle to Indonesia at the reduced tariff rate.

To apply for a quota certificate an exporter must:

have prepared a consignment and received a health certificate from the department.

complete and submit the IA-CEPA live cattle TRQ certificate application using the online submit

button on the last page of the form.

Once an application is approved, the quota certificate will be emailed to the email address provided on

the completed TRQ certificate application. IA-CEPA quota certificates cannot be amended so if there is

a change to the exporter, importer or quantity of the shipment after the certificate has been issued the

existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a replacement certificate issued. Contact Quota Admin

if there is a change to any details on the certificate.

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered

amount is $86 per certificate issued.

Read the detail

See Appendix 2-A.1: Tariff rate quotas of the IA-CEPA for:

a list of eligible products

the quantity for each year of the quota

the in-quota tariff rate.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Legislation

The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas-General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for citrus

to Indonesia.

Data collection

We report on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.

Contact us

Phone: 02 6272 4068

Email: quota.admin@awe.gov.au

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/indonesia-quotas/live-cattle