Kingdom Free Trade Agreement (A-UK FTA), including rice.

Australian exporters can export up to 1,000 tonnes/year of Long Grain Rice and 11,500 tonnes/year of

Broken Rice at a 0% tariff rate. Access to the quota is on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis until the

available quota amount has been exhausted.

Note: the volume access amounts for year 1 of the agreement are pro-rata amounts. Long grain rice pro-

rata amount is 589.041T and broken rice pro-rata amount is 6,773.973T for year one and then the

agreed amount for the following years of the agreement.

Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff

rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under both the A-UK FTA

agreements.

Key dates to remember

1 January - Quota year commences

31 December - Quota year finishes

Current Quota usage

The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for A-UK FTA products. The

tables are updated regularly.

Apply for a quota certificate for rice

Exporters will need to apply to export rice to UK at the reduced tariff rate.

To apply for a quota certificate an exporter must:

Complete and submit the A-UK FTA rice TRQ certificate application using the online submit

button on the last page of the form.

Please note, you cannot apply for a quota certificate more than 3 weeks before your consignment is due

to depart Australia.

A-UK FTA quota certificates cannot be amended without the corresponding export documentation

being amended, so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the

shipment after the certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a

replacement certificate issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details on the certificate.

Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

• 

• 

•

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered

amount is $86 per certificate issued.

Issuing a quota certificate

Under the legislation the department is required to provide a paper-based certificate with an original

government stamp and signature for all UK certificates. To comply with this process the department

will issue a paper-based certificate and post to the exporter using the standard Australia Post method.

The department will provide the exporter with an electronic copy of the certificate and then post the

original to the exporter as this will be required by UK Customs.

The department can send certificates to exporters using Express Post through Australia Post if the

exporter provides the department with self-addressed envelopes. If an urgent certificate is required to

be sent directly overseas this can be done if the exporter provides the department with courier satchels

and account details.

If a certificate is required urgently, email the Quota unit with the RFP/REX number of the consignment

that requires a manual certificate. The email must be received by the Quota Unit no later than 10.00am

(Canberra time) for same-day processing.

Read the detail

Legislation

The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas—General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for rice

to UK.

Data collection

We report on export quotas using data submitted for certificate applications.

Contact us

Phone: 02 6272 4068

Email: quota.admin@aff.gov.au

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/uk-eu-quotas/uk-rice-quota