Australian exporters can export sheepmeat at a 0% tariff rate under the following quota volumes.
Access to the quotas will be administered via an allocation system until the available quota amount has
Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff
rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under the A-UK FTA.
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for A-UK FTA products. The
Allocations of entitlement are available to exporters based on prior shipping history. The department
will allocate 100% of the available volume within a quota year unless the previous quota year has

utilised over 95% of the total annual volume. In this event, the department will limit the following quota
years allocations to 95% to avoid triggering the safeguard provisions within the A-UK FTA.
The calculations for allocations take into account quantity of sheepmeat shipped using market specific
performance and global shipments. Invitations to apply for the quota are sent to eligible exporters
oprior to the start of the quota year. Applications for allocated quota for the following year close on 16
In October of each year the department will run a reallocation process where allocation holders can
return quota they don’t intend to use, retain quota they will use, or request more allocation for the
If existing allocation holders wish to transfer some or all their quota allocation to other exporters, they
Exporters cannot transfer quota between other quotas, for example: WTO and A-UK FTA.
Exporters will need to apply to export sheepmeat to the UK at the reduced tariff rate.
lodge a request for permit (RFP) through the department’s electronic documentation system,
tick the Quota indicator box, enter the quota year and write A-UK FTA in quota type.
Under the A-UK FTA agreement the department is required to provide a paper-based certificate with an
Once an application is approved, an A-UK FTA certificate will be generated and posted to the exporter.
The department can send certificates to exporters using Express Post through Australia Post if the
A-UK FTA certificates cannot be amended without the corresponding export documentation being
amended so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the shipment after
the certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a replacement
certificate issued. Contact Quota Administration if there is a change to any details on the certificate.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export
Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered
Airfreight consignments may require urgent documentation and the Quota Administration team will
If an airfreight certificate is required urgently, email the Quota Administration team with the RFP
number of the consignment that requires a manual certificate. The email must be received by the Quota
Administration team no later than 1:00pm (Canberra time) for same-day processing.
Processing of same day certificates cannot be guaranteed as processing and dispatch is dependent on
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas—Sheepmeat and Goatmeat Export to the European Union and
United Kingdom) Rules 2021 governs the rules around TRQs for sheepmeat to the UK.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/uk-eu-quotas/uk-sheepmeat-quota