Australian exporters can export sugar at a 0% tariff rate under the following quota volumes.
Access to the quotas will be administered via an allocation system until the available quota amount has
Exporters can use the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade tariff portal to find the current tariff
rate applying to their product and to compare the tariff reduction received under the A-UK FTA.
1 August to 31 August – Milling companies receive eligibility volume for next quota year and
The quota usage tables show the total quantity of quota used by Australia for A-UK FTA products. The
complete and submit the A-UK FTA TRQ certificate application using the online submit button

Please note, you cannot apply for a quota certificate more than 3 weeks before your consignment is due
A-UK FTA quota certificates cannot be amended without the corresponding export documentation
being amended so if there is a change to the exporter, importer, product type or quantity of the
shipment after the certificate has been issued the existing certificate may need to be cancelled and a
replacement certificate issued. Contact Quota Admin if there is a change to any details on the certificate.
Note: Quota administration is cost recovered on a per certificate basis in accordance with the Export
Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules
2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any quota certificates issued. The current cost recovered
Under the legislation the department is required to provide a paper-based certificate with an original
government stamp and signature for all UK certificates. To comply with this process the department
will issue a paper-based certificate and post to the exporter using the standard Australia Post method.
The department will provide the exporter with an electronic copy of the certificate and then post the
The department can send certificates to exporters using Express Post through Australia Post if the
exporter provides the department with self-addressed envelopes. If an urgent certificate is required to
be sent directly overseas this can be done if the exporter provides the department with courier satchels
If a certificate is required urgently, email the Quota Unit with the RFP/REX number of the consignment
that requires a manual certificate. The email must be received by the Quota Unit no later than 10.00am
The Export Control (Tariff Rate Quotas—General) Rules 2021 governs the rules around quotas for sugar

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/uk-eu-quotas/uk-sugar-quota