Australian beef can enter the United States through entitlements negotiated under the World Trade

Organization (WTO) framework, and the Australia–United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSTFA).

Under these arrangements, Australian exporters can export up to 449,909 metric tonnes of beef

(combined WTO and AUSFTA entitlements) to the United States at a zero-tariff in calendar year 2026.

The combined amount reflects:

A United States granted WTO quota for Australian beef fixed at 378,214 metric tonnes.

An additional entitlement under AUSTFA, which increases by an amount prescribed under the

agreement every calendar year. In calendar year 2026, this amount is 71,695 metric tonnes.

Australian beef exports exceeding the combined amount for a given calendar year will be subject to the

AUSFTA Beef Safeguard if both price and quantity conditions stipulated in AUSFTA are met. These

conditions are assessed by the United States.

Please note that:

The United States requires export certificates to be issued for all Australian beef.

The department issues export certificates on a first-come, first-served (FCFS) basis through the

calendar year: 1 January to 31 December.

To be eligible to receive a United States beef certificate, an exporter must meet the requirements

under the Export Control Act 2020 and subordinate legislation, including holding a current meat

export licence allowing the holder to export beef to the US. Product must be sourced from an

abattoir listed to export to the US.

Current usage for all red meat quotas, including the United States Beef arrangements, can be found at

the below link under the heading, ‘EU, UK and US red meat quota position’. The report is updated

regularly.

Exporters are encouraged to work with their importers if a change to entry documentation is required

once Australia surpasses the United States granted WTO beef quota fixed at 378,214 metric tonnes.

To apply for a quota certificate for a consignment of beef, an exporter must lodge a request for export

(REX) through the department’s electronic documentation system, NEXDOC.

Once an RFP has gone to ‘COMP status in NEXDOC, the data will go into the department’s Modern

Quota System. When the application is approved, the electronic certificate, known as an eCert, is sent

directly to United States Customs and Border Protection (US CBP). The exporter is also emailed

information relating to the certificate issued.

If the export consignment is altered in any way, the revised RFP will come through to the Quota

Administration team. Once an eCert has been accepted by US CBP it cannot be amended. If there is a

change to the product or weight of the consignment the existing certificate may need to be cancelled,

and a replacement issued. If a new certificate is required to replace one that was previously issued,

contact the Quota Administration team.

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Note: The administration is cost recovered on a per-certificate basis in accordance with the Export

Charges (Imposition-General) Regulation 2021 and the Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules

2021. Exporters are invoiced monthly for any certificates issued. The current cost recovered amount is

$37 per certificate issued.

The AUSFTA beef safeguard will be triggered where Australia exports more than the aggregate of the

AUSFTA and WTO amounts during the calendar year and the price conditions are met.

If the AUSFTA beef safeguard is triggered, beef exports exceeding the amount entitled to enter the

United States duty-free (449,909 metric tonnes for 2026) will be subject to a tariff equal to 65% of the

prevailing Most Favoured Nation tariff on beef.

Once the safeguard is triggered, it will remain in place for three months or until the end of the calendar

year, whichever period is shortest. Only the United States Trade Representative can waive the

application of the safeguard.

Since the conclusion of the Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations in 1995, Australia has

benefited from a tariff rate quota for beef into the United States set at 378,214 metric tonnes. From

2005, Australia also has access to an additional amount agreed under AUSFTA.

On 1 January 2023, Australian beef export quantities to the United States became ‘unlimited’ under

AUSFTA. The United States, however, reserved the right to implement agricultural safeguard measures

if certain conditions under AUSFTA would be met in the future calendar years.

The Quota Administration team collects and manages the data presented on this website for

commercial and government use. The data comes from the REXs received through NEXDOC.

Contact us

For queries or assistance with the United States beef arrangements, contact the Quota Administration

team:

Phone: 02 6272 4068

Email: Quota.admin@aff.gov.au

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/from-australia/quota/us-quotas/us-beef-arrangements