We are working to improve our online information so that it's more useful, usable and accessible for everyone.
Enlarging text and images, keyboard browsing, and listening rather than reading
This website can be browsed and accessed in a number of different ways. Many are available through your web browser and computer operating system and are not specific to our site.
These instructions from the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) explain how to browse sites in a number of different ways:
Our approach to web accessibility
The Australian Government is committed to the principles of open government, including providing accessible web information, content and services to all Australians regardless of disability, culture or environment. The Digital Transformation Agency Digital Service Standard establishes the criteria that Australian Government digital services must meet to ensure our services are simpler, faster and easier to use.
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is adopting best practice solutions that conform to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines Version 2.0 (WCAG 2.0) level AA on all our websites.
Where possible our website includes an HTML version. Large publications are provided as accessible PDF files and Word files. Older documents may not meet these standards.
Documents received from external parties may not be tagged or have an alternative format available and therefore may not be accessible to users with assistive technologies.
Resolving any issues
If you experience difficulty accessing our content, please contact us and we will get back to you within 2 working days.
We will be able to respond faster if you can:
- summarise your issue in a few words in the subject line
- describe the location of the particular web page or document in question.
Or telephone 1800 900 090 or +61 3 8318 6700 (from outside Australia).
Australia's Disability Strategy 2021-2031
Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021-2031 is Australia’s national disability policy framework. It is driving action at all levels of government to improve the lives of people with disability.
The Strategy’s vision is for an inclusive Australian society that ensures people with disability can fulfil their potential, as equal members of the community. The Strategy sets out practical changes that will assist people with disability.