We are committed to supporting economic participation and productivity for First Nations Australians across the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sector.
Our First Nations Commitment
Our First Nations Commitment reflects the aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples across the agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries.
It states:
We commit to empowering First Nations economic self-determination across Australia’s agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries. We will do this by working in partnership with First Nations stakeholders and elevating First Nations voices in the sector through ongoing engagement. We acknowledge that First Nations Australians hold an unceded connection with the land, waters and seas of this country and hold aspirations for more sustainable, productive and profitable land- and sea-based economies.
We commit to supporting First Nations agribusiness ownership and employment, encouraging the use of Indigenous knowledges and activating the economic value of land and sea resource rights to enhance the productivity, resilience, innovation and sustainability of the Australian food and fibre supply chain. We also commit to strengthening the crucial role of Indigenous Ranger groups in Australia’s biosecurity protection and expanding pathways for First Nations food and fibre exporters to international markets.
We commit to embedding the priority reforms and supporting the achievement of outcomes under the National Agreement on Closing the Gap. We will do this by working across all levels of government and cultivating accountable partnerships with First Nations Australians. Our commitment to First Nations Australians underpins our efforts to uplift our First Nations policy and engagement capability, and drive reform in our policy development and program delivery.
National statement on First Nations in agriculture, fisheries and forestry
The National statement on First Nations in agriculture, fisheries and forestry sets out an agreed national policy direction to advance and strengthen First Nations economic inclusion across our sector. It envisions:
“A productive, competitive and sustainable agriculture, fisheries and forestry sector in which First Nations peoples are embedded as decision-makers, land and water managers, business owners, workers and innovators.”
Stronger First Nations participation delivers broad benefits from food security and productivity gains to new market opportunities and positive environmental, cultural and social outcomes.
Read the national statement and learn how we are building toward a stronger and more inclusive sector for all.
Current projects and initiatives
This program grows our biosecurity capability in northern Australia and creates economic opportunities for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.
A new pilot program to facilitate place-based and First Nations-led activities. Including funding to improve participation of First Nations peoples in drought and climate resilience activities.
A project to increase grain yield and overall resilience of cropping systems. A grant was provided via the Accelerate Adoption of Wood Processing Innovation Program.
An evidence-based credential for Indigenous agricultural products to help First Nations agriculture businesses and communities benefit from domestic and export sales.
A pilot project to uplift the export readiness for a First Nations business, Noongar Land Enterprises.
We focus on stronger partnerships with First Nations organisations, to ensure effective delivery of environmental biosecurity programs.
Includes a grant program for projects led by community, Landcare, and First Nations groups to improve management of natural resources and increase on-farm productivity.
Whole-of-government policy links
The Productivity Commission’s review of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap (National Agreement) shows that fundamental change is required to the way governments do business with First Nations peoples.
We are prioritising the implementation of the National Agreement through our policy development and program delivery.
We aim to develop policy and programs that facilitate Indigenous economic self-determination to generate more opportunities for First Nations people, communities and businesses to thrive on their own terms.
We provided a submission to the Joint Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs' Inquiry into economic self-determination and opportunities for First Nations Australians.
We also provided two submissions to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Review of the future acts regime in the Native Title Act 1993 (Cth). You can find our submissions to the Issues Paper and the Discussion Paper on the ALRC’s website.