Weeds are exotic, naturalised plants that aren’t technically feasible to eradicate due to their spread and persistence. They compete with cultivated plants for resources like sunlight, water, and nutrients. They can also disrupt ecosystems and reduce crop yields. Weeds are often difficult to control due to their fast growth and adaptability.

Shared responsibility

Managing the impacts of weeds is a shared responsibility. Farmers, industry, communities and governments all play a role.

Managing weeds protect our natural assets, like soil quality, biodiversity and waterways. It also protects our agricultural industries. We work closely with our colleagues at the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) to protect natural assets.

We also collaborate with state and territory environment and agriculture agencies, industry and community organisations. Together, we build the capacity of land managers and communities to manage weeds.

Australian Weeds Strategy

The Australian Weeds Strategy offers national guidelines for managing weeds.

National Established Weed Priorities

National Established Weed Priorities (NEWP) is a collaborative initiative between community, industry and government. The NEWP aims to determine new national weed priorities and address them through nationally coordinated action.

For details, please visit Weeds Australia.

Weeds of National Significance

National Weed Biocontrol Pipeline Strategy

This national strategy aims to guide Australia’s future weed biocontrol research, development and extension activities for priority weeds.

Weed biocontrol experts from the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions (CISS), the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and state governments developed the strategy.

Weed management survey

In 2016, 2019 and 2022, the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resources Economics and Sciences (ABARES) conducted national surveys of agricultural land managers. The surveys asked about pest and weed management on their property and in their local area.

Review pest animal and weed management survey results at the ABARES website.

Research and development

Our programs invest in research and development in new and improved weed management tools and technologies, including mechanical, chemical and biological control.

- Supporting Communities Manage Pest Animals and Weeds Program

- Established Pest Animals and Weeds Management Pipeline Program