Publication details
Animal Health Committee (AHC) provides national leadership and technical expertise on Australian
animal health and biosecurity matters. AHC includes the Australian, state and territory chief veterinary
officers, and the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness; with Animal Health Australia, Wildlife
Health Australia and New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries as observers. The Committee reports
to the National Biosecurity Committee. AHC met for its second face-to-face (F2F) meeting of 2025 in
Brisbane on 21-23 October 2025 (AHC48). The next AHC F2F meeting will be held in March 2026 in
the Northern Territory.
AHC strategic priorities
AHC discussed strategic priorities for its 2026 workplan and alignment with the strategic risks
identified by the National Biosecurity Committee. Key activities were identified to improve Australia’s
preparedness and response capacity for emergency animal diseases (EAD) and to improve Australia’s
animal health surveillance, diagnostic and data capabilities, and an assessment of emerging strategic
issues in animal health. In the face of increasing global pressures, the Committee agreed to include
horizon scanning in its future planning processes to ensure a proactive approach to managing animal
health in Australia.
Improving effectiveness of EAD responses
AHC discussed challenges and opportunities to improve the effectiveness of EAD responses, informed
by learnings from recent high pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) responses. AHC agreed to prioritise
work to explore opportunities for more scalable and cost-effective responses through greater
government-industry collaboration.
HPAI preparedness
AHC acknowledged the dynamic and evolving global H5 HPAI situation and the value of Australia’s
proactive efforts to strengthen its national preparedness and response capability. To contribute to
preparedness efforts, AHC discussed progress with its review of the vaccination policy for poultry and
next steps with vaccination research pilots for rare, protected and valuable birds. AHC also committed
to ongoing stakeholder engagement to ensure that any future H5 HPAI response is fully informed by
livestock, veterinary, wildlife, and One Health perspectives.
National lumpy skin disease (LSD) Action Plan
AHC discussed progress on its activities under the National LSD Action Plan, which includes developing
national surveillance and vaccination strategies. The findings of a literature review on overseas

experiences with the use of vaccination to control LSD was presented to AHC, which will inform the
development of the vaccination policy.
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR)
AHC’s AMR Task Group reported on activities in Australia's Antimicrobial Resistance Animal Sector
Action Plan 2023-28, requiring government leadership including communications, surveillance, and
reporting. AHC recognised the importance of this work and committed to promote clear and decisive
action in response to national and international AMR trends. AHC agreed to support the AMR Task
Group to continue for a further 12 months.
One Health Forum
The Queensland Department of Primary Industries hosted a One Health Forum with Queensland
Government partners and Wildlife Health Australia. The Forum focussed on the Queensland
government’s holistic One Health approach to HPAI preparedness and included discussions on
preparedness activities, governance, enhanced surveillance, environmental protections, robust
biosecurity measures, and safeguarding public health and worker safety though collaboration and
communication efforts.
Stakeholder session
AHC was joined by 16 stakeholders for its open stakeholder session. Key topics discussed included the
roles and challenges of private veterinarians (including wildlife specialists) during EAD responses,
enhancing on-farm biosecurity standards, and how best to harness the strengths of industry and
governments during EAD responses.
Acknowledgements
AHC would like to thank the Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Australia Zoo for
hosting the AHC48 meeting. AHC also thanks its industry stakeholders for attending the stakeholder
session and sharing their knowledge and experience.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/committees/communique/oct-2025