In response to the referral from Agriculture Senior Officials, the Animal Welfare Task Group (AWTG) is

examining the use of virtual fencing technology - GPS-enabled neckband or collar devices worn by

livestock producing electric pulses to deter animals from approaching or crossing a virtual fence

boundary. An AWTG subgroup is examining animal welfare issues associated with virtual fencing

technology, with a view to harmonising the approach to the use of this technology across jurisdictions.

The AWTG virtual fencing project is focused on supporting a harmonised approach to promoting

optimal animal welfare outcomes, regardless of the type of virtual fencing product or where it is used.

Current progress

In 2024, AWTG agreed to develop an Australian Animal Welfare Guide for Virtual Fencing as the

preferred approach for harmonisation, with the assistance of the Commonwealth as the project

manager. The guide is currently with the AWTG, which is working towards finalisation by the end of

2025.

Purpose of the guide

States and territories regulate the use of virtual fencing. However, as virtual fencing technology is

rapidly evolving and jurisdictions currently have differing regulatory baselines, it was agreed that a

guide is the preferred approach for harmonisation as it can be developed relatively quickly and allows

flexibility.

The guide will promote optimal animal welfare outcomes with the use of virtual fencing technology and

its applications, for beef and dairy cattle, based on current science and evidence. It will not capture its

use for other animal species but will acknowledge that technological developments and animal welfare

research on this topic is ongoing.

The development process will differ from a standards and guidelines development process and the

product delivered at completion will also be different. States and territories will be able to use the guide

content as they see fit in their individual legislation and regulatory frameworks. The guide is not

intended to provide recommendations on whether individual states and territories should support or

oppose the use of virtual fencing technology.

As the guide will not contain recommendations for regulations, or recommend regulatory decisions, the

guide will not undergo regulation impact analysis or public consultation. States and territories may

consider further steps if they intend to make regulatory changes.

For further information on the commercial use of virtual fencing technology in each jurisdiction, refer

to State and Territory Government Animal Welfare Links and Legislation to contact your relevant state

or territory.

Scientific literature review

In February 2022, the subgroup identified the need to conduct an independent scientific literature

review on animal welfare considerations for virtual fencing for livestock, which is now completed. The

guide will be underpinned by this scientific literature review.

View a copy of the finalised literature review:

Independent scientific literature review on animal welfare considerations

for virtual fencing

Virtual fencing technology and the legislation governing its use across jurisdictions continue to evolve.

In recognition of this, the independent scientific literature review has an accompanying addendum

which captures new, additional, and more detailed information on virtual fencing technology since the

finalisation of the literature review. Information contained within the addendum does not form part of

the literature review itself but will be considered by the subgroup.

View a copy of the addendum:

Addendum

Addendum – additional information provided by Halter (PDF 209 KB)

Addendum – additional information provided by Halter (DOCX 30.4 KB)

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

Stakeholder Reference Group

In April 2024, the subgroup established a Stakeholder Reference Group (SRG) to inform work to

support harmonisation. Membership of the SRG consists of agricultural and animal welfare scientists

and representatives from agricultural industry groups, animal welfare organisations and the veterinary

industry from across Australia, with one representative from New Zealand. A series of meetings of the

SRG were convened in mid-2024 and have now concluded. The guide will be developed considering

input provided by the SRG.

View a copy of the SRG Terms of Reference:

Contacting the AWTG

Email: awtg@aff.gov.au

GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/awtg/virtual-fencing

• 

•