Infection with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV)

Also known as white spot disease (WSD)

From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition

Figure 1 WSD in giant black tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon)

Note: White spots on carapace are typical of infection following acute phase of infection.

Source: B Diggles

Figure 2 WSD in giant black tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon)

Note: Carapace is loose and when removed, large smooth-edged white spots are evident. Numerous smaller white spots are also evident on the abdominal segments.

Source: B Diggles

Figure 3 Five juvenile black tiger prawns (Penaeus monodon) infected with WSSV lacking classical white spots

Note: Prawns exhibit few, if any, white spots. Prawns infected with WSSV can present as ‘normal’ prawns.

Source: B Diggles

Signs of disease

Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may still be present in the absence of any signs.

Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are:

rapid onset of mass mortality (80% or more) in farmed penaeid prawns during the grow-out period

lethargy

cessation of feeding

aggregations of moribund prawns near the water surface at the edge of the rearing pond or tank.

Gross pathological signs are:

loose carapace

high degree of colour variation, with a predominance of darkened (red, brown or pink) body surface and appendages

heavy fouling of the surface and gills by external parasites

white midgut line through the abdomen of severely affected larvae and postlarvae

delayed (or completely absent) clotting reaction of the haemolymph of infected shrimp

white calcium deposits embedded in the shell, causing white spots 0.5 to 3.0mm in diameter.

Prawns with WSD may not show distinctive clinical signs. If present, shell lesions can range from minute spots to discs several millimetres in diameter, and may coalesce into larger white plates. Spots are most easily observed by removing the cuticle over the cephalothorax, scraping away any attached tissue with the thumbnail and holding the cuticle up to the light. However, white spots in the cuticle are unreliable for even preliminary diagnosis of WSD. Similar spots can be produced by some bacteria, high alkalinity and other infectious agents or environmental conditions.

Microscopic pathological signs are:

hypertrophied nuclei in gills and/or cuticular epithelium

viral aggregates (shown as small reflective spots) in unstained smear preparations of the haemolymph by dark-field microscopy

pathognomonic inclusion bodies in histological sections in target tissues.

Disease agent

WSD is caused by infection with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV), a large DNA virus assigned as the only member of the genus Whispovirus (family Nimaviridae). The virus only infects crustaceans and appears not to be related to any other known viruses. It is not related to white spot disease of finfish, which is caused by parasitic ciliate protozoans. WSSV is known to occur in fresh, brackish and marine water.

Host range

All decapod crustaceans (order Decapoda) are considered susceptible to infection, including prawns, lobsters and crabs from marine, brackish or freshwater environments (Table 1). The disease has mainly been a problem in farmed penaeid (family Penaeidae) prawns.

Carriers of the virus (Table 2) include rotifers, marine molluscs, polychaete worms and non-decapod crustaceans such as Artemia salina, copepods, non-crustacean arthropods and aquatic insect larvae. Birds can also spread the virus.

Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with WSSV

a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species are likely to be susceptible or shown to be experimentally susceptible.

Table 2 Non-decapod crustacean carriers

Presence in Australia

Exotic disease—under official control.

WSD was confirmed in South East Queensland in December 2016. An emergency response to contain and eradicate the disease is ongoing.

Map 1 Presence of WSSV, by jurisdiction

Epidemiology

WSD is mainly a disease of farmed penaeid prawns, but many species of crustaceans are susceptible to infection with WSSV.

Rapid mortalities of up to 80% or more within 3 to 10 days have been reported in many countries.

Prawn farm productivity falls to about 40% of normal rate for 2 years, and then recovers to about 70% over the long term.

Some of the species listed in the host range section (such as Penaeus monodon) are extremely susceptible to WSSV. Others may be infected but are more resistant to disease.

Infection may be low level and chronic (lifelong carriers are possible) in healthy crustaceans, or acute infection with disease and mortalities.

Viral multiplication and disease appears to be induced by environmental and handling stress. Stressors include eye-stalk ablation, spawning, moulting, high stocking densities, changes in salinity, temperature and pH, and plankton blooms. Imposing such stressors on suspect populations can be a useful diagnostic method for detecting the virus.

All life stages are susceptible, from eggs to broodstock.

Vertical transmission occurs from infected broodstock.

Horizontal transmission of disease is usually via cannibalism of sick or dying prawns, or directly through contaminated water.

Vectors of the virus include rotifers, marine molluscs, polychaete worms and non-decapod crustaceans including Artemia salina, copepods, non-crustacean arthropods and insect larvae.

Birds can transmit the disease from pond to pond by releasing caught prawns over neighbouring ponds.

White spot syndrome virus can persist and retain infectivity in seawater at 30°C for at least 30 days (under laboratory conditions) and for at least 4 days in ponds.

Differential diagnosis

The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases that most closely account for the observed signs.

Similar diseases

Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND), infection with Hepatobacter penaei (NHP), infection with infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHHNV), infection with shrimp haemocyte iridescent virus (SHIV), infection with Taura syndrome virus (TSV) and infection with yellowhead virus genotype 1 (YHV1).

Sample collection

Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on sampling.

Emergency disease hotline

See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure.

Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right state or territory agency.

Microscope images

Figure 4 Photomicrograph of histological section from stomach of juvenile black tiger prawn (Penaeus monodon) with WSD

Note: Prominent intranuclear inclusion bodies are abundant in cuticular epithelium and subcuticular connective tissue of the organ (a). Cells in different phases of infection display intranuclear inclusion bodies. Early-phase inclusion bodies in this section are centronuclear and eosinophilic. These are separated from nuclear membrane and marginated chromatin by an artefactual halo. 900x magnification.

Source: DV Lightner

Figure 5 Histological section of stomach of juvenile Chinese white shrimp (Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) chinensis) with advanced WSD

Note: Fully developed WSSV intranuclear inclusion bodies (a) are more basophilic, appear granular in texture and nearly fill affected hypertrophied nucleus. 1300x magnification.

Source: DV Lightner

Figure 6 Histological section of gills from juvenile Chinese white shrimp (Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) chinensis) with WSD

Note: Nearly one-quarter of cells are infected, as indicated by developing and fully developed intranuclear inclusion bodies (a). 900x magnification.

Source: DV Lightner

Figure 7 Histological section of stomach of Pacific blue shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris) experimentally infected with WSSV

Note: Severe grade 4 infection evidenced by classic WSD intranuclear inclusion bodies (a). 900x magnification.

Source: DV Lightner

Figure 8 Histological section of stomach of Pacific white shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei) experimentally infected with WSSV

Note: Severe grade 4 infection with many classic WSD intranuclear inclusion bodies. 900x magnification.

Source: DV Lightner

Figure 9 In situ hybridisation of histological section of stomach of juvenile Pacific white shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris) with WSD

Note: Intranuclear inclusion bodies in the cuticular epithelium of stomach reacting to digoxygenin-labelled DNA probe. 900x magnification.

Source: DV Lightner

Further reading

CABI Invasive Species Compendium White spot disease

CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases White spot disease

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment AQUAVETPLAN disease strategy manual: White spot disease of prawns

World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of Diagnostic tests for aquatic animals

These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication.

Contact details

Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888

Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic

© Commonwealth of Australia 2020

This work is copyright. It may be reproduced in whole or in part subject to the inclusion of an acknowledgement of the source and no commercial usage or sale.