Before any work can commence, we must first establish the need for:
a new Australian and New Zealand standard diagnostic procedure (ANZSDP), or
revision of an existing ANZSDP or Australian standard diagnostic technique (ASDT).
This is part of a process to draft and review ANZSDPs by scientific experts, managed through a set of
standardised procedures.
Policy
1. Background
The primary objective of an Australian and New Zealand standard diagnostic procedure (ANZSDP) is to
standardise test procedures so as to ensure consistency between laboratories using methods selected for
their optimal accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and robustness. Other objectives include the provision of
standard methods that can be used in external proficiency testing programs and for the development of
documentation for quality systems.
ANZSDPs describe tests and the availability of reagents consistent with the World Organisation for
Animal Health (OIE) Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals or the Manual of
Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals (hereafter referred to as ‘OIE Manual’). ANZSDPs are amenable to
revision as required. Any tests that differ in principle from an established (standard) test must be
favourably evaluated by the National Laboratory Task Group under the Animal Health Committee
(AHC), before inclusion in an ANZSDP. Commercial suppliers and individual proponents seeking
inclusion of a new test, or a new version of an existing test, in an existing ANZSDP will need to submit
relevant data and information to AHC for evaluation. Tests will be evaluated in accordance with
procedures for new test development and evaluation.
2. Purpose
This document describes the criteria and process for establishing the need for an ANZSDP, including a
brief outline of the editorial, approval and publication process. The policy is designed to help laboratory
diagnosticians and other scientists to understand the rationale used in the development of ANZSDPs.
3. Scope
This policy applies to terrestrial and aquatic ANZSDPs and any associated procedural documents
managed by the National Laboratory Task Group.
4. Policy and process
The need for a new ANZSDP, or revision of an existing ANZSDP or Australian standard diagnostic
technique (ASDT), is determined by the National Laboratory Task Group, often in consultation with
relevant senior Australian and New Zealand scientists. Where relevant and if available, previous
• 
•

authors should be included in the revision of existing ANZSDPs. Laboratory task group members
nominate a senior author and, if necessary, one or more co-authors (alternatively the senior author may
nominate a co-author/s). If the nomination is accepted, the author/s and the National Laboratory Task
Group work together to produce the final document. Following AHC approval, the final version of the
ANZSDP is published on the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website—see Australian
and New Zealand standard diagnostic procedures (ANZSDPs).
Did the Animal Health Committee (AHC) determine the need for a national standard operating
procedure for a particular disease?
No, an ANZSDP is not required for this disease.
Yes, find out if there a relevant chapter in the OIE Manual for this disease.
Is there a relevant chapter in the OIE Manual for this disease?
No, find out if laboratory testing is required for regulatory purposes or industry-driven disease
management.
Yes, determine whether the relevant OIE Manual chapter is adequate for Australian needs.
Is the relevant OIE Manual chapter adequate for Australian needs?
No, find out whether laboratory testing is required for regulatory purposes or industry-driven disease
management.
Yes, an ANZSDP is not required for this disease.
Is laboratory testing required for regulatory purposes or industry-driven disease management?
No, an ANZSDP is not required for this disease.
Yes, an ANZSDP is required for this disease.
5. Application
The National Laboratory Task Group determines the need for revision of an existing ANZSDP, a new
ANZSDP to replace an existing ASDT, or a new ANZSDP, based on evidence presented to satisfy the
eligibility criteria.
New and revised ANZSDPs are designed to harmonise with the latest OIE Manuals (where they exist)
and are edited for consistency of information and style. When an ANZSDP is developed and a relevant
OIE Manual exists, the background information will reflect the OIE Manual, but should reflect the
Australian and New Zealand context.
Existing OIE Manuals are generally suitable for Australian and New Zealand laboratories for those
diseases to which none of these eligibility criteria apply. However, the National Laboratory Task Group
may seek an expert scientific assessment of an existing OIE Manual to determine if an ANZSDP is

warranted. Alternatively the relevant OIE Manual may be circulated to National Laboratory Task Group
members, to determine whether it meets Australian and New Zealand needs.
In the event that an expert needs analysis is required, a relevant expert is nominated by National
Laboratory Task Group members. The National Laboratory Task Group Executive Officer (EO) then
writes to the nominated expert requesting a needs analysis and recommendations. This expert service is
not expected to incur any fees.
When a recommendation to develop an ANZSDP is proposed, the EO prepares an agenda or out-of-
session paper, which is circulated to National Laboratory Task Group members for approval of the
ANZSDP and nominations for authorship. If National Laboratory Task Group members approve the
need for a new or revised ANZSDP, endorsement is sought from the AHC for both the particular
ANZSDP and the nominated author/s. If nominations are endorsed by the AHC, development proceeds
as described in the editorial and approval process for ANZSDPs.
Final approval of an ANZSDP is granted by the AHC and publication is by posting on the Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website.
6. Exclusions
An ANZSDP will normally exclude tests that have not been approved by the National Laboratory Task
Group. However, the inclusion of tests that have not been approved may be appropriate, subject to
National Laboratory Task Group approval.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/laboratories/procedures/anzsdp-reviews/anzsdp-
need