This is part of a process to draft and review ANZSDPs by scientific experts, managed through a set of
standardised procedures.
1. Background
The primary objective of the Australian and New Zealand standard diagnostic procedures (ANZSDPs) is
to standardise test procedures to ensure consistency between laboratories using methods that are
accurate, precise and fit for purpose.
Secondary objectives are to provide the methods to be used in external proficiency testing programs
and to aid the development of documentation for quality systems.
2. Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to describe the editorial and approval process for the preparation and
publication of ANZSDPs.
3. Scope
This procedure applies to terrestrial and aquatic ANZSDPs, including any associated procedural
documents managed by the National Laboratory Task Group.
4. Procedure
4.1 Review of procedures and nomination of authors
4.1.1 Selection of procedures for drafting
4.1.1.1 The Animal Health Committee (AHC) National Laboratory Task Group, with administrative
support from the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources, is responsible for establishing the
need for a new or revised ANZSDP based on the agreed criteria.
4.1.1.2 Laboratory task group members nominate a senior author and, if necessary, one or more co-
authors (alternatively co-authors may be nominated by the senior author). The nomination may be
completed either in-session or out-of-session. Where practicable, nominator/s should ensure prior in-
principle consent from nominee(s) is obtained before the selection process.
4.1.2 Contractual arrangements
4.1.2.1 The laboratory task group forwards a letter of invitation to the nominated senior author
requesting acceptance of authorship within 2 weeks. Lack of response after this date will be taken to
indicate non-acceptance and an alternative author will be sought. If co-author(s) have also been
nominated by laboratory task group members the invitation letter should specify such detail.

4.1.2.2 If the invitation is declined, repeat the steps in Section 4.1.1.
4.1.2.3 On receipt of written acceptance, the laboratory task group consults with the senior author to
determine an anticipated completion date. The first draft is expected to be submitted within 6 months
of acceptance.
4.1.2.4 Following confirmation of authorship, authors are referred to the guide for writing an ANZSDP
on the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources website—see Guide for authors writing an
ANZSDP. The laboratory task group will provide the nominated editor with the senior author’s contact
details.
4.1.2.5 Within 3 months of commencement the senior author will provide the laboratory task group
with a progress report on the ANZSDP. If a progress report is not received, the laboratory task group
will follow up with the senior author to help resolve impediments or seek an extension.
4.2 Editorial process
4.2.1 The senior author submits the first draft of the document to the laboratory task group (as an email
attachment). The laboratory task group forwards the first draft to the editor and advises the senior
author that the document is now in the editorial process.
4.2.2 The editor works with the senior author to facilitate production of a second draft (within 6 weeks
of completion of the first draft). This is a collaborative and interactive process with the aim of producing
the best document possible at the time of writing. The editor provides feedback to the senior author on
progress throughout the editorial process.
4.2.3 The editor consults with the senior author (and the laboratory task group if required) to provide a
preliminary final draft.
4.2.4 The editor provides a copy of the preliminary final draft to the laboratory task group.
4.2.5 The preliminary final draft is circulated to laboratory task group members and 20 working days
are allowed for a response. If members do have comments they should reply to all members. Members
may also choose to respond to circulated comments from other members as appropriate. A lack of
response after 20 days will be taken to indicate approval. All comments received are provided to the
author and editor.
4.2.6 The senior author produces a final draft within 6 weeks of receiving comments from laboratory
task group members. If members’ comments are editorial in nature, assistance may be sought from the
editor. The final draft will only be submitted to the AHC when those members who have requested
changes are satisfied that their concerns have been addressed.
4.2.7 The author submits the final draft to the laboratory task group.
4.2.8 The laboratory task group invoices the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources for the
agreed fee on behalf of the editor.

4.2.9 The laboratory task group forwards the approved final draft as well as a preamble to outline the
scope and role of an ANZSDP to AHC for their endorsement either out-of-session or in-session,
whichever is sooner.
4.2.10 If AHC does not endorse the final draft, the laboratory task group will present the draft and the
AHC feedback to the senior author and laboratory task group members for a way forward.
4.2.11 Following AHC approval, the ANZSDP is placed on the Department of Agriculture and Water
Resources website—see list of ANZSDPs. This constitutes publication of the procedure.
4.3 Document control
4.3.1 All AHC-approved ANZSDPs are maintained under document control by the laboratory task
group. Only the laboratory task group, or delegate, will publish ANZSDPs on the Department of
Agriculture and Water Resources website.
4.3.2 All published ANZSDPs carry an issue date at the bottom of each page. The issue date is the same
as the publication date.
4.3.3 The Department of Agriculture and Water Resources website carries a revision history for
ANZSDPs with the more recent revisions highlighted.
4.3.4 Superseded documents are maintained on the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
website for a minimum of 12 months. The department maintains an archive of all versions of published
Australian Standard Diagnostic Techniques (ASDTs) and ANZSDPs. Ongoing maintenance
arrangements of superseded and archived documents is subject to the relevant information
management policies and procedures of the department.
4.3.5 The Department of Agriculture and Water Resources publishes the AHC-approved ANZSDP on its
website under a Creative Commons Licence and retains the respective consent letter signed by the
ANZSDP author for record purpose.
 
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/animal/health/laboratories/procedures/anzsdp-reviews/editorial-process