We take an active approach to sharing information with the public.
The Information Publication Scheme (IPS) details the types of information Australian Government agencies must actively share. This is a part of the Freedom of Information Act 1982 (FOI Act).
As an Australian Government agency, we must meet these requirements.
Agency plan
The FOI Act provides that an agency must prepare an IPS agency plan.
Our approach
We foster a culture of appropriate information sharing.
We are committed to:
- publishing information about our agency, including anything required under s8(2) of the FOI Act
- maintaining this website to keep information current and accessible to the public.
Explore the links available on this page for more detail.
Who we are
What we do
- What we do
- Corporate plan
- Our responsibilities and legislation
You can access legislation through the Federal Register of Legislation website.
Public consultations
Freedom of Information
You can access documents previously released under FOI requests through the FOI disclosure log or make a new request.
Reports and responses to Parliament
Operational information
Operational information is information we hold to assist us to perform or exercise our functions or powers in making decisions or recommendations affecting members of the public. This includes our rules, guidelines and practices relating to those decisions and recommendations.
Our operational information is published throughout this website as well as our linked portfolio websites and can be accessed by using the search function on our websites.
Senate order lists
- Agency appointments
 The IPS requires us to publish details of department officer appointments made under Acts (other than APS employees appointed under the Public Service Act 1999). Statutory office holders working in the department include:
  - Inspector-General of Biosecurity - Biosecurity Act 2015.
  - Inspector-General of Live Animal Exports – Australian Meat and Livestock Industry Act 1997 and Export Control Act 2020.
- Current grants and tenders
- Indexed list of files
- Departmental contracts over $100,000
Public data
Other reporting
We also report on other activities and expenditure.
Contact us
Questions about our approach
Comments about different issues managed by the department can be made to the contact officer identified on each department web page and at the Contact us page.
Information Publication Scheme
Members of the public can direct comments regarding the department's IPS to:
FOI Contact Officer 
Legal Division 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
GPO BOX 858 CANBERRA ACT 2601
Email: foi@aff.gov.au.
Find out more about making an FOI request.