Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at

Processing Facilities and Establishments

AWTG 07-22 noted an update from Queensland that the scientific literature review commissioned by

AWTG to inform the development of the new standards and guidelines is in its final stages, with peer

review in progress. The review will be made publicly available when finalised. AWTG 07-21 also noted

that a Stakeholder Advisory Group (SAG) has been established. The Terms of Reference for the SAG will

be available online shortly. The appointment of an independent facilitator for SAG meetings is

progressing. The SAG will commence formal virtual meetings in early 2022.

Suitability of horses under existing Australian Animal

Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land Transport of

Livestock

On 6 August 2021, AWTG 05-21 endorsed proposals to revise the horse-specific parts of the Australian

Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for the Land Transport of Livestock. The proposals consider

stakeholder feedback gathered by AWTG in April-May 2021. AWTG 07-21 noted an update from

Queensland that preparation for a Consultation Regulation Impact Statement and draft amended

Standards and Guidelines (Chapter B8 – Specific requirements for the land transport of horses) is in

progress. The consultation will be published on the Office of Best Practice Regulation website

(obpr.pmc.gov.au). Key stakeholders will be notified by AWTG when consultation is open (expected

December 2021) and will be encouraged to share the opportunity with their members and networks.

Virtual Fencing Technology

The Commonwealth presented a scoping paper seeking agreement on options and timelines to progress

jurisdiction collaboration on regulatory issues related to virtual fencing technology. The paper:

identified potential options for regulatory harmonisation of virtual fencing technology; proposed the

Commonwealth undertake a scientific literature review; and proposed the establishment of a

stakeholder reference group. AWTG members agreed that a smaller sub-group consisting of

representatives from the Commonwealth, NSW, WA, QLD and VIC would convene to progress the

proposals discussed in the paper. An update will be provided to AGSOC.

Further Information

Contact the secretariat: awtg@aff.gov.au

GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/awtg/communique-november-2021