Options for the Development of National Standards and

Guidelines for Animal Welfare

AWTG 24-06 noted an update from the secretariat that AWTG feedback will be incorporated into the

standards development framework and process map. AWTG agreed that the documents will be

progressed to AGSOC for consideration in early 2025.

Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at

Processing Facilities and Establishments

AWTG 24-06 noted an update from Queensland that AWTG feedback on the third draft of the

Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at Processing Facilities and

Establishments is being collated. Issues raised by AWTG members will require further discussions

which may delay the release of a revised draft of the standards and guidelines for public consultation

proposed in early 2025.

Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for

Land Transport of Livestock - horses

AWTG 24-06 noted an update from Queensland that ministers are working towards national

endorsement of amendments to the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land

Transport of Livestock to improve the welfare of horses.

Virtual Fencing Technology

AWTG 24-06 noted an update from the Commonwealth that the subgroup had met with suppliers and

end users of virtual fencing technology who demonstrated use of the technology and shared their

experiences. The first draft of the Australian Animal Welfare Guide for Virtual Fencing has been

completed and is under review by the subgroup.

Implementation of the Australian Animal Welfare

Standards and Guidelines for Poultry into state and

territory legislation

AWTG 24-06 noted an update from Victoria on the discussions of the poultry implementation

subgroup.

Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS)

AWTG 24-06 noted that development of the National Statement on Animal Welfare was complete, and

ministers are finalising their endorsement. The national statement will underpin the renewal of the

Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) and cement a commitment to joint leadership between

Commonwealth, state and territory governments. The national statement will set a vision for the AAWS

and its key priority areas.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/awtg/communique-november-2024