The Traceability Grants Program is a part of the Modernising Agricultural Trade, Protecting Australia’s

Clean, Green Brand initiative. The program supports collaborative agricultural traceability projects that

assist implementation activities under the National Agricultural Traceability Strategy 2023 to 2033 (the

strategy).

The Traceability Grants Program has the following objectives:

Support industry projects that will enhance our agricultural supply chain traceability systems.

This includes developing and trialling technologies that digitise information flow.

Provide an advantage for our exporters in overseas markets that will assist them to maintain their

competitive edge.

Increase opportunities to export Australian commodities.

The intended outcomes of the Traceability Grants Program are:

Broad enhancement of the traceability systems that support our agricultural export supply

chains, through projects with measurable outcomes.

Exporters are able to use the enhancement of our traceability systems to assist in maintaining

their competitive edge in export markets.

More farmers, producers and processors consider exporting, especially those involved in

exporting high risk commodities.

Traceability system enhancements are cost effective because they use existing systems and

technologies where possible.

About Round 4

Round 4 will support collaborative traceability projects to assist implementation activities under the

strategy. Building on the outcomes of earlier rounds, the Traceability Grants Program - Round 4 will

award grants totalling $4 million ($2 million in 2025-26 and $2 million in 2026-27) and grant activities

funded by those grants are expected to be completed by 30 June 2028.

The strategy has 8 strategic objectives and identifies 11 priority areas for action. Round 4 will fund

projects that meet the program objectives and focus on the priority areas for action of the strategy that

require further investment:

Priority areas for action 2: Align processes and technologies to capture and use data for multiple

purposes, such as regulators and feedback to farmers.

Priority areas for action 5: Support industry to implement interoperable systems.

Priority areas for action 8: Implement a communication and education campaign to strengthen

awareness of agricultural traceability.

The program opened for applications on 13 January 2026, and applications must be received by

11:00pm AEDT 18 February 2026.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Who can apply

Companies, incorporated associations, partnerships, joint (consortia) applications with a lead

organisation, not-for-profit organisations, publicly-funded research organisations and registered

Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Corporations are eligible to apply for grants under the

Traceability Grants Program – Round 4.

How to apply

To apply for a grant from the Traceability Grants Program – Round 4 you need to complete the

Traceability Grants Program – Round 4 Grant Application Form (available from the GrantConnect

website) and submit it via email to the department by 11:00pm AEDT on 18 February 2026 to be

eligible for consideration.

Grant applications need to:

address the program objectives

target at least one of the 3 priority areas for action referred to in section 2.1 of the Grant

Opportunity Guidelines, and

clearly and explicitly state how your project aligns to the objective and the priority areas for

action within the application form and associated templates.

Eligible applications will then be assessed by the Selection Advisory Panel (comprised of employees of

Commonwealth officers with relevant specialist expertise) against defined assessment criteria. For more

information on the application and assessment process please refer to the Traceability Grants Program

– Round 4 Grant Opportunity Guidelines.

The guidelines, application form and other documents to apply for a grant from the Traceability Grants

Program – Round 4 are available from the GrantConnect website.

More information

For more information about the Traceability Grants Program – Round 4 please email: 

traceability.project@aff.gov.au.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/market-access-trade/national-traceability/grantsprogram/round-4

• 

• 

•