Animal Health Committee (AHC) provides veterinary leadership and technical expertise for Australia’s
animal health systems. AHC includes the Australian, state and territory Chief Veterinary Officers
(CVOs), and the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP); with Animal Health Australia,
Wildlife Health Australia and New Zealand as observers. The committee reports to the National
Biosecurity Committee. This communiqué covers the key items discussed at meeting 43 held 18 20
AHC met for its first face-to-face (F2F) meeting of 2023 in Launceston, Tasmania. Progression of
preparedness for emergency animal diseases (EADs) continued to be a key topic of discussion.
AHC Chair, Michelle Rodan, WA CVO, welcomed new AHC member Dr Rob Williams, acting NT CVO
and welcomed back Dr Wendy Townsend, ACT CVO, who has returned following a period of leave. AHC
Chair acknowledged the significant contribution of previous NT representative Dr Sue Fitzpatrick who
departed AHC effective April 23. The Chair also acknowledged the significant contributions of Dr Sarah
Britton, NSW CVO, who will be leaving NSW DPI on 30 June and Professor Trevor Drew, Director
ACDP, who will be retiring later in the year. Dr Debbie Eagles will join AHC as the ACDP representative
AHC received an update on the progress of key strategic plans including Animalplan, the National
Animal Health Diagnostic Business Plan (NAHDBP), the National Animal Health Surveillance Business
AHC continued discussions on activities to support preparedness for EADs such as lumpy skin disease
(LSD), foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) and highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI).
AUSBIOAGPLAN is a critical resource to enhance capacity and to activate emergency disaster relief

outside of the Emergency Animal Disease Response Agreement (EADRA), for example in cases where
The Commonwealth provided updates on the progress of actions resulting from the recommendations
of the Joint Interagency Taskforce on Exotic Animal Disease Preparedness, and within the National
LSD Action Plan, particularly those that encompass activities being undertaken by AHC.
Queensland briefed AHC on the outcomes of Exercise PREPARE, a simulated EAD response exercise to
a HPAI scenario. The poultry industry (layer and broiler) and government exercised the scenario in
November 2022 in Queensland. The exercise objectives focussed on information gaps in destruction,
disposal and decontamination operations for very large enterprises across multiple housing systems.
To help inform the current review of the EADRA, AHC discussed key issues being considered by the
EADRA review working group. Key areas included input into the national response framework for
diseases with significant public heath implications, valuation and compensation, categorisation process
and criteria. AHC views the efficient operation of the EADRA as a critical component of Australia’s
biosecurity system and supports the opportunity for all EADRA signatories to review how it could be
enhanced to ensure Australia is best prepared to respond in the event of an EAD outbreak.
AHC discussed progress on the national animal health policy for official testing. This policy will ensure
Australia has consistent standards and framework to ensure assurance in the competence, reliability
and repeatability of results of laboratories performing testing for official testing including testing for
AHC also reviewed the process for reporting results of EAD exclusion testing performed by Laboratories
AHC, AHA IF and the Tasmanian Industry members held a joint session to discuss industry and
Representatives working in the Tasmanian aquatic sector presented on emerging issues and
opportunities for innovation in Australian aquaculture and on the translocation requirements for

IF raised opportunities for enhanced engagement with AHC members at Animal Health Australia
AHC has established several new task (time-limited) and advisory (ongoing) groups, including several
that will report to the recently established Sub-Committee on Emergency Animal Disease (SCEAD).
The National Epidemiology and Surveillance Advisory Group will provide advice to AHC on key
National Framework for Engagement of Private Veterinary Practitioners Task group has been
established to review the process and award rates for engaging veterinarians in an emergency animal
A number of new and already established groups have been established under SCEAD to progress some
of the recommendations from the LSD action plan and the Joint interagency EAD task force.
The next AHC face-to-face meeting will be held in Canberra on 5-7 September 2023.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/committees/communique/apr-2023