Publication details

Animal Health Committee (AHC) provides veterinary leadership and technical expertise for Australia’s

animal health systems. AHC includes the Australian, state and territory chief veterinary officers (CVOs),

and the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness; with Animal Health Australia and Wildlife Health

Australia as observers. The committee reports to the National Biosecurity Committee. This

communiqué covers key outcomes of its face-to-face meeting held in Darwin on 17-19 March 2026.

AHC strategic planning

AHC held a strategic planning workshop focused on building a shared vision for a future animal health

system and identifying AHC’s strategic risks and priorities. The workshop highlighted the importance of

national collaboration, system interoperability, stakeholder partnerships and adaptability in AHC’s

future activities. AHC agreed to incorporate input from this workshop into the 2026 workplan and

future engagement with the National Biosecurity Committee. AHC also agreed to build on the outcomes

of this workshop through further strategic foresight discussions in the coming months.

High pathogenicity avian influenza (HPAI) preparedness

HPAI Infected Premises (IP) resolution policy

AHC agreed to update IP resolution policy settings for HPAI drawing on insights from recent Australian

and international experiences with HPAI outbreak responses. The revised policy settings will help

poultry farms return to business more rapidly after an outbreak, while maintaining strong biosecurity

standards. AHC agreed to notify relevant industry parties to inform them of the outcome of this work.

H5 HPAI response strategy for non-avian livestock

AHC received an update from the Subcommittee for Emergency Animal Diseases on the development of

a national response strategy for the management of H5 HPAI in non-avian livestock. A consultation

draft national response strategy will be provided to relevant industry stakeholders in the coming

months.

National guidelines for private veterinarians on the management of H5 HPAI in domestic (non-

livestock) animals and wildlife AHC discussed progress on the development of national guidelines for

private veterinarians on the management of H5 HPAI in pets and wildlife presenting to veterinary

clinics. AHC noted the guidelines have been developed in consultation with key stakeholders including

the Australian Veterinary Association and is close to finalisation.

Avian Influenza (AI) vaccination policy in poultry

AHC were provided with an update on the national AI vaccination policy review for poultry. AHC

members agreed to finalise work on a policy on the emergency use of vaccination ahead of the

development of a policy on systematic (preventative) vaccination. This will enable outcomes of the

review to be realised iteratively while work continues on developing a policy for systematic vaccination

informed by a better understanding of delivery requirements.

Lumpy skin disease (LSD) preparedness

AHC agreed to establish a government-industry steering committee and a technical writing group to

progress the development of a national LSD vaccination policy. AHC also discussed continued progress

on actions under the National LSD Action Plan, including updates to the national LSD surveillance

strategy.

Zoning operationalisation

AHC agreed to establish a task group to progress further scoping work to strengthen national

preparedness for zoning, recognising its importance in maintaining livestock movements and market

access during EAD responses. Victoria agreed to lead the task group.

Stakeholder session

AHC was joined by 20 local and national stakeholders for its open stakeholder session. Key topics

discussed included LSD threats and preparedness, activities of the AHC antimicrobial resistance task

group, the roles of industry and private veterinarians during EAD responses and HPAI preparedness.

AHC thanks stakeholders for attending and sharing their knowledge and experience.

Acknowledgements

meeting. AHC also extends its thanks to PRI Farming for the opportunity to visit Marpu Crocodile Farm

and see first-hand how animal health and biosecurity are maintained in this unique industry.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/committees/communique/mar-2026