Latest releases
This report is a first step towards understanding productivity in the plantation forestry sector and uses a partial productivity measure of Mean Annual Increment (MAI) which is the average annual volume growth per hectare of a plantation over its entire age
Published: December 2025
During periods of heightened construction activity and demand for structural sawnwood, domestic production is supplemented by supply from overseas. The ability of Australian consumers to use imports to balance demand swings and insulate against price effects is expected to continue.
Published: November 2025
This biannual report presents 2024-25 data for key domestic indicators of forestry sector activity such as new housing commencements and the trade of wood products. This report also presents 2023-24 data (first published in June 2025) for the value and volume of logs harvested and changes in Australia’s commercial plantation estate.
The wood volumes analysis was announced as a 2022 election commitment during a period of uncertainty in the forest and wood products sector. Its purpose is to give confidence that Australians have sufficient access to forest and wood products for the construction sector, from a range of sources.
Published: March 2025
This issue includes 2021–22 data for key domestic indicators of forestry sector activity such as the value and volume of logs harvested and changes in Australia’s commercial plantation estate.
This report also presents 2021–22 data (first published in November 2022) on forest sector employment, data on new housing commencements and the trade of wood products.
Published: June 2023
This report outlines the creation, structure and utilisation of the Forest Resource Use Model.
Published: 6 October 2022
This report presents data collected from surveys of public and private plantation growers and managers on the size and changes to the commercial plantation estate.
Published 10 August 2022
This biannual report presents 2020-21 data for key domestic indicators of forestry sector activity such as new housing commencements and the trade of wood products.
Published: 28 June 2022
This report presents an outlook on the availability of and demand for raw wood fibres by geographic region and country. The analysis looks into potential changes in global trade flows, and regional and country level trade balances that could affect Australia’s forestry sector.
Published: 23 November 2021
In this report, plantation areas and forecast log availability are presented nationally and by National Plantation Inventory (NPI) regions for softwood and hardwood plantation types. This is based on data collected from private growers and grower representatives and public state and territory agencies. This data is published every 5 years and supports strategic forest industry planning and decision–making.
Published: 25 October 2021
Statistical report series
- The Australian forest and wood products statistics report series presents detailed analysis of the economic performance of key indicators of domestic forestry sector activity, including sales and service income and industry value added. This series also presents socio-economic indicators and trends.
- The Australian plantation statistics report series supports strategic forest industry planning and decision-making by presenting information on total plantation area, new planting and ownership. It is prepared under the auspices of the National Plantation Inventory.
- The Australia's plantation log supply report series presents forecasts of sawlog and pulplog volumes available from softwood and hardwood plantations. Comprehensive plantation log availability forecast reports are published every five years and Australia's plantation log supply 2015-2059 is the fifth log supply report.
In addition to regular publications, ABARES Forest Economics section publishes economic research on specific issues within the Australian forest industry sector.