the development of the international standards of the World Organisation for Animal Health
The World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) is the global authority on animal health. Australia
is a strong contributor to WOAH processes. This helps protect our animal health status and trade in
animals and animal products. The Australian Chief Veterinary Officer (ACVO) is Australia’s Delegate to
WOAH’s Aquatic Animal Health Standards Commission ensures that the Aquatic Animal Health Code
(Aquatic Code) and the Manual of Diagnostic Tests for Aquatic Animals (Aquatic Manual) reflect
Australia reports on our aquatic animal disease status to the WOAH. Australia’s reporting obligations to
International reporting data to the WOAH can be found on the WOAH’s World Animal Health
Information System (WAHIS). The latest WAHIS reports can be viewed via the ‘Reports’ tab.
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in the Asia-Pacific (NACA) is an intergovernmental organisation.
It promotes rural development through sustainable aquaculture and aquatic resources management

We partner with NACA to support a range of activities that aim to improve the management of aquatic
animal health in the region. For information on NACA’s Aquatic Animal Health Program see the Health
Australia is a member of the NACA Asia Regional Advisory Group on Aquatic Animal Health. The group
meets annually to discuss regional disease issues, including emerging disease threats.
Australia reports quarterly to NACA and WOAH Regional Representation for Asia and the Pacific
(RRAP) on our aquatic animal disease status. This report is for specific diseases of concern to the Asia-
Pacific region. The NACA Asia Regional Advisory Group on Aquatic Animal Health determines the
The QAAD report is available to view and download on the NACA website and WOAH (Regional
We work with the CSIRO Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness, to carry out laboratory
Vietnam is a prominent seafood producer and one of Australia’s major trading partners. We work
closely with the Department of Animal Health in Vietnam, have successfully concluded a technical
capacity building project to improve on-farm biosecurity practices of small-scale aquaculture farms in
The project recognises Vietnam’s increasing market influence and Australia’s leadership in the

The on-farm aquaculture biosecurity project in Vietnam – final report summary (PDF 350 KB) The on-
farm aquaculture biosecurity project in Vietnam – final report summary (DOCX 710 KB)
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/aquatic/international_activities