July 2016 
Australian Dairy Industry 
Represented by 
Australian Dairy Farmers Limited and 
Dairy Australia 
Response to 
Intergovernmental Agreement on 
Biosecurity Review 
Contacts

Page 2 of 16 
 
Australian Dairy Industry Submission 
IGAB Review 
1. The Australian Dairy Industry 
Australian Dairy Farmers (ADF) is the national advocacy body representing dairy 
farmers across the six dairying states, on issues of national and international 
importance.  Our mission is to improve the profitability and sustainability of dairy 
farmers in Australia. 
Dairy Australia is the national services body for dairy farmers and the industry.  Our 
role is to help farmers adapt to a changing operating environment, and achieve a 
profitable, sustainable dairy industry.  We act as the ‘investment arm’ of the industry, 
investing in projects that can’t be done efficiently by individual farmers or companies. 
 
2. Industry significance 
Australian dairy is a $13 billion farm, manufacturing and export industry. With a 
farmgate value alone of $4 billion, the Australian dairy industry enriches regional 
Australian communities. 
Over 6,000 Australian dairy farmers produce around 9.7 billion litres of milk a year.  
The Australian dairy industry directly employs nearly 40,000 Australians on farms 
and in factories, while more than 100,000 Australians are indirectly employed in 
related service industries. 
Dairy is also one of Australia’s leading rural industries in terms of adding value 
through downstream processing.  Much of this processing occurs close to farming 
areas, thereby generating economic activity in country regions.  
Approximately 40% of dairy production is exported contributing significantly to 
regional and the national economy. 
3. Scope of this submission 
Australia’s national biosecurity system aims to minimise the impact of pest and 
disease incursions on the nation’s economy, environment and community, while 
protecting our international reputation for high quality and safe produce.  (IGAB 
Review Discussion Paper - 2016) 
The scope of the national biosecurity system is very broad encompassing a large 
number of stakeholders.  The principle focus of this submission is to bring forward 
the needs and views of the dairy industry.  However, there are many complex 
challenges in achieving a coordinated agreed approach, and comments will be 
directed to this broader need when appropriate.

Page 3 of 16 
 
4. Biosecurity and the dairy industry – Importance and Investment 
For the dairy industry, biosecurity activity extends from the farm across the supply 
chain and underpins trade access for dairy products on domestic and export 
markets.  An effective biosecurity system is fundamental to all facets of Australia’s 
dairy industry covering: 
 On-farm – animal and product biosecurity measures, including veterinary 
services 
 Transportation – livestock and milk 
 Milk processing 
 Food safety and on-farm QA – milk and meat products 
 Trade and market access – product quality, disease freedom, animal health 
and welfare 
 Dairy Biosecurity programs and activities 
o Dairy Australia 
o Animal Health Australia 
 
5. Addressing the questions in the Review Panel Discussion Paper 
 
The IGAB  
 
1) Is the IGAB a suitable mechanism to underpin Australia’s national 
biosecurity system in the future (10 or 20 years from now)? Are the 
consolidated priority areas still appropriate? 
Whilst governments have a vital role in Australia’s national biosecurity system, the 
overall biosecurity system is much broader than governments and this needs to be 
more adequately accommodated as part of the underpinning mechanisms.  It is 
important to have an agreement between governments that enables a national 
coordinated government approach, but if there is to be broader “shared 
responsibility,” then arrangements and mechanisms need to reflect this partnership. 
The priority areas within IGAB in many cases remain work in progress, however they 
have provided a focus for dedicated actions in areas that has been beneficial (e.g. in 
gaining agreement on a Surveillance Business Plan for the Animal industries and 
continued improvement for preparedness for emergency animal disease response).  
The priority areas remain appropriate, and being Schedules to the agreement, there 
should be scope for flexibility if new priorities are identified.

Page 4 of 16 
 
 
2) What are your views on the construct, effectiveness, and transparency of 
the IGAB? Please provide examples. 
The existing structure provides a high level framework on which to build. It has 
operated almost exclusively for and between governments with limited engagement 
of other stakeholders.  See comment 3 below. 
 
3) What practical improvements to the IGAB and/or its structure would 
provide for an increased, but accountable, role for industry and the broader 
community?  
The expression “shared responsibility” implies that there is shared ownership, and 
involvement, yet that is currently not the case, except for limited involvement of AHA 
(and PHA). 
Agreement and cooperation would be enhanced by enabling industry and other 
biosecurity stakeholder’s that have a significant investment in biosecurity, to become 
engaged and signatories to a broader agreement.  This would assist in gaining a 
broader commitment and contribution to the shared responsibility.  For example, the 
existing commitment by industry to participating in (and funding) AHA, would be an 
appropriate starting point for the animal industries, as there is a familiarity with the 
commitments arising from EADRA, and accountability and governance mechanisms 
are already in place. 
Practical improvements that would be required to the IGAB would include: 
 Recognising the involvement of industry as an integral partner of the 
biosecurity framework throughout the document 
 Redrafting schedules to broaden outcomes and priority reform areas.  As an 
example there has been agreement by Animal Health Committee and AHA 
Industry Forum on a Surveillance Business Plan.  Similar commitments could 
be included in the schedules on: 
o addressing industry needs for input and access to disease information,

Page 5 of 16 
 
o developing a broader management framework and strategy for 
established pests and diseases, 
o better utilising industry networks within the engagement and 
communication framework 
o involvement of industry RDC’s as a component of implementing the 
Biosecurity agreement 
 
Agreeing to risks, priorities and objectives  
 
4) Is the goal, and are the objectives, of Australia’s national biosecurity 
system still appropriate to address current and future biosecurity 
challenges? 
The goal and objectives are appropriate, however, in keeping with the suggestions 
put forward in comment 3, the following is suggested: 
Clause 3.2 be amended by adding the underlined words to read - The objectives of the 
national biosecurity system are to provide arrangements, structures and frameworks 
involving both governments and industry (and additional stakeholder investors in biosecurity 
if appropriate) that:       etc., 
 
5) In order of importance, what do you see as the most significant current and 
future biosecurity risks and priorities for Australia and why? Are Australia’s 
biosecurity objectives appropriately tailored to meet these risk and 
priorities? 
People movement – both visitors and immigration, and consequential risks posed 
from people returning from overseas visits with high risk products from low disease 
status countries.  There is also the risk of zoonotic pathogens being brought into 
Australia by humans that may subsequently be transmitted to animals, e.g. Swine 
Flu. 
Complacency – is a risk at all levels, in government, industry and the general 
community as Australia has a natural advantage from its isolation, relative disease 
freedom, sound import and quarantine arrangements that have served us well.  As a 
shared responsibility, our biosecurity remains vital and adoption of co-regulatory

Page 6 of 16 
 
arrangements whilst supported, must be subject to audit and government verification 
of processes 
Trade – brings risks and it is important to get the right balance between biosecurity 
and the ability to trade through objective and scientific risk assessment. Increased 
food imports that are processed or sourced from countries with poorer disease status 
requires more stringent attention. 
Feral animals and non-commercial enterprises – are subject to limited scrutiny and 
controls. They present a potential risk for amplification and spread of introduced 
pests and diseases before they are recognised and managed.  
Terrorism – whilst this is often associated with high profile incidents to generate 
maximum publicity, bioterrorism exists as a potential longer term and economically 
damaging risk. 
 
6) Are the components and functions of Australia’s national biosecurity 
system consistently understood by all stakeholders? If not, what could be 
done to improve this? 
No.  Improving stakeholder and community awareness of the importance of 
biosecurity must remain an ongoing priority to protect the viability of agricultural 
industries and their contribution to the Australian economy.  Significant dairy industry 
resources are directed to promoting the importance of biosecurity within the dairy 
industry and more broadly through AHA Programs and Projects. Having an agreed 
broad biosecurity agreement and strategy (see 8 below) would assist in ensuring an 
agreed consistent framework.  
Targeting of awareness of biosecurity must be risk based, with a focus on those 
most likely to create risk. 
 
7) What benefits (or impediments) are there in realising a more integrated 
national approach to biosecurity, agreed to by key partners in Australia’s 
national biosecurity system? 
There would be major benefits in:

Page 7 of 16 
 
 Incorporating greater involvement of industry in strategy development 
 Gaining an agreed strategy and a more integrated and coordinated delivery 
program and activities 
 Avoiding duplication 
 Assisting in communication and awareness activities 
 Utilising industry assurance mechanisms to support biosecurity assessment 
measures 
Impediments 
 The number of stakeholders across various industries and other areas of 
responsibility 
 The range of biosecurity measures and components that need to be included 
 The trend in governments to reduce service delivery and cut costs.  There is 
an ongoing responsibility for governments to provide regulatory backing and 
support for the “rules” and to have the balance right on implementation and 
enforcement.  Stakeholders who are not engaged, constitute a potential risk. 
 
8) What form would this best take (for example, a national statement of intent 
or national strategy)? What are the key elements that must be included? 
What specific roles do you see industry and the broader community playing 
in such an initiative?  
High level 
 A national biosecurity stakeholder’s agreement adopting a partnership 
approach with industry 
 A National Biosecurity Strategy 
Key elements (based on the IGAB) 
o Governance and Administration arrangements 
o National Biosecurity Information Framework 
o National Surveillance and Diagnostic Framework 
o National Framework for Established Pests and Diseases 
o National Communication Strategy and Engagement Framework

Page 8 of 16 
 
o National Emergency Preparedness and Response Arrangements 
o National Biosecurity Research, Development and Extension 
Framework 
Industry bodies have a major role in providing policy input on behalf of their 
constituencies, and providing input, comment and feedback on the strategy, and 
biosecurity frameworks.  Industry also have a role in implementation of the agreed 
strategies through involvement in communication, training and awareness activities.  
Linkages with RDC’s will also facilitate a more coordinated national approach across 
industry sectors and governments. 
An important requirement is to know and understand who the biosecurity 
stakeholders are and the level of risk associated with their activities. 
 
Embedding shared responsibility 
 
9) Are the roles and responsibilities of stakeholders in Australia’s national 
biosecurity system clearly and consistently understood? How might this be 
improved? 
No, and having broader involvement of investors in biosecurity and being party to the 
components agreed is essential in clarifying this, as it has done within AHA.  
Effective biosecurity arrangements protect the national and regional economies from 
catastrophic impairment and support the viability of sustainable and productive 
agricultural industries. 
 
10) What practical actions do you think governments and industry 
organisations can undertake to strengthen the involvement of industry and 
community stakeholders in Australia’s national biosecurity system? Would 
increased involvement in decision making on and implementation of 
biosecurity activities help the adoption of shared responsibility?  
Increased involvement of industry organisations in decision making for the 
biosecurity framework would greatly improve the outcomes of the IGAB.

Page 9 of 16 
 
There are already existing partnership between industry and government through 
AHA (and PHA) and this demonstrates the benefits of a more integrated 
industry/government approach in a number of biosecurity activities.  The dairy 
industry value this partnership and have gained a real sense of ownership in the 
agreed activities.  The interaction between industry and governments at the AHA 
Members Forum, has led to the emergence of other interactions that improve 
understanding and communication on biosecurity activities.  These include the 
regular dialogue between AHA Industry Forum and the Animal Health Committee 
and the engagement between AHA Industry Forum, CSIRO AAHL and DAWR. 
AHA and PHA Industry Members initiated a Joint Industry Biosecurity Forum in 2014, 
which included a combined session with members of the National Biosecurity 
Committee (NBC) that received encouraging feedback.  Senior level staff changes in 
the Department prevented a similar forum with NBC being conducted in 2015. There 
was however a valuable interaction at the 2015 Joint AHA/PHA Industry Forum with 
senior DAWR staff on improving communications, improving workability of industry 
levy arrangements and emergency response arrangements on weed incursions.   
The 2015 Joint AHA/PHA Industry Forum supported the suggestion of holding an on-
going biosecurity forum with NBC, and the possibility of additional engagement with 
a smaller industry group at the time of NBC meetings if the need for dialogue arises. 
The EADRA is another important example of the effectiveness of partnerships 
between industry and government.  The CCEAD and NMG, enable joint input to EAD 
response plans and overall decision making. 
 
Funding biosecurity  
 
11) Are the IGAB investment principles still workable? Do they still meet the 
needs of Australia’s national biosecurity system now and in the future? 
The over-arching principle that biosecurity investment is allocated according to a 
cost-effective, science-based and risk-management approach, prioritising the 
allocation of resources to the areas of greatest return is supported.  Specific areas 
that require greater recognition of the partnership include:

Page 10 of 16 
 
 The contribution and benefits of effective biosecurity arrangements to the 
national and regional economies through the sustainability of Australian 
agricultural industries. 
 Consistent and complementary regulatory and operational systems to avoid 
unnecessary duplication and maximise effectiveness and efficiency.  Industry 
based mechanisms such as Quality Assurance arrangements that provide 
biosecurity assurances, provide greater capacity for avoiding duplication and 
increasing data for biosecurity information systems, particularly where there 
are commercial undertakings.  Better integration of government and approved 
industry measures based on sound risk management principles provide an 
opportunity for greater co-regulation 
 The National biosecurity information and intelligence system – this network 
needs to more effectively capture information from industry to increase the 
credibility of claims of disease freedom.  Wider industry needs for data need 
to also be assessed and accommodated within data sharing mechanisms 
 Training that targets industry needs, and integration with existing capabilities 
and delivery 
 Ongoing awareness and management of biosecurity risks in trading partners 
and near neighbours 
 Integration of industry communication networks as part of the biosecurity 
engagement and communication framework 
 
12) Are governments and industry investing appropriately in the right areas? 
Are there areas where key funders should be redirecting investment? Can 
investment in biosecurity activities be better targeted? If so, how? Please 
provide examples. 
This is covered by comments made on question 11. 
 
13) How do we ensure investments and investment frameworks align with 
priorities, while being flexible enough to address changing risks and 
priorities?

Page 11 of 16 
 
Investment priorities will be identified in the National Biosecurity Stakeholder’s 
agreement, and delivery networks within the National Biosecurity Strategy, and in the 
elements of the framework set out in response to question 8.   
Mechanisms to ensure planning and risk management needs are identified were 
outlined in response to question 10, such as an annual biosecurity industry forum 
and engagement with representatives from AHA and PHA Industry Forum.  Greater 
involvement of representatives of industry organisations in decision making is 
recommended. 
It is recognised that this framework does not cover all biosecurity stakeholders, but 
any over-arching governance structure would be best focused on those bodies that 
have an investment in biosecurity delivery.  Other stakeholders however do 
constitute a potential risk and need to be engaged. 
 
14) Are current biosecurity funding arrangements still appropriate to meet the 
needs of Australia’s national biosecurity system, now and in the future? 
What might an alternative or novel funding model encompass? 
Effective funding mechanisms are currently heavily dependent on having access to: 
 Contribution of producers to biosecurity arrangements within their enterprise 
 National government revenues 
 State and territory revenues – that vary between jurisdictions 
 National Industry levies 
 State industry levies – that vary between jurisdictions 
 Cost recovery mechanisms (governments and industry e.g. QA) 
Industry levies rely on government taxation measures or a supply-chain bottle-neck, where a 
levy can be applied, and many biosecurity stakeholders fall outside the reach of levy 
mechanisms. 
The IGAB Principles propose that: 
“Relevant parties contribute to the cost of biosecurity activities: 
 
Risk creators and beneficiaries contribute to the cost of risk management 
measures in proportion to the risks created and/or benefits gained (subject to the 
efficiency of doing so); and

Page 12 of 16 
 
 
Governments contribute to the cost of risk management measures in proportion 
to the public good accruing from them.” 
The dairy industry support the principle that risk creators and beneficiaries 
contribute, but does not agree with this being a cost socialised across all industry 
through levy arrangements.  Individual risk creators and beneficiaries already benefit 
from broader biosecurity activities funded from industry levies and contributions at 
this level need to be based on the principle of cost recovery. 
The dairy industry also stress the need to recognise that effective biosecurity 
arrangements provide public good and support the national and regional economies 
by maintaining viable agricultural industries and favourable market access  
 
15) What can be done to ensure an equitable level of investment from all 
stakeholders across Australia’s national biosecurity system, including from 
risk creators and risk beneficiaries?  
This is covered by comments made on question 14. 
 
Market access  
 
16) Are market access considerations given appropriate weight in Australia’s 
national biosecurity system? What other considerations also need to be 
taken into account? 
Market access remains a critical outcome focus for Australia’s biosecurity 
arrangements, particularly given the significance of addressing non-tariff trade 
barriers, and ensuring Australia is able to demonstrate that biosecurity arrangements 
and outcomes have integrity. 
Other considerations that need to be taken into account include: 
 The environment 
 Native flora and fauna 
 Good animal management and welfare whether on-farm or elsewhere 
 Effective disease preparedness and response arrangements

Page 13 of 16 
 
 The increasing level of people movements 
 Increasing international trade, including the growing level of international on-
line shopping 
 
17) Are there ways governments could better partner with industry and/or the 
broader community to reduce costs (without increasing risk), such as 
industry certification schemes? 
This is covered by comments made on question 11. 
 
18) How can the capacity and capability of surveillance systems (including 
diagnostic systems) underpinning Australia’s national biosecurity system 
be improved?  
This has largely been covered in earlier responses, including better capturing data 
from veterinary services and industry assurance programs.  The agreement of AHA 
Industry Forum and Animal Health Committee to a National Surveillance is positive 
step towards improved cooperation. 
The conduct of regular reviews, monitoring of technological advances and an 
assessment of systems to ensure they meet current needs and address risk 
priorities, is an ongoing requirement. 
 
The role of research and innovation  
 
19) Which specific areas of Australia’s national biosecurity system could 
benefit from research and innovation in the next five, 10 and 20 years and 
why? Please provide examples. 
Surveillance mechanism – existing mechanisms that rely on regional monitoring 
programs are labour intensive and very costly, e.g. the National Arbovirus Program 
(NAMP).  Are there alternative approaches with sufficient integrity to satisfying 
importing country requirements?

Page 14 of 16 
 
Utilising web based systems for surveillance, diagnosis, awareness and training. 
Consistency in approaches and technology between jurisdictions. 
Review of the effectiveness of risk-based import biosecurity management. 
 
20) How can coordination of biosecurity-related research and innovation 
activities be improved? 
The development of the National Animal Biosecurity Research, Development and 
Extension Strategy, has provided a forum for sharing information, initiatives and 
expertise and has facilitated coordination among animal biosecurity RD&E funders, 
provider, and end-users, including governments, RDC’s, industry and Universities.  
This initiative would be enhanced by a more broadly based National Biosecurity 
Agreement and Strategy. 
 
21) How can innovation (including technology) help build a more cost-effective 
and sustainable national biosecurity system? 
Refer response to question19. 
Also, improved traceability of imported produce and clarification of responsibilities 
where transfer of authority occurs between National border quarantine and State and 
Territory regulatory control. 
 
Measuring the performance of the national biosecurity system  
 
22) What does success of Australia’s national biosecurity system look like? 
How could success be defined, and appropriately measured (that is, 
qualitatively or quantitatively)? What, if any, measures of success are in 
use? 
For the animal industries success looks like efficient and effective arrangements for 
the avoidance of incursions and the response to (suspect or real) incursions with the 
maintenance and expansion of market access, however there are many subordinate

Page 15 of 16 
 
measures that could assist in determining how the system is working.  These 
include: 
 The monitoring of high risk imports 
 The number and frequency of breaches of import requirements or of disease 
incursions 
 Costs incurred by producers and processors in disease control and prevention 
 Incident reporting by industry, government and private veterinarians 
 Numbers of diagnostic assessments carried out by regional veterinary 
laboratories and AAHL 
 
23) What would be required to ensure data collection and analysis meets the 
needs of a future national biosecurity system? Who are the key data and 
expert knowledge holders in the national biosecurity system? 
Efficient data collection processes from as many data holders as possible 
Key data holders include: 
 Quarantine authorities 
 ABS 
 CSIRO – AAHL 
 Regional government laboratories 
 State and Territory Primary Industry Departments 
 DAWR 
 Private veterinarian and private laboratories 
 Universities 
 Company or industry QA systems 
 Food safety authorities 
 
24) How can existing or new data sets be better used? How might data be 
collected from a wider range of sources than government?

Page 16 of 16 
 
Enabling wider access to biosecurity data, including import risk management, on 
a controlled basis would facilitate industry biosecurity decision making. 
Negative test results need to be included in as many areas as possible, including 
from the routine testing for product assurance or for disease freedom for export 
certification.