Submission	  on	  Streamlining	  Regulation	  of	  Agricultural	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  
	  
Page	  1	  of	  8	  
Submission	  on	  Streamlining	  Regulation	  of	  Agricultural	  and	  
Veterinary	  Chemicals	  
Section	  A:	  General	  information	  
Purpose	  of	  this	  form	  
For	  individuals	  and	  organisations	  to	  provide	  submissions	  on	  streamlining	  
regulation	  of	  agricultural	  and	  veterinary	  chemicals.	  
Use	  this	  form	  to	  provide	  a	  submission	  or	  to	  write	  a	  long-­‐form	  response.	  
You	  can	  also	  attach	  a	  separate	  response.	  
Before	  applying	  
See	  Agriculture	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  Legislation	  Amendment	  
(Streamlining	  Regulation)	  Bill	  2018.	  
Closing	  date	  
22	  August	  2018	  
To	  complete	  this	  form	  
Save	  the	  document	  to	  your	  computer.	  
Your	  submission	  must	  
include	  
	  a	  completed	  and	  signed	  submission	  form	  
	  where	  relevant,	  supporting	  information	  from	  organisations,	  written	  
on	  their	  official	  letterhead.	  
Post	  or	  email	  
(preferred)	  your	  
submission	  
Agvet	  Chemicals	  
Sustainable	  Agriculture,	  Fisheries&	  Forestry	  Division	  
Department	  of	  Agriculture	  and	  Water	  Resources	  
GPO	  Box	  858	  
Canberra	  ACT	  2601	  
Email	  agvetreform@agriculture.gov.au	  
Section	  B:	  Applicant	  
1 Organisation	  name	  (if	  applicable)	  Grain	  Producers	  Australia	  
	  
2 Contact	  address	  
Postal	  address	  PO	  Box	  3517	  
	  
Suburb/town/city	  MANUKA	  
	  State/territory	  ACT	  
	  Postcode	  2603

Submission	  on	  the	  Exposure	  Draft	  of	  the	  Agricultural	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  Legislation	  Amendment	  
(Streamlining	  Regulation)	  Bill	  2018	  
Page	  2	  of	  8	  
3 Contact	  person	  
Given	  name(s)	  Andrew	  
	  Family	  name	  Weidemann	  
	  
Work	  phone	  	  
	  Mobile	  phone	  0428	  504	  544	  
	  
Email	  andrew.weidemann@grainproducers.com.au	  
	  
	  
Section	  C:	  Confidentiality	  
4 Is	  all	  of	  your	  submission	  confidential?	  
No	  
	  
Yes	  
	  Clearly	  mark	  the	  submission	  ‘In	  confidence’	  
5 Is	  part	  of	  your	  submission	  confidential?	  
No	  
	  
Yes	  
	  Clearly	  mark	  the	  relevant	  section(s)	  ‘In	  confidence’	  
Section	  D:	  Publication	  of	  submissions	  on	  the	  department	  website	  
Unless	  you	  request	  otherwise,	  the	  department	  will	  publish	  your	  name,	  organisation	  and	  the	  title	  of	  
your	  submission	  on	  its	  website.	  Your	  contact	  information	  will	  not	  be	  made	  available.	  
6 Do	  you	  agree	  to	  your	  submission	  being	  made	  publicly	  available?	  
No	  
	  Go	  to	  question	  8	  
Yes	  
	  Go	  to	  question	  7	  
7 Do	  you	  agree	  to	  your	  name	  and	  state/territory	  being	  listed?	  
No	  
	  
Yes	  
	  
8 Do	  you	  agree	  to	  the	  department	  contacting	  you	  about	  your	  submission	  if	  required?	  
No	  
	  
Yes	  
	  
Section	  E:	  Submission	  type	  
9 What	  type	  of	  submission	  are	  you	  making?	  (select	  one	  box	  only)	  
	  Response	  to	  key	  topics	  in	  the	  draft	  report	  
→	  Go	  to	  section	  F	  
	  Long-­‐form	  response	  to	  the	  whole	  draft	  report	   →	  Go	  to	  section	  G	  
	  Separate	  response	  in	  an	  attached	  document	  
→	  Go	  to	  section	  H	  
Section	  F:	  Response	  to	  key	  topics	  in	  the	  consultation	  paper	  
Support	  your	  answers	  with	  references.

Submission	  on	  the	  Exposure	  Draft	  of	  the	  Agricultural	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  Legislation	  Amendment	  
(Streamlining	  Regulation)	  Bill	  2018	  
Page	  3	  of	  8	  
10 	  Comment	  on	  provisional	  registration	  of	  chemical	  products	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
11 Comment	  on	  accreditation	  of	  assessors	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
12 Comment	  on	  approval	  and	  registration	  for	  prescribed	  active	  constituents,	  products	  and	  labels	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
13 Comment	  on	  data	  protection	  incentives	  (limits	  on	  use	  of	  information)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
14 Comment	  on	  information	  to	  be	  taken	  into	  account	  in	  determining	  applications	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
15 Comment	  on	  computerised	  decision-­‐making

Submission	  on	  the	  Exposure	  Draft	  of	  the	  Agricultural	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  Legislation	  Amendment	  
(Streamlining	  Regulation)	  Bill	  2018	  
Page	  4	  of	  8	  
16 Comment	  on	  voluntary	  recalls	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
17 Comment	  on	  notification	  of	  new	  information	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
18 Comment	  on	  standards	  for	  registered	  chemical	  products	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
19 Comment	  on	  suspensions	  or	  cancellation	  of	  approvals	  and	  registrations	  for	  providing	  false	  or	  
misleading	  information	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
20 Comment	  on	  addressing	  an	  inconsistency	  in	  label	  particulars	  (supply	  with	  unapproved	  label)	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
21 Comment	  on	  variation	  of	  approval	  or	  registration	  during	  suspension

Submission	  on	  the	  Exposure	  Draft	  of	  the	  Agricultural	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  Legislation	  Amendment	  
(Streamlining	  Regulation)	  Bill	  2018	  
Page	  5	  of	  8	  
22 Comment	  on	  prescribing	  matters	  for	  the	  statutory	  criteria	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
23 Comment	  on	  removing	  the	  need	  for	  an	  annual	  operational	  plan	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
24 Comment	  on	  aligning	  the	  2014	  legislation	  review	  with	  the	  current	  review	  of	  agvet	  chemical	  
legislation	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
25 Comment	  on	  other	  minor	  and	  machinery	  changes	  to	  the	  Agvet	  Code	  and	  the	  Administration	  
Act

Submission	  on	  the	  Exposure	  Draft	  of	  the	  Agricultural	  and	  Veterinary	  Chemicals	  Legislation	  Amendment	  
(Streamlining	  Regulation)	  Bill	  2018	  
Page	  6	  of	  8	  
26 Comment	  on	  other	  amendments	  from	  the	  Agriculture	  and	  Water	  Resources	  Legislation	  
Amendment	  Bill	  2016	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
27 Comment	  on	  other	  minor	  and	  machinery	  changes	  to	  the	  Agvet	  Code	  and	  the	  Administration	  
Act	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
28 Other	  comments.	  This	  could	  include	  additional	  information	  or	  relevant	  issues	  to	  be	  raised.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
→	  Go	  to	  section	  H	  
Section	  G:	  Long-­‐form	  response	  to	  the	  consultation	  paper	  
29 Support	  your	  response	  with	  references.	  Attach	  additional	  sheets	  if	  necessary.

Grain Producers Australia  PO Box 3517 MANUKA  ACT 2603 
	  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  
	  
SUBMISSION 
GPA response to the consultation on Agricultural and Veterinary 
Chemicals Legislation Amendment exposure draft (Streamlining 
Regulation) Bill 2018 
 
 
Addressed	  to:	  
	  
Streamlining Regulation of 
Agricultural  
and Veterinary Chemicals  
AgVet Chemicals Branch 
Department of Agriculture and 
Water Resources 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 August 2018

2 
 
GPA response to the consultation on Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment exposure draft (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018 
Thank you for the opportunity for Grain Producers Australia (GPA) to provide a response to the 
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment exposure draft (Streamlining 
Regulation) Bill 20181.   
The GPA submission is made on behalf of all our members including the State Farming 
Organisations. In some cases State Farming Organisations such as WA Farmers will be putting in a 
separate submission to more clearly articulate state based concerns. In other cases such as for the 
Victorian Farmers Federation, they would like DAWR to recognise their viewpoint and concerns have 
been submitted as part of the GPA submission and they have therefore chosen not to make a 
separate submission. 
 
As detailed in the 2014 and 2017 GPA submissions regarding Agvet chemicals regulatory reform, the 
outcomes for community and industry that need to be achieved through policy and legislative reform 
include; 
• 
Increased National and foreign investment in Australia 
• 
Increased agricultural profitability and sustainability 
• 
Increased delivery of a diverse range of foods to a multicultural community 
• 
Increase productivity and scale of industries contributing to GDP and balance of trade 
• 
Improving safety to community, environment and trade. 
Potential options for addressing increased investment in Australia have been identified which include; 
• 
Improved prioritisation 
• 
New incentives for investment 
• 
Co-investment partnerships 
• 
Increased clarity on benefits and return on investment  
• 
Regulation co-equivalence opportunity 
• 
Clarity of roles for commercial companies, RDCs and regulators 
• 
Regulation reforms. 
The proposed regulatory reforms detailed in the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment exposure draft (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018 only address a small number of the 
issues identified, or in some cases created, through previous rounds of legislative reforms.  There is 
clearly a need for further legislative reform to deliver technology access outcomes for Australian 
agriculture including grain growers.   
There is an urgent need for the chemical industry to embrace digital agriculture and automation 
technologies and the legislation must embrace these 21st century technologies and encourage the 
consideration of these systems by the APVMA. There is also an urgent need for reforms to enable 
electronic labels and for these changes to be reflected in state control of use legislation.  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1 http://www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/ag-vet-chemicals/better-regulation-of-ag-vet-chemicals/streamlining/public-
consultation

3 
 
Executive Summary 
GPA provides the following overview of our comments on the exposure draft. Further clarification of 
the rationale behind these positions is contained within the body of the submission. 
GPA partly supports the proposed approach on reforms for provisional registration of 
chemical products, however this should be extended to chemical residues. GPA in previous 
submissions has proposed a provisional registration program of chemical products.  GPA has 
proposed the establishment of a provisional and/or conditional registration system with fee payment 
deferral options based on agro-ecological co-equivalence and same use in crops/animals overseas 
GPA partly supports the proposed approach to reforms on accreditation of assessors, 
however limitations of liability need to be recognised. GPA recognises that there has been an 
APVMA pilot study using external assessors. GPA considers that there is significant opportunity for 
implementation of third party APVMA approved certifiers rather than current APVMA monopoly. 
GPA partly supports the proposed approach to reforms for prescribed approvals and 
registrations. 
Regarding Data Protection mechanisms the GPA supports the government in engaging in a 
discussion on potential incentives to support increased AgVet investment into Australia to 
provide the tools and production capacity for industry to remain internationally competitive.   
GPA does not support the proposed legislative initiative reforms as proposed. Reforms to the 
legislation do not link the proposed incentives to industry need or priorities. The proposal to limit 
extension of the protection period only if the application to vary an existing registration is made at 
least three years before the limitation or protection period for the information associated with the 
existing registration expires, will result in companies delaying decisions for support of minor crops and 
where market failure exists. 
GPA supports the proposed approach to reforms for prescribed approvals and registrations.  
Reforms that speed up the evaluation process and avoid unnecessary delays for new chemical 
approval should be implemented in legislation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GPA supports the proposed approach to reforms to modernise the Agvet Code by providing 
for the APVMA to use computerised decision-making.  There is an urgent need for the chemical 
industry to transform from current 19th century paper based systems into a 21st century smart digital 
agriculture system. 
GPA supports improving transparency about recalls of AgVet chemicals by requiring persons to 
inform the APVMA when they are undertaking certain voluntary recalls and requiring the APVMA to 
publish such recalls. 
 
 
 
 
 
GPA supports the reforms ensuring that obligations to allow holders of label approvals, and 
applicants for both label approvals and variations to approvals or registrations; as they do in 
relation to active constituent approvals and product registrations.  
 
 
 
GPA supports the reform to enable label holders to make reasonable variations, reducing the 
regulatory burden on industry and the APVMA by allowing defined variations to the constituents in 
chemical products. 
 
 
 
GPA supports the reform to address the anomaly in the AgVet Code whereby the APVMA is 
unable to suspend or cancel an approval or registration where false or misleading information 
is given.

4 
GPA supports the reforms addressing an inconsistency in label particulars.  GPA agrees with 
the Department that legislative amendment is required to clarify the nominated agent and the holder 
of approval, as opposed to the marketer of the product. 
GPA is concerned with the proposed changes to the reform on variation of approval or 
registration during suspension. GPA understands that in a number of cases there is a need for a 
more pragmatic mechanism to vary a suspended chemical product registration 
GPA does not support the proposed change in legislation relating to matters that can be 
prescribed for the statutory criteria (safety, efficacy, trade and labelling criteria). 
GPA does not support the removal of the requirement of an annual operational plan in addition 
to the corporate plan required annually under the Public Governance, Performance and 
Accountability Act 2013.  GPA believes that the publication of the annual operational plan provides 
transparency of its operational plans, which will be additionally supported by the proposed re-
establishment of the APVMA board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GPA does not support the planned alignment of review measures in AgVet chemical 
legislation. 
 
Background: Grain Producers Australia 
Grain Producers Australia (GPA) represents Australia's broadacre, grain, pulse and oilseed producers 
at the national level. Grain Producers Australia works to foster a strong, innovative, profitable, globally 
competitive and environmentally sustainable Australian grains industry. Representing 5200 farm 
businesses, it strives to represent Australian grain farmers nationally and internationally in their 
contribution to sustainable development and society. 
Working with its members – state farm organisations and farmers across the grain production area of 
Australia - GPA advocates for sound outcomes that deliver a positive commercial result. GPA is a not-
for-profit company limited by guarantee. It is governed by a board, elected by its members. 
The objectives of GPA are to: 
• 
Provide a strong, independent, national advocate for grain producers based on a rigorous and 
transparent policy development process. 
• 
Engage all sectors of the Australian grains industry to ensure operation of the most efficient and 
profitable grain supply chain. 
• 
Facilitate a strategic approach to research, development and extension intended to deliver sound 
commercial outcomes from industry research.  
 
The GPA policy council, is strategically focused on three pillars of economic development, social 
responsibility and environmental management.  
 
Our policy council includes representatives from State Farm Organisations including:  
• 
Agforce Grains 
• 
Grain Producers SA 
• 
NSW Farmers Association 
• 
Victorian Farmers’ Federation Grains Group 
• 
Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association 
• 
WA Farmers 
• 
WA Grains Group 
 
GPA manages the biosecurity program for the grains industry through Plant Health Australia and is a 
joint Representative Organisation (RO) responsible for overseeing the performance of the Grains 
Research and Development Corporation (GRDC).

5 
GPA and AgVet chemicals  
GPA has been engaged for many years in cross industry discussion in relation to increasing market 
failure of commercial investment in agricultural pesticides and veterinary medicines (AgVet) in 
Australia.  
 
Key relevant GPA responses previously submitted include: 
• 
Response to Department of Agriculture Proposed Agricultural & Veterinary Chemicals 
Legislation Amendments Consultation Paper (7 March 2014)  
• 
Response to Australian Government Senate Inquiry into the Agricultural and Veterinary 
Chemicals Legislation Amendment (Removing Re-approval and Re-registration) Bill 2014 (17 
April 2014) 
• 
Response to Australian Government Agricultural Competitiveness Issues Paper (17 April 
2014). 
• 
Grain Producers Australia response to Department of Agriculture First Principles of Cost 
recovery at the APVMA final report (24 October 2014). 
• 
GPA response to the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation 
Amendment (Operational Efficiency) Bill 2017 (19 July 2017). 
As detailed in previous submissions by GPA, it is recognised that Australia is no longer on the global 
priority list for pesticide and veterinary medicine investment in commercialisation as it was 20 years 
ago.  It is essential that unnecessary reviews and red tape does not further erode Australian AgVet 
investment and resulting productivity through reduced technology access.  It is important that APVMA 
reviews are based on science-based evidence where adverse events or new international scientific 
evidence calls for reconsideration of existing chemical actives.   
The Australian grains industry is not resourced to meet the potential significant cost of an 
unnecessary regulatory process where time bound compulsory re-registration is likely to result in 
commercial market failure for regulatory support of generic off patent chemical actives.  Australia is 
also missing out from productivity improvement through commercial investment in a large number of 
potential emerging biological, biochemical and biotechnology based AgVet technologies.   It is 
essential that Australian grain growers have access to the same pesticide technologies to remain 
internationally competitive with other overseas producers,   
While GPA is responding positively to initiatives and some of the key changes in the Agricultural and 
Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment exposure draft (Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018 the 
key deficiency of the proposed changes is that it does not address the declining commercial pesticide 
investment into Australia.  Proposed incentive programs in the legislation are likely to result in 
unintended consequences, further slowing industry access to technology.  
Consultant Dr Rohan Rainbow, is a consultant to GPA on all AgVet chemical related issues. He has 
previously facilitated discussions with most of the agricultural industry RDCs, Department of 
Agriculture and Water Resources, APVMA and key registrant groups CropLife Australia and the 
Animal Medicines Australia to identify the major factors resulting in declining investment in Australia 
which include; 
• 
Australia is a small market in a global context < 1.5% 
• 
Since the last round of AgVet reforms in 2014 and 2017, Australia is continuing to experience 
difficulties with complex AgVet regulations, timeliness and costs relative to commercial return 
on investment 
• 
Global multinational companies face a poor rate of return on commercialisation investment 
compared with major developing markets including Brazil and China.

6 
GPA response to issues as outlined in the exposure draft and accompanying documentation. 
In providing a response on the key issues outlined within the exposure draft the GPA would like to 
make the observation that there is some conflict between the exposure draft and the explanatory 
memorandum with relation to the use of the words “May” and “Must”. There is a need to ensure clarity 
where it is proposed that the word “May” in the current legislation is to be replaced with the word 
“Must” as this can be a significant and in some cases detrimental change. If there were further 
proposed changes to the either the legislation and regulations then we would expect clear and 
transparent consultation with industry. 
 
Provisional registration of chemical products 
GPA partly supports the proposed approach on reforms for provisional registration of 
chemical products, however this should be extended to chemical residues. GPA in previous 
submissions has proposed a provisional registration program of chemical products.  GPA has 
proposed the establishment of a provisional and/or conditional registration system with fee payment 
deferral options based on agro-ecological co-equivalence and same use in crops/animals overseas; 
• Delivering technology to agricultural industries faster 
• Increasing incentive to commercialise technology in Australia 
• Provisional review self-funded through sale of product. 
The proposed legislation change does not deliver on this proposal. The legislation does not remove 
the need for local Australian efficacy data generation. The outlying costs will still remain and where 
market failure exists the cost will often be borne by industry Research and Development Corporations 
(RDCs). 
While there is a proposal for provisional approval of efficacy data, it does not remove the requirement 
for Australian residue trial data, which is the more significant cost barrier to registration in Australia.  
GPA considerers that provisional registration of residue data should also be included if agro-
ecological co-equivalence and same use pattern can be demonstrated in overseas registrations.  
GPA following consultation with the Grains Research and Development Corporation (GRDC) is 
concerned that the proposed legislation may increase investment market failure with registrants, 
pushing a investment needs towards RDCs.  There is also concern that there will be a cascading 
effect for increased RDC investment to deliver data on efficacy criteria. 
 
Accreditation of assessors 
GPA partly supports the proposed approach to reforms on accreditation of assessors, 
however limitations of liability need to be recognised. GPA recognises that there has been an 
APVMA pilot study using external assessors. GPA considers that there is significant opportunity for 
implementation of third party APVMA approved certifiers rather than current APVMA monopoly; 
• 
This approach has been implemented successfully in New Zealand 
• 
The approach could be successfully implemented specifically for an industry led minor use 
program 
• 
Would go some way in addressing the current critical shortage of regulatory expertise at the 
APVMA 
There is a need for specific legislative instruments to protect the liability to these assessors with final 
decisions and liability risk being held by the APVMA. Limitations of liability from negligence will need 
to be in place, otherwise the cost of insurance premiums for external assessors are likely to be make 
the program unviable.

7 
Approval and registration for prescribed active constituents, products and labels 
GPA partly supports the proposed approach to reforms for prescribed approvals and 
registrations. The reforms will reduce industry cost and speed up changes to approvals for those 
active constituents, chemical products and labels where minimal or no assessment of technical 
information was required. From the Australian scientific community, GPA is aware that in some cases, 
formulation changes with some chemical herbicide products has resulted in major changes to 
efficacy, particularly where lower manufacturing cost formulations have been used. There is 
potentially a need for new efficacy data where formulations and formulation specifications appear to  
differ significantly from the original registration.   
 
Data protection incentives (limits on use of information) 
As detailed above, GPA has proposed new incentives to address the significant issue of investment 
market failure of AgVet investment in Australia. The impact of this declining investment is highlighted 
in table 1 comparing differences in pesticide technology access for Australian grain growers with the 
USA.  This data clearly identifies a significant problem from a lack of investment as growers are 
impacted by the ‘double whammy’ of lack of new, more advanced pesticide options delivering 
productivity outcomes, plus accelerated selection pressure for pesticide resistance due to a narrow 
pool of products. This situation has not improved since 2014 and commercial investment in new 
pesticide technologies appears to have become worse in recent years.  
Table 1. Comparison of first registered labels between Australian and USA.   
Grain crops highlighted in red 
Source: compiled by Kevin Bodnaruk AKC Consulting Pty Ltd for Horticulture Innovation Australia 
Limited 
GPA supports the government in engaging in a discussion on potential incentives to support 
increased AgVet investment into Australia to provide the tools and production capacity for industry to 
remain internationally competitive.   
GPA does not support the proposed legislative initiative reforms as proposed. Reforms to the 
legislation do not link the proposed incentives to industry need or priorities. The proposal to limit 
extension of the protection period only if the application to vary an existing registration is made at

8 
least three years before the limitation or protection period for the information associated with the 
existing registration expires, will result in companies delaying decisions for support of minor crops and 
where market failure exists. 
Potential outcomes will be that chemical companies will potentially slow down investment in minor 
and new crops and data protection, the resulting effect will be a slow down in the rate of industry 
access to new products and a skew of investment into crops that may not meet the gaps identified by 
industry.  The incentives also don’t reflect the amount of effort or cost to deliver technology for some 
industries.  There is a need for incentive benefits that stretch data protection out to 3 to 5 years to be 
a higher bar of effort than a single year of extension. While the proposed legislations recognises this 
with a proposed twelve months additional limitation or protection period for the use of a chemical 
product on each entire crop or animal commodity group, this should only be allowed where the group 
priority is support by the relevant industry through an identified priorities list.  
Incentives must be linked in the legislation to a list of industry priorities.  Reference to a list of 
industry priorities by the government should include the list delivered through the successful AgVet 
Collaborative Forum, currently supported by all plant industry RDCs.  A project and report funded by 
the Department of Water Resources through RIRDC, Delivery of Access to AgVet Chemicals 
Collaborative System – AgVet Collaborative Forum2 established this process and manages a current 
list of industry priorities and needs3.  The process used to develop this list is largely based on the 
Canadian government minor use priority setting process, incorporating some of the process from the 
USA IR-4 minor use program.  Like these North American programs, the Australian government 
should consider additional financial incentives to underwrite an Australian minor use program such as 
fee waivers and discounts, particularly where generic compounds are involved. 
The intention from this legislative change is to reduce market failure, but in effect the proposal is likely 
to make market failure worse and more importantly, it will be hard to wind back the commercial 
impacts once implemented. GPA has previously suggested a number of incentive reforms likely to 
address market failure without any resulting additional cost to the government or regulators.  These 
include; 
Establish a points credit system for registrants who put minor use needs onto label being 
rewarded with an option for acceleration of an alternate registration evaluation priority, to 
incentivise commercial investment in industry priorities where market failure exists.  These 
credits could then be used to accelerate other applications being assessed perhaps even at a 
later time eg. 6-12 months later allowing the build up of credits; 
• Would be a self-funding program by registrants 
• Delivering minor use and new technology onto label to industry faster 
• Encourages parity with international labels for agriculture. 
Adopt in new AgVet legislation and regulations improved data protection for emergency 
and minor use permits to improve the value proposition and incentive for commercial 
investment, encouraging contribution of exiting Australian and International data to these 
programs. In addition provide data protection incentives on existing registered labels 
encouraging investment in minor use through adopting a USA based system of 1 extra year for 3 
minor use label extensions would; 
• Be self funding program by registrants 
• Potentially provide incentives for additional label registration of minor uses 
• Improve product stewardship through company label communication 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/wp-content/uploads/publications/17-019.pdf 
3 https://www.agrifutures.com.au/national-rural-issues/agvet-chemicals/

9 
Increased Federal Government support and legislative incentive to build on the AgVet 
Collaborative Forum - now established cross agricultural industry minor use program supported 
by all Australian plant industry RDCs resulting in; 
• Improved priority setting and cost sharing 
• Achieving Government, RDC and Commercial co-investment in data generation 
• Achieving cost savings through cross industry efficiencies and international collaboration and 
co-investment with IR-4 USA and Canada. 
There are significant barriers to companies contributing protected data to minor and emergency use 
permits, particularly if this is new international data to Australia which would not have already been 
protected through a label application process.  The potential opportunity for increased data protection 
would provide incentive for greater investment by commercial manufacturers in minor use programs in 
Australia and this would also potentially support a longer-term objective of an increased number of 
permits being transferred to label registrations.   
To address investment market failure in the longer term, there is need for transformational change to 
AgVet regulation in Australia.  This should include consideration to full international co-regulation with 
a major technology development country.  A transition to this could be supported through an interim 
provisional and/or conditional registration process. This will increase multinational confidence for 
investment into Australia and also increase Australia’s ranking on investment priority compared with 
competing investment opportunity in Asia and South America.  This initiative would deliver; 
• 
Consumer and government confidence in broader international standards 
• 
Cost savings to Australia 
• 
Fastest possible technology access for agricultural industries 
• 
Ensuring Australia is on the first priority commercialisation list. 
These options would capture not only minor uses, but also major uses where there is demonstrated 
market failure for investment and a need for additional investment intervention.  There is a need to 
expand the minor use definition to not only those industry needs that are of low economic value to a 
registrant but also for situations where there is insufficient approved options for pest management or 
where investment market failure occurs impacting on industry productivity. 
If Australia were to effectively collaborate with IR-4 in the USA, then there will need to be some 
government appropriation for an Australian equivalent.   An investment model, which is at odds with 
the USA system, would be a significant disincentive for international collaboration with Australia.  To 
address this, there is a need to consider amendment to regulations so that no fee is payable (or is 
reduced to a certain percentage) if the use qualifies as a priority by ‘written submission in a prioritised 
list by the government nominated representative peak agricultural industry organisation or relevant 
research and development corporation defined under the PIERD Act’  
There are significant advantages of having industry-linked incentives in place as soon as possible to 
encourage industries to participate in priority setting process and additional industry and commercial 
investment.  This includes the USA IR-4 approach of priority review by the USEPA for support of key 
industry priorities.  Having these linked in the legislation, particularly in terms of fees and assessment 
timeframes would be an excellent initiative to deliver rapid benefits to industry and the community. 
Information to be taken into account in determining applications 
GPA supports the proposed approach to reforms for prescribed approvals and registrations.  Reforms 
that speed up the evaluation process and avoid unnecessary delays for new chemical approval 
should be implemented in legislation.

10
Computerised decision-making 
GPA supports the proposed approach to reforms to modernise the Agvet Code by providing for the 
APVMA to use computerised decision-making.  There is an urgent need for the chemical industry to 
transform from current 19th century paper based systems into a 21st century smart digital agriculture 
system. There is also the additional need for legislative reform that allows for the outcome of the 
decision making process to result in an electronic label as an alternative to the current paper based 
output. These changes should also be reflected in state control of use legislation to support the 
implementation of electronic labels.  This will allow for the future integration of label information into 
computerised spray control systems that will facilitate the integration of autonomous machine control.  
 
Voluntary recalls 
GPA supports improving transparency about recalls of AgVet chemicals by requiring persons to 
inform the APVMA when they are undertaking certain voluntary recalls and requiring the APVMA to 
publish such recalls. 
 
 
 
 
 
Notification of new information 
GPA supports the reforms ensuring that obligations to allow holders of label approvals, and applicants 
for both label approvals and variations to approvals or registrations; as they do in relation to active 
constituent approvals and product registrations.  
 
 
 
Standards for registered chemical products 
GPA supports the reform to enable label holders to make reasonable variations, reducing the 
regulatory burden on industry and the APVMA by allowing defined variations to the constituents in 
chemical products. 
 
 
 
Suspensions or cancellation of approvals and registrations for providing false or misleading 
information 
GPA supports the reform to address the anomaly in the AgVet Code whereby the APVMA is unable to 
suspend or cancel an approval or registration where false or misleading information is given. 
Addressing an inconsistency in label particulars (supply with unapproved label) 
GPA supports the reforms addressing an inconsistency in label particulars.  GPA agrees with the 
Department that legislative amendment is required to clarify the nominated agent and the holder of 
approval, as opposed to the marketer of the product. 
Variation of approval or registration during suspension 
GPA is concerned with the proposed changes to the reform on variation of approval or 
registration during suspension. GPA understands that in a number of cases there is a need for a 
more pragmatic mechanism to vary a suspended chemical product registration. There needs to be 
flexibility in the options to deal with the problem that led to the initial suspension of registration to then 
allow the chemical product to be put back on the market.  
There is however significant concern that this reform may result in a weakening of registrants taking 
timely responsibility for the registration of their products.  There is a risk that some registrants may 
continue to manage these situations after the effect.  There is a need for a restriction or penalty to use 
this mechanism if there is continued suspension situations arising. 
Prescribing matters for the statutory criteria 
GPA does not support this proposed change in legislation to matters that can be prescribed 
for the statutory criteria (safety, efficacy, trade and labelling criteria). GPA understands that the

11
APVMA has advised that they are already maximising the use of international standards, 
assessments and data in its assessments. There is clearly no need to introduce a legislative 
requirement for compulsory consideration of international data. Registrants have the right to include 
international data to support label applications and the legislation should reflect the right for this data 
to be considered in a label application. The current exposure draft of the Agvet Bill and the 
explanatory notes supplied appears contradictory; 
‘5E  Overseas trials and experiments 
Without limiting subparagraph 5A(2)(a)(vii) or (3)(a)(vii) or paragraph 5B(2)(d), 5C(2)(c) or 
5D(2)(d) and despite section 160, the matters prescribed by regulations made for the purposes 
of that subparagraph or paragraph may relate to matters covered by paragraph 160(2)(a), (b) 
or (c)’. 
The Department consultation document details that the APVMA must rather than may have regard 
as per the Bill exposure draft; 
‘Proposed approach 
The government proposes to correct the anomalies in the statutory criteria by amending the 
Agvet Code to provide that: 
• regulations, if made in the future, may prescribe matters the APVMA must have regard to for 
the purposes of being satisfied that a label meets the labelling criteria, similar to the current 
regulation making powers in sections 5A to 5C of the Agvet Code 
• regulations, if made in the future, could prescribe that the APVMA must have regard to the 
matters in section 160 of the Agvet Code (overseas trials and experiments, which could include 
international standards, assessments and data)’. 
This change will unnecessarily increase the operational demands of the APVMA, requiring unsolicited 
review assessment under their normal assessment process.  The requirement for the APVMA to 
consider international data included in a label registration application should be based on the need to 
review data as submitted by the registrant. There are also sovereignty risks to creating legislative 
review triggers in Australia based on overseas information from this amended legislation. 
Removing the need for an annual operational plan 
GPA does not support the removal of the requirement of an annual operational plan in addition 
to the corporate plan required annually under the Public Governance, Performance and 
Accountability Act 2013.  GPA believes that the publication of the annual operational plan provides 
transparency of its operational plans, which will be additionally supported by the proposed re-
establishment of the APVMA board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aligning the 2014 legislation review with the current review of AgVet chemical legislation 
GPA does not support the planned alignment of review measures in AgVet chemical 
legislation. There should be a separate review of the impact of changes from the 2018 Bill. The 
10 year review of the AgVet chemical regulatory framework under section 72 of the Administration Act 
should be conducted separately and consider the broader strategic issues of future legislative reforms 
including digital data, labels and systems, autonomy in application and use in legislative label 
consideration and reforms taking allowing consideration of new science of chemical, biological and 
biochemical technology. 
 
Other comments for future AgVet legislative reform 
As detailed in previous submissions to the Department by GPA, agriculture is facing significant 
challenges in being able to deal with the future resistance threats and emerging plant and animal

12
health issues.  Many agricultural industries, particularly grains will experience significant productivity 
losses in 8-10 years through the combined impacts of pesticide resistance evolution and the limited 
access to new technologies.  With a lead-time of 7 to 10 years to deliver a commercial technology that 
has already demonstrated proof of concept, Australia cannot afford an increased burden of 
unnecessary costs. 
Options that could be implemented through further legislative AgVet reform delivering productivity 
outcomes for industry including an improved approach to minor use and specialty needs of pesticide 
and veterinary medicines have been proposed following consultation with many RDC’s and peak 
industry bodies.  An option includes; 
Establishment of formal collaboration with USA and Canada through IR-4 minor use programs, 
establish an Australian minor use program cost recovery model, which mirrors these overseas 
programs with supporting legislation to ensure efficiency of this program; 
• Delivering cost savings, which would need to be based on co-equivalence of cost recovery 
models for evaluation  
• Delivering technology to agricultural industries faster 
• Increasing international confidence of Australia as a cost effective investment option. 
 
GPA commitment to further reform discussion 
 
There is an urgent need for the chemical industry to embrace digital agriculture and automation 
technologies and the legislation must embrace these 21st century technologies and encourage the 
consideration of these systems by the APVMA. There is also an urgent need for reforms to enable 
electronic labels and for these changes to be reflected in state control of use legislation.  
GPA is committed to further discussion with the Australian and state governments on the need to 
deliver transformational change delivering improved pesticide technology access and stewardship in 
the Australian agricultural industry.  There is commitment from GPA to work cross industry and deliver 
productivity outcomes to agricultural industries and the Australian economy and community. 
If you would like to discuss any of these comments and suggestions further in detail, please contact 
me on email andrew.weidemann@grainproducers.com.au or 0428 504 544. 
Yours sincerely 
 
Andrew Weidemann 
Chairman  
Grain Producers Australia