x
ee,Koy, y! Australian Government
“Reig? Department ofAgriculture
and Water Resources
Submission on Streamlining Regulation of Agricultural and
Veterinary Chemicals
Section A: General information
Purpose of this form
For individuals and organisations to provide submissions on streamlining
regulation of agricultural and veterinary chemicals.
Use this form to provide a submission or to write a long-form response.
You can also attach a separate response.
Before applying
See Agriculture and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment
(Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018.
Closing date
22 August 2018
To complete this form
Save the document to your computer.
Your submission must _ {XJ a completed and signed submission form
include
where relevant, supporting information from organisations, written
on their official letterhead.
Post or email
Agvet Chemicals
(preferred) your
Sustainable Agriculture, Fisheries& Forestry Division
submission
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources
GPO Box 858
Canberra ACT 2601
Email agvetreform@agriculture.gov.au
Section B: Applicant
1
Organisation name: The Western Australian Farmers Federation (Inc)
2
Contact address: PO Box 556, Belmont, WA 6984
Submission on Streamlining Regulation of Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals
Page 1 of 2

3
Contact person
Given name(s): Jessica Wallace
Work phone: (08) 9486 2100
Email: grains@wafarmers.org.au
Section C: Confidentiality
4
Isall of your submission confidential?
No
5
Is part of your submission confidential?
No
Section D: Publication of submissions on the department website
Unless you request otherwise, the department will publish your name, organisation and the title of
your submission on its website. Your contact information will not be made available.
6
Do you agree to your submission being made publicly available?
Yes
7
Do you agree to your name and state/territory being listed?
Yes
8
Do you agree to the department contacting you about your submission if required?
Yes
Section E: Submission type
9
What type of submission are you making? (select one box only)
Response to key topics in the draft report
> Go to section F
Section F: Response to key topics in the consultation paper
WAFarmers supports and endorses the submission contributions from Grain Producers Australia
(GPA) and Australian Medical Association (AMA), and acknowledges the contributions made to the
WAFarmers submission by Dr Enoch Bergman (Swan Veterinary Practice Esperance WA).
Submission on the Exposure Draft of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment
(Streamlining Regulation) Bill 2018
Page 2 of 2

Submission to the:
Consultation on Streamlining Regulation of
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals
nd
22.
August 2018
Prepared by:
Kim Haywood (Livestock) & Jessica Wallace (Grains)
Organisation:
The Western Australian Farmers Federation (Inc.)
President Livestock
Mr David Slade
Council:
President Grain
Mr Duncan Young
Council:
Address:
161 Great Eastern Highway
Belmont WA 6104
Postal Address:
PO Box 556
Belmont WA 6984
Phone:
(08) 9486 2100
Contact Names:
Kim Haywood & Jessica Wallace
Title:
Executive Officers
Email:
kimhaywood@wafarmers.org.au; grains@wafarmers.org.au
1

Background
The Western Australian Farmers Federation Inc. (WAFarmers) is the State’s largest and most
influential rural advocacy and service organisation.
Founded in 1912, WAFarmers boasts a membership of over 3,200 primary production businesses
including grain growers, meat and wool producers, horticulturalists, dairy farmers, commercial egg
producers and beekeepers.
Collectively our members are major contributors to the $8.2 billion gross value of production that
agriculture in its various forms contributes annually to Western Australia’s economy.
Additionally, through differing forms of land tenure, our members own, control and capably manage
many millions of hectares of the State’s land mass and as such are responsible for maintaining the
productive capacity and environmental wellbeing of that land and the animals that graze it.
Agriculture was the largest contributor to national GDP growth in 2016-17, and is the fastest growing
industry, particularly driven by the grains and livestock industries.
Executive Summary
WAFarmers welcomes the opportunity to comment on the consultation document and would like to
offer the following comments for consideration.
In terms of the proposals for AgVet chemicals, WAFarmers do not in principle have any major
apprehensions with the proposed approaches however we are concerned about whether the
changes will result in significant improvements to our regulatory environment.
The proposed changes appear to give the APVMA more latitude and strength
in dealing with
organisations that contravene the process, which is important in protecting our industry. Most of
the
procedural
substance
regarding
accelerating
the
registration
process’
specifically,
the
computerised decision making processes, is excellent. There are some strong measures that may
provide advantages to large multi-nationals over local or generic companies, which need some
consideration. Another concern,
is the inadequate distinction between Agri-Chemical and Vet-
Chemical
products
of which
vet
chemicals
already
has
excellent
regulation,
oversight
and
enforcement (through veterinary deregistration).
In regard to products that already exist within Australia, gaining access to use it on “new” animal
(e.g. using Dectomax Injectable (labelled for cattle and swine) for sheep is currently achievable
through individual producers working with their veterinarian), veterinarians are allowed wide extra
label prescribing rights for the benefit of their clients, however they are also professionally and
financially liable for outcomes.
The proposed legislative change will assist the livestock industry to make some products that exist in
Australia more accessible, however when a pathway to market already exists, there may not be
much incentive for companies to pursue label changes primarily due to the substantial investment
required. Furthermore, the Australian grains industry would be significantly disadvantaged by being
subject to unwarranted re-registration of off-label chemical actives. This unnecessary regulatory
process has the potential to create significant additional costs for growers and to deter beneficial
2

commercial investment in this area generally.
WAFarmers Responses to the Questions in Context to the Submission Paper
10.
Comment on provisional registration of chemical products
WAFarmers
supports
simplifying
conditional
registration
as
proposed,
however the
current
proposed regulatory reform does not address key areas specific to Australian residue trials and the
resulting data. This area significantly impacts barriers to chemical registration in Australia.
11.
Comment on accreditation of assessors
WAFarmers supports the proposed approach to the reforms, which provide great options for
recourse to the APVMA to manage accredited assessors, especially in light of the potential for
greater numbers and types of assessors that may be necessary due to the changes in the provisional
registration scheme. WAFarmers also supports the outsourcing of “third-party” assessors, which are
APVMA approved. WAFarmers also suggests a formalised review process is implemented whereby
assessors are rotated through to ensure integrity is upheld within the system.
12.
Comment on approval and registration for prescribed active constituents, products and
labels
WAFarmers supports the proposed reform for prescribed approval and registration. Changes to the
regulations capable of simplifying the approval and registration of prescribed active constituents,
products, and labels would be welcomed by WAFarmers.
13.
Comment on data protection incentives (limits on use of information)
Protecting entities which take on the risk of either innovating new products or conducting the
appropriate
trial work to demonstrate efficacy within Australia at face value
is both fair and
just. WAFarmers supports the proposed changes in principal, however, the proposed changes may
benefit from some reworking to allow pragmatic interpretation so as to prevent larger, better
funded organisations such as multi-nationals from securing exclusivity of product registration claims
where they intend to utilise that exclusivity to either restrict access or worse refrain from marketing
products viewed as competitive to their existing products.
If a product is well established in its use
overseas for instance, and a number of generic products exist,
it would seem inappropriate to
restrict access to a single organisation within Australia.
14.
Comment on information to be taken into account in determining applications
WAFarmers supports the proposed changes and encourages the reform to avoid unnecessary delay
and “red-tape” in the chemical approval process. The proposed changes should both improve the
quality
of submissions and
provide recourse for additional supporting information for most
submissions.
15.
Comment on computerised decision-making
WAFarmers
strongly supports the
proposal to
modernise the AgVet Code through modern
technology and
more
up-to-date
decision-making
resources,
such
as computerised
chemical
labelling systems, whereby electronic labels are made available for registered chemical product. This
will provide an easier, more efficient process, and ensure that grain growers have access to up-to-
date information that can be integrated into their on-farm electronic technologies. WAFarmers
3

believes the implementation of computerised decision-making processes by the APVMA is a benefit
to industry and should be implemented within the streamlining process.
16.
Comment on voluntary recalls
WAFarmers supports the voluntary recall of AgVet chemicals where this is considered necessary and
encourages the APVMA to publish any such recalls. This published information will allow growers to
make better informed decisions with regards to their on-farm chemical programs. WAFarmers also
understands that not all voluntary recalls warrant a public notice via the APVMA. Accordingly,
WAFarmers encourages retaining some degree of flexibility for minor risks and suggests that, before
a recall is published, the APVMA investigates the nature of the recall. In doing this, it would ensure
the regulatory process is not unnecessarily burdened.
17.
Comment on standards for registered chemical products
WaAFarmers supports the proposed reforms, so long as all label approvals, and variations to existing
approvals or new registrations, are labelled clearly for consumer use. Access to new information is
viewed as
beneficial to
all
parties
involved, and WAFarmers continues to support improved
standards to chemical labelling.
18.
Comment on suspensions or cancellation of approvals and registrations for providing false
or misleading information
WAFarmers supports the reform in minimising the provision of misleading information in relation to
the AgVet Code.
Clarity is required in relation to the APVMA’s ability to intervene with suspension,
cancellation,
approval or
registration. WAFarmers supports the reform and encourages clear
transparency.
It is important to ensure that the APVMA is permitted to suspend registrations or product variation
permits when false information is provided.
This ensures that stakeholders are provided accurate
information and ensures safe handling of approved products.
19.
Comment on addressing an inconsistency in label particulars (supply with unapproved
label)
WAFarmers
continues
to
support the
reform
with
regards
to
labelling
particulars.
Greater
transparency and clarification surrounding approval holders and product marketers is important,
and WAFarmers supports a clearer understanding of product labelling.
It is important to ensure that
the APVMA suspends
registrations
or
product
variation
permits when
false
information
is
provided. Ensuring stakeholders provide accurate information and that information is not omitted is
paramount to ensuring access to safe, efficacious products.
20.
Comment on variation of approval or registration during suspension
WAFarmers is concerned with the proposed changes to the variation of approval or registration
during suspension. Whilst pragmatic responses to a chemical suspension may be warranted under a
particular circumstance, not all ‘problems’ or suspensions pose the same associated risk. This reform
has the ability to significantly weaken product availability, even after a suspension has been lifted.
Registrants have a responsibility to ensure product availability.
A penalty must be implemented to
4

ensure prolonged suspensions do not occur. WAFarmers supports greater flexibility in dealing with
suspended applications.
21,
Comment on prescribing matters for the statutory criteria
WAFarmers does not support the change in legislation on prescribing matters that can be prescribed
for the statutory criteria. Unnecessary “red-tape” should not be further embedded into our own
regulatory framework, when the APVMA
is already
utilising international standards.
Creating
unnecessary ties to overseas legislation could adversely impact on Australian production. Should an
international
“trigger’
occur,
sparking an
international
regulatory
review,
Australia
will
be
significantly restricted.
Creating greater flexibility in dealing with suspended applications is viewed
as a very positive goal.
22.
Comment on removing the need for an annual operational plan
WAFarmers does not oppose the proposal to simplify the APVMA’s reporting requirements,
WAFarmers does, however, believe the annual operational plan provides much needed industry
transparency of the APVMA’s operational plans. Thus WAFarmers supports the continuation of the
annual plan. The proposed changes should allow greater flexibility in the utilisation of appropriate
overseas data at the discretion of the APVMA.
23.
Comment on aligning the 2014 legislation review with the current review of AgVet
chemical legislation
WAFarmers does not support the alignment of the 2014 legislation review with the current review of
Ag Vet chemical legislation. WAFarmers supports more strategic legislative measures and insists
these measures should cover greater issues such as improved data innovations, improved labelling
systems and the continued adoption of new technologies. These key areas need to be addressed and
reviewed. Currently, the regulatory framework does not address these key individual areas.
5

Section H: Applicant declaration
To be completed by the person listed in section B of this application.
| understand that:
e
the Australian Government reserves the right to refuse to publish submissions, or parts of
submissions, that contain offensive language,
potentially defamatory material or copyright
infringing material
®
a request may be made under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 for a submission marked
confidential to be made
available. Such
requests
will
be determined
in accordance with
provisions under that Act
e
if
| provide personal information about an individual other than myself,
| must make that person
aware of the privacy notice in section
| of this form and draw their attention to the department’s
privacy policy.
Qe
der
WA
Signatures:
“ ka
cs
:
Date: 21/08/2018
Full name: DUNCAN YOUNG & DAVID SLADE
Section I: Privacy notice
‘Personal information’ means information or an opinion about an identified
individual, or an
individual who is reasonably identifiable.
The collection of personal information by the Department of Agriculture and Water Resources in
relation to this submission is for the purposes of gathering information on the Exposure Draft of the
Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals (Operational Efficiency) Bill and related purposes. If you do
not provide this information, the department will be unable to contact you to discuss your
submission.
Under the Freedom of Information Act 1982, submissions marked confidential may be made
available. Such requests will be determined in accordance with provisions under that Act.
Personal information may be published on the department’s website, disclosed to other Australian
agencies, persons or organisations where necessary for these purposes, provided the disclosure is
consistent with relevant laws, in particular the Privacy Act 1988. Your personal information will be
used and stored in accordance with the Privacy Principles.
See the
department’s
Privacy
Policy to
learn more
about
accessing
or correcting
personal
information or making a complaint. Alternatively, telephone the department on +61 2 6272 3933.
6