1. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization recently indicated that global 
agricultural production would need to increase by 70 percent by 2050 in order to meet the rising 
international food demand. However, significant constraints, such as limited access to arable 
land and fresh water will affect countries’ ability to increase production. Given this reality, the 
increase in agriculture production would need to come from an increase in productivity. To this 
2. In addition to helping address food security challenges, biotechnology would assist in 
mitigating climate change impacts by, for example, supporting agricultural practices that could 
3. Today, the number and complexity of genetically engineered crops being developed and 
cultivated worldwide is increasing annually. This situation threatens to increase the number of 
asynchronous and asymmetric approvals worldwide and, consequently, increase the risk of trade 
disruptions resulting from the low level presence (LLP) of unapproved events in commercial 
channels. Reducing asynchronous approvals is the most effective way of reducing trade 
disruptions due to LLP. However, there is an immediate need to address the risk to trade arising 
from LLP occurrences, a risk that impacts importing and exporting countries alike, and global 
4. Recognizing the need for action, we, importing and exporting countries, have decided to 
discuss the issue of LLP; exchange information on its origin and potential implications on the 
agricultural trading system; and begin the development of an approach or set of approaches to 
5. We recognize the importance of developing practical approaches for the management of LLP 
that are science-based, predictable and transparent, and that will encourage the use of 
international science-based guidelines on LLP, such as the Codex Alimentarius Annex 3: Food 
Safety Assessment in Situations of Low-Level Presence of Recombinant-DNA Plant Material in 
6. We recognize that the approaches could be implemented on a voluntary basis by countries. 
7. Work collaboratively on the issue of LLP to facilitate international trade of agriculture 
commodities by developing practical approaches, designed to address LLP globally;  
8. Define, for the purpose of this initiative, LLP for food as low levels of recombinant DNA plant 
materials that have passed a food safety assessment according to the Codex Guideline for the 
(CAC/GL 45-2003) in one or more countries, but may on occasion be present in food in 
importing countries in which the food safety of the relevant recombinant-DNA plants has not 
10. Continue to work collaboratively to address the overarching problem of asynchronous 

11. Work collaboratively to address the risk of trade disruptions resulting from LLP in order to 
facilitate international trade of agriculture commodities by developing an approach or 
12. Recognize that LLP of unapproved seed in commercial channels is also a challenge to seed 
trade and that it also requires collaborative efforts to address. Further collaborative efforts on 
seed through this initiative should be informed by the work being currently undertaken by the 
13. Assure that these practical approaches do not compromise human, animal, and plant health 
14. Facilitate the timely and continued exchange of information on domestic policies related to 
15. Continue to implement the International Workplan on Low Level Presence which structures 
our collaborative actions leading to the development of practical approaches to reduce 
international trade risks related to LLP, with a view to have Ministers considering the 
endorsement of an approach or a set of approaches designed to facilitate the global management