The WoolPoll Review final report is now available. Visit Have Your Say to read the WoolPoll Review final report today.

Australia is one of the world’s largest wool producers, producing around 25 per cent of greasy wool sold on the world market. The value of Australian wool exports in 2021-22 was $3.592billion; this reflects the continuing strong global demand for Australia’s wool, which is regarded as among the world’s best.

Wool is produced in all Australian states except the Northern Territory. New South Wales produces the greatest volume of wool, followed by Victoria, Western Australia and South Australia. In 2021-22, 71.6 million sheep were shorn in Australia.

- Detailed statistics and information about the Australian wool industry are available from Australian Wool Innovation. This includes data on prices, production, exports and outlooks for the industry.

- The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) produce detailed data about the wool industry through quarterly Agricultural Commodities forecasts and publications. They are available at ABARES Publications for viewing and download.

The wool levy and export charge funds Australian Wool Innovation Pty Ltd (AWI) research and development (R&D). Levy is payable on all shorn wool produced in Australia and sold or used in the production of other goods. The producer (the person who owns the wool immediately after it is removed from the sheep or lamb) is liable to pay the levy. More information about the levy investment can be found at Australian Wool Innovation, or on the department’s levies and wool levies page.

Wool is classified as a biological import. Information about importing wool can be found on the importing biological products section.

Wool exports are covered by non-prescribed goods certification under the Export Control Act 2020, further information on exporting wool can be found at the Exporting non-prescribed goods section of the website.

Other organisations that represent interests in the Australian Wool Industry include: Australian Superfine Wool Growers (ASWG), Wool Producers Australia (WPA), Australian Woolgrowers Association (AWGA), Australian Wool Exchange (AWEX), Australian Wool Testing Authority (AWTA).