Australia's public policies and programs are coordinated nationally by different government
committees. This includes public policies and programs for aquatic animal health. These committees
have different levels of responsibility. Some provide operational and technical advice, while others
make higher level policy decisions. Matters are progressed to different committees depending on:
Committees also have arrangements in place for industry consultation. This consultation is an
SCAAH provides policy, scientific, technical and strategic advice on aquatic animal health issues.
to support AHC in its policy deliberations on aquatic animal health issues. It does this by
to provide a technical forum for members to work together on aquatic animal health.
to help with information exchange and awareness raising. Particularly for relevant Australian and
Seafood Industry Australia's Aquaculture Advisory Committee (SIA-AAC) also has an observer on
SCAAH. SCAAH collaborates with other committees on matters of mutual interest. This includes 
Aquaculture Committee, and the Sub-committee on Animal Health Laboratory Standards.

SCAAH engages with industry on aquatic animal health matters through the SIA-AAC. It provides
advice on research and development priorities through the Fisheries Research and Development
Animal Health Committee (AHC) provides national leadership on animal health and biosecurity
matters. It delivers strategic policy, technical and regulatory advice. AHC handles areas of national
priority reform. It also oversees the development and implementation of animal health strategies and
The Aquatic CCEAD provides advice on emergency aquatic emergency animal disease (EAD) events.
The Australian Chief Veterinary Officer chairs Aquatic CCEAD. The committee comprises
It shares information and makes decisions on the management of aquatic EAD events. It will meet until
AMM comprises Australian, state and territory government ministers with responsibility for primary
enables cross-jurisdictional cooperation and coordinated approaches to matters of national interest. It
is the peak forum to collaborate on priority issues of national significance. It focuses on issues affecting

AGSOC comprises all agency heads responsible for primary industries policy issues. Including the:
AGSOC. AGSOC enables cross-jurisdictional cooperation and coordinated approaches to matters of
The National Biosecurity Committee (NBC) is an advisory committee to AGSOC. It provides strategic
leadership in managing national approaches to emerging and ongoing biosecurity policy issues across
jurisdictions and sectors. The committee comprises senior representation from primary industry or
environment government departments. Including the Australian, state and territory governments. The
For further information contact the Aquatic Pest and Health Policy section at: aah@aff.gov.au.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/aquatic/committees