If you see any unusual symptoms in farmed or wild aquatic animals, including unusual fish deaths,
The main risks associated with these sources are the spread of pests and diseases to new areas. Some
You can play a vital role in protecting Australia’s aquatic animal health. This page provides information
on simple practices the public can use to protect the health of Australia’s aquatic animals.
Like all animals, aquarium fish can carry and transmit aquatic animal diseases. These diseases pose a
risk to our wild fisheries, waterways and aquaculture industries if they escaped from aquariums into the
environment. The below provides information and advice on how responsible fish owners can help
Get advice from your veterinarian or pet retailer on how to maintain a healthy aquarium.
If you suspect a serious disease in your aquarium fish, contact your local veterinarian or state
Never release or dispose of aquarium fish in waterways. This includes stormwater drains. Both
Return unwanted fish to your local pet store (most pet shops will take healthy fish)

Ensure outdoor ponds or aquariums cannot overflow into local waterways or stormwater drains.
Always dispose of aquarium water appropriately (e.g., down a household sink or in a suitable
if disease is suspected in the aquarium only dispose of water down a household sink.
Like animals, the movement of bait and berley products within Australia has the potential to introduce
The National Policy Guidelines for Translocation of Domestic Bait and Berley provide a national
framework for bait translocation policies in Australian states and territories to address identified
Ensure you are familiar with and follow regulations on the use of bait and berley in your state or
Never release live bait into a water body other than the one in which it was caught.
Only buy products to use as bait that are being sold as bait (e.g., from retail outlets such as fishing
Like animals, seafood products intended for human consumption, have the potential to carry and

Never dispose of seafood or seafood waste (e.g., prawn heads, oyster shells, fish heads, bones,
etc.) in waterways, stormwater drains or areas where they can enter local waterways.
Fishing and boating equipment can transmit aquatic animal diseases and pests. Follow any biosecurity
guidelines or regulations directed at fishers and boaters in your state or territory.
Dislodge any plants and animals from your equipment, including waders, boots, and nets, or
Drain water from boats and equipment. Drain water back into the waterway it came from. Do not
Rinse boats and equipment, including waders, boots, and nets with fresh water, without letting it
Wash boats and equipment with detergent, rinse with tap water and dry completely before
Launder clothing, such as wetsuits, appropriately before wearing in a different waterway.
Infectious diseases are just one source of risk to aquatic animal health in Australia. Other risks include
For further information contact the Aquatic Pest and Health Policy section at: aah@aff.gov.au.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/aquatic/how-you-can-protect-aquatic-animal-health