Aquatic animal disease incidents do occur within Australia. When a disease incident occurs, Australia’s

response arrangements may be activated to minimise their potential impacts on aquaculture, fisheries

resources or the environment. Several recent aquatic animal disease incidents of significance are

included below for information.

For information on all current responses to exotic animal and plant pest and disease outbreaks

nationally, refer to outbreak.gov.au.

For information on Australia’s approach to national disease preparedness and the technical response

and control strategies to be activated in a national aquatic animal disease emergency, refer to 

AQUAVETPLAN.

For assistance recognising diseases of significance to aquaculture and fisheries in Australia, refer to the 

Aquatic Animal Diseases Significant to Australia: Identification Field Guide.

Infection with white spot syndrome virus (WSSV), or white spot disease (WSD), is a reportable disease

that causes increased mortalities in crustaceans (refer to the Aquatic Animal Diseases Significant to

Australia: Identification Field Guide for the list of naturally susceptible species). WSD was first detected

in Australia in farmed prawns on the Logan River in southeast Queensland in 2016. It was later

detected in wild populations of crustaceans, such as prawns and crabs, in the northern part of Moreton

Bay in 2017. A Movement Regulated Area (MRA) was established to prevent the virus spreading to

other parts of Queensland and other states and territories. The national WSSV surveillance program

demonstrated that all areas of Australia, outside of the MRA, were free from the virus.

WSSV was detected at a biosecure prawn hatchery in northern New South Wales (NSW) in August

2022. The incident was quickly contained and WSSV was eradicated from the facility. More recently,

WSSV was detected in farmed black tiger prawns (Penaeus monodon) on the north coast of NSW in

February and April 2023. The genetic strain of WSSV detected in NSW is different to that detected in

QLD. For the latest information on this incident refer to outbreak.gov.au.

For further information on management arrangements for this disease, including import restrictions in

other states and territories, refer to the following websites:

Infection with ostreid herpesvirus-1 (OsHV-1) is a reportable disease that causes increased mortality in

Pacific oysters (Magallana gigas, previously known as Crassostrea gigas). OsHV-1 is the causative agent

of pacific oyster mortality syndrome (POMS). OsHV-1 was first detected in Australia in farmed oysters

in the Georges River, New South Wales in 2010. It has since been detected in farmed and feral oysters

in the Parramatta River, Hawkesbury River and Brisbane Water, NSW, in farmed oysters in Tasmania

(2016) and in feral oyster populations in the Port River, South Australia (2018). Commercial growing

regions in SA remain free of the disease. Movement restrictions are in place in all three states to reduce

the risk of spread.

For further information on management arrangements for this disease, refer to the following websites:

Infection with abalone herpesvirus (Haliotid herpesvirus 1) (AbHV) is a reportable disease that causes

increased mortality in abalone (refer to the Aquatic Animal Diseases Significant to Australia:

Identification Field Guide for the list of naturally susceptible abalone species). AbHV is the causative

agent of abalone viral ganglioneuritis (AVG). Victoria and Tasmania have officially reported the

presence of AbHV. AbHV was first observed in Victoria in farmed abalone in 2005 and in wild abalone

in 2006. AbHV was eliminated from farmed abalone populations but is considered endemic in some

wild populations in Victoria. In Tasmania, the disease has not been observed in wild populations, but

has been observed in abalone held in holding and aquaculture facilities.

AbHV has not been detected elsewhere in Australia. However, some jurisdictions such as New South

Wales and South Australia, have movement restrictions and management arrangements in place to

prevent introduction of the disease.

For further information on management arrangements for this disease, refer to the following websites:

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/aquatic/emergency/incidents