The Agricultural Commodities Report contains ABARES' forecasts for the value, volume and price of Australia's agricultural production and exports, and average broadacre farm performance.

Underpinning the forecasts contained in the Agricultural Commodities Report are ABARES' outlook for global commodity prices, demand and supply. Each edition of the report factors in how changes to this outlook affect Australian producers and the value of their produce. Important risks to the outlook are also considered and discussed in each report.

A ‘medium term’ (5 year) outlook is published each year in the March edition of the Agricultural Commodities Report.

Each June, September and December edition contains a short-term outlook. In June, the forecast period is to the end of the next Australian financial year (July to June). In September and December, the forecast period is to the end of the current Australian financial year.

From 2 June 2026, ABARES will release its quarterly Agricultural Commodities and Australian Crop reports at 8:00am (AEDT/AEST) instead of 12:01am to better align with Australian business hours and enable more timely responses to stakeholder queries.

Definitions provides more information around specific terms and classifications included in the report.

Agricultural commodities and trade data provides the recent and historical data used in the report.

Historical agricultural forecast database provides a comprehensive source of historical ABARES agricultural forecasts.

The Australian Crop Report contains ABARES state level forecasts for the area, yield and production of Australia’s major winter

and summer broadacre crops.

Agricultural Commodities Report: September 2026

8am AEST Tuesday 1 September 2026

Access the previous digital publications of the Agricultural Commodities Report on the previous reports page and ABARES historical publications archive.

Agricultural Commodity Statistics

The Agricultural Commodity Statistics (ACS) provides comprehensive data on the Australian agriculture, fisheries, and forestry sectors. The publication covers a wide range of commodities, such as broadacre crops, horticulture, livestock, fisheries, and forestry products. Key areas of focus include:

- Production statistics – detailing quantities and values of agricultural output.

- Trade data – including Australian imports and exports of agricultural products.

- Financial performance – analysing prices, costs, employment, and revenue in the sector.

The publication serves as an important resource for policymakers, researchers, and industry to track trends and make informed decisions.

The ACS data tables are available in downloadable format at Agricultural commodities and trade data.

Other research

Livestock prices

Published 5 December 2023

The significant fall in livestock saleyard prices over recent months has been driven by a large increase in animal supply and a fall in demand.

Cattle feedlot industry

Published 5 December 2023

The growing feedlot industry plays an important role in smoothing Australian beef production and export availability.

Meat processing labour

Published 7 March

Slaughter volumes correlated with meat and livestock prices.

Foot-and-mouth disease

Published September 2022

Summary of foot-and-mouth disease risks and potential economic impacts.

China's meat import demand

Published June 2022

Analysis of China's meat import demand in 2022.