ABARES Working Paper

Published: 22 December 2025

Authors: Neal Hughes, Maruge Zhao, Rhys Downham

Introduction

Hydrologic models typically predict irrigation water demands via bio-physical processes in-line with

FAO-56 standards. However, irrigation demands also depend heavily on the economic behaviour of

farmers, particularly their responses to water and crop prices. This study develops a novel method for

predicting monthly irrigation water demand that integrates bio-physical processes with an economic

profit maximization framework.

This method yields a set of simple parametric equations for predicting annual crop areas and monthly

water use as a function of both weather and prices. We apply this method to the Australian Murray-

Darling Basin (MDB) with a dataset covering 13 regions and 12 irrigation activities between 2004-05

and 2021-22. Model parameters are obtained using structural estimation, with a joint system of

physical and behavioural regression equations solved by non-linear least squares. Validation results

show strong performance for water use particularly in the southern basin (annual in-sample R2 0.94,

cross-validated R2 0.90).

Performance is slightly weaker in the northern basin partly on account of data quality issues (annual in-

sample R2 0.84, cross-validated R2 0.71). The model is applied to measure the effects on water demand

of long-term adjustment in the irrigation sector, including the emergence of almond and cotton crops in

the southern basin. The results show that new almond plantings have contributed to a 40 per cent

increase in peak summer demands in the lower Murray since 2014.

In future, this bio-economic approach could provide a foundation for integrated hydro-economic

models capable of analysing complex water policy issues, including environmental water management,

water market design and climate change adaptation.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/working-papers/bio-economic-approach-predicting-monthly-

irrigation-water-demands