ABARES research and analysis in forest economics and sciences provides professionally independent, world-class advice to inform government and private sector decision-makers on significant issues affecting forests and the forestry sector.

Latest releases

This Insights paper describes Australia’s native production forests, the sustainable wood harvesting that is carried out within them, and other ecosystem services that they provide. Future opportunities and challenges regarding Australia’s native production forests are also discussed.

Published 3 July 2025

This report gives confidence that Australians have sufficient access to forest and wood products for the construction sector, from a range of sources.

Published: 27 March 2025

This report outlines the creation, structure and utilisation of the Forest Resource Use Model.

Published: 6 October 2022

This report presents data collected from surveys of public and private plantation growers and managers on the size and changes to the commercial plantation estate.

Published: 10 August 2022

This biannual report presents 2020-21 data for key domestic indicators of forestry sector activity such as new housing commencements and the trade of wood products.

Published: 28 June 2022

This dashboard displays Australian forest and forest industry data through interactive maps, charts and tables. Users can view data on a national, state, territory and regional level.

Published: 15 June 2022

This report presents information describing the extent and distribution of planted farm forestry in Australia based on available inventory information. It provides an understanding of the potential for planted farm forestry to complement the well-characterised public production native forests and existing commercial plantations.

Published: 6 April 2022

ABARES forest research capabilities

ABARES capabilities cover spatial analysis of forest data; economic surveys, analyses, modelling and forecasting; forest ecology, silvicultural systems, and sustainable yield; and national and international reporting based on criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management. ABARES also contributes data, performs analysis and provides advice on Regional Forest Agreements, threatened species, illegal logging, and national, regional and state-based forest issues.

ABARES also manages the National Plantation Inventory (NPI), a component of the NFI which has been collecting data on plantations established primarily for wood production in Australia since 1993. NPI data on Australia’s plantations are collected by ABARES through an annual survey of growers, grower representatives and state and territory agencies.

Forests Australia

The Forests Australia website, hosted by ABARES, provides up-to-date information on Australia's forests in collaboration with Australia’s state and territory governments.