Publication details
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, November 2022
For exporters of non-prescribed goods where the importing country requires government certification.
Exporters may apply for a government certificate as per section 65 the Export Control Act 2020. All
applications for a government export certificate for a non-prescribed good must be made via 
EXDOC (certain inedible meats, wools, feathers, trophies, skins and hides), NEXDOC (certain honey
markets) or using the below manual application form.
Applications must be accompanied by a completed certificate template. See the Manual of importing
country requirements (Micor) to determine which certificate template is required. Please contact your
regional office if you would like to confirm which certificate template is applicable to your product or to
request the latest version.
A commonly required certificate is the Declaration and Certificate as to Condition (EX188, EX188B and
EX188M). Read more about the Declaration and Certificate as to Condition.
Applications must also be accompanied by evidence of the importing country requirements. Evidence
types are not fixed, but do need to be official. They may include:
a Micor case
official documentation from an importing country authority, and if certification is required what
information the certificate must attest to (for example, an import permit, copy of import
protocol/regulation with translation)
link to an overseas authority webpage where importing country requirements are outlined.
If applicable you may also need to provide evidence to demonstrate you meet the importing country
requirements, for example:
a manufacturer’s declaration attesting that the relevant goods have been manufactured/treated in
the manner outlined in the certificate’s endorsement
copies of import permits, certificates from State Authorities, HACCP certification, copies of
laboratory test results
any supporting documentation as listed in the Micor case
any other evidence requested by a departmental assessing officer to assist with their assessment.
Instructions on how to complete an application for an NPG certificate are incorporated within EXDOC
and NEXDOC. Guidance on how to complete the manual application form can be found at Application
for a government export certificate for non-prescribed goods example PDF.
If you are unable to source evidence that certification is required but believe you still need a certificate,
the department is able to issue an unendorsed certificate. Your application will need to include why you
couldn’t obtain the importing country requirements and why you need a certificate, in addition to all
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

other application requirements being met. An unendorsed certificate is one without additional
attestations specific to the product beyond it being fit for human consumption if applicable.
Download
Application for a government export certificate for non-prescribed goods (PDF 254 KB)
Attachment for the application form for a government export certificate for non-prescribed goods -
description of additional goods and manufacturing establishments (DOCX 35 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/non-prescribed-goods/forms/application-
export-certificate