INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT ON 
NATIONAL DROUGHT PROGRAM REFORM 
 
 
 
An agreement between:  
 the Commonwealth of Australia and 
 the states and territories, being  
o New South Wales 
o Victoria 
o Queensland 
o Western Australia 
o South Australia 
o Tasmania 
o the Australian Capital Territory 
o the Northern Territory of Australia.

Page 2 of 8 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT ON  
NATIONAL DROUGHT PROGRAM REFORM 
 
Preliminaries 
1. This agreement outlines the arrangements for implementing national drought program 
reform, replacing the Exceptional Circumstances arrangements. 
2. This agreement is between the Commonwealth of Australia (the Commonwealth) and the 
states and territories. Where the terms ‘jurisdictions’ or ‘governments’ are used these refer 
to the Commonwealth, states and territories. 
3. In entering this agreement, the Commonwealth and the states and territories recognise that 
they have a common interest in reforming drought-related programs and need to work 
together to help farmers manage risk and prepare for future challenges. 
4. This agreement will commence as soon as the Commonwealth and one other state or 
territory signs the agreement. The agreement is scheduled to expire on 1 July 2018, however 
it may be terminated earlier or extended as agreed in writing by all parties. 
5. Programs specified in this agreement are to be implemented prior to or on 1 July 2014. This 
agreement would also apply to any other programs related to the objectives of this 
agreement introduced at a later date.  
 
Objectives 
6. This agreement aims to: 
a. assist farm families and primary producers adapt to and prepare for the impacts of 
increased climate variability  
b. encourage farm families and primary producers to adopt self-reliant approaches to 
manage their business risks 
c. ensure that farm families in hardship have access to a household support payment 
that recognises the special circumstances of farmers  
d. ensure that appropriate social support services are accessible to farm families  
e. provide a framework for jurisdictions’ responses to needs during periods of drought. 
 
Outcomes 
7. This agreement will facilitate achievement of the following outcomes: 
a. primary producers have an improved capacity to manage business risks  
b. farm families are supported in times of hardship.  
 
Outputs 
8. The following measures will be implemented under this agreement: 
a. a farm household support payment 
b. continued access to Farm Management Deposits (FMDs) and taxation measures 
c. a national approach to farm business training  
d. a coordinated, collaborative approach to the provision of social support services 
e. tools and technologies to inform farmer decision making.

Page 3 of 8 
9. Future programs related to the objectives of this agreement will be consistent with the 
principles for reform agreed by the Standing Council on Primary Industries (SCoPI) at 
Attachment A. 
10.  Future programs providing temporary in-drought support will be consistent with the 
principles and processes agreed by SCoPI at Attachment B.  
 
Roles and responsibilities 
11. To realise the objectives and commitments in this agreement, each party has specific roles 
and responsibilities, as outlined below. 
Role of the Commonwealth  
12. The Commonwealth is responsible for:  
a. funding and delivering a time-limited farm household support payment based on 
individual need, including 
i. reciprocal obligations aimed at driving behavioural change  
ii. case management to support reciprocal obligations  
b. providing continued access to primary producer taxation concessions that support 
farmer risk management, including the FMD Scheme  
c. delivering Commonwealth programs under this agreement 
d. developing a Commonwealth implementation plan in consultation with the states and 
territories 
e. monitoring and assessing the delivery and performance of Commonwealth programs 
under this agreement 
f. reporting on the delivery of Commonwealth programs and the contribution of these 
programs to the achievement of outcomes as set out in this agreement. 
Role of the states and territories  
13. Each state or territory is responsible for:  
a. encouraging the delivery and uptake of the national approach to farm business 
training 
b. delivering state or territory programs under this agreement 
c. developing a state or territory implementation plan, in consultation with the 
Commonwealth  
d. monitoring and assessing the delivery and performance of state or territory programs 
under this agreement 
e. reporting on the delivery of state or territory programs and the contribution of these 
programs to the achievement of the objectives of this agreement.  
Shared roles and responsibilities 
14. The Commonwealth and the states and territories are responsible for: 
a. a coordinated, collaborative approach to the provision of social support services  
b. contributing to the development of tools and technologies to inform farmer decision 
making 
c. ongoing cooperation and collaboration between the Commonwealth, states and 
territories to achieve the objectives of this agreement 
d. considering ways that current programs related to the objectives of this agreement 
could be delivered more efficiently and effectively

Page 4 of 8 
e. sharing information related to the objectives of this agreement, including informing 
the other parties of changes to relevant programs prior to implementation 
f. participating in activities to implement this agreement 
g. negotiating new or revised sections to this agreement 
h. conducting or contributing to evaluations and reviews of services and outputs 
delivered under this agreement.  
 
Performance indicators and benchmarks 
15. The outputs specified in paragraph 8 of this agreement are to be implemented prior to or on 
1 July 2014. 
16. Performance indicators and benchmarks will be included as part of implementation plans 
developed by each jurisdiction. Implementation plans are to be finalised and agreed by PISC 
by 31 December 2013. 
 
Monitoring and reporting 
17. The parties will report against their roles and responsibilities in this agreement and their 
implementation plans annually during the operation of the agreement. Reports are to be 
provided for consideration at Primary Industries Standing Committee (PISC) and Standing 
Council on Primary Industries (SCoPI) meetings.  
18. PISC members or their representatives will meet quarterly for the duration of this agreement 
or as agreed by all parties. The group will meet to ensure the ongoing effective and efficient 
implementation of this agreement and the execution of roles and responsibilities. 
19. Arrangements for monitoring, evaluation and reporting will be included in implementation 
plans developed by each jurisdiction. Monitoring, evaluation and reporting should be 
standardised across jurisdictions to aid in reporting against the agreement’s objectives, 
outcomes and outputs. 
 
Governance arrangements 
Implementation 
20. PISC will oversee the implementation of the agreement. 
Enforceability  
21. The parties do not intend any of the provisions of this agreement to be legally enforceable. 
However, that does not lessen the parties’ commitment to this agreement. 
Review  
22. The agreement will be reviewed approximately twelve months prior to its completion to 
assess progress made by the parties towards the agreed outcomes. 
Variation  
23. The agreement may be amended at any time by written agreement between all parties. 
24. Any party may terminate its participation at any time by notifying all other parties in 
writing. 
Dispute resolution 
25. Under this agreement any party may give notice of a dispute to any or all other parties. 
26. Officials of relevant parties will attempt to resolve any dispute in the first instance.

Page 5 of 8 
27. If officials cannot resolve a dispute, it may be escalated to relevant ministers and if 
necessary to SCoPI. 
28. If the dispute is not resolved, it may be referred to the Council of Australian Governments 
for consideration.

Page 6 of 8 
The parties have confirmed their commitment to this agreement as follows: 
Signed for and on behalf of the  
Commonwealth of Australia by 
Senator the Hon. Joe Ludwig  
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
 3 May 2013 
 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of the  
State of New South Wales by 
The Hon. Katrina Hodgkinson MP 
Minister for Primary Industries 
 3 May 2013 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of Victoria by 
The Hon. Peter Walsh MP 
Minister for Agriculture and Food Security 
 3 May 2013 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of Queensland by 
The Hon. Dr John McVeigh MP 
Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
 3 May 2013 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of Western Australia by 
The Hon. Ken Baston MLC  
Minister for Agriculture and Food 
 3 May 2013 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of South Australia by 
The Hon. Gail Gago MLC 
Minister for Agriculture, Food and Fisheries 
 3 May 2013 
Signed for and on behalf of the 
State of Tasmania by 
The Hon. Bryan Green MP 
Minister for Primary Industries and Water 
 3 May 2013 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of the  
Australian Capital Territory by 
Mr Shane Rattenbury MLA 
Minister for Territory and Municipal Services 
27 June 2013 
Signed for and on behalf of the  
Northern Territory of Australia by 
The Hon. Willem Westra van Holthe MLA 
Minister for Primary Industry and Fisheries 
 3 May 2013

Page 7 of 8 
Attachment A: Standing Council on Primary Industries’ principles for reform 
 
The principles, reconfirmed by the Standing Council on Primary Industries in April 2011, are:  
1. there should no longer be Exceptional Circumstances declarations or ‘lines on maps’. 
Instead, governments should focus on addressing the specific needs of farming families, 
farming businesses and farming communities  
2. acknowledgement that drought is just one of a number of hardships that can adversely 
impact farmers  
3. recognition of the important role of farmers as the nation’s food producers  
4. future farm family welfare assistance should require a level of mutual responsibility  
5. for access to the income support system, farming families should have a temporary period of 
exemption from the normal assets tests for farm assets, but otherwise receive the same 
access rights as the wider community  
6. government farm business support should assist farming businesses plan and prepare for the 
future. Farm business support will be based on a willingness by those businesses to prepare 
for the impacts of drought and climate change  
7. the role of farmers in natural resource management and their role in maintaining vibrant 
rural communities  
8. the importance of maintaining and supporting the natural resource base during drought and 
climate change  
9. government policies and programs should support farming communities to prepare for 
drought and enhance their long term sustainability and resilience.

Page 8 of 8 
Attachment B: Principles and processes for in-drought support  
The Standing Council on Primary Industries agreed to a set of principles and processes for the 
provision of in-drought support in May 2013.  
Principles 
The following principles have been identified as criteria to assess whether a possible 
in-drought measure is consistent with the intent of drought program reform. 
Where a jurisdiction(s) decides to implement an in-drought support measure, the measure should:  
a. 
be consistent with principles and complementary to measures already in place  
b. occur where there is a clear role for government and deliver a net public benefit 
c. 
address recognised welfare needs 
d. encourage good farm business decision-making and facilitate adjustment in the agriculture 
sector  
e. 
avoid government being positioned as the business ‘lender of last resort’ 
f. 
enable links with other measures or between service providers 
g. recognise the importance of maintaining the natural resource base 
h. be underpinned by monitoring and performance information to ensure any measures 
implemented are appropriately targeted. 
Processes 
SCoPI has agreed in-drought support should be provided through a phased approach. This allows 
governments to tailor the type or level of support provided to farmers and/or rural communities as 
conditions change. The different phases are:  
 measures available at all times  
 existing measures increased to address growing demand  
 measures introduced to address identified needs. 
New or additional measures or programs will be subject to agreement by individual governments 
and will only be introduced if they are consistent with the principles for in-drought support, and 
when existing measures are found to be deficient. Governments may elect to use an independent 
advisory committee to help inform its decisions on such programs. 
Implementation plans will inform and clarify jurisdictions’ commitments on in-drought support.