The Australian Government recovers the cost of delivering agricultural export regulatory services. Under the Australian Government Charging Framework, the department must regularly document changes to regulatory charging activities through a Cost Recovery Implementation Statement (CRIS).
Charging Framework
The Australian Government Charging Framework (Charging Framework) allows government agencies to plan, implement and review their charging activities.
The Charging Framework is a cornerstone to government charging. We apply this policy to all activities that deliver goods, services or regulation, or a combination of them, to the non-government sector unless otherwise decided by government.
Under the Charging Framework, the key criteria for regulatory charging is the link between the activity and the individuals or groups that creates the demand:
- A regulatory fee is used when the activity is regulatory and its costs can be attributed to a specific individual or organisation (for example, application for a license).
- A regulatory levy is used when the activity is a regulatory and its costs can be attributed to a group of individuals or organisations being regulated by a proxy that reasonably aligns to the effort each party in the group causes (for example, compliance audits across an industry).
Fees and levies
Fees and levies (charges) are set out in the following legislative instruments:
- Export Charges (Imposition–General) Regulations 2021
- Export Charges (Imposition–Customs) Regulations 2021
- Export Control (Fees and Payments) Rules 2021
Government policy approval to cost recover
Policy authority for export regulatory charging was reaffirmed in the 2020–21 Budget when the then government announced the Busting Congestion for Agricultural Exporters package. The package consisted of reforms for the Australian agricultural sector as part of the Economic Recovery Plan aimed at rebuilding the economy following the COVID -19 recession. This included $71.1 million to improve the financial sustainability of export certification services, supporting a stepped return to full cost recovery, and enabling reforms to be rolled out while maintaining existing systems.
Our fees and charges for 2026–27
The 2026–27 export CRIS will implement the government’s MYEFO decision of a phased return to full cost recovery by 1 July 2029. The 2026 March Budget decision provided additional supplementation to defer price rises by 12 months until July 2027, with 2025–26 prices largely staying in place. This comes with additional supplementation from government to fill the gap along with the current revenue raised from export cost recovery to continue to deliver export regulatory services.
For more information visit Export cost recovery reform for sustainable trade funding.
The full schedule of revised prices for 2026–27 to 2029–30 is included in the 2026–27 CRIS documents.
2026–27 Agricultural Exports Cost Recovery Implementation Statements
The Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry certified the 2026–27 CRIS documents for the 7 agricultural export arrangements. On 21 May 2026, the Hon Julie Collins MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, approved the documents, including the revised price schedule to phase in full cost recovery by 1 July 2029.
Our CRIS describes the fees and charges to support the legislated prices for 2026–27.
Fact sheets
These fact sheets present the changes to fees and charges in the final exports cost recovery implementation statements (CRIS) from what was published in the draft exports CRISs on 29 January 2026. They provide a comparison of the cost recovery fees and levy-based charges proposed in draft and final exports CRISs with brief explanations for these changes.
2026–27 price fact sheet for all export arrangements
- 2026–27 Price fact sheet for all export arrangements (PDF 655 KB)
- 2026–27 Price fact sheet for all export arrangements (DOCX 332 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.