Government and industry share responsibility for managing the biosecurity risk associated with
importing bulk grain. Risks are managed at each step of the import journey, from the offshore farm to
the processing facility in Australia.
Find out how:
we assess the risks before issuing a permit
the risks are managed under any permits we issue
[expand all]
Step 1: Deciding to import
An Australian business may choose to import bulk grain for a range of commercial reasons. This may be
due to product specifications or to meet shortfalls due to low domestic production.
Step 2: Applying for a permit
The importer contacts us to discuss the import. Then the importer applies for a permit.
• 
•

Step 3: Assessing the offshore risks
Our scientists assess the biosecurity risks of importing from the proposed source country. They verify
the presence or absence of pests or diseases of biosecurity concern and pest control practices. They also
check the systems in place for producing, harvesting, storing, transporting and processing grain
destined for export. The scientists recommend ways for reducing the risks to provide the Appropriate
Level of Protection (ALOP) for Australia.
Step 4: Assessing the application
We audit the proposed onshore facilities, systems and processes. We verify that the proposed strategies
can manage the associated risks to a very low level and provide feedback to the applicant. The applicant
may need to update their proposed Process Management System and Site Operations Manual
accordingly.

Step 5: Application decision
We will issue a permit only if we are is confident that the applicant’s proposed management strategies
can reduce the biosecurity risks along the entire import journey to a very low level. The permit includes
conditions the importer must meet to manage those risks. This includes the requirement to:
source from low risk countries
ensure cleanliness and control any spillage and dust during transport, storage and processing.
Permit conditions are legally enforceable.
Ongoing: Regulating the import
Once a permit is issued, we will verify that the importer is meeting the requirements of the permit at
each step during the importation.
We may intervene at any time to stop activity or require it to be done differently.
We can also suspend, vary or cancel the permit or approved arrangement at any time.
• 
•

Step 6: Sourcing
The importer must source the grain from the area and country stated in the permit we have issued.
Step 7: Handling and transport in the source country
Equipment and transport systems used to move the grain from the farm to the point of loading at the
port must all be free from pests and animal material of biosecurity concern.
The grain must be loaded at the port stated in the permit.
The importer must provide a supplier’s declaration and government certification to show they have met
these conditions.
Step 8: Pre-export

Both the grain and the ship used for transporting must be inspected by the exporting country’s
government. They must be certified as free of live insects and foreign materials of biosecurity concern.
The importer must provide this certification as evidence they have met this condition.
Step 9: Arrival in Australia
The grain must remain secured in the ship’s hold until our biosecurity officers have inspected and taken
samples of the grain.
They will only allow the grain to be discharged from the ship if it meets Australia’s import
requirements.
Step 10: Onshore storage of the grain
The grain must be stored under biosecurity control at a facility authorised by us (approved
arrangement).
A Site Operations Manual we have approved must be in place for the facility outlining the processes for
managing the grain within the site.

Step 11: Transport to processing facility
The grain must be transported along department-approved routes and tracked from discharge at the
port to the processing facility. The grain must be securely transported to minimise leakage and dust in
accordance with the importer’s Process Management System document.
The importer must record all grain movements and provide us with daily grain weight reconciliations.
Step 12: Onshore processing
The grain must be handled and processed to reduce plant and animal biosecurity risks as outlined in the
importer’s Site Operations Manual.
The processed product can only be:
released after the approved facility has demonstrated that the conditions of the permit have been
met
used for purposes approved by us.
• 
•

Step 13: Decommissioning of onshore facilities
At the end of the import program, the storage and processing facilities must be comprehensively
cleaned to prevent future cross contamination from the imported grain. The cleaning processes must be
approved by us prior to doing the work.
The storage and processing of domestic grain can only commence once we have inspected and approved
the decommissioned facilities.
Download the infographic
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry July 2025
Document
Pages File size
Importing bulk grain infographic PDF
1
2 MB
If you have difficulty accessing this file, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/plant-products/importing-bulk-grain/biosecurity-
risks