Imports of plants and their products from outside Australia can risk introducing weeds, pests and
diseases. These can threaten Australia’s natural environment, our food security and economy.
We set import conditions to reduce these risks. Learn more about how we manage plant biosecurity
risks.
Plant and plant products include any goods that contain ingredients or components of plant origin. This
includes wooden or bamboo articles, cut flowers and foliage, horticultural produce, seeds and plants for
planting and other plant-derived food, pet food and stockfeed.
News and alerts
Xylella
On 20 January 2027, the import conditions for nursery stock that can host Xylella will change.
Find out how the updated import conditions may affect you.
Khapra beetle
We’re strengthening import requirements to address the risk of Khapra beetle (Trogoderma granarium)
from entering Australia. Find out how Khapra beetle measures will affect you.
Types of plant imports
Animal feed
How to import plant-based animal feed including stockfeed, aquaculture feed and pet food.
Bulk grain

How to import bulk grain for onshore processing.
Cut flowers and foliage
How to import fresh and dried cut flowers and foliage for commercial or personal use.
Food, drink and supplements
How to import plant-based products for human consumption. This includes food, drink, medicine, and
therapeutics. For commercial or personal use.
Fresh produce
How to import unprocessed or partially processed fresh fruit and vegetables for commercial or personal
use.
Live plants

How to import nursery stock for planting or propagating.
Plant products applied to soils and plants
How to import plant-based fertilisers, growing media, soil conditioners, bioremediation agents and
geotextiles.
Plant products for cultural and seasonal events
How to import goods into Australia for cultural or seasonal events or as souvenirs.
Plant research material
How to import plant-based research material.
Seeds for planting

How to import seeds for planting or sowing.
Timber, bamboo and wood products
How to import timber, wooden articles, bamboo and related products.
Importing into external territories
We have set special import conditions designed to protect the unique environment of these islands.
In Australia
Do your goods need a permit?
Some goods can only be imported into Australia under an import permit we have granted. If you need
an import permit, ensure you apply well ahead of the goods arrival in Australia.
Onshore processing at an approved arrangement class 3.0
Some plant products can be processed in Australia. This can only take place at a facility that operates
under an approved arrangement with us.
Compliance-based intervention scheme
The Compliance Based Intervention Scheme rewards importers of selected plant products who show
consistent compliance with Australia’s biosecurity requirements with risk-based inspection rates.
Advice for consumers
Sending or ordering plants from outside Australia
Be aware of our strict import conditions before you send or order plant material from outside Australia.

Travellers bringing plants and plant products
If you’re travelling to Australia, you must meet our strict conditions for any plant material you bring.
Plate it. Don’t plant it.
Avoid introducing exotic pests and diseases into our environment through food meant for cooking or
eating by following these simple rules.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/plant-products