If you notice sick or dead birds or other animals, you should not touch them. If there are multiple sick
Record your location and report it to the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
If you have pet birds or backyard chickens, there are simple steps you can take to help protect your
Avian influenza can only be confirmed through laboratory testing of samples collected by a veterinarian
If you notice something unusual, talk to your local vet or call the Emergency Animal Disease hotline on
H5 bird flu spreads easily and can infect backyard poultry and pet birds through:
If you own backyard poultry or other birds, these simple steps will help protect them
Remove litter, sand and grit from the aviary between batches of birds, and every few months for
Thoroughly clean concrete floors, walls and aviary wire with soapy water. Apply disinfectant after

Don't share equipment with other birdkeepers unless it has been thoroughly cleaned and
Prevent contact with wild birds by restricting access to open ponds, lakes and creeks. Protective
netting or keeping them housed can help prevent wild birds from mingling with yours. Some
Ensure water supplied to birds is from a chlorinated mains water supply or a clean bore. If these
sources aren't available use water that has been properly treated (see the Water Biosecurity
Don't allow wild birds or pest animals to contaminate your birds feed. Store it in a container with
Clean your footwear and wash clothing regularly. Avoid using the same clothing and footwear
All bird equipment and permanent carrying containers should be cleaned and disinfected before
At home, show birds should always undergo a period of quarantine before returning to the flock.
Ask visitors to wash their hands. Practice good hygiene and put on clean protective clothing. Use
footbaths containing the correct disinfectants at the entrance to bird areas or sheds.
Separate and monitor new birds for at least 30 days before introducing them to your existing
Always source birds from a reputable producer or breeder whose bird health status is known.

There is an increased risk of disease spreading at exhibitions because birds are brought in from many
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/animal/avian-influenza/help-protect/bird-