If you notice sick or dead birds or other animals, you should not touch them. If there are multiple sick
or dead birds or other animals, take photos or a video.
Record your location and report it to the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
If there is a bird flu outbreak
Governments will provide information publicly if there is a bird flu outbreak.
National poultry biosecurity measures
The Consultative Committee for Emergency Animal Disease (CCEAD) endorsed a framework on
national poultry biosecurity measures that commenced on 31 July. Under this framework, state and
territory governments are responsible for issuing advice on biosecurity measures using a risk-based
approach.
Find out more about bird flu in your state or territory.
See more on our current responses to pests and diseases in Australia at outbreak.gov.au 
Commercial poultry producers and workers must use effective on-farm biosecurity and hygiene
Infectious diseases like bird flu can spread directly to poultry from wild birds. It can also spread via
contaminated clothing, footwear, equipment or vehicles. Bird flu can spread between birds. It can also
spread via contaminated poultry products, feed, equipment or other items. The virus can survive for
long periods in droppings, respiratory secretions, water, feathers, eggs and meat.
Know the signs of bird flu
Signs of bird flu usually appear in several or all birds in a flock, including:
sudden death
lethargy or reluctance to walk, eat or drink
droopy appearance or ruffled feathers
head or limb swelling
bruising of the wattle, comb, feet or skin
respiratory signs such as panting, nasal discharge or sneezing
diarrhoea
unusual head or neck posture, uncoordination, inability to walk or stand
unusual reduction in egg production.

Report sick or dead birds
Bird flu is a notifiable animal disease. You must immediately report it if you think one or more of your
birds are infected. If you spot sick or dead birds keep your distance.
Call your local vet or the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
If bird flu is found
If H5 bird flu is detected in Australia, state and territory governments will provide information specific
to your farm.
Visit outbreak.gov.au for information on current responses to pests and diseases in Australia.
Commercial poultry producers and workers must use effective on-farm biosecurity and hygiene
Experience from overseas shows that strong biosecurity is the most effective way to prevent the spread
of bird flu.
Everyday actions outlined in your biosecurity plan will reduce the risk of diseases entering a farm. This
is the most important step you can take to protect your birds and your business. Actions outlined in the
plan will reduce the risk of bird flu and other diseases coming onto your farm.
See our online resource links below to help you create a biosecurity plan.
Find out more on how to manage the biosecurity risks for commercial poultry.
Biosecurity manuals
National Farm Biosecurity Manual - Poultry Production
National Water Biosecurity Manual - Poultry Production
Chickens – Farm Biosecurity

Industry resources
Watch
If you notice any unusual signs of disease in your herd or on your farm, including in wild birds, record
your location and report it to the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
Maintaining strong farm biosecurity practices is critical to protecting your animals.
Australia has well-established, nationally agreed arrangements in place to respond to emergency animal
diseases like H5 bird flu.
Bird flu mainly affects birds but can sometimes infect other animals.
Experience from overseas shows that strong biosecurity is the most effective way to prevent the spread
of bird flu. Good biosecurity reduces the risk of disease entering and spreading on your property.
Livestock producers are encouraged to use sound biosecurity practices and ensure their farm
biosecurity plans are current.
You should:
quarantine new stock before entering the herd,
minimise contact between livestock and wild birds where possible
limit visitors to your property
ensure vehicles, equipment and footwear are clean and disinfected
Reducing the attractiveness of your property to wild birds is important. This may include:
covering or managing feed and water sources
using netting where appropriate
removing access to standing water near areas where livestock reside
Livestock producers should report any unusual signs of disease in their animals, including drops in
production, to their veterinarian or the 24/7 Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
Members of the public and farmers are also encouraged to report multiple sick or dead wild birds via
the same hotline.
Current risk to livestock
An independent risk assessment has found that if H5 bird flu establishes in wild birds:
the risk to dairy and pork industries is estimated to be low

the risk to beef cattle, sheep and goats is estimated to be negligible.
Preparedness planning and biosecurity remain essential to minimise any potential impacts.
Find out more on how to manage farm biosecurity risks.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/animal/avian-influenza/help-protect/
poultry-farmers