If you notice sick or dead birds or other animals, you should not touch them. If there are multiple sick or dead birds or other animals, take photos or a video.

Record your location and report it to the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.

You can find and download our resources in different languages and formats. Use these resources to educate and raise awareness of H5 bird flu.

Fact sheets

Videos

Videos - educational

Videos - from the Australian Chief Veterinary Officer

First Nations resources

Bird flu awareness – Keep watch for bird flu

One day, a group of friends are fishing.

Not far off, Jim notices a shore bird struggling, then wobbling, and finally collapses to the ground.

Jim jumps up to get a closer look, but Pam stops him, telling him that the bird may have a highly infectious virus called bird flu.

Seeing Jim's surprise, Pam explains that the birds migrating between countries can carry bird flu virus.

Lately, a nasty strain of this virus has been causing trouble globally, affecting chickens, wild birds, and other animals, including mammals such as dolphins and seals.

Jim and his friends learned that people occasionally catch the virus from handling infected birds.

To stay safe, Pam advises that they keep their distance and avoid contact with sick birds.

Bird flu may look like one sick or dead bird or many.

It affects ducks, migratory shore birds, sea birds, birds of prey, and domestic birds like chickens.

The group soon notices more sick birds, some wobbling and others already laying down.

Alarmed, they asked Pam what to do next.

She tells them to avoid record report, avoid contact with sick or dead birds, record the time, date, location of the sighting if you can, take some photos or videos and report to the relevant authorities as soon as possible.

You can also report your findings to a Ranger by security officer, government debt or trusted adult.

So keep watch and report any unusual signs or behaviours in wildlife, including any sick birds or increasing number of bird deaths in the area.

What you need to know about H5 avian influenza (bird flu) poster

What you need to know about H5 avian influenza (bird flu) - Pet birds and chickens poster

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

Guides

Postcards

What you need to know about H5 avian influenza (bird flu) – chicken owner postcard

What you need to know about H5 avian influenza (bird flu) - nature postcard

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

Social media content

These social media tiles can be used on your social media channels to raise awareness of H5 bird flu.

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

Webinars

Download webinar video transcript

If you have difficulty accessing this file, contact us for help.

About us