If you notice sick or dead birds or other animals, you should not touch them. If there are multiple sick or dead birds or other animals, take photos or a video.

Record your location and report it to the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.

We can all play a role in protecting Australia’s unique wildlife from H5 bird flu by reporting sick or dead wildlife and taking steps to reduce the risk of spreading the disease.

How you can help

If H5 bird flu spreads through Australia’s wildlife, some native species may face long-term population impacts.

H5 bird flu has had a significant impact where birds gather in large numbers, like ducks and geese, seabirds and on birds of prey (birds that eat other animals).

In other countries, the virus has only affected mammals and birds and not other animals like reptiles, fish and amphibians.

Australia has unique animals that are found nowhere else in the world. This means the impacts of this disease are hard to predict.

Healthy habitats and strong populations give native species the best chance to withstand the impacts of H5 bird flu. This means continuing our efforts to support species recovery, build resilience and reduce other threats.

If you’re visiting nature trails, beaches, wetlands or other areas with wildlife, you can also play a role in protecting them.

If you see sick or dead wildlife

Bird flu is a notifiable animal disease. You must report any sick or dead birds.

Avoid contact

If you spot sick or dead birds keep your distance. Don’t touch the birds, their feathers, dropping, eggs, or the area around them. Keep pets away too – don’t let them sniff, touch, or eat the birds.

Record what you see

If safe, take photos or a video. Remember to keep your distance.

Record these details:

- date and time

- location (GPS pin, nearby roads, or landmarks)

- type or description of birds

- how many birds are sick or dead

- what they look like (e.g. freshly dead or just bones, signs of disease)

Report it

Call the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.

You will be directed to your state and territory government.

Safe disposal of dead birds

You should only consider disposing of dead birds on your property once you have spoken to the Emergency Animal Disease Hotline. It is important to dispose of dead birds safely. If you don’t, you could risk getting sick or spreading the virus to other animals.

If you find a dead bird in your backyard

After reporting, you are responsible for disposing of dead birds found on your property if you do not wish to leave the carcass to decompose where it is. Report sick or dead birds. Follow any instructions on what to do with the carcass.

Guidance and requirements on disposal of dead wildlife may vary between and within states and territories and may depend on the situation.

Check your state or territory before acting.

On public land

If you are not the property owner, leave any dead birds or animals where they are and report what you have found. Find out how to report.

Leaving carcasses to decompose is sometimes safer and less disruptive in remote areas. Clean-up could cause wild birds to scatter and spread the virus further.

Public access to the area may be limited during clean-up or decomposition. This is to keep people safe and reduce disturbance.

Wildlife carers

How you work with and care for wildlife is important to help protect Australia’s unique wildlife. To help reduce the spread of disease you should:

- have a biosecurity plan in place

- make sure injured or sick birds in care do not mingle with any pet birds or other animals

- keep aviaries and animal handling equipment clean, this includes bedding.

Wildlife Health Australia has a free online toolkit for people who care for wildlife.

People who manage wildlife populations can take steps to prepare for a potential outbreak.

You need to be aware of:

- the signs and symptoms of H5 bird flu

- how it spreads

- how to prepare your property or site

Work safely with birds

Visit the Australian Centre for Disease Control to find out more about protecting yourself or to access the Bird flu toolkit for people who work with birds.

Bird flu signs in wildlife

Find out more on biosecurity and wildlife health incidents.

Resources

If you work with wild birds and animals, Wildlife Health Australia has toolkits and information to help you prepare for H5 bird flu.

State and territory wildlife pages

Find more guidance and resources from your state and territory government.