If you notice sick or dead birds or other animals, you should not touch them. If there are multiple sick
Record your location and report it to the 24-hour Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888.
We can all play a role in protecting Australia’s unique wildlife from H5 bird flu by reporting sick or dead
If H5 bird flu spreads through Australia’s wildlife, some native species may face long-term population
H5 bird flu has had a significant impact where birds gather in large numbers, like ducks and geese,
In other countries, the virus has only affected mammals and birds and not other animals like reptiles,
Australia has unique animals that are found nowhere else in the world. This means the impacts of this
Healthy habitats and strong populations give native species the best chance to withstand the impacts of
H5 bird flu. This means continuing our efforts to support species recovery, build resilience and reduce
If you’re visiting nature trails, beaches, wetlands or other areas with wildlife, you can also play a role in
If you spot sick or dead birds keep your distance. Don’t touch the birds, their feathers, dropping, eggs,
or the area around them. Keep pets away too – don’t let them sniff, touch, or eat the birds.

You should only consider disposing of dead birds on your property once you have spoken to the
Emergency Animal Disease Hotline. It is important to dispose of dead birds safely. If you don’t, you
After reporting, you are responsible for disposing of dead birds found on your property if you do not
wish to leave the carcass to decompose where it is. Report sick or dead birds. Follow any instructions on
Guidance and requirements on disposal of dead wildlife may vary between and within states and
If you are not the property owner, leave any dead birds or animals where they are and report what you
Leaving carcasses to decompose is sometimes safer and less disruptive in remote areas. Clean-up could
Public access to the area may be limited during clean-up or decomposition. This is to keep people safe
How you work with and care for wildlife is important to help protect Australia’s unique wildlife. To help
make sure injured or sick birds in care do not mingle with any pet birds or other animals

Wildlife Health Australia has a free online toolkit for people who care for wildlife.
People who manage wildlife populations can take steps to prepare for a potential outbreak.
Visit the Australian Centre for Disease Control to find out more about protecting yourself or to access
If you work with wild birds and animals, Wildlife Health Australia has toolkits and information to help
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/animal/avian-influenza/wildlife