Unlocking the power of information
ABARES' data specialists are the backbone of our operations.
They drive innovation, efficiency, and rigour to ensure ABARES research and analysis is supported by quality data.
Your role as a data specialist with ABARES is not just a job — it's an opportunity to shape the future of data management in the agricultural and natural resource sectors.
Strategic Data Management
Our data specialists manage the Bureau's data infrastructure, ensuring it operates seamlessly to meet corporate objectives. The team continuously enhance data and information management processes, setting and upholding high standards.
They also support ABARES business systems from publications and library cataloguing through to providing in-house technical support to our research teams. And they play a vital role in supporting the Bureau through large corporate IT changes to ensure seamless transitions.
Innovative Automation
As a specialist is this area you will be involved in researching, delivering, and engaging with modern technologies to automate data processing, ensuring efficiency and accuracy in every operation.
Insightful Delivery
We know that data means nothing if we can’t communicate it to others. ABARES data specialists harness the power of business intelligence tools like PowerBI and Tableau to deliver compelling insights from our data resources.
Platform Evolution
As technology advances, our team delves into how we can get the best out of our systems. They contribute to the research, development, coordination, and delivery of innovations, propelling the ABARES data platform into the future.
Collaborative Stakeholder Engagement
ABARES is passionate about sharing knowledge to help advance Australia’s agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors.
Our data specialists engage with internal and external stakeholders, including state and territory governments and Research and Development Corporations, on IT and data-related matters.
They also collaborate with agencies such as the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Bureau of Meteorology and CSIRO on pilot projects which contribute to impactful initiatives like the farmpredict model and our farm data analysis.
Development opportunities
We’re committed to ensuring our data specialists have a well-rounded perspective. Our staff take part in a range of development and training opportunities including:
- online and in-house training in modern data processing tools and technologies
- mentoring in Agile project management methodologies
- participation or leadership roles in ABARES and DAFF data working groups
- work on joint projects with DAFF and/or external stakeholders
ABARES is fully supportive of continuing education, and study support is available for relevant courses.
Mad about data? Visit the Department’s careers page for current opportunities.