May 2025

Fee-Free TAFE for agriculture

Overview

Australian agriculture and its processing are critical to Australia’s economy. The production of high-quality Australian food and fibre plays a significant role in supporting global food security. The agriculture sector is always evolving and will need ongoing access to new and updated skills to succeed into the future.

Fee-Free TAFE

Fee-Free places are now available for students keen to commence a career in agriculture, as well as for existing workers looking to upskill.

Over $1.4 billion has been committed across the Commonwealth and state and territory governments from 2023 to 2026. Fee-Free TAFE is supporting industries that need more skilled workers, including agriculture and other growing sectors. Fee-Free TAFE provides opportunities for Australians to access short courses, certificates, or diplomas.

Agriculture is a national priority under Fee-Free TAFE. The number of places available for courses related to the agriculture sector varies across states and territories. Please check with your local TAFE on the availability of agriculture courses under Fee-Free TAFE.

Who can apply Australians who are keen to commence a career in agriculture, as well as existing workers looking to upskill, are encouraged to apply for a Fee-Free TAFE course. The following priority groups are also encouraged to enrol as States and Territories look to support local needs and initiatives:

First Nations Australians

young people (17-24)

people who are out of work or receiving income support payments

unpaid carers

women facing economic insecurity

women undertaking study in non-traditional fields

people with disability

certain categories of visa holders.

Each State and Territory has eligibility criteria that meets local needs.

From 2027, the Australian Government has made Free TAFE a permanent feature of the national VET system, supporting at least 100,000 places per year under the Free TAFE Act 2025. The Australian Government is working closely with state and territory governments on the details of the ongoing fee-free TAFE.

Courses

Explore a broad range of exciting courses in agriculture such as:

handling highly sophisticated agricultural technology

specialised livestock production

digital agronomy

agribusiness management

and more.

More information

Students, employers and agricultural businesses interested in learning more about Fee-Free TAFE, can visit www.yourcareer.gov.au/fee-free-tafe. Through the Your Career website, you can explore hundreds of in-demand job pathways and find your local state and territory TAFE or vocational training provider for further details on enrolment, eligibility and course availability.

Frequently Asked Questions

When can I enrol in a Fee-Free course?

Fee-Free course enrolments are open, subject to state and territory eligibility and availability.

If I’m not in the priority groups, am I eligible to apply?

Yes, you can still apply, and we encourage you to contact your local State and Territory TAFE or vocational training provider for further details on enrolment, eligibility and course availability.

Why is eligibility different across States and Territories?

States and territories have developed eligibility criteria that provides access to training for  priority cohorts to support local needs in their jurisdictions.

How long will the courses be Fee-Free?

Fee-Free places are available for learners, subject to funding availability, and will remain free for eligible learners for the duration of the course, subject to eligibility and availability of courses in states and territories.

What qualifications are offered?

A wide range of training is on offer, with opportunities for learners to upskill through a short course, a certificate I, II, III or a diploma. Contact your State and Territory TAFE for details or vocational training provider for details.

Who can deliver Fee-Free training?

Fee-Free TAFE and vocational education places are mainly available through public TAFEs and public dual-sector providers. In special cases where TAFEs don’t have enough capacity, other providers may be used, such as First Nations community-owned registered training organisations. To find training providers in your area, visit the Your Career website.

What does ‘Fee-Free’ mean?

‘Fee-Free’ means that your tuition fees are covered, subject to funding availability, and will remain free for the duration of the course.

Will I have to pay fees or other expenses?

There may be additional fees associated with the specific course you choose to undertake, which will vary between course providers and between states or territories. These costs could include administration fees, and books or materials required for study.

Will Fee-Free places be offered mid-year?

Some courses begin at different times throughout the year, depending on local training capacity, and will remain fee-free for the duration of the course. Contact your local TAFE for details on course enrolment and start dates.

I am studying now. What does this mean for me?

Contact your local TAFE for specific information on the state and territory initiatives that support students to access education.