Accrediting properties for protocol markets

Australia’s horticulture industry operates in a highly competitive international market.

Importing countries are increasingly requiring assurance of the integrity of Australian exports. Meeting the requirements of our trading partners is key to continuing strong global demand for our products.

In response to this demand, we accredit properties for protocol markets to:

- streamline and clarify export processes

- protect our reputation as an exporter of high-quality agricultural products (primarily due to our high standards across all stages of the supply chain, from farm to consumer)

- grow Australia’s market access by demonstrating the robust export assurance arrangements in place.

Property accreditation required

Properties, including farms and packhouses, will need to be accredited by the department, if the importing country requires the property to follow specific procedures or systems.

The circumstances where properties must be accredited under the Export Control Act 2020 and Plant Rules are set out in the Accredited Properties (Prescribed Plants and Plant Products) List.

Download

Accredited Properties (Prescribed Plant and Plant Product) List (PDF 283 KB)

Accredited Properties (Prescribed Plant and Plant Product) List (DOCX 132 KB)

Managers of properties will need to apply to have their property accredited.

Clients should also be aware of terminology that may be used interchangeably in importing country requirements, the new legislation and departmental policies.

| Previous / Protocol agreement | Legislation / Policy | 

|---|---|

| Registration | Accredited property | 

| Export approval | Accredited property | 

| Patch, orchard, etc. | Block | 

| Grower | Farm | 

| Owner/responsible party | Manager | 

| Approval | Accreditation | 

Important information for property managers

As the manager of a horticulture export accredited property, there are some important things you must do and know. Further information is available on the management, requirements, performance standards, and audit of horticulture export accredited properties. This factsheet steps through common situations you may encounter and what you should do.

Download

Information for managers of accredited properties (PDF 300 KB)

Information for managers of accredited properties (DOCX 625 KB)

Protocol export requirements

Protocol requirements may include:

- pest and disease management requirements on farm

- traceability, and packaging requirements

- treatment and inspection requirements

Exporters are responsible for checking the export regulatory requirements.

Before you export:

- check Exporting plants and plant products: A step-by-step guide for Australian exporters

- check Manual of Importing Country Requirements, including protocols and workplans

- talk to the importing country authority if you are unsure of the import conditions.

Management and audit of accredited properties

Find out more about management and audit of horticulture export accredited properties, and the performance standards, in the Plant Export Operations Manual.

Apply for accreditation

Industry Advice Notices will call for applications to be submitted through online industry systems or as manual application forms submitted to the department prior to annual export seasons commencing.

To receive notification when applications open for export to specific markets, register for Industry Advice Notices.

Apply for crop monitor training

Before conducting crop monitoring activities, crop monitors are required to complete online training and pass the associated assessments. Crop monitors must register to conduct crop monitor training by completing and submitting the Crop Monitor Training Registration Form.