This course has been designed for Authorised Officer (AO) candidates wanting to perform export

inspections of fruit and vegetables for protocol markets (markets that have specific import procedures).

Prior to undertaking export inspections of fruit and vegetables for protocol markets, you must be

the Environment for the job function HEP4001: Export inspection of horticulture protocol.

This job function covers specific importing country requirements for nine different fruit and vegetable

commodity groups. You can choose to be trained in either a single group or combination of groups. A

list of the different groups and the specific commodities they cover, is available in the Reference: Table

of authorised officer job functions within the

Plant Export Operations Manual.

The learning and assessment methods for this course include:

Mandatory facilitated training

Competency based assessment.

A working knowledge of export inspection requirements, procedures and techniques is fundamental for

AOs carrying out this job function.

This course provides you with the knowledge and skills to effectively conduct, document and record

inspections of fruit and vegetables for export to protocol markets.

Mandatory facilitated training (Approximately 6 hours)

The combination of instructional material published on the Plant Export Operations Manual and

facilitated training, delivered by a department Plant Export Assessor (PEA), will develop your

understanding of your role and responsibilities as an AO when performing this job function.

Competency based assessment (Approximately 2.5 hours)

After completing the facilitated training, you are required to demonstrate your competency to a PEA,

through an assessment.

Refer to the HEP4001 Competency and Assessment Requirements document for more detailed

information about the assessment and competency requirements for this job function.

Download

Document

File size

HEP4001 Competency and Assessment Requirements PDF

266 KB

HEP4001 Competency and Assessment Requirements DOCX 104 KB

• 

•

Ongoing

Following successful completion of the course, and being deemed competent by a PEA, you must:

maintain ongoing competency

carry out this job function in line with the relevant policies and procedures

be audited by the department

participate in additional training and assessment as required.

HOR3002 Export inspection of fruit and vegetables—before requesting training or assessment for

a HEP4001 commodity group, you must have successfully completed the assessment for the

related commodity group/s under the HOR3002course (for example, citrus).

On successful completion of the course, you will receive an Instrument of Appointment accrediting you

in the job function HEP4001: Export inspection of horticulture protocol—for the commodity groups for

which you have been trained—permitting you to inspect those commodities for export, on behalf of the

department.

This course is flexible and the duration varies significantly from person to person. The duration of each

course requirement (outlined under Course Requirements) is a guide only and you are encouraged to

only nominate for an assessment when you determine you are ready.

Mandatory facilitated training – will take place at a location of the candidate’s choosing, in

consultation with a Plant Export Assessor

Competency based assessment – will take place at a location of the candidate’s choosing, in

consultation with a Plant Export Assessor.

The facilitated training will take place at a date arranged by the candidate and the department,

depending on demand.

Fees and charges apply to becoming an AO and maintaining your AO appointment. Further information

about AO fees and charges is available on the department’s website.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/plants-plant-products/ao/job-functions/

export-inspection-horticulture-protocol

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•