Agriculture makes an important contribution to the Australian economy. Around two-thirds of our
farm, fish and forestry production—worth around $52 billion—is exported to more than 100 countries
annually. Australia’s plant industries generate more than $12 billion in export revenue for the economy.
In 2018, the National Farmers Federation published its 2030 Roadmap to achieve $100 billion in farm
We have worked with internal and external stakeholders, the latter represented by the Horticulture and
Grain and Plant Products Export Industry Consultative Committees (HEICC and GPPEICC) to develop
a vision and strategic plan to support the plant export industry in achieving this goal over the next
The Plant Export Operations Strategic Plan 2020–2030 presents our vision for 2030, what it will look
like when we achieve that vision and the key strategies that will help us get there.
Plant Export Operations Strategic Plan 2020-2030 (PDF 1.0 MB) Plant Export Operations Strategic
products meet all Australian and importing country requirements. This maintains the integrity of our
exports, Australia’s positive relationships with trading partners and our reputation as a reliable
The department regulates plant and plant product exports and the inspections of empty containers and
Australia exports a diverse range of plants and plant products to many importing countries. These
include (but are not limited to) fresh fruit and vegetables, dried fruit, plants, cut flowers, nuts, timber,

Plants or plant products prescribed (listed) under Australian export laws are controlled by the
department and may require an export permit, inspection for compliance by an accredited Plant Export
Prescribed products must also be packed, treated (if required) and inspected at an establishment
registered with the department for the export of plants and plant products from Australia.
The following products are prescribed and regulated under Australian plant export law:
some grain and legumes (including barley, canola, chickpeas, dried field peas, faba beans, lentils,
any other plants and plant products where an importing country requires a phytosanitary (plant
health) certificate or any other official certificate (this may include nuts, fodder, timber products,
For more information about prescribed goods, please visit the department’s Exporting from Australia
To export plants and plant products, there are a few steps exporters will need to complete. For more
information, please see the Exporting plants and plant products: A step–by–step guide for Australian
The department provides export services to industry under cost recovery arrangements. Costs are
recovered through fees and charges that are imposed for the complete range of plant export inspection
This includes time spent on preparation and completion of export inspections, audits, treatment
monitoring and registrations, and the issuance of all export documentation. In some cases costs are also
The department’s Client Service Charter and Service Standards outline our commitment to our clients.
They describe our service responsibilities and the standard of service you can expect from our staff. We

strive to provide and maintain a high level of service by stating necessary lead times for the functions
The department issues Industry Advice Notices (IANs) to inform exporters of changes and updates
You can register to automatically receive IANs relevant to your business, or you can check the 
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/plants-plant-products