We are working to keep our agriculture industries strong and safeguard our environment and heritage
during the COVID-19 outbreak.
We know the importance of our agriculture sectors. Feeding our nation is an essential service. We want
to ensure high-quality produce can reach domestic and overseas markets.
We play an essential role in preserving our unique biodiversity. We want to ensure we can protect our
natural resources and heritage, and the public who want to enjoy them.
Find advice on COVID-19 and how it affects you and your activities.
Explore topics
Food security and agriculture
How we are securing Australia's agricultural food chain. From the farm to the table.
Environment permit holders
Advice for environmental permit and approval holders. How to make sure you meet your legal
obligations.
Exports

How you can ensure you can continue to export.
Imports
What you need to know about imported goods.
Domestic animals
There have been no reported cases in animals in Australia.
Human health
How you can help slow the spread of COVID‑19 in Australia and what to do if you have symptoms.
Managed by Department of Health and Aged Care.
Research and insights

We are conducting regular analysis of the impact of COVID-19 on agricultural industries and trade. This
will help inform our work with industry.
National park closures
We are prioritising the health and wellbeing of our visitors, staff and local communities.
Industry support
Industry engagement
We are working together to keep our agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries strong.
Fisheries
Help for fisheries to deal with the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Support from the Australian, state
and territory governments.

Business support
Financial assistance is available for Australian businesses. This is managed through business.gov.au.
Find out if you are eligible
Whole of government advice
You can also stay up to date on the latest Coronavirus news, updates and advice from other government
agencies across Australia.
In your area
Make sure you are aware of local requirements for travel and freight.
New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania
Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/coronavirus
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•