The Steering Committee met in May 2026 for the quarterly meeting. They discussed current and proposed Animalplan projects, the 2026 
The Secretariat published project updates from the February to April 2026 quarter on the Animalplan website.
The next Animalplan Steering Committee meeting will be held in August 2026. The Secretariat will also then publish updates for the May to July 2026 
Animalplan will host its first webinar of the year on 7 August 2026. It will update stakeholders on progress against the National Animal Health Diagnostics 
More information will be shared closer to the event via DAFF social media and the Animalplan website. 

o All crisis management plan templates and basic guidance videos are complete, and a final workshop will be held in May 2026.
• #44: Australia’s Animal Sector Antimicrobial Resistance Action Plan 2023 to 2028
o Australia’s Animal Sector AMR Action Plan 2023-2028 is undergoing a mid-term review.
o Risk based identification of 10 priority drug-bug-host combinations for surveillance is nearly complete.
o Dairy Australia will soon finalise antimicrobial resistance testing to estimate susceptibility profiles for E. coli (Escherichia) and Enterococcus 
• #64: Assessing the feasibility of testing trapped pooled insects for lumpy skin disease virus – Mosquitoes have been bred, raised and prepared for 
o Pools of mosquitoes will be tested to understand the lowest level of contamination with lumpy skin disease virus that can be detected.
• #66: Australian Animal Disease Genomics Initiative: building the molecular blueprints for animal health – The Australian Animal Disease Genomics 
Initiative ran a second request for project partnership proposals to generate foundational genomic data for priority animal pathogens, parasites 

• #67: Enhancing rapid decision-support for emergency animal disease outbreaks - HASTE – Phase one of the project has progressed to the final 
o Core deliverables have been completed, including modelling workflows, advancements in TAPPAS-2 capability and delivery of two 
o Engagement and collaboration with government and industry are ongoing to increase awareness and use of HASTE tools.
o Final reporting is underway, with potential next-phase activities under consideration.
• #72: CalfWays, Sustainable Dairy Calf Management Roadmap to 2035 – The CalfWays website is now live.
o Organisations are encouraged to subscribe to the quarterly newsletter and explore opportunities to support or collaborate