REDLINE 1800 803 006
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Redline is a free call service for people to
confidentially report information about suspected breaches of Australian biosecurity, meat or food
inspection laws. Breaches of Australian biosecurity, meat or food inspection laws include illegal
importation, providing fraudulent or misleading documentation, and bypassing directions given by the
department.
Seen an unusual pest or disease on your property or in goods, containers or parcels? Information and
contact numbers for reporting pests and diseases of biosecurity concern are available at Report a pest of
disease of concern
Reporting on the department's Redline
Redline allows callers to report matters that may not be detected, reported or acted on through other
means.
Some of the best people to spot breaches of Australian biosecurity, meat or food inspection laws in a
neighbourhood or workplace are those who are there everyday. As we go about our daily lives, we can
keep an eye out for anything that may seem unusual or suspicious. Whether or not something is
suspicious can depend on the circumstances. Look at the situation as a whole. If it doesn’t add up and
looks like a risk to our Australian biosecurity, meat or food inspection laws then call the Redline.
The Redline call should contain information about:
a person or company operating in Australia or sending goods into or out of Australia
sufficient details that could identity a breach of legislation
information that has made you suspicious that may contribute to the department detecting a risk
or a breach of legislation.
Contact your state or territory office concerning operational issues such as:
Arriving in Australia — Declare it!
Report a pest or disease of biosecurity concern
Requirements when travelling within Australia
General inquires - 1800 900 090 (free call from within Australia).
Investigations and enforcement contacts
Information supplied is valued, as callers are helping to protect Australia.
What happens if I call the Redline?
During business hours calls are usually answered by a departmental compliance officer or a message
can be left on the Redline service.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

If the occurrence falls within the department's area of responsibility, the officer will take a full report.
The departmental compliance staff may also want to interview the caller in person but this will depend
on the caller’s cooperation. After the report, an investigation may be launched or the information may
form part of the department's general information gathering procedures.
If the caller provides contact details and wants to be advised of the outcome of an investigation the
compliance officer will contact the caller with the results, but callers need to understand that the
department's ability to supply information back to callers may be restricted in line with legislative
obligations to protect privacy or to ensure proper administration of justice.
If the call provides information that can be handled by another authority, such as police or customs, the
departmental compliance officer will provide appropriate contact details to the caller or may forward
the information on to that other agency with the caller’s agreement.
Confidentiality
When you call the Redline leaving a name and contact details is not necessary, but if evidence is 'on the
record' it may help the department to better prosecute cases.
Information provided on the Redline is covered by relevant legislation that protects confidential
information such as the Privacy Act 1988 and the Freedom of Information Act 1982.
Other ways to report breaches
Email: Compliance
Postal address:
The Department of Agriculture Redline
Compliance and Enforcement
GPO Box 858
Canberra ACT 2601
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity/legislation/compliance/redline