Foreign Direct Investment in Australian Agriculture 

17 December 2024

This Insights article looks at the trends in foreign direct investment in Australia’s agricultural sector, its potential benefits, community concerns about it, and the range of Australian policies that are involved in its regulation.

What Asia Wants: Long-term agrifood demand in Asia - 2023 Revision (PDF)

5 May 2023

This research report identifies export market growth opportunities in Australia’s nearby region, contributing to an information base to support agricultural exporters’ diversification, while also helping policymakers to identify priorities for market access. The report presents an update to modelling results in What Asia Wants, a series of reports from ABARES from 2012 to 2015 utilising the ABARES Agrifood Model.

ABARES Insights: Australia’s future agricultural trade advantage (PDF)

16 Mar 2022

This Insights paper examines the erosion of Australia's tariff advantages over competitors in our agricultural export markets, as competitors negotiate FTAs and gain similar advantages. The paper emphasises the importance of FTAs and identifies actions for Australian agricultural exports to remain competitive in international markets.

This ABARES Insights report examines the drivers of food demand in Indonesia and outlines opportunities for Australian agricultural exporters.

Understanding effects of supply disruptions on globally and locally focused economies (PDF)

19 Apr 2021

This paper explores the implications of trade and support policies designed to increase local production to reduce the risks of international shocks such as pandemics. It provides input into current debates around creating more locally based supply chains through inward focused policies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic as a means to build sector resilience and longer-term growth. The paper depicts a hypothetical series of international shocks rather than seeking to estimate the economic costs of the recent COVID-19 pandemic.

ABARES Insights: Value creation in Australia through agricultural exports

15 Dec 2020

This Insights article addresses concerns that the Australian economy may be missing opportunities for domestic value creation because of the focus on trade in raw and minimally processed agricultural products. To do this, the report analyses the returns across the economy from agricultural exports, comparing different pathways for value creation, such as adding attributes or further downstream processing. In contrast to some suggestions, the report finds that Australia’s focus on raw and minimally processed agricultural products outperforms alternatives, and we are not missing out on opportunities to create value.

ABARES Insights: Opportunities in India (PDF)

3 Apr 2020

This ABARES Insights report provides analysis and modelling results of projected agricultural and food demand in India. This report largely summarises and updates data previously released in the 2014 ABARES report 'What India Wants'.

The world’s food and fibre is increasingly being produced within global production networks that span a number of countries. Australian agriculture is already part of these chains and benefiting through export and employment growth. However, while global value chains are offering new opportunities, both within agriculture and for the sectors that support it, recent trade disruptions and a lack of progress in multilateral trade negotiations pose risks. This report examines how global value chains have created new opportunities for Australian agriculture and how they are important for further opening of import markets.

What Indonesia wants: Analysis of Indonesia's food demand to 2050 (PDF)

9 Nov 2015

With significant income growth and urbanisation, food demand in Indonesia is expected to increase significantly towards 2050. This study examines projected food demand in Indonesia across urban and rural populations under a business-as-usual policy environment with no changes to underlying policies.

What India wants: Analysis of India's food demand to 2050 (PDF)

26 Nov 2014

What India wants aims to assess future trends in Indian food consumption, production and trade under four hypothetical scenarios involving reform to existing producer and consumer support policies and increased investment in productivity and infrastructure.

What China wants: Analysis of China's food demand to 2050 (PDF)

4 Mar 2014

‘What China wants: Analysis of China's food demand to 2050’ investigates the developing agrifood production, consumption and trade trends out to 2050.

With food security at the forefront of government policy agendas worldwide, much of the focus is on how the world will respond to a rise in food demand over the next 40 years. Building on agrifood modelling in ‘Food demand to 2050: Opportunities for Australian agriculture’, this report uses three scenarios to investigate the possible response of world food prices, food production and trade to the projected increase in demand.

What Asia Wants: Long-term food consumption trends in Asia (PDF)

10 Oct 2013

What Asia wants assesses future trends in Asian food demand and identifies opportunities for Australian agriculture and food industries in expanding Asian markets over the long term.

Food demand to 2050: Opportunities for Australian agriculture

6 Mar 2012

ABARES has assessed the implications for Australian food exports of an increase in global food demand by 2050. The real value of world agri-food demand in 2050 (in 2007 US dollars) is projected to be 77 per cent higher than in 2007. The projections in this paper provide an assessment of a plausible scenario for growth in global food demand and the broad potential effects of this growth in food demand. A technical annex is also available.