Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
1 | P a g e 
 
Note from the Chair 
The last few months have been very busy for the RAWS. At the last RAWS Coordination Group 
meeting the RAWS (edition 2) was endorsed and I presented the RAWS (edition 2) to the OIE 
Regional Commission for the Asia, Far East and Oceania region. The new edition of the strategy 
was endorsed and will now be printed in several regional languages and made available 
throughout the region. 
The RAWS Coordination Group have revised the RAWS Action Plan and collated the completed 
activities to make the plan more user-friendly, this document outlines the key achievements and 
priorities to promote the RAWS. New activities are also planned to extend the reach of the RAWS 
and undertake further education and training in animal welfare. 
Across the region, member countries are reporting animal welfare achievements. New legislation to 
improve animal welfare is currently being developed or implemented in Bhutan, Thailand and 
China. Malaysia released its animal welfare strategy last year and now several countries in the region are considering 
developing their own national strategies. The new legislation and strategies will have real on-ground effects to improve 
animal welfare in those countries and provide potential models to share and improve animal welfare in the region. 
Looking forward, the RAWS CG secretariat and OIE headquarters are currently discussing the next proposed RAWS CG 
meeting in conjunction with the OIE Focal Point seminar in Seoul, Korea. The RAWS CG is also preparing a comprehensive 
paper on our proposed activities and past achievements for the Regional Commission meeting in Cebu, the Philippines. 
 
Gardner Murray 
Chairman 
RAWS Coordination Group 
Introduction 
The RAWS-News June 2013 edition covers the most recent meeting of the RAWS Coordination Group, the Regional 
Commission meeting in Paris and the progress of the second edition of the RAWS and the RAWS Action Plan. Member 
countries have also contributed their recent animal welfare achievements. The Secretariat encourages all members of the 
region to contribute to future editions of RAWS newsletter. For your contribution to future editions of RAWS newsletter, 
please provide your input to Ms Lee-Ann Swift via email at animal.welfare@daff.gov.au.  
 
Outcomes of the 5th RAWS Coordination Group meeting in Bangkok, Thailand 
The RAWS Coordination Group met from 26-27 March 2013 in Bangkok, Thailand (RAWS CG group pictures below). The 
group endorsed the RAWS (edition 2) and members provided updates on country and organisation activities. Some of the 
achievements that were discussed are outlined in the country summaries below. Using this information, the members 
considered what activities could be undertaken to build on the strategy and further animal welfare improvements in the region. 
The RAWS CG is now considering a number of possible activities related to communications, education and training. New 
activities will be announced in the RAWS News as they are finalised.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
2 | P a g e 
 
 
The RAWS CG also discussed a comprehensive paper to go to the regional commission meeting in the Philippines in 
November on the progress of the strategy and next steps. The paper will canvas the RAWS (Edition 2) endorsement, the 
RAWS Action Plan, governance of the RAWS and a communications plan going forward to promote further uptake of the 
RAWS.  
 
The May 2013 OIE Regional Commission Meeting in Paris, France 
The 81st OIE general session was held from 26-31 May in Paris, France. More than 800 people attended from 146 of the 178 
OIE Member Countries, international organisations and non-government organisations. At the opening session, the 
Australian Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry gave a presentation by video on animal welfare leadership.  
 
On 27 May 2013, the Regional Commission meeting for Asia, the Far East and Oceania met to discuss issues that affect the 
region. Dr Gardner Murray, Chair of the RAWS CG, presented the RAWS (Edition 2) to the Regional Commission for Asia, 
The Far East and Oceania. The RAWS was well received and has been endorsed by the Regional Commission. 
 
New OIE Animal Welfare Standard for Broiler Hens 
The OIE has adopted new a new standard on maintaining the animal welfare of broiler chickens including criteria and 
measurable outcomes for production systems. 
 
"This new chapter is the culmination of a long-term undertaking and it has taken OIE member countries several years to 
reach a consensus. It also goes to show that our organisation's international standards-setting process, based on scientific 
excellence and democratically adopted standards — one country, one vote — achieves results of worldwide importance," 
OIE Director General, Dr Bernard Vallat 
 
The RAWS (Edition 2) 
Over the past year and a half, the RAWS Coordination 
Group has been working to update the RAWS to 
reflect the achievements of the past four years. The 
RAWS (Edition 2) final version was endorsed by the 
coordination group at meeting 5 in March 2013 held in 
Bangkok, Thailand. 
 
The RAWS (Edition 2) retains the policy and strategy 
from the first edition of the RAWS as this is still central 
to the vision and goals for animal welfare in the region. 
 
The first edition of the RAWS was endorsed and 
published in 2008. The OIE Asia, Far East and 
Oceania Region is the only OIE Region to have such a 
strategy, now other OIE regions are considering 
drafting their own strategies following the success of 
the RAWS. The review of the RAWS is part of a 
regular process to ensure that the RAWS stays 
relevant and up-to-date. 
 
Endorsed by the OIE Regional Commission for Asia, 
The Far East and Oceania, the RAWS will be printed 
in several languages and available to members. 
Please email the RAWS Secretariat to request your 
copies now.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
3 | P a g e 
 
Update on the RAWS Action Plan 
At the last RAWS Coordination Group meeting, the group workshopped and updated the RAWS Action Plan. The Action 
Plan is a living document that brings together the activities and outcomes from meetings, and the previous RAWS 
Implementation Plan in an easy-access format. The activities are linked to the four RAWS goals and objectives to ensure 
that the strategy is progressing in line with the regional vision. Regional member countries are encouraged to seek a copy of 
the RAWS Action Plan from the RAWS Secretariat. 
 
Country Highlights 
 
Animal Welfare Legislation in China 
Last year, China drafted three farm animal welfare 
standards: good practice for the production of farm 
animals, good practice for the transportation of farm 
animals, and good practice for the slaughter of farm 
animals. Comments have now been received on the draft 
standards and they are being revised. 
 
These standards will re-enforce the current General 
Principles of Animal Welfare Assessment, which are non-
compulsory guidelines mainly focused on the treatment of 
livestock. As well as promoting animal welfare, these 
guidelines and standards recognise other benefits of 
improved animal welfare which include; increased 
production, fewer health problems, better meat quality and 
reducing animal welfare trade barriers. 
 
 
Update on Thailand’s investigation of stunning parameters for poultry 
In February The RAWS NEWS reported that the Department of Livestock Development (DLD) in collaboration with the 
Department of Biomedical Engineering of Mahidol University and the Department of Veterinary Public Health of Kasetsart 
University was analysing the electroencephalograms (EEGs) of stunned poultry in commercial slaughterhouse conditions. 
This study noted that food consumed by Muslims must be slaughtered by the Islamic way of Halal which includes that the 
animal must be alive at the time of slaughter and must be able to recover after stunning within 5 minutes. These 
requirements and meat quality were monitored in relation to the OIE’s electrical waterbath stunning method recommended 
prior to the slaughter of poultry.  
 
Somatosensory signs (corneal reflex and wing flapping) are not reliable to detect unconsciousness and as recording the 
pre-stunning EEG is not practical outside laboratory conditions. The study proposes that the real-time EEG interpretation 
method be used to monitor the unconsciousness after waterbath stunning of poultry using the shift of frequency bands (i.e. 
via a frequency based algorithm). Using the algorithm, there is a trend from lower to higher EEG activity after stunning while 
the bird is in recovery. The study also recommends that further field trials related to the clinical somatosensory signs be 
conducted in order to improve the technique. 
 
WSPA and Myanmar work together to develop Early Warning Systems 
WSPA has worked with the Livestock Breeding and Veterinary Department (LBVD) of Myanmar to provide Early Warning 
System training and kits to villagers who own livestock. With these kits, in times of disasters, livestock owners know when to 
evacuate with their livestock to safer ground and to take proper care of their animals. WSPA held a workshop for 5 townships 
in the Sagaing Region with 126 participants and has another four workshops planned to be completed during the year.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
4 | P a g e 
 
Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards 
As the Asia Representative of Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS) Steering Group, WSPA has actively 
been driving forward LEGS in the region to improve the welfare of animals in disasters. In 2013, WSPA is supporting at least 
six trainings in Vietnam, Thailand, Myanmar and in Fiji following the Commonwealth Veterinary Association conference in 
September. 
 
Veterinary Emergency Response Units  
The Veterinary Emergency Response Unit (VERU) 3-day course for veterinary students was developed by WSPA to teach 
veterinary students about disaster management and the role of veterinarians to protect the welfare of animals in crises. The 5th 
VERU workshop was held recently at Khonkaen University in Thailand with 58 veterinary students across Thailand. VERU 
training gives participants the skills and expertise to be able help animals affected by disasters more quickly and efficiently, in 
both the communities and regions where natural disasters are likely to increase in the future. 
 
Concepts in Animal Welfare Training Program 
WSPA believes that education is the key to achieving a world where animal welfare matters and animal cruelty ends. To 
promote animal welfare education, WSPA developed the First Concepts in Animal Welfare (FCAW) course and the 
Advanced Concepts in Animal Welfare (ACAW) course in conjunction with the School of Clinical Veterinary Science at the 
University of Bristol in England.   
 
Teachers from the South Delhi Municipal Corporation participating in the FCAW program in New Delhi, India have 
successfully been certified as animal welfare teachers in a graduation ceremony in April. In addition to training the teachers, 
the programme allows for the FCAW resources to be integrated into the current curriculum and helps to build the capacity of 
the South Delhi Municipal Corporation to ensure animal welfare is taught effectively in their schools. 
 
Together with the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration, WSPA launched the 2013-2014 FCAW teaching course late last 
month. It is expected that over the course of the year teachers from 52 schools across Bangkok will be taking part in the 
training. Over the first 3 months of the year, observations of classes of Vietnamese teachers enrolled in WSPA animal 
welfare education programme showed that many are successfully integrating animal welfare into their teaching and that their 
lessons are having a positive impact on their students. 
 
The ACAW stream of work has been developed further with the syllabus having been endorsed by the Federation of Asian 
Veterinary Association and The South East Asia Veterinary School Association. The teaching resource will be available in 
several South East Asian languages such as Indonesian and Thai, and WSPA recently launched the CAW syllabus in 
Vietnamese at a fruitful workshop in Hanoi, focusing on the welfare of livestock and animal welfare education 
 
Indonesian Humane Pre Slaughter Treatment and Slaughter of Local Cattle Project 
The Indonesian Veterinary Medical Assosiation (IVMA) and The World Society for The Protection of Animals (WSPA) have 
agreed to work together to improve the animal welfare in Indonesia through a project which focuses on the treatment of local 
cattle before slaughter and during slaughter procedures. The project aims to deliver an economically viable and culturally 
sensitive humane slaughter model for Indonesia (and potentially beyond). The collaborators for the project strongly believe 
that it has the potential to directly and sustainably improve the welfare during lairage, handling and slaughter of millions of 
local cattle – initially by pilot activities which, if successful, will be expanded further in conjunction with regional support.  
 
The animal welfare program within the project also receives the necessary support from the Government through the 
Directorate General of Livestock and Animal Health Services in order to assure local acceptance and collaboration. The 
existence of the Government Regulation no.95 year 2012 on Veterinary Public Health and Animal Welfare which just been 
enacted is in line with the project objectives that could facilitate sustainable improvements in animal welfare, strengthen 
auditing mechanisms and encourage new and existing market confidence in Indonesian cattle products.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
5 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Above: Delegates at the workshop on Indonesian Humane Pre Slaughter Treatment and Slaughter of Local Cattle Project 
 
Animal Welfare Farm Certification System in Korea 
On 4 August 2011, the Republic of Korea introduced farm certification standards for animal welfare. Under the system, the 
Government certifies that an animal farm breeds livestock humanely in accordance with animal welfare standards. The 
system is aimed at improving animal welfare, and the quality and safety of livestock products through farm management. 
These certification standards take into account the OIE animal welfare definition, the five animal freedoms and trade 
opportunities. 
 
Farm certification for laying hens was implemented on 20 March 2012. Now dozens of farms have been certified including 
7 free range farms for layer hens. Target dates for future certification standards are; pigs (2013), chickens (2014) and dairy 
and beef cattle (2015). 
 
The certification involves an assessment of common farm requirements; management processes including emergency plans, 
animal health plans and feed/water plans; environment including the stocking density, floor and litter, next boxes etc; and 
additional free-range criteria if the farm is applying for free-range certification. The Government of Korea is also providing 
support for animal welfare farms including guidance and training on improving the management and environment of farm 
facilities 
 
 
 
Left to right: farm certification sign, Animal welfare certification sticker and the inside area of a certified free-range layer hen 
farm.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
6 | P a g e 
 
New Zealand has a new code of welfare for 
Llamas and Alpacas 
A new code of welfare is now in place for the estimated 15,000 
South American camelids (Ilama, alpaca, guanaco and cross-
breeds of these) that are owned and cared for by New 
Zealanders. Llama and alpaca have become increasingly 
popular in New Zealand and are unique animals that require 
experience, skill and understanding for their proper care. 
This new code was developed by the National Animal Welfare 
Advisory Committee (NAWAC) in consultation with the New 
Zealand Llama Association and the Alpaca Association of New 
Zealand. It contains minimum standards and best practices 
relating to all aspects of llama and alpaca ownership and care 
including food, water, shelter, behaviour and socialising. 
One of the main requirements outlined in the code is a 
camelid’s strong need for companionship. Camelids are highly 
social and hierarchical animals and the code requires that they 
must always live with another animal, preferably of the same 
species. In addition, young llamas and alpacas also need to be 
reared with their own species in order to develop normal 
behaviours. 
The code and the explanatory report that accompanies it are 
available on the MPI website at: 
http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/regs/animal-welfare  
 
National Animal Welfare for New Zealand is released 
New Zealand’s Minister for Primary Industries, Nathan Guy, has released a New Zealand Animal Welfare Strategy on 2 May 
2013. The Strategy is not a detailed action plan, although it does give some initial priorities for the government. Rather, it 
gives a national focus for improvements and future work directions for all New Zealanders involved with animals. It sets out a 
high level framework for how New Zealanders treat animals and provides a formal foundation for New Zealand’s animal 
welfare legislation and policy. 
 
The underpinning values are: 
 
It says that it matters to us and to animals how animals are treated; 
 
We have responsibilities toward animals in our care and animals affected by our activities; 
 
Using animals is acceptable as long as it is humane. 
 
Under two key outcomes – care of animals, and our reputation for integrity, the Strategy lists four main routes toward 
maintaining high animal welfare standards: 
 
Better planning to prevent animal welfare problems; 
 
Better animal husbandry, science and technology; 
 
Clear expectation and sanction, with help for people to comply; and 
 
Measuring animal welfare performance. 
 
See http://www.mpi.govt.nz/biosecurity-animal-welfare/animal-welfare/new-zealand-animal-welfare-strategy

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u n e 2 0 1 3 
 
7 | P a g e 
 
 
 
Key Dates 
Event 
Date  
Location 
OIE AFEO Regional Commission meeting 
November 2013 
Cebu (Philippines) 
OIE AFEO focal point seminar  
27-29 August 2013 
Seoul (Korea) 
 
Newsletter Contacts 
Jim Paradice  
RAWS Secretariat 
Director, International Animal Welfare  
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
jim.paradice@daff.gov.au  
 
+61 2 6272 5532 
 
Lee-Ann Swift  
RAWS Secretariat 
Policy Officer, Animal Welfare 
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
animal.welfare@daff.gov.au  
+61 2 6272 3484