Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u l y 2 0 1 2 
 
1 | P a g e 
 
Note from the Chair 
I had the opportunity to attend the OIE‘s 80th General Session OIE Delegates in 
Paris in May. On 21 May 2012 the Regional Commission endorsed the development 
of a revised welfare strategy and action plan to guide on the ground activities in the 
region. The Regional Commission noted and agreed to the thrust of the 
recommendations arising from the RAWS Coordination Group meetings 2 and 3 and 
encourages Members to provide summary reports on animal welfare developments 
to the RAWS CG. 
The General Session also adopted new generic guiding principles on animal welfare relating to livestock production 
systems and a new chapter on the welfare of cattle bred for meat production. Following the Session OIE Director 
General, Dr Vallat said ―In 2011 the Delegates of the OIE did not reach a consensus on a text on animal welfare of 
broiler chickens and this year‘s consensus on livestock is a huge step forward This is a historical event that opens 
way to the adoption of animal welfare standards of other farm animal production.‖  
The Regional Animal Welfare Strategy (RAWS) continues to lead the way in assisting regional member countries to 
address local priorities for the improvement of animal welfare. The success of the RAWS is being monitored by all 
OIE member counties with a view to implementing similar strategies in the OIE‘s other four global regions – Europe, 
the Americas, Africa and the Middle East. 
Gardner Murray 
Chairman 
RAWS Coordination Group 
Introduction 
The RAWS-News May 2012 edition focuses on updating members about country animal welfare activities and 
initiatives as well as progress of the RAWS. The Chair of the RAWS Coordination Group, Dr Gardner Murray, 
encourages members to contribute to future editions of the RAWS-News, for the benefit of all members and other 
interested parties. Please provide your input to Ms Lee-Ann Swift via email at lee-ann.swift@daff.gov.au.  
RAWS Developments 
The third meeting of the Regional Animal 
Welfare Strategy – Asia, the Far East and 
Oceania Coordination Group (RAWS CG) was 
held in Bangkok, Thailand on 3 and 4 April 
2012. The purpose of the meeting was to 
examine how the RAWS CG can best work 
with and support the OIE, as well as improving 
understanding of OIE policies and priorities 
and gain the views of members on current and 
future welfare matters; review the draft RAWS 
Implementation Framework and make 
recommendations on future priority actions; 
and prepare a report of outcomes for the 
Regional Commission and OIE. The fourth 
meeting of the Coordination Group is scheduled for the 9th of November 2012.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u l y 2 0 1 2 
 
2 | P a g e 
 
Country Highlights 
Australian Veterinary Association Conference. 
RAWS delegates presented at the Australian Veterinary Association Conference which was held from 20 to 25 May 
2012. Over 1250 veterinarians, government delegates and industry representatives attended. The conference 
included a range of animal health and welfare topics such as animal welfare during disaster management presented 
by Ian Dacre from the Wold Society for the Protection of Animals and an introduction to phase two of the Australian 
Animal Welfare Strategy presented by Jim Paradice. 
 
Australia’s new Exporter Supply Chain Assurance program (ESCAS).  
In October 2011 the Australian Government announced a range of livestock export trade reforms. A key focus of 
these reforms was that Australian Exporters must now submit an ESCAS plan to demonstrate that: 
 animals will be handled and processed through specified supply chains in accordance with the internationally 
accepted requirements for animal welfare established by the OIE right through to the point of slaughter; 
 the exporter has control of the movement of animals within their supply chain; 
 that the exporter can track or account for animals throughout the supply chain; and  
 that independent audits have been conducted of the supply chain, both prior to export and of performance 
afterwards, to assess compliance with these new requirements. 
 
The Improved Animal Welfare, and Approved Supply Chain Improvements Programs have been established by the 
Australian Government to assist with the implementation of the ESCAS. The Improved Animal Welfare Program has 
been allocated $10 million the Australia‘s Official Development Assistance for eligible countries that import Australian 
animals to improve their animal welfare outcomes. The details of this assistance are being settled with eligible 
nations. The Approved Supply Chain Improvements program is available to approved Australian exporters who have 
an ESCAS approved chain in place for improvements to their supply chains through to the point of slaughter 
available on a 3:1 investment ration from the exporter and the government.  
 
Election to the OIE animal welfare working group 
Australia‘s expertise and commitment to animal welfare has been 
internationally recognised with the appointment of Dr Peter 
Thornber, Director of Animal Welfare Policy, to the OIE‘s Animal 
Welfare Working Group. Dr Thornber‘s appointment was 
announced at the OIE‘s conclusion to its 80th General Session of 
the World Assembly in Paris on 25 May 2012. Australian 
representation will provide a valuable perspective from the Asia—
Oceania region. 
 
 
Thailand’s Animal Welfare Sub-committee 
The Animal Welfare Sub-committee was set up in February 2012 under the Agricultural Standards Act 2008 with the 
objectives to establish the animal welfare strategy of Thailand, to communicate and cooperate with stakeholders on 
animal welfare standards and to monitor the operation on animal welfare. It is composed of a mixture of stakeholder 
representatives and chaired by the Director General of the Department of Livestock Development (DLD). The 
preliminarily activities performed by the Animal Welfare Sub-committee will be continued by the Animal Welfare 
Committee under the Bill of Cruelty Prevention and Animal Welfare Management Bill which is now in the process to 
be adopted by the parliament.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u l y 2 0 1 2 
 
3 | P a g e 
 
 
Malaysian Animal Welfare Advisory Committee (MAWAC) 
Malaysia has formed a Technical Advisory Committee on Animal Welfare which aims to provide advice to the 
government in addressing issues related to animal welfare. This committee has been set up while waiting for the 
parliament to pass the Animal Welfare Bill 2012. The second committee meeting will be held in June 2012. 
 
Malaysian Animal Welfare Policy & Strategy (MAWePS) 
Malaysia is in the process of preparing the Animal Welfare Policy & Strategy. The first workshop was held in 
Selangor in February 2012, this workshop outlined the Malaysian Animal Welfare Vision, Mission and Strategies. The 
second workshop was held in April and brought together stakeholders and non-government organisations to plan the 
national activities pertaining to animal welfare. 
 
Malaysian Standards, Guidelines and Codes of Practice 
Malaysia is in the process of preparing the National Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines. In the 1st workshop 
held in Jan 2012, seven drafts on the Malaysian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines were prepared. Malaysia 
also in the process to develop an Accreditation System for Animal Welfare Codes of Practice for Abattoirs, Pet Shop 
and Animal Breeders with the objectives to ensure and encourage the establishments continuously adopt the Animal 
Welfare Codes of Practice. 
 
Indonesia 
The Indonesian Government currently is increasing its effort in implementing animal welfare practices as an 
integrated part of food safety and quality to ensure human health, these practices are not only for imported cattle, but 
also for local cattle and other species. Increasing participation and support for this effort also came from 
professionals association, non-government organisations, private sector organisations, and universities.  
 
Indonesia’s development of National Provisions on Animal Welfare  
A draft of Government Regulation Concerning Veterinary Public Health has been prepared, where Animal Welfare 
issues will be part of the regulation. The proposed regulation consists of provisions for housing and caging, raising 
and nursing, transporting, usage and use, slaughtering and killing, proper treatment and caring of animals by 
humans, and disasters management. In general, basic provision concerning issues on animal welfare is contained in 
Law 18 of 2009 regarding Livestock and Animal Health. 
 
Indonesian Standards, Guidelines and Codes of Practice 
Indonesia‘s standards work includes development of Guidelines for Animal Welfare implementation in Ruminant and 
Poultry Slaughter House (2011-2012). Initial priorities will focus on farmed animals, pet animals, and wildlife and will 
be formed in cooperation with concerned non-government organisations and other government agencies such as the 
Ministry of Agriculture. 
 
Indonesia’s National Animal Welfare Expert Sub-Committee  
An expert subcommittee will be established as part of the existing expert committee under the Directorate General of 
Livestock and Animal Health Services and Animal Health and Veterinary Public Health Expert committee as a result 
from a national animal welfare meeting with stakeholders in March 2012. This expert sub-committee will include 
animal welfare expert representatives from professionals associations, universities and non-government 
organisations. The sub-committee will provide advice related to animal welfare problems for the Indonesian 
Government.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u l y 2 0 1 2 
 
4 | P a g e 
 
 
 
World Society for the Protection of Animals’ (WSPA) emergency guidelines and disaster 
management 
During 29 January 2012-3 February 2012, World Society for the Protection of animals (WSPA) has hosted Livestock 
Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS): Training of Trainers in Manila and the Philippines. Participants 
including WSPA staff were invited from 5 different countries in the region- India, Vietnam, Indonesia, Thailand and 
Philippines. The training was to equip participants to be able to conduct a 3-day LEGS training in their own countries 
aimed at building capacity to support the saving of lives and livelihoods among livestock owning communities 
affected by disasters. 
 
In June 2011 a Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of 
Vietnam and WSPA was signed that agreed on the framework of cooperation for the period of 2011 to 2015. WSPA‘s 
work in Vietnam is focused on the national roll-out of LEGS training to Department of Livestock Production staff 
under the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. The first LEGS training in Vietnam under the cooperation 
took place in April 2012. WSPA supported translation of the LEGS documents into Vietnamese and will be reviewed 
and finalised by the end of 2012.  
 
WSPA held a stakeholder meeting on 13 February 2012 gathering various sectors working with animals and in 
disaster management in Thailand to improve disaster interventions for animals and better animal welfare in the 
country. The next step is for the stakeholders to fill in their roles in the Incident Command System adjusted by WSPA 
and then the working group will investigate setting up a committee and work plan. 
 
WSPA held a session on ―Disaster Management for Animals‖ at the 37th International Conference on Veterinary 
Science in Bangkok, Thailand to share knowledge in animal management in disasters. WSPA also took this occasion 
to receive comments for the Incident Command System proposed by WSPA. 
 
Development of the ‘Concepts in Animal Welfare’ training syllabus by WSPA.  
The ‗Concepts in Animal Welfare‘ (CAW) is a training syllabus that comprises of thirty four teaching modules 
covering a wide range of animal welfare topics, produced in 2003 and revised in 2008, as a result of collaboration 
between WSPA and the School of Clinical Veterinary Science at the University of Bristol in England. CAW syllabus 
has now been translated into Korean and will be distributed to all Korean vet schools, followed by a training 
workshop in autumn 2012. WSPA has also developed the ‗First Concepts in Animal Welfare‘ Program which aims to 
integrate animal welfare education into the curricula for primary and secondary schools and ensure that teachers in 
target countries (Thailand, Vietnam and India) are teaching animal welfare effectively. 
 
WSPA overview meeting 
WSPA held an Asia-Pacific Regional Overview Meeting early on 23 February 2012 to share and discuss the 
organisation‘s animal welfare work in the region which covers 38 countries. 
 
New name and strategy for New Zealand Ministry responsible for Animal Welfare 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry is now the Ministry for Primary Industries, Manatu Ahu Matua (MPI). The 
name links in with the Ministry‘s strategy ―Growing and protecting New Zealand‖ and covers its work across the 
agricultural, horticultural, aquaculture, fisheries, forestry and food sectors, and the protection of our primary industries 
from biological risk. Staff email addresses are now firstname.lastname@mpi.govt.nz but all existing email addresses 
will continue to work. The main Ministry website is www.mpi.govt.nz but visitors to the old site will automatically be 
redirected to the new site.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u l y 2 0 1 2 
 
5 | P a g e 
 
New Zealand animal welfare strategy update 
The Ministry for Primary Industries is leading the development of a national strategy for animal welfare to set the 
future direction of animal welfare in New Zealand and outline the Government‘s key priorities over the next few years. 
The Animal Welfare Act 1999 is being reviewed at the same time, with changes expected to be considered by 
parliament in 2013. 
 
Proposals have been developed with input from key stakeholders such as vets, animal industries, animal advocacy 
groups, and users of animals in research and teaching, and a specially-convened stakeholder advisory group. The 
draft strategy is likely to focus on the integrity of our animal welfare system and ensuring that animals‘ welfare needs 
are met. The legislation proposals aim to create a wider range of ways to ensure compliance with the Act, providing 
greater flexibility for managing animal welfare risks and allowing the animal welfare system to evolve as societal 
expectations shift.  Some technical amendments will also be proposed. See www.mpi.govt.nz/biosecurity-animal-
welfare/animal-welfare for more information. 
  
Code of welfare for goats issued 
A new code of welfare for goats has been issued under New Zealand‘s Animal Welfare Act 1999. Goats are kept in a 
variety of situations in New Zealand, including being farmed for milk, meat and fibre, or kept in safari parks, as pets, 
or for controlling pest plants. The code of welfare supports people to meet their responsibilities under the Act to look 
after goats appropriately, no matter how or why they are kept. It has practical information and 19 minimum standards 
relating to all aspects of goat ownership and care, including water, food and shelter, breeding, and handling.  
 
Codes of welfare set minimum standards and promote best practice for the care and management of animals. There 
are currently fifteen codes of welfare, with revised codes for meat chickens and layer hens expected this year, and 
further codes for llamas and alpacas, equines and temporary housing of companion animals under development. 
See www.mpi.govt.nz/biosecurity-animal-welfare/animal-welfare for more information. 
 
Animal welfare advice for vets on-farm  
As part of the programme to improve animal welfare compliance in New Zealand, 'Safeguarding our Animals, 
Safeguarding our Reputation', the Ministry for Primary Industries is working alongside representatives of the farming, 
transport, and processing industries and the veterinary profession to improve compliance. The major focus for 2012 
relates to the Animal Welfare (Transport within New Zealand) Code of Welfare especially fitness for transport of 
bobby calves (unweaned calves for slaughter) and cattle likely to become recumbent. A "toolkit" to provide practical 
guidance for veterinarians involved in addressing animal welfare issues on farms was launched in August 2011 and a 
similar one for representatives in the farming community is to be published this year. 
 
Regional meeting of the International Society for Applied Ethology (ISAE) 
The Australasia & Africa region of the ISAE is holding a meeting on ‗Our animals, our issues: applying animal 
behaviour science to regional issues‘. The meeting will be held at the Animal Welfare Science Centre, Melbourne on 
Friday 26 October. Dr Carol Petherick is giving a keynote address ‗The changing face of ethology in the management 
of rangeland beef cattle.‘ The ISAE is the international, professional association for the scientific study of applied 
animal behaviour. It acts to encourage and support the teaching of animal behaviour, to provide a pool of expertise to 
governments, international bodies, industry and animal welfare organisations dealing with problems involving animal 
behaviour, and to encourage the uptake of scientific knowledge to solve practical problems in animal care and use. 
See http://www.applied-ethology.org/australia_new_zealand_phillipines_and_africa.html for more information.

Regional Animal Welfare Strategy Newsletter 
J u l y 2 0 1 2 
 
6 | P a g e 
 
Key Dates 
Event 
Date  
Location 
RAWS coordination group and focal point meeting  
8-9 November 2012 
Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia) 
Third OIE Global Conference on Animal Welfare  
6-8 November 2012 
Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia) 
 
Newsletter Contacts 
Jim Paradice  
RAWS Secretary 
Manager, International Animal Welfare  
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
jim.paradice@daff.gov.au  
 
+61 2 6272 5532 
 
Lee-Ann Swift  
RAWS secretariat 
Policy Officer, Animal Welfare 
Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
lee-ann.swift@daff.gov.au 
 
+61 2 6272 3484