Enabling activities help farmers and regional communities build drought resilience through investment in collaboration and impact assessment.
Science to Practice Forum
The Forum was delivered annually from 2021-2023 under the first investment phase of the FDF.
Science to Practice 2.0 program
The Science to Practice 2.0 program builds on the foundational case study work delivered as part of the Science to Practice Forum. The program is a key element of the FDF's Measuring Progress and Knowledge Sharing theme and will generate a range of FDF impact stories through tangible, visual evidence of the FDF's influence on the ground.
Knowledge sharing is critical to enhancing community, farm and landscape resilience and the creation and distribution of FDF impact stories via DAFF channels, stakeholder networks and regional events and media will contribute to demonstrating the intersection of program outcomes, FDF themes, and regional and industry based impact.
Drought Resilience Research and Adoption Investment Priorities
There are four priority areas for future investment in drought resilience:
- Building economic resilience
- Building environmental resilience
- Building social resilience
- Improving the extension and adoption of existing tools and services
These were identified through consultation with farmers and their communities and conducting a stocktake of current drought resilience building services, programs and tools.
The priorities inform Future Drought Fund investments and decisions made in the 8 Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hubs.
Identifying these priorities helps to advance the National Agricultural Innovation Agenda.
Drought resilience in First Nations communities
We recognise the need to understand the impact of drought and drought resilience for First Nations people and communities.
We engaged Indigenous-owned consultancy group, Terri Janke and Company, to undertake a desktop review of the gaps, barriers and opportunities for drought innovation activities in rural and remote First Nations communities.
The final report is a summary of key opportunities for the Future Drought Fund to consider in its future programming.
Report
Knowledge sharing
Knowledge sharing is key to the success of 8 Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hubs.
Knowledge sharing will aid collaboration by making valuable data available to researchers and end users, while respecting ownership where it applies.
Knowledge sharing also focuses on impact assessment to measure the outcomes of hubs’ activities.
Funding information
Find details of the payment information for the Drought Resilience Research and Adoption National Enabling Activities as required under Section 27A of the Future Drought Fund Act 2019 below.