Aircraft operators must meet the requirements and standards for aircraft disinsection.
About disinsection
Disinsection is the procedure where health measures are taken to control or kill the insect vectors of human disease. They can be present in baggage, cargo, containers, conveyances, goods, and postal parcels.
This is one of the requirements under the International Health Regulations (2005) that are adopted by the World Health Organisation (WHO) technical guide, Aircraft Disinsection Methods and Procedures, 2nd Edition (WHO Recommendations)
The schedule
The Schedule of Aircraft Disinsection Procedures for Flights into Australia and New Zealand V5.3. (the Schedule) is approved by the relevant health agencies in each country.
The Schedule sets out the aircraft disinsection requirements for Australia and New Zealand (NZ) in accordance with WHO recommendations.
All aircraft arriving in Australian territory or New Zealand must be disinsected according to the Schedule. It provides full instructions of approved methods and certificate templates.
Approved methods
The Schedule specifies 4 approved disinsection methods. These apply to flights into Australia and New Zealand.
Here is a short description and a video of each of these methods.
The RES method is conducted without travellers onboard.
Effect
It provides a lasting insecticide residue that can protect the aircraft for approximately 8 weeks.
Conditions
The aircraft operator must:
- hold an Approved Arrangement (Australia) or Compliance Agreement (NZ)
- complete an Aircraft Disinsection Information (ADI) report and hold a certificate onboard the aircraft
- ensure applicator competence and maintain documented procedures
Watch
See how to do the residual method application for the both the cabin and hold (cargo areas) of an aircraft.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
The PED method is conducted at the last overseas port. It is applied before travellers board, but after catering and service doors are closed.
Conditions
The aircraft operator must:
- hold an Approved Arrangement (Australia) or Compliance Agreement (NZ)
- complete an ADI report and hold a certificate onboard the aircraft
- have exhausted aerosol cans to present if requested
Watch
Demonstrates pre-embarkation cabin and pre-departure cargo hold disinsection method application for different sized aircraft.
A320 Aircraft
This aircraft needs 1 aerosol can.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
A330 – A 300 dual aisle aircraft
This aircraft needs 3 aerosol cans.
Download
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
The PDD method must be carried out at the last overseas port prior to push-back. It must occur after travellers have boarded, with all cabin doors closed, but before overhead and sidewall lockers are closed.
It can be used when the pre-embarkation method is not possible.
Conditions
If doors or service doors are opened after treatment, re-treatment may be necessary.
Watch
This procedure is demonstrated in the pre-embarkation cargo hold disinsection method application videos.
Videos are not yet available for the pre-departure cabin disinsection method application.
The on-arrival disinsection treatment is conducted while travellers are onboard.
The treatment occurs:
- immediately after landing
- before unloading of cargo / baggage and disembarkation
- under the supervision of biosecurity officers
- if disinsection has not been undertaken or cannot be verified on arrival.
Videos are not available for the on-arrival cabin and hold disinsection treatment.
See the WHO aircraft disinsection methods and procedures, 2nd ed.
Conditions
Costs may be charged to the aircraft operator.
In Australia, the aircraft operator is responsible for the provision of aerosol cans.
Use of aerosol cans
You must use an aerosol brand that is approved for aircraft disinsection procedures. These brands may vary for disinsection overseas, in Australia and in New Zealand.
Overseas
You can use any brand that meets the requirements and standards defined by the WHO for aircraft disinsection, including spray rates.
The brand must also meet approved:
- manufacturing specifications
- active ingredients for the method of application.
In Australia
You can only use brands approved by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA).
In New Zealand
You can only use brands approved by the Environmental Protection Authority New Zealand (EPA NZ).
Formal arrangements
To conduct a residual or pre-embarkation method, you must have a formal arrangement with us or Ministry for Primary Industries, New Zealand (MPI NZ).
This arrangement will outline your:
- governance requirements
- disinsection application procedures
- monitoring and testing compliance with the arrangement.
Benefits
Benefits of entering a voluntary formal arrangement include:
- disinsection methods are undertaken while passengers are not on the aircraft.
- access to the Aircraft Disinsection Information (ADI) system to report disinsection before arrival.
- verified pre-arrival disinsection via the ADI allows immediate passenger disembarkation on arrival.
- improved aircraft operator and contracted third party applicator knowledge of disinsection and their role and responsibilities.
Aircraft operators must report if disinsection has not been undertaken prior to arrival. Failure to do so may result in non-compliance action.
Approved arrangements (Australia)
Before you apply for an Approved Arrangement (AA) Class 43.1 we must endorse your:
- internal disinsection procedures
- contracts of service if using a third party to conduct disinsection treatments.
Email us Conveyance.Aircraft@aff.gov.au
MPI NZ compliance agreements
Aircraft operators can apply for a compliance agreement with MPI NZ.
You will need to provide:
- detailed documented procedures for chosen method(s)
- intended routes (commercial aircraft) to Australia and New Zealand
- aircraft types flying to Australia and New Zealand
- appropriate aircraft operator contacts
- details of intended applicator(s).
Email disinsectionmatters@mpi.govt.nz to start discussions.
ADI reporting
Aircraft operators on formal arrangements must use the ADI system to report disinsection treatments.
You must report the treatment status of each flight prior to arrival.
Find out more on Aircraft Disinsection Information (ADI) Application and Import Relationship and Access Manager (iRAM).
Contact us
General enquiries: 1800 900 090
Email: conveyance.aircraft@aff.gov.au
New Zealand (Ministry for Primary Industries)