Before touching down in Australia, make sure to comply with your in-flight biosecurity obligations. Preparing for this will avoid delays or complications upon arrival.
The Biosecurity obligations for aircraft arriving in Australian territory outlines the mandatory obligations at each stage of aircraft clearance.
Here we’ve reproduced the section on pre-arrival reporting obligations for all flights.
Pre-arrival reporting obligations for all flights
Per ss47(2), Biosecurity Regulation 2016, all aircraft operators must give a report to a biosecurity officer at the intended first landing place if any of the following events occur during the flight:
- details of any person on board the aircraft who has, or had, signs or symptoms of a listed human disease
- details of any person on board the aircraft who died
- if there are animals and/or plants in the cabin of the aircraft
- if any animal in the cabin of the aircraft died
- if you have not undertaken the mandatory disinsection measures before you arrive in Australian territory
Find out more on listed human disease symptoms (Department of Health).
Failure to give a report is an offence that may result in the penalties outlined in Table 2.
When to submit the report
The pre-arrival report must be submitted:
- as close to the top of descent as is operationally practicable before the aircraft is estimated to arrive at its first landing place in Australian territory, or
- 30 minutes before the aircraft is estimated to come to a standstill after arriving at its first landing place in Australian territory, or
- at the time specified by a biosecurity official
How to submit the report
You, your representative or ground-handling agent can lodge the pre-arrival report by email or phone.
Mandatory traveller announcement
Delivery of the approved inflight traveller announcement to all travellers on all international flights is a legal requirement. The approved in-flight traveller announcement MUST NOT be edited as it provides information about Australia’s biosecurity requirements.
Aircraft operators are strongly encouraged to deliver the approved inflight traveller announcement as close to the top of descent as is operationally practicable before the aircraft is estimated to arrive at its first landing place in Australian territory.
The information may be given in writing or orally, including using an audio or audio-visual recording. Failure to do so is an offence that may result in the penalties outlined in Table 9.
| Table 9: Penalties for failure to provide information about biosecurity requirements to travellers on board an incoming aircraft |  |  | 
|---|---|---|
| Entity | Penalty | Legislation reference | 
|---|---|---|
| natural person | 300 penalty units | Biosecurity Act 2015, section 220 | 
| body corporate | 1,500 penalty units | Biosecurity Act 2015, section 220 | 
The in-flight traveller announcement will be updated as required by the department. When this occurs, the release will be communicated through an Import Industry Advice Notice.
Check to see if you are using the current version by looking at the department’s traveller announcement resources.
Download
Download the full document.