If your aircraft will be entering the domestic network after arriving in Australia, you must comply with our biosecurity requirements. Preparing for this will avoid delays or complications upon arrival.
The Biosecurity obligations for aircraft arriving in Australian territory outlines the mandatory obligations at each stage of aircraft clearance.
Sovereign immunity
If you are operating a foreign military or state aircraft arriving in Australian territory under sovereign immunity, see arrangements for aircraft arriving under sovereign immunity.
Release from biosecurity control
In accordance with s191 of the Biosecurity Act 2015 (the Act), international aircraft arriving in Australian territory are subject to biosecurity control. Aircraft operators intending to transition to the domestic flight network after arrival must request the release of their aircraft from biosecurity control prior to doing so. The request can be submitted via email to the intended first landing place.
This requirement does not apply to aircraft departing Australia immediately after arrival.
This protocol ensures that, before an aircraft operates within Australia’s domestic flight network, the Department has assessed and appropriately managed any potential biosecurity risks, ensuring an acceptable level of protection.
When you, your representative or ground handling agent submit a request to be released from biosecurity control, a biosecurity officer will attend the aircraft and conduct a risk assessment that will involve the following:
- all unused catering is unloaded and managed by a department approved third-party provider
- all international waste is unloaded and managed by a department approved third-party provider
- all international cargo and baggage are unloaded
An international aircraft can only be released from biosecurity control, consistent with s218 of the Act, when:
- a biosecurity officer informs the owner or operator that the aircraft has been released from biosecurity control after completing the above risk assessment, or
- the aircraft departs Australian territory
Once an aircraft is released from biosecurity control and subsequently departs Australia, it will again be subject to biosecurity control upon its return to Australian territory.
Learn more about aircraft release from biosecurity control with our dedicated Final Approach fact sheet.
Download
Download the full document.