The department has implemented a range of standard permit conditions for certain commodities to help streamline the permit application process.
A standard permit contains a specific set of conditions that have been assessed by the department as being appropriate to manage biosecurity risks for a certain commodity type.
If you can meet all of the import conditions in a standard permit case, we recommend you apply for a standard permit.
The benefits of applying for a standard import permit
- The application process is quicker: with import conditions already set, the department can process applications in a much shorter timeframe.
- Applications are cheaper: the application costs $217, including the $135 standard application levy and a $82 assessment fee.
- The permits are broader: once approved, a standard permit may be used to import multiple goods in the same commodity class, provided all of the conditions on the standard permit can be met.
Note: the $82 assessment fee allows applicants to apply for multiple sets of import conditions for goods in the same commodity class. Additional time-based assessment fees may be applied as per the Departmental charging guidelines.
How do I know if my goods meet the conditions of a standard permit?
Import conditions can be found on the Biosecurity Import Conditions (BICON) system. This database lists the categories of goods that can be imported into Australia and stipulates the import conditions that are required to manage the biosecurity risk posed by these goods. The BICON help page and task card provides information and tips to help you search BICON. All standard permit cases will identify that a permit is required before importing the goods and list each of the conditions required to do so. The information in BICON is the same information that the department’s border staff use when inspecting and clearing goods arriving in the country.
Permit applicants must self-assess whether they are able to meet all of the import conditions before applying for a standard permit. If you meet all of these conditions, then you can apply for a standard permit.
What happens if you are unable to meet all the conditions for a standard permit?
If you cannot meet all of the listed import conditions, then you will need to apply for a non-standard permit. An application for a non-standard permit will require a more detailed biosecurity risk assessment to determine whether the goods can be imported and what import conditions need to be applied.
Lodgement of an import permit application
You can lodge an electronic import permit application through the BICON system. For information about fees and charges visit the Biosecurity cost recovery implementation statements page.
Do I need to send through any documentation to the assessing officer for my application?
The assessing officer will contact you if any additional information or clarification is required to support your standard permit application.
If you need clarification regarding one or more conditions in a standard permit case, applicants and permit holders should contact the department’s Biosecurity Import Support Team on 1800 900 090 or imports@aff.gov.au
Can I change the conditions of my standard permit?
No, the conditions on a standard permit cannot be changed.
If you are unable or unwilling to meet all of the import conditions on a standard permit, then you will need to apply for a non-standard permit.
Does my permit need to list a specific manufacturer?
Most standard permits do not require holders to import their goods from a specific manufacturer.
If a standard permit is manufacturer-specific, the manufacturer’s details will be listed on the permit.
Can I update the personal information on my standard permit?
Permit holders may apply for a variation to an existing standard permit to update personal information (e.g. name, address, telephone number, fax number or email address).
It is the importer’s responsibility to ensure the information on an import permit is accurate, up-to-date, relevant and not misleading. If you need to vary your existing import permit, additional fees may apply. Varied permits will retain the expiry date of the original permit. If your permit is due to expire soon, we recommend applying for a new permit instead of applying for a variation.
Charges for variations to permit may apply.
For more information
Please contact the department if you would like further information on standard import permits.
- Phone: 1800 900 090 or ;+61 3 8318 6700 (from outside Australia)
- Email imports@aff.gov.au or submit an online enquiry.
- The ‘Contact Us’ function within BICON