Before you import
Before you import goods to Australia, it is important that you understand your responsibilities as an importer and the biosecurity import conditions that may apply to your goods. Complying with these requirements can reduce costly delays and help keep biosecurity risks offshore.
Imported food intended for sale in Australia may also be referred to the Imported Food Inspection Scheme to assess safety and compliance with Australia’s food standards.
See what import conditions apply to your goods.
Preparing for import
Before your goods leave the country of export, they should be packaged and treated to meet Australia’s import requirements. There are a number of steps to follow to make sure your goods are cleared with minimal delay.
Find out how to prepare your goods and packaging for import.
Sending your goods to Australia
When planning to import cargo, you will need to ensure that the airport or seaport of first arrival is approved to land your cargo.
You are also required to provide information to the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and to the Department of Home Affairs about your goods.
Plan an arrival destination and documentation for your goods.
Arrival of goods in Australia
Inspection of containers is conducted on a risk-based approach, focusing on pathways that the department has assessed to be higher risk pathways for pests and diseases.
Goods arriving from high risk ports or destined for unpack in rural areas required increased inspection.
Clearance and inspection of goods
The department will issue the importer with a directive that goods are released from biosecurity control or if any actions are required; for example inspection, treatment, isolation, hold pending further information or insect identification. Third parties who have entered into arrangements with the department supply biosecurity services to importers of goods when they arrive in Australia.
Learn more about inspection and treatment processes.
Once biosecurity requirements have been met, food imports may also be referred to the Imported Food Inspection Scheme for inspection and testing. A Food Control Certificate will be issued to food importers if the food will be inspected. Check imported food safety cases in BICON for relevant food safety requirements.