Biological goods that have previously been imported into Australia may be subject to end use restrictions. In other words, there may be restrictions to how those goods can be used in Australia.

This page outlines the process of applying to the department for approval to change the end use of previously imported biological goods. A change in end use is also referred to as repurposing.

If your goods are yet to be imported into Australia:

An import permit may be required. Importers should review BICON for import conditions and apply for a permit if required. Alternatively, if you already have a permit and wish to import a different product, you may be able to apply to vary your import permit via your BICON account.

If you want to use/repurpose your imported goods in non-laboratory animals*:

An application for an in vivo assessment is required.

*laboratory animals are defined as guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, rats or rabbits contained under laboratory or animal house conditions.

Application to change the end use of imported biological goods

Applying

To apply for approval to change the permitted end use of imported biological goods and their derivatives which were imported in accordance with the Quarantine Act 1908 or the Biosecurity Act 2015, complete the Application to change the end use of imported biological goods form (see below).

Paying for your application

Before your application is processed by the department, you must pay the prescribed fee in full. For information about fees and charges visit the Biosecurity cost recovery implementation statements page.

Please note that if the assessment is complex and requires additional time for assessment to be completed, you will be charged extra fees.

The fee covers assessment of the imported goods and the proposed new end use. The assessment takes into consideration the biosecurity risk associated with (but not limited to):

- biological components of the goods (e.g. ingredients),

- where the raw materials were sourced from (e.g. country of origin),

- processing of the goods offshore (e.g. treatment and manufacture processes)

- proposed new end use (e.g. potential exposure to humans or animals)

To apply please submit the below application form along with a completed credit card payment form to imports@aff.gov.au.

Download

Application to change the end use of imported biological goods (repurposing) (PDF 165 KB)

Application to change the end use of imported biological goods (repurposing) (DOCX 240 KB)