There are significant biosecurity risks associated with the use of imported biological goods in non-
Non-laboratory animals, as defined by the department, are all animal species other than guinea pigs,
There are two ways that laboratory materials or reagents can be approved by the department for in vivo
This option is preferable when biological goods have not yet been imported into Australia and there is
Apply for an import permit with the department for in vivo end use in non-laboratory animals (see
‘Laboratory materials’ BICON case). The import permit application will be assessed for compliance with
This two-step option should be considered when there is a need to undertake initial in vitro research
Apply for an import permit with the department. The import permit will restrict the imported product
A separate application for in vivo approval must be lodged with and approved by the department.
Approval for in vivo use must be obtained before non-laboratory research animals are exposed to
imported biological goods (or their derivatives). This also applies if goods are to be used in vaccine or

It should be noted that an In Vivo Approval issued by the department is not an import permit. This
means that importers cannot clear goods at the border using an In Vivo Approval. Applicants wanting
to import products into Australia for in vivo end use in non-laboratory animals can apply for an import
the name of the supplier and the number of the import permit used to import the product
a list of all ingredients, including, for ingredients of animal origin, (supported with
brief details of the proposed end use of the product (include the species, number of animals,
where they will be housed and post-treatment arrangements e.g. euthanasia and disposal of
the name, address and approval number of the approved arrangement site where the product will
The department uses approved arrangements (AA) to manage the risk associated with importation of
many commodities. Conditions on permits can specify that imported biologicals must be contained
and/or used only at an AA site. Some institutions (e.g. those regularly using imported biological goods
in non-laboratory animals, or those using them to manufacture veterinary medicines have qualified
AA site applications and enquiries should be directed to an AA site officer in your local office.

Submit an application to amend an in vivo approval to the department if circumstances surrounding the
end use change and you can no longer comply with conditions outlined on the in vivo approval.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/biological/checklist/in-vivo