Climate change is already impacting agricultural, fisheries and forestry productivity, water availability, soil health and the spread of pests, weeds and disease.
The first National Climate Risk Assessment (NCRA) provides a comprehensive overview of nationally significant climate risks and impacts.
We need to continue to manage our landscape to reduce climate impacts. Our action will be guided by the National Adaptation Plan (NAP).
The National Climate Risk Assessment (NCRA)
The Australian Government released the National Climate Risk Assessment in September 2025. The NCRA identifies risks to primary industries as one of 11 high priority risks.
The National Adaptation Plan (NAP)
The National Adaptation Plan provides guidance on how Australia can adapt to climate risks and build national resilience. The NAP highlights the roles for all levels of government and industry in meeting these challenges.
Australia’s agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors are global leaders in adaptation and resilience.
Over the years, producers have addressed climate impacts by investing in technology and innovation and improving land management practices.
The Australian Government aims to support increased on farm resilience for our world class farmers, fishers and foresters.
Adaptation, alongside mitigation, will be critical in reducing the impacts to farm productivity and profitability, building climate resilience and ensuring long term food security.
Key programs and strategies
Climate-Smart Agriculture Program
The Natural Heritage Trust (NHT) is the Australian Government’s key investment platform for achieving its natural resource management, sustainable agriculture and environmental protection outcomes. The program provides improved access to, and mainstreaming of, climate-smart technology and practices on Australian farms, forests and fisheries, which will be critical to building climate resilience.
Future Drought Fund
The Future Drought Fund is helping Australian farms and communities be more resilient to the impacts of drought. It includes the Climate Services for Agriculture program which provides accessible and relevant climate information for farm businesses.
National Soil Strategy
The National Soil Strategy sets out how Australia will value, manage and improve its soil for the next 20 years. It will support Australia’s commitment towards a more sustainable future and build resilience in our communities and agricultural sector to adapt to climate change.
Research and Development
The Australian Government supports rural research and development in Australia. The Rural Research and Development Corporation Climate Initiative is playing an important role in managing climate risk for the agricultural sector.
National Landcare Program
The National Landcare Program provides a range of measures to support natural resource management, sustainable agriculture and to protect Australia’s biodiversity.
DAFF Biosecurity 2030 Roadmap
Australia’s biosecurity system is our best defence against threats to our lands, seas and waterways from exotic pests and diseases.
The DAFF Biosecurity 2030 Roadmap acknowledges climate change as an emerging biosecurity risk to manage, and the pivotal role the department plays in ensuring our strategic goals and priorities remain contemporary to the changing needs and priorities of the national biosecurity system.
Resources
ABARES Climate research
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) is the science and economics research division of the department, and undertakes research projects on climate change to advance the agricultural sector’s resilience.
Centre of Excellence for Biosecurity Risk Analysis
The Centre of Excellence for Biosecurity Risk Analysis is a long-standing biosecurity research initiative of the Australian Government and is integral to the department’s response to managing biosecurity risks facing Australia, including those stemming from climate change.
CSIRO climate adaptation
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) climate adaptation resources available on the Climate Adaptation research website. The CSIRO has been working with primary industries and communities to adapt to climate change through practical strategies.
Climate Change in Australia
The Australian Government’s Climate Change in Australia website provides climate information, projections, tools, data and learning resources from the CSIRO and Bureau of Meteorology. It includes targeted information for the natural resource management sector.
Read more
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry climate change and agriculture website is being updated. For more information, please contact climatepolicy@aff.gov.au