2026 is the International Year of the Woman Farmer, recognising the vital role women play in agriculture and food systems worldwide. In Australia, women are central to the success of our agriculture sector—strengthening food security, driving innovation and sustainability, and supporting rural and regional communities.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is a multilateral treaty adopted in 1992. It aims to keep greenhouse gas levels in the atmosphere stable. This would help prevent dangerous changes to the climate caused by human activities.
The Conference of the Parties (COP) is the world’s premier forum for action on climate change. Countries meet annually to assess global efforts in achieving the objectives set out in the UNFCCC, Kyoto Protocol, and Paris Agreement.
DAFF in the UNFCCC
The Department of Climate Change, Energy the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) leads Australia’s engagement in the UNFCCC. DAFF leads Australia’s negotiations in the UNFCCC agriculture workstream – the Sharm el Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security.
Our agricultural negotiators meet with negotiators from other countries throughout the year in the lead up to COP, including annual climate talks in Bonn, Germany.
Register on DCCEEW’s UNFCCC engagement hub for more information on the Australian Government’s involvement in the UNFCCC.
COP31
COP31 will be held in Antalya, Türkiye, from 9 to 20 November 2026. Türkiye will hold the COP Presidency and have lead responsibility for the Action Agenda.
Australia is President of Negotiations for COP31. Australia will set the agenda for negotiations at COP31, collaborate with the international community, and work with Pacific Island countries to advance Pacific priorities.
Fiji will host pre-COP meetings from 5 to 8 October 2026. Tuvalu will host a leaders’ level event to bring global leaders to the region. Palau will also host a special climate event alongside the Pacific Island Forum Leaders Meeting from 30 August to 4 September 2026.
Australia is working in partnership with Türkiye and the Pacific to deliver COP31 and the Pacific Pre-COP.
See more
- Türkiye’s official COP31 website
- Australia’s engagement at UNFCCC COPs
- Fiji and Tuvalu chosen to host pre-COP
- COP31 bid outcome statement
Food and Agriculture for Sustainable Transformation (FAST) Partnership
In June 2026, Australia became a member of the Food and Agriculture for Sustainable Transformation (FAST) Partnership.
The FAST Partnership was launched at COP27 in 2022. It is a knowledge exchange platform to improve climate finance contributions towards transforming agriculture and food systems. Over time, the FAST Partnership has become an important vehicle for COP-to-COP initiatives, helping COP Presidents deliver key agri-food initiatives.
Australia has been engaged with FAST since 2023 as an Observer. During this time, the department has:
- participated in FAST meetings
- contributed to workshops and webinars
- shared Australia’s experience reforming Environmentally Harmful agricultural Support.
Our FAST membership will allow us to play a more active role in supporting the sustainable transformation of agriculture and food systems and continue to share Australia’s best practice policy and science approaches on a global stage.
We look forward to continuing to work with FAST co-chairs, Brazil and Türkiye, and other FAST Members, Observers and Technical Partners.
International Year of the Woman Farmer
The United Nations has declared 2026 the International Year of the Woman Farmer. This Year will spotlight the essential role women play across agrifood systems and their contributions to food security, nutrition, and economic resilience.
In Australia, women make up around one third of the total agricultural workforce, with more than 40% of women working in the sheep, beef cattle and grain farming sectors. We work closely with industry, state and territory governments and communities to support a strong, sustainable and inclusive agriculture sector.
Through engagement at events such as the Australian Women in Agriculture (AWiA) National Conference, we are strengthening collaboration, sharing knowledge and supporting inclusive climate action.
International Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists
The United Nations has also declared 2026 the International Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists. Rangelands cover about half the world’s land surface and support unique biodiversity and the livelihoods of millions of pastoralists. This Year will celebrate and showcase the lived experience of pastoralists from across the world.
Over 75% of Australia is broadly defined as rangelands, and Australian pastoralists use innovation and research to adapt to challenging environments. Australia’s rangelands are home to many of Australia’s First Nations Peoples and are culturally important for Australians.
Past COPs
See more of our outcomes and event videos from past UNFCCC conferences.
COP30 was held in Belem, Brazil, from 10 to 21 November 2025.
Outcomes for agriculture
We used COP30 to:
- welcome the Resilient Agriculture Investment for net-Zero land degradation (RAIZ) initiative, which aims to accelerate investment in restoring degraded agricultural lands
- showcase Australia’s climate-smart and sustainable agriculture efforts and achievements through various events, and participated in the thematic days on forestry, agriculture, food systems and food security, and fisheries
- host numerous events in the Australian Pavilion, Brazil’s AgriZone and the Moana Pavilion, on food systems, soil health, weather modelling, forest policy, fisheries, and Rio Convention synergies
- welcome the opening of the United Nations Forum on Forests Forestry Pavilion, where we helped promote the productive management, conservation and sustainable development of forests.
Learn more
COP29 was held in Baku, Azerbaijan, from 11 to 22 November 2024.
Outcomes for agriculture
COP29 provided an opportunity to share our experience internationally, build capacity in our region and develop partnerships to support our farmers. We also used COP29 to:
- encourage practices tailored to the ecological, cultural and economic conditions of each country by promoting a ‘no one-size-fits-all’ approach
- showcase climate-smart agricultural innovation at our Pavilion and beyond, including during the thematic day on food, agriculture and water
- host a networking event in the Pacific’s Moana Pavilion to mark World Fisheries Day
- welcome the launch of the Baku Harmoniya Climate Initiative for Farmers.
Learn more
COP28 was held in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, from 30 November to 13 December 2023.
Outcomes for agriculture
We endorsed the Emirates Declaration on Sustainable Agriculture, Resilient Food Systems and Climate action. To date, more than 160 countries have signed up to the landmark agriculture, food and climate action declaration, committing to integrate food into their climate plans by 2025.
We also participated in the thematic day on food, agriculture and water with panel events on sustainable food systems, the role of livestock in meeting global climate and food security goals, and sustainability frameworks.
Learn more
COP27 was held in Sharm el Sheikh, Egypt, from 6 to 20 November 2022.
Outcomes for agriculture
Parties adopted a decision to establish the Sharm el-Sheikh joint work on implementation of climate action on agriculture and food security. This 4-year joint work includes the implementation of outcomes of the previous work program, Koronivia joint work on agriculture.
The Food and Agriculture for Sustainable Transformation (FAST) initiative was launched by the COP27 Presidency through the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). FAST is a multi-stakeholder partnership that aims to ‘accelerate the transformation of agriculture and food systems by 2030 for people, climate, and nature.
Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases
The department oversees Australia’s commitment to the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. Australia is a founding member, and our continued involvement allows us to share research on a global scale that provides important benefits to Australian farmers.
International climate initiatives
We are committed to ensuring the global conversation on climate-smart agriculture remains prominent in international fora. We have joined and endorsed several international climate initiatives that relate to agriculture, forestry and food systems. These include:
See more
- Australia’s international climate action
- For more information, please contact international.strategy@aff.gov.au.