Purpose
Everyone has a role in protecting Australia from pests, diseases and invasive species that can damage our agriculture industries, unique environment, the economy – our way of life. Underpinning this is Australia’s biosecurity system.
Aligning to Australia’s National Biosecurity Strategy (NBS), this National Biosecurity Communication and Engagement Strategy (NBCES) shows how we can work together—across government, industry, and the community—towards building a stronger biosecurity system. Together we can grow our food and fibre industries, protect our flora and fauna, and keep us safe from exotic pests and diseases.
Vision
Key to its success is effective communication and community engagement. It sets the foundation to ensure people receive accurate and timely information when they need it; encourages positive behaviour so everyone understands their role and what’s at risk; builds trusts and partnerships; and supports new and innovative ideas.
Priority Areas
Australia's National Biosecurity Strategy, launched in 2022, is being implemented through a 10-year plan with the goal of strengthening the nation's biosecurity system. The strategy lists 6 priority areas.
The Role of Communication and Engagement
To support the implementation of the NBS communication and engagement activities are driven across government, industry and the community. The National Biosecurity Strategy Implementation Committee (NBSIC) works with the National Biosecurity Committee (NBC) and oversees the delivery of the NBS, including the development of this NBCES. The National Biosecurity Communication and Engagement Network (NBCEN) leads communication and engagement activities relating to Australia’s biosecurity through the NBCEN Workplan. It enables a strategic approach and national consistency through the biosecurity phases of prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
| National Biosecurity Strategy priority areas | The role of communication and engagement | 
|---|---|
| Shared biosecurity culture We will enhance our culture of biosecurity action so that everyone understands its importance and plays their part. | Raise the profile of biosecurity in Australia through awareness and education, so everyone knows how they can play their part in protecting Australia from the introduction and spread of pests, diseases and invasive species. | 
| Stronger partnerships We will strengthen and expand partnerships and networks between all stakeholders at local, regional, national and international levels. | Foster opportunities to forge new partnerships and broaden our engagement across all levels of government, industry sectors and the community. Continue to build a One Health approach, recognising the health of our people, animals and environment are interconnected. | 
| Highly skilled workforce We will develop and sustain a highly skilled workforce to ensure we have the right capability and capacity in the right place at the right time. | Promote and encourage participation in training, exercises, and events that build capability and capacity in the areas of prevention, preparedness, response and recovery. | 
| Coordinated preparedness and response We will boost our system’s adaptability and its capacity to prevent, detect, manage, respond to, and recover from, outbreaks. | Support initiatives to prevent, contain and eradicate current and emerging pests and diseases, by delivering nationally coordinated, targeted, timely and trusted information. This includes building capability, capacity, and using communications best practice to develop and improve policies, plans and processes. | 
| Sustainable investment We will ensure funding and investment is sufficient, co-funded, transparent, targeted to our priorities and sustainable for the long term. | Deliver targeted and transparent communication and engagement activities to show where we have invested in sustainable and priority biosecurity areas. Invest in social and behavioural research to inform effective long-term communication and engagement activities. | 
| Integration supported by technology, research and data We will create a more connected, efficient science-based system to facilitate timely, informed and risk-based decisions. | Collaborate on new approaches in biosecurity-related communication and engagement with a focus on online and digital capabilities. Experiment, learn and share, review and refine approaches for continuous improvement. Use an evidence-based approach to communication and engagement activities by using social and behavioural research, and analytics. | 
This strategy has been prepared by the National Biosecurity Communication and Engagement Network (NBCEN) and endorsed by the National Biosecurity Committee (NBC).