International engagement is an important function for our agriculture industry. We engage in multilateral and regional opportunities to advance Australia’s interests. We pursue agriculture trade and market access opportunities through multilateral negotiations, high-level bilateral meetings, and the overseas counsellor network to deliver outcomes reflecting our national priorities and international interests. We work closely with our international partners to determine and pursue common goals.

The Philippines and Australia have a strong and mutually beneficial agricultural relationship underpinned by our close and longstanding bilateral partnership, elevated to a Strategic Partnership in September 2023.

The PAAF met for the sixth time in Canberra, Australia and via videoconference on 17 March 2025 and was co-chaired by DAFF Deputy Secretary Tina Hutchison and Atty. Asis G. Perez, DA Undersecretary for Policy, Planning and Regulations.

The co-chairs recognised the importance of the rules-based trading environment and committed to working together in relevant multilateral institutions including ASEAN, APEC, and the Cairns Group in the WTO to support open, transparent and predictable trade. New opportunities to enhance trade and market access outcomes for our agriculture and agri-food sectors including under Invested; Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040 were noted at the meeting.

The parties acknowledged the cooperation activities underway to enhance trade and biosecurity outcomes, combat illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and build sustainable fisheries and discussed our shared interests in strengthening livestock disease diagnostics and genetics.

The co-chairs held productive discussions on traceability, sustainable agriculture, climate resilience, soil health, and emissions reduction, and noted the importance of the principles-based, no one size fits all approach to sustainability in the agriculture sector.

In discussion on each country’s priority market access requests, the Philippines confirmed its priority remains access for Cavendish bananas and fresh dragon fruit. Australia’s priority is recognition of irradiation as an alternative phytosanitary treatment for fresh fruit.

The co-chairs reaffirmed the importance of ongoing cooperation and constructive engagement to strengthen two-way agricultural trade and looked forward to the seventh PAAF to be hosted by the Philippines in 2027.

The Joint Statement was signed by the co-chairs on 17 March 2025 in Canberra, Australia.

Australia strengthened its bilateral relationship with Indonesia during Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Julie Collins’ visit to Jakarta, from 29 July to 1 August 2025. The visit marked a significant step forward in advancing shared goals across agriculture, fisheries and forestry, and reinforced Australia’s role as a trusted and collaborative regional partner.

During the visit, Minister Collins and her delegation successfully progressed key trade initiatives, delivering major outcomes that support both countries’ economic resilience, sustainable production and food security. These included:

- Announcing the signed rendering protocol, reinstating market access for Australian rendered products for animal feed to Indonesia for the first time since 2018. The agreement restored a trade previously worth approximately $100 million annually and resolved a longstanding priority for the Australian Rendering Association.

- Signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Indonesian Quarantine Authority (IQA), formalising cooperation on regional biosecurity. The MoU builds on a strong history of collaboration and will guide joint efforts to strengthen biosecurity across the region.

- Announcing re-establishment of a bilateral Forestry Working Group with Indonesia’s newly created Ministry of Forestry, reaffirming cooperation on sustainable forest management, timber legality, and forest product trade. Indonesia is Australia’s fourth-largest export and import market for forest products. In FY2023–24, exports totalled $144 million, and imports were valued at $455 million.

- Agreement on a wheat protocol with the Indonesian Quarantine Authority (IQA), securing continued access for Australia’s largest agricultural export to Indonesia, worth $1.76 billion in FY2023–24. The protocol reaffirmed Australia’s commitment to meeting Indonesia’s biosecurity requirements and advancing regional food security.

- Agreement on a mangosteen operational workplan, opening a new export pathway for Indonesian fruit and supporting smallholder farmers, which is an important priority for Indonesia’s agricultural development. These outcomes demonstrate Australia’s commitment to trusted standards in biosecurity and food safety assurance, reinforcing its reputation as a reliable supplier of high-quality food and agricultural products.

The visit also highlighted the importance of regional collaboration and cooperation, with both countries working together to strengthen food security, support economic growth, and build resilience across Southeast Asia. Along with re-establishing a mechanism for forestry cooperation between Australia and Indonesia, Australia looks forward to deepening our cooperation on fisheries matters including understanding and sharing information on the production and standards for fish and fish products.

In addition, in line with Australia’s National Biosecurity Strategy, the visit advanced key priorities including fostering a shared biosecurity culture and strengthening partnerships with our near neighbours.

Minister Collins’ engagements built on the momentum of Prime Minister Albanese’s recent visit to Indonesia and reflected the Albanese Government’s priority to deepen agricultural, biosecurity and forestry ties with one of Australia’s most important regional partners. With two-way agricultural, fisheries and forestry trade valued at $5.5 billion in FY2023–24, Indonesia remains a critical market for Australian exporters.

In August 2026, Australia and Vietnam signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Cooperation in Agriculture and Sustainable Development.

The MoU enables cooperation across a range of areas including agricultural policy, sustainable fisheries and forestry management, biosecurity, food safety, and trade.

The MoU was formalised during Vietnamese General Secretary and President To Lam’s visit to Australia. The signing of the MoU is a testament to the strong and positive relationship between the two nations, and will build on our existing engagement and cooperation, including through the Vietnam-Australia Agriculture Forum (VAAF).

The MoU was signed on 11 August 2026.