We work with overseas governments to implement eCert exchanges for exports. This includes
Our goal is for export certification to be completely paperless. You can find out more about the benefits
If an eCert exchange has not been established, paper certification continues to be required.
We have an eCert export application that allows us to send electronic certificates (eCerts) directly to
We are able to send eCerts to importing government agencies that have established exchanges with us.
The importing government agency receives our eCerts directly into their importing eCert system and
will use the eCerts for import clearance. This process may vary between trading partners.
In a parallel exchange the eCert and paper certificate are issued together. The eCert can be used for
clearance and/or verification, but the paper certificate should be used if there are issues accessing the
We also have an eCert web view application for trading partners to view certificates through a secure
log-in. This is usually used as a first step when building a system-to-system eCert connection. Paper
certificates will still be issued, but importing government agencies may also verify the eCert online.
Where a paperless eCert exchange is in place, the Australian exporter will be provided with a certificate
number, which is found on the certificate extract. The certificate number must be provided to the

The extract is only to be used for commercial purposes. It’s not to be used as part of the import
clearance process. The extract does not contain enough information for clearance, and is not an official
The eCert will display the all the required information to meet importing country requirements and
legislation. The eCert is considered the original government certificate, due to the government-to-
Exporters and freight forwarders do not have access to view the eCert, due to the government-to-
government exchange. You will be notified through your software provider or through NEXDOC when
Country-specific information about how eCert works with our trading partners is published in:
We’ve set up eCert export exchanges with many of our trading partners. These include paperless,
parallel and web view verification exchanges. Details of the status of these exchanges are provided in
This table shows the trading partners and commodities where we have established a paperless eCert
EU member states: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Republic of Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

This table highlights the trading partners and commodities where we have established a parallel eCert
2 We have a paperless exchange with Ministry of Food and Drug Safety only. However, paper
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/market-access-trade/ecert/export