Agriculture, fisheries and forestry exports are an economic powerhouse for Australia. Strengthening the

competitiveness and productivity of Australia's agriculture sector is a key commitment of the Australian

Government.

To ensure that the export legislative framework, namely the Export Control Act 2020 (Export Control

Act) and the Export Control Rules 2021, remains effective, relevant and fit for purpose, the department

regularly reviews its operation and functionality. Improvements to the framework can result in changes

that provide time and cost savings for exporters and administrators.

Updates to the Export Control Act 2020

Following passage of the Export Control (Streamlining Administrative Processes) Act 2023 on 4

September 2023, improvements have been made to streamline a number of administrative

arrangements under the Export Control Act.

In addition to these, further improvements came into effect on 1 February 2024. These changes

improve and clarify the way that information is used and shared under the Export Control Act. The

changes are designed to make processes simpler for those in the export supply chain.

From 1 February 2020, the Export Control Act has:

more effective information management provisions which simplify the circumstances in which

relevant information can be used or disclosed, including with other government agencies and

people engaged by the Commonwealth;

new definitions to define what is ‘relevant information’ and ‘protected information’ and who is an

‘entrusted person’;

new authorisations for the use and disclosure of relevant information;

new sanctions for the unauthorised use or disclosure of protected information.

These changes improve and clarify the way that information is used and shared under the Export

Control Act. The changes are designed to make processes simpler for those in the export supply chain.

These changes follow on from those that came into effect on 4 September 2023, which streamlined a

number of administrative arrangements under the Export Control Act.

These amendments will ensure that the legislation remains relevant – supporting growth and

innovation, while maintaining the level of regulatory oversight trading partners expect.

This page includes links to the Act, the C&T Act and the Rules, as well as information sheets that will

assist your understanding of the new agricultural export legislation.

Going forward, we will continue to consult with our stakeholders to ensure Australia’s agricultural

export legislation remains modern and fit for purpose.

• 

• 

• 

•

Information Sheets

Download

Streamlined administrative arrangements (PDF 599 KB)

Streamlined administrative arrangements (DOCX 211 MB)

Export Control Act 2020

Export Control Rules 2021

Details of our previous consultations with stakeholders, critical to shaping Australia’s new agricultural

export legislation are available via these links:

Keep informed

Further information on The Export Control (Plants and Plant Products) Rules 2021 (plant rules) can be

found at Plant export legislation changes.

If you want to be contacted about the improved agriculture export legislation, please register you

interest below.

For more information please email exportlegislation@aff.gov.au.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/market-access-trade/improving-export-legislation