Phase 1 - Updated seed testing protocols for Tomato brown
rugose fruit virus and Tomato mottle mosaic virus
We have completed the first phase of our review of Australia’s import conditions for tomato and
capsicum seed disease testing.
This initial phase focused on evaluating seed testing protocols for Tomato brown rugose fruit virus
(ToBRFV) and Tomato mottle mosaic virus (ToMMV), as well as the authorisation process for
laboratories conducting these tests.
As a result of this review, we have made 2 key changes to strengthen the seed testing requirements:
We have established a list of authorised laboratories registered to test tomato and capsicum seed
for ToBRFV and ToMMV for export to Australia
We have updated the list of approved testing protocols for detecting ToBRFV and ToMMV.
These changes aim to improve assurance in laboratory testing and ensure consistent interpretation of
results. They will ensure seed is tested using the most suitable protocols and requirements for detecting
ToBRFV and ToMMV.
The new requirements became mandatory import conditions on 12 November 2025.
Phase 2 - wider review of seed pathogen testing
We announced the commencement of Phase 2, a wider review of diagnostic testing requirements for
tomato and capsicum seed, on 12 May 2026.
This phase builds on Phase 1 and focuses on the remaining regulated seed pathogen tests. The aim is to
ensure these tests are technically robust, appropriately validated and fit for purpose to manage
biosecurity risk consistent with Australia’s Appropriate Level of Protection (ALOP).
Phase 2 of the review is focused on the remaining tomato and capsicum seed pathogens:
Pepino mosaic virus
Columnea latent viroid
Pepper chat fruit viroid
Potato spindle tuber viroid
Tomato apical stunt viroid.
The review includes consideration of:
testing protocols
interpretation of results
laboratory authorisation requirements.

Phase 2 does not introduce new seed pathogens and does not include Tomato brown rugose fruit virus
(ToBRFV) or Tomato mottle mosaic virus (ToMMV), which were addressed in Phase 1.
Note: There are no immediate changes to the import conditions or testing requirements as a result of
Phase 2. Current testing and laboratory authorisation requirements continue to apply until further
notice.
Consultation and next steps
We plan to release the draft report for consultation in mid-2027. Please note that this is an indicative
timeline and may be subject to change. We will notify permit holders in advance of any proposed
changes to import conditions.
Under the updated import conditions from Phase 1, tomato and capsicum seed lots must be tested for
ToBRFV and ToMMV by an authorised laboratory.
Laboratories intending to conduct this testing for seed exports to Australia must register to become
authorised. To do so, laboratories must complete the registration form below, confirming their
agreement to implement the new testing requirements and protocols.
Laboratories must submit their completed form via email to imports@aff.gov.au. Note: please include
‘Plant T2 - Seed for sowing – Laboratory authorisation’ in the subject line of the email.
The list of authorised laboratories is published on the Department authorised seed testing laboratories
webpage. 
We have updated the list of approved testing protocols for detecting ToBRFV and ToMMV in tomato
and capsicum seed. The new requirements became mandatory import conditions on 12 November
2025.
Some existing seed testing requirements will remain unchanged and continue to apply under the
updated protocols. Laboratory test reports for tomato and capsicum seed for export must continue to
include the following details:
The name and address of the testing laboratory
The full botanical name of the species tested
The date of testing
The type of test done
The seed lot number(s)
The sample size, which must be 20,000 seeds or 20% of the seed lot for small seed lots
The subsample size, which must be no greater than 400 seeds per subsample for all testing
conducted by PCR
The pathogens targeted
The test result confirming freedom from each of the targeted pathogens.
Full testing requirements are available on BICON.

The updated list of approved testing protocols for detecting ToBRFV and ToMMV in tomato and
capsicum seed for export to Australia, along with associated requirements, is detailed below:
Laboratories must use 2 reverse-transcription qPCR protocols to verify the status of ToBRFV and
ToMMV in each seed lot.
For ToBRFV, the CaTa28 protocol must be used as one of the 2 qPCR protocols, and either the
CSP1325 protocol or the qs1/p1/qas2 protocol must be used as the second protocol (see Table 1
and Table 2).
For ToMMV, the CaTa9 protocol must be used as one of the 2 qPCR protocols, and either the
CSP1572 protocol or the ToMMV2 protocol must be used as the second protocol (see Table 1 and 
Table 2).
References to the approved protocols are listed in Table 3. Please note that the department’s
requirements for these protocols and for reporting results may differ from some of the
parameters stated in the references.
No other tests are approved for verifying the status of a seed lot regarding these 2
viruses. Laboratories shall not discount a positive result obtained from an approved qPCR test on
the basis of any other test result or consideration, except retesting following the ‘Retesting’
section.
Table 1. Summary of required
testing protocols
Virus
First required
Second required protocol
ToBRFV
CaTa28 reverse-
transcription qPCR
CSP1325 reverse-transcription qPCR
OR
Menzel and Winter reverse-
transcription qPCR (qs1/p1/qas2)
ToMMV
CaTa9 reverse-
transcription qPCR
CSP1572 reverse-transcription qPCR
OR
ToMMV2 reverse-transcription qPCR
Table 1. Summary of required testing protocols
The testing protocols that will no longer be approved for use from 12 November 2025 for
detecting ToBRFV and ToMMV are listed in Table 4.
Extraction and amplification positive controls must be run and should include an RNA target. At
least one weak positive control should be used that produces a Ct value of 30 or higher.

At least one negative control should be run. If any negative controls yield Ct values below 35, the
testing should be considered invalid, and the department should be contacted.
A Ct cut-off value of 35 applies to all qPCR tests for ToBRFV and ToMMV. A statement must be
included on laboratory reports that states the Ct cut-off point used to determine the result.
The lowest Ct value obtained for a subsample must be used to interpret the result for that
subsample.
If the Ct value of the subsample is equal to or below 35, this will be considered a positive result,
i.e. the target virus has been detected.
If the Ct value of the subsample is above 35, this will be considered a negative result, i.e. the
target virus has not been detected.
If a laboratory considers that further information is relevant to the interpretation of a set of test
results for a seed lot, the laboratory can contact the department for advice. We will consider the
information before making a final decision on the status of the seed lot.
A laboratory may re-run a qPCR where the result is considered to be potentially anomalous. For
example, if the amplification curve deviates substantially from a typical sigmoidal shape this may be
considered anomalous, and the qPCR may be re-run.
Retesting must be conducted using the seed homogenate (seed slurry) or RNA extract from the
same seed subsample.
An anomalous or ambiguous qPCR result cannot be superseded by testing a different seed sample
or subsample.
At least two additional replicate qPCR reactions must be done for the re-test and the same qPCR
protocol that produced the anomalous result must be used for those reactions.
The results from the retest must be interpreted according to the ‘Ct cut-offs and interpretation
requirements’ specified above.
Any anomalous finding that has not been shown to be negative by retesting based on the
interpretation requirements, must be reported as a positive.
We may conduct retesting or trace back investigations of seed lots. Laboratories must provide
records of previous testing to assist with these investigations.
Laboratories must keep copies of the quality control records, protocols used and any validation
and verification reports relevant to the tests, and must provide these documents upon request by
the department .
Laboratories must keep records of all testing done to meet the Australian requirements for at
least 3 years, including Ct values, records of decisions about test results, negative test results,
retest results, anomalous results, and results from controls. Images of amplification curves of
anomalous results should also be kept.
If a laboratory resolves an anomalous result and concludes that a seed lot is negative for the virus,
the laboratory must record the reason why the anomalous result was considered not to be a
detection of the virus.
Table 2.
Approved

protocols and
result
interpretation
for ToBRFV
and ToMMV,
effective 12
November
2025
Virus
Primers and probe
Date
approved
ToBRFV
CaTa28
reverse-
transcription
qPCR
CaTa28  forward  GGTGGTGTCAGTGTCTGTTT    
CaTa28 reverse GCGTCCTTGGTAGTGATGTT
CaTa28 6FAM-GAGAATGGAGAGAGCGGACGAGG-BHQ1
24 June
2019
CSP1325
reverse-
transcription
qPCR
CSP1325  forward CATTTGAAAGTGCATCCGGTTT   
CSP1325 reverse GTACCACGTGTGTTTGCAGACA
CSP1325 VIC*-ATGGTCCTCTGCACCTGCATCTTGAGA-
BHQ1
*can be FAM
7 June
2019
qs1/p1/qas2 
Menzel and
Winter
reverse-
transcription
qPCR
ToBRFV qs1  forward  CAATCAGAGCACATTTGAAAGTGCA 
ToBRFV qas2 reverse CAGACACAATCTGTTATTTAAGCATC
ToBRFV p16
6-FAM-ACAATGGTCCTCTGCACCTG- BHQ1
12
November
2025
ToMMV
CaTa9
reverse-
transcription
qPCR
CaTa9 forward  ATGTGGAGGAACCCTCTATGA    
CaTa9 reverse AATCTCCTCGCTCCTTGTAAAC
CaTa9P ROX-TCAATGGCCCGTGGTGAGTTACAA-BHQ1
12
November
2025
CSP1572
reverse-
transcription
qPCR
CSP 1572 forward CCCGACTACAGCCGAAACAT
CSP 1572 reverse TTAACAGCGGACCTGATCGC
12
November
2025

ToMMV2
reverse-
transcription
qPCR
ToMMV2   forward     GAAACATTGGATGCCACTCG 
ToMMV 2 reverse CTCTGGTTGTAGAAACCTGTTCC
ToMMV2p FAM-CGATGCTACGGTTGCGATCAGGTC-BHQ1
12
November
2025
Table 2. Approved protocols and result interpretation for ToBRFV and ToMMV, effective 12 November
2025
Table 3. References to protocols
Reference
CaTa28
CSP1325
Menzel and Winter
CaTa9
CSP1572
ToMMV2
Table 3. References to protocols
Table 4. PCR protocols removed from the approved
list
Protocol and Primers
Reason
Approval
period
Levitzky et al. 2019
F    GAAGAAGTTGTTGATGAGTTCAT
R   GATTTAAGTGGAGGGAAAAACAC
Reference
Levitzky, N, Smith, E, Lachman, O, Luria, N, Mizrahi, Y,
Bakelman, H, Sela, N, Laskar, O, Milrot, E & Dombrovsky, A,
2019, ‘The bumblebee Bombus terrestris carries a primary
inoculum of Tomato brown rugose fruit virus contributing to
disease spread in tomatoes’ PloS one, volume14, issue 1,
p.e0210871.
The protocol of Levitzky
et al. 2019 is not suitable
for the detection of
ToBRFV and ToMMV as
it is not sufficiently
sensitive and uses a
group specific primer set.
1 April 2019
- 12
November
2025
Alkowni et al. 2019
F      AATGTCCATGTTTGTTACGCC
R     CGAATGTGATTTAAAACTGTGAAT
The protocol of Alkowni
et al. 2019 is not suitable
for the detection of
ToBRFV as it is not
sufficiently sensitive.
1 April 2019
- 12
November
2025

Reference
Alkowni, A, Alabdallah, O & Fadda, Z 2019, ‘Molecular
identification of tomato brown rugose fruit virus in tomato in
Palestine’ Journal of Plant Pathology, available at DOI
10.1007/s42161-019-00240-7.
Li et al 2018
TobamodF   TKGAYGGNGTBCCNGGNTGYGG
TobamodR   ACNGAVTBNABCTGTAATTGCTAT
Reference:
Li, Y, Tan, G, Lan, P, Zhang, A, Liu, Y, Li, R, & Li, F, 2018,
‘Detection of tobamoviruses by RT-PCR using a novel pair of
degenerate primers’ Journal of virological methods, volume
259, pp.122-128.
Test results indicate that
the protocol of Li et al.
(2018) is not sufficiently
sensitive. The protocol
was removed from the
approved list on 7 June
2019.
1 April 2019
- 7 June
2019
Table 4. PCR protocols removed from the approved list
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/plant-products/seeds-for-sowing/pathogen-testing-
req-tomato-capsicum