The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is responsible for applying fees and charges to industry and the public.
Fees and charges are applied for services provided by the department, including:
- regulatory services, including biosecurity and export certification
- requests for information under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 (FOI Act).
Charges are also administered by the department, for distribution to agencies with responsibilities across agricultural sectors, including:
- managing research
- market and industry development
- plant and animal health programs across agricultural sectors.
Import and export services
Cost recovery charges are applied to the department’s import and export services, including inspection and certification of goods and premises.
The cost recovery implementation statements (CRISs) document the changes to regulatory charges for 2025-26. Additional information about fees and charges for 2026-27 is available here:
- Fees and charges for agricultural export regulatory activities from 1 July 2026
- Fees and charges for biosecurity and imported food regulatory activities from 1 July 2026
Cost recovery charges
Cost-recovery charges are made up of three types of amounts:
- a fee for service
- a charge similar to a tax
- a late payment fee relating to either the fee or the charge.
Basic charge
Where a person requires a regulatory service from the department for the purpose of a biosecurity, imported food control or export control matter, the person will be invoiced the relevant fees and charges (collectively, the basic charge). If the basic charge is not paid on or before it becomes due and payable, it becomes a debt to the Commonwealth.
Late payment fees
A late payment fee is a compliance tool built into the department’s legislation to encourage on-time payment of a basic charge so we can recover costs for services already provided. A late payment fee is applied automatically by operation of law and is payable in addition to a basic charge where payment of that basic charge is overdue. Unless remitted, a late payment fee continues to accrue until the overdue basic charge is paid, and the fee becomes payable after the basic charge has been paid. If a late payment fee is not paid on or before it becomes due and payable, it becomes a debt to the Commonwealth.
Under the department’s legislation, a late payment fee is worked out using a prescribed formula. It is calculated at 20% of the basic charge annually, and pro-rated for the period commencing from the day after the basic charge became due and payable, to the day before the basic charge is paid.
Non-payment of invoices that we issue for our regulatory services may result in regulatory action against a debtor, including the withdrawal of services, the suspension and/or revocation of approvals, permits or licences, or court action for the recovery of a debt to the Commonwealth.
For assistance with late payment fees email ARhelpdesk@aff.gov.au or call 1800 647 531 (8.30 am – 5.00 pm Monday to Friday AEST).
Remissions and refunds
The department’s policy on remission and refunds explains the circumstances in which a delegate may remit or refund the whole or part of a cost recovery charge that is payable or paid to the department.
Read the refunds and remissions for cost recovery charges policy.
How we set our cost recovery charges
Cost recovery fees and charges applied by the department are periodically reviewed.
A key part of this process is the development of a Cost Recovery Implementation Statement (CRIS).
Each CRIS document provides information on:
- the legislative basis for cost recovery
- the design of fees and charges
- how fees and charges are applied
- ongoing reporting on the fees and charges.
Agriculture industry levies
The department administers primary industry levies that are applied across a range of agricultural commodities.
These levies are designed to collectively respond to a problem or opportunity through funding and resource sharing across a particular industry.
AIMS Account Clients
The department allows clients who receive invoices for services charged in AIMS to become an AIMS Account Client if they meet the criteria outlined on the AIMS Account Client page.
Freedom of information
The department provides access to documents under the FOI Act.
Requests for information under the FOI Act may attract charges for the time required to process the request and provide the documents.
Guidance on the FOI process and any applicable charges is available on our website.
Other fees and charges
Other services provided by the department may also attract fees. You will be informed of any fees or charges when you make your request.