National Management Group Communiqué:
H5 Avian Influenza (bird flu) – 29 July 2026
On 29 July 2026, the National Management Group (NMG) agreed to enact the National Management Agreement for H5 HPAI in Wildlife (the H5 NMA), providing a nationally agreed framework for cost-sharing response activities that build upon, and further strengthen Australia’s initial H5 bird flu response efforts.
The decision to enact the H5 NMA is based on advice from the Consultative Committee on Emergency Animal Diseases (CCEAD) that H5 bird flu in wildlife is not technically feasible to eradicate following recent detections and evidence of local transmission of H5 bird flu in a small number of wild seabirds. Importantly:
- There are no detections in poultry or evidence of large-scale deaths in any animals.
- The current risk of bird flu to people in Australia remains low.
Australia’s national arrangements are working as intended by enabling a coordinated and planned response as the situation changes.
Enacting the H5 NMA provides a clear pathway for governments and response partners to continue coordination through a ‘One Health’ approach including activities to mitigate risks to human health, animal health, and the environment associated with H5 bird flu in wildlife.
Response activities will include continued surveillance, investigation, technical assessment, public information and engagement with wildlife, animal health, environment, public health and industry partners.
This will help governments and response partners understand how H5 bird flu is behaving in wildlife, support timely advice to communities, and guide practical actions to reduce risks to poultry, wildlife, people and industry.
Further information on response activities will be communicated by relevant state and territory response agencies and through the National Management Group as required.
Jurisdictions have actively invested in H5 bird flu preparedness, including more than $113 million invested by the Australian Government in H5 bird flu preparedness and the recent commitment by all governments to cost-share up to $24.8 million to support initial response activities. The enactment of the H5 NMA further emphasises the national approach to working together on a coordinated response.
Australian poultry remains free of H5 bird flu. Food Standards Australia New Zealand has advised that poultry and egg products are safe to eat, and that people should always follow good hygiene practices when handling and preparing food.
Reporting suspicion of emergency animal diseases is easy and vital in protecting Australia. Early detection enables a rapid response and improves the likelihood of successful management.
If you notice any sick or dead birds, including domestic poultry, captive or wild birds, do not touch them. Contact the 24/7 Emergency Animal Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888 from anywhere in Australia. Further information about H5 bird flu is available at birdflu.gov.au.