We’ve designed journey maps and step-by-step guides to help you on your way.
Journey maps
Our journey maps will help you to understand the steps you need to take to become export registered and start exporting your products.
The ‘New Establishment’ map will help if your establishment is currently not registered for export.
If you’re currently registered for export and want to expand to other markets or vary your establishments registered operations, use the 'Existing Establishment' map.
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Watch: I am looking into export
If you are new to export, this pathway could assist you in your journey to become export registered.
Our step-by-step guide can help you to understand your obligations as an export manufacturer.
The step-by-step guide can also assist you in identifying your product definition.
You will also need to understand Australia’s export legislation and the importing country requirements of the country you want to export to.
Once you understand the applicable export legislation and importing country requirements you can engage the Export Facilitator.
The Export Facilitator is a free service that provides tailored assistance to dairy manufacturers.
You can contact the Export Facilitator via email.
After you have engaged with the Export Facilitator you can start completing your approved arrangement checklist.
To progress your registration, you will need to submit the export registration application form also known as an EX26 form, and pay your application fee.
After your documentation has been received and reviewed by us, you will be contacted to schedule an onsite audit.
If there are any gaps identified at audit, you must address them and contact us for a follow-up audit.
Once you meet all of the requirements your auditor will recommend you be approved for export, your approved arrangement will come into effect, and you are ready to begin manufacturing for export.
There is an annual registration fee that you will receive an invoice for.
Now that you are registered to export, you need to comply with your approved arrangement and keep records to show evidence of your products eligibility for export.
You are now ready to begin the manufacture of products for the export market.
See more
Watch: I am already exporting and looking at new markets
If you are already export registered and looking at exploring additional export markets, this is a suggested pathway for you.
It is important to understand the requirements of the new market you want to export to.
Check Micor for information on importing country listing requirements.
Check with your importer/buyer for any specific requirements that need to be met.
You will need to update your approved arrangement to show how your establishment will comply with the Importing country requirements.
Some countries require specific country listing before you can send products to that market, this may require additional information or applications to be submitted to us for review.
When you have completed your listing application, the department will submit the application to the overseas competent authority for final approval.
When they have reviewed and approved your listing you will be able to send your products to that market.
You must identify any new market requirements in your approved arrangement and how you demonstrate compliance with those requirements.
When your application has been approved and listed by the importing competent authority your products will be eligible for export to that market.
There is a department charge for reviewing listing applications.
Any significant or critical changes you make to your approved arrangement must be reviewed and approved by us prior to implementation.
Advise the department of critical non compliances that impact export eligibility and compliance with importing country requirements.
You are now ready to export to your new market, good luck.
See more
Watch: I am already exporting and looking at adding or varying registered export operations
If you are looking at adding additional processes to your existing export registration, this pathway could assist you.
Before implementing any new changes to your establishment, you will need to assess the risks involved with any changes or new processes.
Once you have established the changes required to your systems and processes, you will then need to make any necessary modifications to your approved arrangement and documentation to reflect the changes.
You need to contact your auditor to assess your new process and the associated changes to your approved arrangement before you can start exporting.
Once your auditor is satisfied that your additional processes uphold the food safety quality, they will provide a recommendation to us, we will then review and approve the change to your export registration.
You must wait for approval from us before you can export.
You can trial production of your new process however, you are unable to produce the product for export until you have received approval from us.
It is important to maintain contact with us and your importer to make sure your goods meet the requirements for that market.
You can always contact our Export Facilitator for any further assistance or guidance.
We are here to help you further your export journey.
If you have questions that are not answered here, we’d love to hear from you. Contact us and we’ll be in touch.