The Biosecurity Amendments (Strengthening Biosecurity) Act makes changes to the Biosecurity Act 2015 to modernise and harmonise the information management regime under the Biosecurity Act.
From the 6th of June 2023, the way you can use and disclose information under the Biosecurity Act 2015 will be changed.
The changes are designed to make it easier to share relevant information with different entities in certain situations.
While still maintaining appropriate controls for potentially harmful information.
It is anticipated that this will have positive implications for stakeholders and regulators, providing greater clarity, time savings and efficiencies, including reduced administration for business and operational staff across the department.
The amendments align with similar changes being proposed for the Export Control Act 2020, with the aim to harmonise the information sharing framework across these two key departmental acts.
This has been done to provide greater consistency and predictability for stakeholders.
Watch out For more information to come about these important changes.
The changes will provide greater clarity on how relevant information obtained by the department under biosecurity legislation can be shared across government and with other stakeholders for the purposes of managing biosecurity, while maintaining appropriate controls and safeguards for the sharing of certain kinds of protected information, including sensitive information.
For some stakeholders, including biosecurity industry participants (BIPs) and survey authorities, the changes will introduce specific authorisations to use or disclose relevant information in the course of performing their functions or duties under biosecurity legislation, as well as new sanctions that may apply for the unauthorised use or disclosure of protected information.
It is anticipated that these amendments will have positive implications for stakeholders and regulators, providing greater clarity, time-savings, and efficiencies.
Changes to the Biosecurity Act 2015 come into effect on the 6th of June 2023.