If your livestock are showing signs of lumpy skin disease, immediately call the Emergency Animal
Disease Hotline on 1800 675 888 (free call within Australia).
Australia is free from lumpy skin disease (LSD) and has never had an incursion of the disease.
Further information can be found at Australia’s freedom from lumpy skin disease.
LSD is a serious viral disease that primarily affects cattle and buffalo. The disease can result in animal
welfare issues and significant production losses. LSD is transmitted between animals. It is not a human
health risk, and cannot be transmitted to humans by eating affected meat.
LSD is carried by live animals and reproductive material. It can also be spread by contaminated
equipment and biting insects such as flies and mosquitoes or parasites like ticks.
Latest on LSD
Trade Situation in Europe
On 24 June 2025, Italy notified the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) of an
outbreak of LSD in a herd of dairy cattle Sardinia.
An outbreak of LSD was reported in France on 30 June 2025.
On the 19 July 2025 the Swiss Government began vaccinating against LSD.
An outbreak of LSD was reported in Spain on 4 October 2025
To manage biosecurity risk to Australia, the department has removed Italy, San Marino, France, Spain,
and Switzerland from the LSD-Free List and list of Countries approved for bovine fluids and tissues and
restricted imports that require country freedom from LSD.
The emergence and continued spread of LSD changed the risk profile for Australia. As a result, we have
been working with government and industry groups to strengthen our disease preparedness activities
under the National Lumpy Skin Disease Action Plan.
Australia has nationally agreed response and cost-sharing arrangements in place to respond to exotic
disease incursions, including for LSD.
The department will continue to actively monitor and respond to the global disease situation and any
changes in the risk to Australia.
Read more about Australia’s animal health systems and information to support Australia’s freedom
from infection.
• 
• 
• 
•

About the disease and the risk to Australia.
Learn more about the measures in place to prevent and prepare for LSD.

Find out what signs to look for in cattle, how to report a suspect case, and what you can do to protect
your animals.
Learn more about diagnosing, sampling and reporting LSD.
Find out more about the agreed priorities for actions to strengthen Australia’s preparedness for a
potential LSD incursion.
Media enquiries
For media enquiries visit our News and media centre, email us or phone (61 2) 6272 3232.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/animal/lumpy-skin-disease