A REPORT ON THE 2003 
PERFORMANCE REVIEW AND AUDIT OF 
RURAL FINANCIAL COUNSELLING SERVICES

Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) Program 
  A REPORT ON THE 2003 PERFORMANCE 
REVIEW AND AUDIT OF RURAL FINANCIAL 
COUNSELLING SERVICES
on behalf of the 
AND FORESTRY

© Commonwealth of Australia 2006
any process without prior written permission from the Commonwealth. Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction 
Robert Garran Office, National Circuit, Barton ACT 2600, or posted at <http://www.ag.gov.au/cca>.

3
CONTENTS
Preface
4
Background
5
Introduction
5
About the Rural Financial Counselling Service Program
5
Performance review objectives
7
Review approach
9
Evaluation criteria
9
Results of the review
11
General findings
11
Specific findings and recommendations
14
Improving RFCS operations and service delivery
24
Introduction
24
Methodology employed
24
Improving accountability
25
Improving delivery of services to rural communities
31
Other issues
35
Findings of a self-audit investigation
37
Introduction
37
Methodology employed
37
Summary of findings and opportunities
38

4
PREFACE
This is an abridged report of a performance review and audit by the Acumen Alliance consulting 
company on the Rural Financial Counselling Service Program currently administered by the 
umbrella for 68 separate projects providing rural financial counselling services across the country.
The report has four parts.
The first part gives the background to the program and details of the review.
The second part gives the results of the review, which draw principally on hands-on audits of 
24 of the projects in the program. A summary of the main findings and levels of compliance 
with specified audit criteria is followed by details of specific findings. Potential risks to 
management committees are identified and recommendations made for their avoidance. 
•     The third part further summarises the overall findings of the review and makes 
recommendations for improving the administration and performance of the program. 
The fourth part gives the results of a self-assessment audit of those projects (44) not included 
in the hands-on audit.

5
BACKGROUND
Introduction
program originally established within the former Department of Primary Industries and Energy, 
Department”. 
This is a report of the performance review and audit of the program, made by the consulting firm 
Acumen Alliance during 2003. The review was conducted by auditing the operations of a 
representative sample of 24 of the 68 projects then making up the program.
The goal of the RFCS Program is:1
To secure the profitability, sustainability and competitiveness of the farm sector.
The intent of the program is to develop the capacity of regional and rural communities to take 
control of their own development.
The RFCS Program was formerly part of the Rural Communities Access Program (RCAP), 
previous programs known as the Rural Counselling Program, Business Advice for Rural Areas, Rural 
Access Program, Telecentres Program, Australian Country Information Service and Countrylink. 
The RFCS Program is now part of the Agriculture Advancing Australia (AAA) package. The 
objectives of the AAA package are to: 
help farmers profit from change
give farmers access to an effective welfare safety net
provide incentives for ongoing farm adjustment
encourage social and economic development in rural areas.
About the Rural Financial Counselling Service Program 
Eligibility and administration
Any not-for-profit, representative groups with strong community or regional involvement can 
apply for funds for a RFCS project, as long as they are incorporated or are sponsored by an 
incorporated body. Funding is generally no more than $50,000, but some projects have received 
considerably larger sums. Funding applications frequently include budgets to employ project staff 
and/or consultants.
Applicants are expected to provide cash or in-kind contributions to the project. These must amount 
to at least 50% of the total cost (cash or in kind), part of which can be contributed by the State 
government and local communities. There are no formal agreements with State governments for 
matching or top-up funding, although on a project-by-project basis, State governments have 
contributed 20–25% of funding. State contributions are subject to approval by the State minister 
responsible. 
1 At the time of the performance review and audit in 2003.

6
The Department’s role in the RFCS
As the needs of each RFCS project vary, the Department relies on each project to determine the 
most appropriate operational structure. In addition, all decisions concerning the day-to-day 
operations of RFCS projects are determined by the grant recipients.
Information about the program is widely advertised in rural and regional newspapers and on the 
Department’s website. The Department’s staff assess applications against specific criteria set out 
in application guidelines, and pass these assessments and recommendations to members of the 
Rural Financial Counselling Advisory Committee. Advisory Committee members then make 
their own determinations and Committee recommendations are passed to the National Rural 
Advisory Council (NRAC) which reviews the recommendations and forwards them (with its 
comments) to the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
for final decision.
project outcomes. The funding agreements with RFCS projects provide details of the duties and 
responsibilities of management committees, rural financial counsellors and reporting 
requirements. The approved budget for the project is part of the funding agreement, and any 
significant changes to project budgets and expenditure require a variation to the agreement. 
Projects may be administered by existing community management bodies or committees, or by 
new bodies established by the community. In either case, the community body administering the 
project must appoint a management committee with a chair and other officeholders.
ARC database
The Department has developed an Access database known as ARC (formerly known as ATLAS), 
which allows rural financial counsellors to record key information on the activities of each RFCS, 
including the time spent by rural financial counsellors and administrative staff on RFCS project 
business, and client details such as name, contact details and current financial status. 
The ARC database incorporates proforma screens and is used by staff employed by the projects. 
Rural financial counsellors can report directly to the Canberra-based administrative staff using 
this database loaded on their own computers and can send reports electronically, by email. 
The Department can monitor the effectiveness of the scheme by way of aggregated data from 
ARC, as well as annual and informal data and feedback from surveys of clients (the last National 
Survey being completed in 2002). 
Resource Manual
The Department provides a Resource Manual to each RFCS project. The manual, at the time of 
the audit, was in its second edition, and provides information on:
management committee issues and responsibilities
protocols for employment of a rural financial counsellor
funding and finance
reporting and record-keeping requirements.

7
Structure of RFCS projects
There is no prescribed structure for organisations providing rural financial counselling services, 
but a typical RFCS project is structured as follows:
In each project, a management committee is responsible for ensuring that the terms of the 
funding agreement are met. Management committees typically consist of 6–15 volunteers 
from local government councils, rural businesses, regional businesses or local citizens and 
meet 2–4 times a year. The management committee is responsible for employing a rural 
financial counsellor(s) to deliver financial counselling services. The management committee 
has complete discretion to set the terms of the financial counsellor(s) employment, salary and 
provisions, including any fringe benefits.
Rural financial counsellors can come from a variety of backgrounds. Rural financial 
counselling positions are normally advertised in regional and national newspapers. A panel 
interviews appropriate applicants. The qualifications of rural financial counsellors vary, and 
people appointed have included ex-bank managers, qualified accountants and agricultural 
science graduates.
The support offered to a counsellor depends on the size and financial position of the particular 
RFCS project. Most RFCS projects employ an assistant to provide administrative support. The 
administrative assistant is, in most cases, primarily responsible for entering information in the 
ARC database. Larger RFCS projects may also employ a separate individual to assist in the 
management of the project’s finances.
Role of State rural counselling associations
Each State has an association of management committees and rural financial counsellors, which 
acts as a central point for knowledge sharing, networking and training for rural financial 
counsellors within the State. The State associations currently have no role overseeing the 
operations of RFCS projects.
Performance review objectives
The overall objectives of the review reported here were to determine whether current funding 
being complied with by grantee organisations. The review also sought to determine whether 
appropriate financial management arrangements exist at each RFCS project to ensure 
accountability to the Department for Commonwealth funds. The overall objective also 
encompassed a need to determine if appropriate governance arrangements were in place to ensure 
the grantee organisations manage their responsibilities in relation to committee record keeping, 
decision-making, accounting practices and any other legal obligations.
The audits were completed in accordance with “General Auditing Points” agreed between 
Acumen and the Department. The review focused primarily on the delivery of program outcomes, 
and financial and record keeping mechanisms employed by each RFCS project. Each project was 
assessed in accordance with a standard audit program that was developed as part of the review. 
It was envisaged that the results of the review would provide the Department with information 
enabling it to draw conclusions on whether or not grantee organisations were being operated and 
administered in an efficient and effective manner, and were meeting the agreed outcomes. It was

8
also expected that deficiencies in administration would be identified, and improvements 
suggested.
The objectives of the individual project audits were to assess whether:
the rural financial counsellors were performing the tasks for which they had been employed
management committees/rural financial counsellors had the capacity to ensure RFCS projects 
produced desired program outcomes
broad governance and risk issues (including conflict of interest and competitive neutrality) 
were appropriately dealt with by each project
services were being provided in a way that met current needs 
financial and record keeping mechanisms employed were appropriate, timely, accurate and 
consistent with the requirements of the program
the projects were complying with their funding agreements.
As regards the last point, management committees agree to accept funding for the purposes and 
subject to the terms and conditions of the agreement. Management committees are obliged to:
hold funds in an account in the name of their organisation — the account should be established 
solely for the purposes of accounting for and administering grant funding
have a constitution that is not inconsistent with their funding agreement
identify the receipt of funds and other contributions in an appropriate way in their accounting 
records
keep adequate financial records to identify all income and expenditure related to the RFCS 
project’s activities and ensure records are audited by a qualified auditor in accordance with the 
Australian auditing standards
refund monies not expended in a funding period, and do so within 20 business days of the 
completion of the period
expend funds in accordance with the budget set out in the schedule to the funding agreement 
— prior written approval must be sought to transfer funds between expenditure categories
keep full and accurate records of activities conducted, and ensure confidentiality of material in 
accordance with the Commonwealth information privacy principles contained in Section 14 of 
the Privacy Act
hold appropriate insurances
ensure no conflicts of interest exists or are likely to arise
comply with the provisions of all relevant statutes, regulations, by-laws and requirements of 
any Commonwealth, State, Territory or local authority (in particular the Association 
Incorporation Act in each State is of relevance).
The following specific issues were also investigated:
financial interests
other interests (of rural financial counsellors)
client need/eligibility and competitive neutrality

9
performance and ability
service efficiency
accuracy of information
financial information integrity.
Review approach
The review entailed:
assessment of existing departmental guidelines and legislation, and the current funding 
agreement for each RFCS project audited
gaining a detailed understanding of how each of the projects audited operates
assessing compliance with the existing funding agreement, including undertaking detailed 
compliance testing of information provided by grantee organisations
interviews with relevant departmental staff, grantee organisation staff, rural financial 
counsellors, committee members of RFCS projects and users of the RFCS.
In each of the RFCS projects audited the review commenced with a discussion with the counsellor 
to obtain background information on the service provided. The review then focused on the RFCS 
project’s financial records, client files, its constitution and the minutes of management committee 
meetings.
The examination of client files compared paper files with the records maintained on ARC. Also, 
a sample of clients of each RFCS project was surveyed.
The assessment of financial records analysed the variance between spending within the current 
period and the budget provided to the Department. An explanation was sought from the project 
when the variance was greater than 10%.
Record keeping and accuracy of records were examined by sampling invoices.
Evaluation criteria
The overall focuses of the review were compliance with funding agreements and the RFCS 
Resource Manual. 
Since the RFCS Resource Manual does not provide any direct guidance on corporate governance 
(the system by which the grantee organisation sets objectives, monitors risk and directs and 
manages the counsellor), criteria were established to measure the current level of corporate 
governance within RFCS projects. The following criteria were assessed:
Committee structure — was it appropriate and was there a balance of skills and experience to 
appropriately oversee the operations of the RFCS project?
Frequency of committee meetings — did the committee meet often enough to ensure 
appropriate oversight of the project? If not, were there other mechanisms in place to ensure all 
issues were dealt with promptly and members remained informed and in control of project 
activities?

10
Did the committee promote good ethical values? Was there a code of conduct, a policy on 
complaint handling and a policy on conflicts of interest? Were conflicts of interest an agenda 
point discussed early at each management committee meeting?
Information integrity — were appropriate mechanisms in place to ensure integrity in financial 
and other information provided to the Department? Did the management committee actively 
review financial information provided to it, and review all material before it is provided to the 
Department?
Does the committee have a sound system in place to identify, assess, monitor and manage risk?
Does the committee have a sound system in place to review the performance of the counsellor 
and to ensure the level and composition of remuneration is sufficient and reasonable? Does the 
committee have a remuneration policy in place that motivates the counsellor in an appropriate 
way?

11
RESULTS OF THE REVIEW
General ﬁndings
The key finding of the review was that a significant number of services were acting outside the 
terms of their funding agreements, in one or more of the following ways:
the level of corporate governance applied within the RFCS projects was below that expected 
of their funding agreements
in-kind contributions were not appropriately recorded for the purpose of monitoring and 
accountability
management committee minutes did not provide sufficient detail about decisions made in 
committee meetings
committees lacked an understanding of what constituted conflict of interest
some rural financial counsellors were providing services outside the boundaries of the funding 
agreement
auditing statements provided by external auditors of RFCS projects did not comply with 
Australian auditing standards
required budgets were overstated
budgeting failed to accurately reflect running costs
clients records were incomplete, both in client files and in records maintained in the ARC 
database
statements of client numbers were inconsistent
services were provided inefficiently
levels of counsellor qualifications were inconsistent. 
In addition, a number of general issues in relation to the delivery of the RFCS program and options 
for change were raised during the review. These are considered in the next section of this report, 
which also outlines options for improvements to the program.
The following general conclusions can be drawn on each of the auditing points.
Audit point
Conclusion
• Counsellor is performing the tasks 
for which they have been employed
• Rural ﬁnancial counsellors were found to be providing clients with a 
range of options that would assist them in resolving the ﬁnancial 
difﬁculties they were facing as a result of drought, personal 
circumstances or the withdrawal of other ﬁnancial services such as 
banks, accountants and solicitors from their area. In remote areas, the 
ﬁnancial counsellor acted as an information point on other government 
services.

12
• Counsellor is performing the tasks 
for which they have been employed 
(cont’d)
• The services provided by rural ﬁnancial counsellors varied signiﬁcantly 
depending on the other services available in the area. For instance, rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors were more likely to provide personal counselling 
services and assistance preparing Centrelink forms in rural towns where 
mental health services and Centrelink were absent. 
• Queries were raised in relation to the methods employed by some rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors in achieving results for their clients, and in some 
instances the services performed went beyond the boundaries identiﬁed 
in the funding agreements for rural ﬁnancial counselling services.
• Management committees/rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors have the 
capacity to ensure RFCS projects 
produce desired program outcomes
• The capacity of management committees to ensure RFCS projects 
produce desired program outcomes was found to be a product of how 
active the committee was, and the backgrounds of members. In general, 
where committee members were located a long distance from the RFCS 
project ofﬁce (meaning members were unable to be involved in the day 
to day work of the project) and did not involve local business people or 
professionals, the committee was less likely to be accountable for the 
RFCS project activities.
• Additionally, where the committee was less active, the counsellor was 
more likely to be running the service.
• Broad governance and risk issues 
(including conﬂict of interest and 
competitive neutrality) are 
appropriately dealt with by each 
RFCS project
• Many of the issues that emerged during the review related to this 
auditing point. No committee was found to have appropriately met all 
governance and risk issues. Most RFCS projects did not have a fully 
developed business plan, and did not undertake performance reviews of 
the counsellor and other staff. No project had undertaken a risk 
assessment. Improvements to the RFCS Resource Manual would help 
committees to deal with these issues.
• Services are being provided in a 
way that meets current needs and 
targets areas of need appropriately
• In many cases, it was not possible to gauge the effectiveness of the 
services provided, as more than 50% of projects had incomplete client 
records. While many rural ﬁnancial counsellors appeared to be tailoring 
their services to meet the needs of the community, few RFCS projects 
had performance review or client feedback mechanisms. Without these 
mechanisms, services cannot measure current needs within the 
community and whether clients believe these are being met.
• Financial and record keeping 
mechanisms being employed are 
appropriate, timely, accurate and 
consistent with the requirements of 
the program
• Overall, ﬁnancial and record keeping mechanisms were considered 
appropriate for the size of the operations undertaken. In general, most 
RFCS projects could improve their operations by tracking expenditure 
to the grant budget. 
• Record keeping could also be strengthened by all rural ﬁnancial 
counsellors maintaining a diary that recorded, as a minimum, all 
meetings held, the participants, location and major topics of discussion. 
These entries could then be used to verify entries in the ARC database.
• Improvements could also be made in budgeting arrangements and in the 
recording of in-kind contributions. 
Audit point
Conclusion

13
The following table gives a summary of the degree of compliance with the individual audit points 
across the 24 RFCS projects in the review.
• RFCS projects are complying with 
their funding agreements
• Some projects are complying with the spirit of their funding agreements, 
but many services are engaged in activities that may compromise the 
intent of the program including:
– projects were not employing formal mechanisms to record in-kind 
contributions
– management committee minutes did not provide sufficient detail about 
decisions made by the committee
– some RFCS projects (committees and/or rural financial counsellors) 
had conflicts of interest that may compromise the outcome of 
counsellor activities
– some rural financial counsellors were placing themselves in a position 
where they may be taking fee-paying clients over needy clients 
– some counsellors were providing services outside the scope of the 
agreement
– management committees had not employed appropriate corporate 
governance mechanisms.
Audit point
Number of 
projects  
(from 24) fully 
complying
Percentage of 
projects not 
fully 
complying
Counsellor performing appropriate tasks
• Management committee/rural ﬁnancial counsellors have capacity to produce 
desired outcomes
• Broad governance and risk issues are appropriately dealt with 
• Services are provided in a way that meets current needs and targets areas of 
need appropriately
• Financial and record keeping mechanisms are appropriate, timely, accurate 
and consistent with the requirements of the program
17
13
5
21
13
29
46
79
13
46
Requirements of funding agreements
• Hold funds in an account in the name of their organisation. The account 
should be established solely for the purposes of accounting for and 
administering grant funding
• Have a constitution which is not inconsistent with the funding agreement
• Identify the receipt of funds and other contributions in an appropriate way in 
their accounting records
• Keep adequate ﬁnancial records to identify all income and expenditure related 
to the RFCS project’s activities and ensure records are audited by a qualiﬁed 
auditor in accordance with the Australian auditing standards
• Refund monies not expended in a funding period, and do so within 20 
business days of the completion of the period
• Expend funds in accordance with the budget set out in the schedule to the 
funding agreement. Prior written approval must be sought to transfer funds 
between expenditure categories
• Keep full and accurate records of activities conducted and ensure 
conﬁdentiality of material in accordance with the Commonwealth information 
privacy principles contained in Section 14 of the Privacy Act
• Hold appropriate insurances
• Ensure no conﬂict of interests exist or are likely to arise
• Comply with the provisions of all relevant statutes, regulations, by-laws and 
requirements of any Commonwealth, State, Territory or local authority (in 
particular the Association Incorporation Act in each State is of relevance)
18
22
5
9
15
12
7
24
16
12
25
8
79
62
38
50
71
0
33
50
Audit point
Conclusion

14
Speciﬁc ﬁndings and recommendations
Finding 1
Capacity of management committee and rural ﬁnancial 
counsellors to produce desired program outcomes 
Discussion
There was significant variance in the skill sets of each counsellor and each management 
committee reviewed, with no two committees or two rural financial counsellors being directly 
comparable. Some rural financial counsellors held formal qualifications, as did some committee 
members. Overall, it was found that the backgrounds and skill sets of rural financial counsellors 
were appropriate for the role they were undertaking. However, the same was not the case for 
management committees.
Most management committees did not have a detailed understanding of their role as the employer of 
the counsellor and the obligations imposed upon them by their funding agreement with the 
Department. The supervision provided by most of the committees failed to include a detailed review 
of the methods employed by the counsellor to assist clients, and in particular did not include any 
review of the client files to ensure the counsellor was keeping appropriate records. Without 
undertaking a review of the rural financial counsellor's methods and record keeping, the committee is 
not in a position to guide the counsellor, and will not be able to ensure the desired project outcomes.
It was also observed that, where committees were constituted from local council representatives, 
these committees were less active than those constituted from interested community volunteers. 
The more active committees had a better understanding of their rural financial counsellors’ 
activities and the outcomes the service was achieving. 
Risk exposure
Management committees may be in breach of their funding agreements if they fail to ensure the 
service is producing desired program outcomes. 
Members of management committees may be exposed to legal action if the rural financial 
counsellors’ activities go beyond the desired program outcomes and result in losses to a client. 
Recommendation 1 (high priority)
Management committees should be encouraged to take a more active role in supervising and 
supporting the counsellor. Such activities could include regular review of the counsellor’s 
activities, and providing guidance and assistance.
The Department should consider the consolidation of management committees and the 
employment of a regional executive officer, who would report directly to management 
committees on the performance of rural financial counsellors and ensure that program objectives 
are being targeted by the activities undertaken. 
Finding:
Overall, management committees are primarily constituted 
from community volunteers and do not have the capacity or 
knowledge to ensure their service produces desired program 
outcomes.

15
Finding 2
Broad governance and risk issues are not appropriately dealt 
with 
Discussion
Each management committee is responsible for ensuring that broad governance and risk issues 
are appropriately addressed. In particular, it was anticipated that, at a minimum, the following 
corporate governance strategies should be in place to ensure that RFCS project outcomes are 
achieved:
development and promulgation of a business plan
establishment of clearly defined roles and responsibilities
completion of a risk assessment
completion of appropriate quality assurance reviews (particularly of record keeping in client 
files and options provided to clients)
implementing a performance review system
training and development of rural financial counsellors and committee members.
Implementation of an effective corporate governance strategy would enable a service to establish 
and assess the effectiveness of the control structure. Several benefits can be gained from such an 
approach including: 
staff being able to apply more initiative and ingenuity to everyday tasks
increased opportunities to analyse an operation more broadly, thereby improving strategic 
planning 
identification of more effective and efficient ways to provide services 
making the decision process more open and transparent. 
The review found that most services lacked an appropriate corporate governance framework. 
Reasons provided for the absence of corporate governance strategies included the uncertainty of 
future funding. Committees found that there was no benefit to be gained from spending time and 
money planning when funding periods were no more than 12 months.
Management committees should be more aware that the absence of strategies may suggest that 
they are not exercising reasonable care in their role—particularly if their project overspends their 
grant funds and trades in an insolvent position. While incorporation of RFCS projects provides 
some protection to committee members, they remain personally liable if they fail to exercise 
reasonable care in their role—or if an employee fails to carry out their role, causing injury 
(primarily through economic loss) to a client. 
Finding:
The corporate governance practices exercised by 
management committees are rudimentary and inadequate to 
assure RFCS projects meet their requirements under 
funding agreements and State legislation.

16
Absence of appropriate corporate governance strategies may also result in conflicts of interest 
arising between rural financial counsellors and/or committee members and the service. 
Risk exposure
Management committees may be in breach of both their funding agreement and State Acts 
covering incorporated associations.
Members of management committees may be in breach of their duties to the organisation and be 
found personally liable for any resulting losses. 
Conflicts of interest may arise that affect the ability of the service to produce desired program 
outcomes.
Recommendation 2 (high priority)
The RFCS Resource Manual should be updated to highlight the aforementioned issues and to 
ensure management committees understand their risk exposures. State associations should be 
encouraged to provide corporate governance frameworks and templates for services to use as a 
starting point.
Finding 3
Inappropriate services provided by rural ﬁnancial counsellors
Discussion
The role of the counsellor is to provide free, objective and confidential financial analysis to 
primary producers, rural businesses and individuals who have no other source of financial 
assistance. Three primary issues of concern were identified during the review:
rural financial counsellors were not applying eligibility criteria to clients
rural financial counsellors were providing advice they were not qualified to provide
rural financial counsellors were using inappropriate methods to achieve outcomes for their 
clients.
The review found that there was an overall need for rural financial counsellors to establish 
eligibility criteria for acceptance of clients. 
Risk exposure
Management committees may be in breach of their funding agreements. 
Members of management committees may be in breach of their duties to the organisation and 
personally liable for any resulting losses. 
Recommendation 3 (high priority)
The Resource Manual should be updated to highlight these issues and to ensure management 
committees understand the risks to which they are exposed. Management committees should be 
Finding:
Services provided by rural ﬁnancial counsellors are outside 
the parameters of their projects’ funding agreements.

17
encouraged to review the work undertaken by the counsellor and to make an assessment of the 
appropriateness of the assistance provided.
Finding 4
In-kind contributions
Discussion
When preparing an application for funding, each RFCS project must show that it can match the 
in the form of in-kind contributions such as volunteers’ time for office assistance and provision 
of premises rent free (subject to upper limits on some items). 
Each RFCS reviewed was in receipt of one form or other of in-kind contributions. They included:
reduced office rent and associated costs
financial management services where services had been co-located with other community 
organisations
personal services for cleaning, administration etc.
accommodation for committee members
free use of local council facilities.
It was noted that there was also an inconsistent approach to costing in-kind contributions provided 
in the form of personal services. In the majority of cases, an estimate was given of the value of 
the services provided, but no indication of how this was calculated. It would help if a standard 
hourly rate were set for all personal services provided as in-kind contributions.
The documentation maintained to support the in-kind contributions claimed by RFCS projects 
was generally inadequate.
Risk exposure 
Under or overstatement of contributions may occur.
RFCS projects may be in breach of their funding agreements if contributions are not received. 
Recommendation 4 (medium priority)
Each RFCS project should:
record in-kind contributions during the period on either a spreadsheet or in a receipt book
ask providers of in-kind contributions to provide, in writing, an annual statement of the 
assistance provided to the service
ask their external auditor to certify compliance with the in-kind contributions, stated in their 
funding agreement, during the annual financial statement audit process.
The Department should develop an hourly rate to be applied for personal services.
Finding:
RFCS projects are not adequately documenting in-kind 
contributions.

18
Finding 5
Overstatement of required budget 
Discussion
A quarter of the RFCS projects reviewed had overstated their requirements for operating funds 
for the period. In each instance, this resulted in the project having surplus funds in its bank 
account. All projects with surplus funds had bank balances above $40,000, with some having 
surplus funds of over $100,000. In one instance, additional emergency funding was sought and 
provided to the RFCS on the basis of its case of demonstrated need. However, the audit found that 
the project had surplus funds of more than $100,000 that were not disclosed in its application for 
emergency funding.
On average, the funds on hand and available to each RFCS project under review were over 
$66,000. Extrapolated across the 68 RFCS projects funded by the Department this equates to 
approximately $4.5 million in funds held by projects at 30 June 2003. The bulk of these funds is 
of operation of the Rural Financial Counselling Service. However, it would be almost impossible 
intermingled with community and State government contributions to the projects.
A number of RFCS projects indicated that the accumulation of surplus funds had been 
deliberately planned to allow the service to continue to operate in the event that the Department 
ceased to provide funding. It is inappropriate for RFCS projects to overstate expenditure 
requirements to accumulate funds in this way.
Risk exposure
If RFCS projects are allowed to continue to accumulate surplus funds there is a risk that funds 
provided for rural financial counselling may be used at a future time for provision of other 
services, or to fund commercial operations. That is, if the Rural Financial Counselling Service 
program ceases, RFCS projects will no longer be under any obligation to expend accumulated 
surplus funds in accordance with their funding agreements.
Recommendation 5 (high priority)
The Department should establish a policy for the treatment of RFCS projects with accumulated 
surplus funds. In instances where the agreed budget has been significantly underspent in any one 
period, alterations to future funding payments should be made.
The existence of accumulated surplus funds should be taken into consideration when RFCS 
projects apply for emergency funding. Where projects have accumulated funds, it is appropriate 
for these funds to be used to provide rural financial counselling services to the community before 
emergency funding is provided.
Finding:
RFCS projects have overstated their required budgets for the 
period under review resulting in surplus funds accruing to 
them.

19
Finding 6
Failure of budgets to accurately reﬂect running costs
Discussion
The finding that budgets did not reflect the actual running costs of the RFCS projects is related to 
the previous finding. Two types of circumstances were found during the review:
the budgeted amount was significantly more than the actual expenditure
OR
the actual expenditure was significantly more than the budgeted amount. It was found, for 
example, in a number of projects that no allowance had been made for the cost of utilities in 
the budget, yet significant expenditure was incurred on electricity, water and telephones.
In most cases, the failure of the budget to reflect actual expenditure resulted from general ledger 
accounts in prior periods not aligning to budget categories. A number of RFCS projects indicated 
that they had randomly assigned costs to budget categories and did not use the agreed budget from 
their funding agreements to monitor performance.
Running costs appeared, in some cases, to be significantly outside the average costs incurred by 
other projects under review. These running costs had not been identified as anomalous in the past 
due to a lack of comparative evidence and failure to establish standard acceptable costs.
Acumen has conducted an analysis of standard costs incurred on major expenditure items such as 
accommodation, salaries and utilities. 
Risk exposure
Where actual expenditure is recorded in financial categories that do not align to budget categories 
there is increased risk to the Department that funds will be spent on non-approved activities or for 
non-approved purposes.
Where budgets do not accurately reflect the running costs of the RFCS project there is an 
increased risk that either:
at a later date
OR
the RFCS will not have adequate funds to perform its activities and will risk trading in an 
insolvent position.
Recommendation 6 (medium priority)
The Department should encourage all RFCS projects to establish their financial records in 
accordance with a proforma chart of accounts that reflects budget categories. When funding 
applications are received, the Department should compare past expenditure in each category 
against the amount applied for and query any significant differences.
Finding:
RFCS projects are not generating budgets for funding purposes 
that accurately reﬂect the costs of operating the project.

20
The Department should establish standard cost ranges for key running costs such as 
accommodation (rental) expenditure, rural financial counsellors’ salaries, utility costs and vehicle 
running costs. These standard costs should be used as benchmarks to measure current and planned 
expenditure. Any anomalies identified should be queried with the RFCS project. 
Finding 7
Incomplete client records
Discussion
Client files were reviewed at most of the sites visited. The review entailed observing procedures 
for client management, including at what point an enquiry became a client, initiation procedures 
and time recording. A sample of clients (5–10% of total client numbers at each project) was 
obtained and records in the ARC database were compared with the client files held by the projects.
In 50% of the projects reviewed it was found that client records were incomplete, and lacked 
evidence to support the time entries recorded in ARC.
In addition, the records of client meetings were often found to contain insufficient detail on the 
time and location of the meeting and of the matters discussed. This may lead to difficulty for 
another counsellor in helping the client in the event that the current counsellor fell ill or left the 
project. Furthermore, should a client commence legal action against the RFCS, adequate client 
meeting notes would serve as useful evidence about the actual interaction and options provided to 
the client by the counsellor.
At a number of RFCS projects, ARC records were not up to date at the time of the review, with the 
entry of client information being three months behind in some cases. Failure of a RFCS to update 
ARC, results in inaccurate information being passed to the Department. Incomplete information also 
means that ARC statistics become less useful for comparing RFCS project activities.
Overall, it was noted that ARC and client records were more likely to be well maintained in 
projects in which an administrative assistant was employed.
Risk exposure
Incomplete ARC records may expose the RFCS project to adjusted funding amounts because of 
incorrect reporting to the Department.
Incomplete physical client files may result in RFCS projects being unable to adequately defend 
themselves in the event of legal action against them by a client. 
Recommendation 7 (medium priority)
All RFCS projects should introduce a self-audit process in which ARC entries are independently 
audited against the physical client file to ensure all ARC information is supported.
The Department should contact all RFCS projects where no administrative assistance is currently 
employed and encourage them to seek mechanisms through which they can address this issue (e.g. 
sharing office services or RFCS project amalgamation).
Finding:
Client records maintained in both physical client ﬁles and on 
the ARC database were incomplete.

21
Finding 8
Inconsistent statement of client numbers
Discussion
During the review of client records, RFCS projects were asked what criteria they applied to decide 
that a contact had become a client. The answers provided varied significantly, with some projects 
indicating it was once they had acted on the contact, possibly just by making an enquiry on their 
behalf. Other projects attached a time criterion to contacts, indicating that once they had spent more 
than a certain amount of time on the contact they considered them a client. While this time factor 
was the most common criterion applied, the time applied varied from an hour to half an hour. 
The glossary on page 51 of the ARC User Guide defines clients as:
Primary Producers, fishing enterprises and Small Rural Businesses in rural areas who are:
a)
experiencing financial hardship and have no other sources of financial assistance; 
b)
in need of information and assistance to make decisions about their future business 
directions; and
c) 
are being assisted by You.
In order to maintain some level of consistency across the program a client should only be entered 
into the client statistical database –ARC –once they have received a minimum 1 hour assistance 
from the Rural Financial Counselling Service, specifically to identify their current financial 
circumstances. The same condition will be used to reactivate clients who have become inactive.
An inconsistent approach to determining when a contact is a client results in the comparability of 
RFCS projects being lost. Projects with high numbers of clients may be providing the same 
service to the community as RFCS projects with lower client numbers. The difference in client 
numbers may occur when “clients” are established for activities such as “Committee”, 
“Department” and “Marketing” which reflect administrative activities of the counsellor. Many 
rural financial counsellors had established these codes to avoid breaching the requirement in the 
funding agreement to spend 75% of their time on client work.
Risk exposure
The Department may not be able to use client numbers as reported in ARC as a reliable statistic 
with which to measure the performance of RFCS if a consistent definition of a “client” is not 
applied. This is particularly an issue when RFCS projects are applying for emergency funding 
based on client numbers.
Any attempt at benchmarking RFCS projects will be unsuccessful while inconsistent criteria are 
applied.
Recommendation 8 (high priority)
The Department should state within the main body of information in both the Resource Manual 
and the ARC User Guide what constitutes a client. Within the funding agreements it would also 
Finding:
RFCS projects do not have a consistent standard for what 
constitutes a client. Thus, some projects are overstating client 
numbers.

22
be worthwhile updating the definition of a client in the schedule, to include the time frame in 
which a person must be serviced to be considered a client. At present it states only what type of 
entity a client may be, with no reference to time frame.
Where services are found to be recording client numbers outside the average parameters of a 
typical service, a review of client record-keeping should be undertaken.
The Department should review the need to maintain the 75%/25% criterion which is applied to all 
services for client time/administrative time split.
Finding 9
Inefﬁciencies in provision of services in some regions 
Discussion
During the performance review, a number of the RFCS projects visited were geographically very 
close to each other. The reviewers believe that efficiencies could be gained by combining these 
projects. Savings would be made in the costs of accommodation, administrative assistance and 
utilities. Management committees would also be in a position to become more active if they were 
combined.
Some services had already gained efficiencies by combining administrative functions such as 
financial management. 
Risk exposure
The Department may incur unnecessary expenditure in some areas if there are overlaps in service 
provision.
Recommendation 9 (high priority)
The Department should explore options to improve efficiency of service delivery at RFCS 
projects. These options are discussed in the next section of this report.
Finding 10 Inconsistent level of counsellor qualiﬁcations 
Discussion
During the review, information was collected on the experience of, and formal and informal 
qualifications held by rural financial counsellors. It was noted that there was a wide range in 
experience and qualifications among rural financial counsellors.
Finding:
The Department may be able to gain some efﬁciencies in the 
delivery of ﬁnancial counselling services by amalgamating 
RFCS projects in some areas.
Finding:
Qualiﬁcations among rural ﬁnancial counsellors varied 
signiﬁcantly. Not all rural ﬁnancial counsellors held relevant 
formal qualiﬁcations.

23
In general, those rural financial counsellors without formal qualifications had experience in the 
banking or finance sector before commencing as a rural financial counsellor. Most rural financial 
counsellors with formal qualifications had completed studies with an agricultural focus.
Risk exposure
Rural financial counsellors may not have suitable skills to adequately fulfil their role.
Recommendation 10 (high priority)
The Department should explore options to provide all rural financial counsellors with a minimum 
level of qualifications. In particular, it should consider the development, in conjunction with an 
external body, of a certificate course in rural financial counselling. The course should cover all 
the basic skills needed by a counsellor, such as cash flow budgeting, time management and record 
keeping.

24
IMPROVING RFCS OPERATIONS AND 
SERVICE DELIVERY
Introduction
The focus of the audit stage of this performance review was to identify the areas in which 
individual services were in breach of either the audit criteria or their funding agreement. As 
described in the previous section, recommendations were made which focused on dealing with 
each individual finding in isolation. An overall finding was that a significant number of services 
were undertaking activities which were considered contrary to their funding agreements. No 
service was found to be fully compliant with the audit criteria and funding agreement 
requirements. 
The impacts of each instance of non-compliance identified extend beyond individual RFCS 
projects to the program as a whole. In this section of the report we consider impacts and 
opportunities identified within individual service reviews, and apply a holistic approach to 
identify options for overcoming problems so as to improve RFCS operations and service delivery. 
The impacts of the individual instances of non-compliance were found to fall into two main 
classes: 
accountability — impacts which affected the ability of individual RFCS projects or the 
Department to remain accountable for the funds expended in providing financial counselling 
services
efficiency and effectiveness — impacts that affected the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
delivery of services to rural communities. 
Methodology employed
The opportunities identified during the review have been analysed and presented in this report in 
the context of the COSO (Committee of Sponsoring Organisations) Internal Control Framework 
in combination with a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis.
The COSO Internal Control Framework, details of which can be found at <www.coso.org>, 
provides a basis for analysing the key components of a program and identifying areas where 
improvements can be made and benefits gained. Internal control is essential for effective 
management and service delivery of a program and to ensure that desired outcomes are achieved. 
In addition, internal controls promote efficiency, reduce risk and assist in the assurance of 
financial reliability and legislative compliance. Five interrelated components of internal control 
were considered during the review:
risk management — consideration and documentation of all risks associated with the 
provision of funding and development of an effective risk mitigation strategy
control environment 
– implementation of an appropriate organisational structure to achieve the objectives of the 
program, including identifying roles and responsibilities for key staff within the program
– appropriate training for staff involved in administration and management of the program

25
control activities — appropriate and cost-effective mechanisms, operating effectively to 
ensure compliance with current legislation, including ensuring that the chief executive 
manages the affairs of the program in a way that promotes proper use of Australian 
Government funds in accordance with the Financial Management and Accountability Act
information and communication — adequate systems to ensure that RFCS projects can meet 
reporting requirements, and that appropriate management reports have been developed and are 
prepared in a timely manner 
monitoring and review — regular monitoring and review processes to ensure that funding 
agreements remain current and relevant, that the performance of RFCS projects is assessed 
The assessment of each of these components provides an effective way to determine the overall 
operation of the Department in its delivery of the RFCS program and allows the identification of 
both good practices and areas for improvement within the program.
SWOT analysis is a standard tool used to identify areas for improvement in an organisation. It is 
an effective way of identifying strengths and weaknesses, of assessing the opportunities and 
threats an agency might face. Through a SWOT analysis, areas for potential improvement can be 
identified and implemented to benefit the organisation.
The review of 24 RFCS projects forms part of the Department’s control activities in that the audit 
objectives assessed the performance of individual services. The review did not, however, look at 
internal processes and procedures in place within the Department to administer and manage the 
program.
Improving accountability
Introduction
The review found that the Department is reliant on information provided by the RFCS projects to 
effectively manage and allocate the funding available under the program, and to maintain 
Information is provided to the Department from a number of sources including:
ARC database reports — extracted every four months from ARC systems maintained by each 
of the RFCS projects and provided to the Department where they are consolidated
funding applications and funding agreements — in which projects provide the Department 
with information on the goals and objectives of their organisation and the estimated costs of 
providing a rural financial counselling service in their community
annual financial reports — provided to the Department at the end of each year, following the 
completion of a project’s annual financial audit
ad hoc information provided at the request of the Department, or by a RFCS project to support 
a claim for changes in its funding.
A number of weaknesses in financial and other record-keeping processes and procedures were 
identified at RFCS locations. These weaknesses affect the quality of information provided to the 
Department and therefore its ability to remain accountable for funding. 
SWOT analysis
The results of a SWOT analysis of the accountability of the Department follow.

26
Strengths
Weaknesses
Threats
Opportunities
COSO element strengthened 
by addressing weaknesses
ARC database
• Database developed by the 
Department to facilitate 
statistical data collection 
and reporting
• Some structure reporting 
mechanisms are in place, 
for instance four-monthly 
ARC reports
• RFCS projects have 
inconsistent deﬁnitions of 
clients, leading to lack of 
comparability of client numbers 
reported 
• Inconsistent use of ARC 
categories results in a lack of 
comparability of services 
provided
• The pre-existing version of 
ATLAS is dysfunctional, poorly 
programmed and unreliable
• Limited analysis of data by 
Department (largely due to 
database dysfunctionality)
• ARC statistics are not useful to 
the Department
• ARC information may be lost if 
RFCS projects do not back-up 
data or receive appropriate 
training
• The Department may be 
criticised for lack of 
accountability for 
funds
• Improvements to ARC can be 
made to ensure statistics 
produced can be actively used 
to monitor services and 
determine apportionment of 
program funds to individual 
RFCS projects. The department 
is in the process of 
implementing ARC 
improvements.
Monitoring and review
Control activities
Information and 
communication
Approved budgets
• Some structure reporting 
mechanisms are in place; 
for instance, a standard 
budget exists for funding 
applications
• By omitting or understating 
costs, budgets do not reﬂect 
actual running costs of the 
organisation 
• Budgets are overstated, 
resulting in RFCS projects 
accruing surplus funds
• The Department may be 
criticised for failing to 
recover Australian 
Government funds 
provided to projects, but 
not expended during their 
annual activities
• Improvements can be made to 
the review of funding 
applications and annual 
acquittal of funds
Monitoring and review
Control activities

27
Approved budgets (cont’d)
• In-kind contributions stated in 
funding applications are 
overstated, or not received by 
the RFCS project during the 
reporting period 
• RFCS projects are not required 
to acquit funds against budget
• Acumen Alliance can provide 
information that can be used to 
provide parameters to measure 
proposed and actual 
expenditure against budgets
• Implementation of a structured 
accounting framework that 
would allow for consistency 
and comparability in 
information provided by RFCS 
projects
Information and 
communication
• Some structured reporting 
mechanisms, such as the 
four-monthly ARC reports, 
are in place
• Failure of the Department to 
respond in a timely and decisive 
manner on matters brought to 
its attention
• Failure of RFCS projects to 
record administration time 
because rural ﬁnancial 
counsellors have set up client 
codes for particular 
administration tasks, or because 
an administrative assistant’s 
time is not entered
• Multiple communication points 
between RFCS projects and the 
Department lead to 
misinformation and inefﬁcient 
resolution of issues
• RFCS projects cease 
communicating with the 
Department, as they see 
no value or need in doing 
so
• The Department may act 
on inaccurate or 
incomplete information, 
resulting in an 
inappropriate outcome
• The Department ‘s 
position on issues may be 
inconsistently 
communicated
• ARC reports may distort 
the actual effort of rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors and 
administration staff, 
resulting in an inability to 
justify grant expenditure
• Implement a communications 
strategy which details all the 
methods by which information 
is to be provided to RFCS 
projects from the Department
• Update the RFCS Resource 
Manual to include more detail 
and the answers to frequently 
asked questions and issues that 
arise
Information and 
communication
Monitoring and review
Strengths
Weaknesses
Threats
Opportunities
COSO element strengthened 
by addressing weaknesses

28
Monitoring and review
• Some monitoring occurs in 
the form of ARC reports 
and the requirement for 
projects to provide audited 
annual accounts
• Monitoring is not tied to future 
funding provision
• Feedback on issues and 
concerns in information 
provided from RFCS projects 
does not occur
• The 75%/25% requirement for 
allocation of rural ﬁnancial 
counsellors’ time is distorted by 
current use of ARC — 
recording of assistants’ time 
can also distort the ratio
• The Department makes 
decisions in relation to the 
continuation and future 
direction of the program 
based on incomplete or 
inaccurate information
• RFCS projects provide 
services inconsistent with 
their funding agreement 
which are not detected
• Funds remain unspent and 
are not returned to the 
department
• Develop an ongoing program 
of site visits and self audits to 
ensure RFCS projects are 
implementing 
recommendations and changes 
suggested by the department
Monitoring and review
Information and 
communication
Strengths
Weaknesses
Threats
Opportunities
COSO element strengthened 
by addressing weaknesses

29
Action plan
Improvements to ARC functionality
It is recommended that the department include in its current upgrade of the ARC database, 
enhancements to its functionality. Enhancements should include the following:
Mandatory data fields — the department needs to assess what analysis is to be performed on 
the data provided by the RFCS projects in order to determine which data fields are to be made 
mandatory. At the time of the review, consistency of ARC data across projects was not being 
achieved. As a minimum, rural financial counsellors should be required to enter all of the 
relevant contact details of clients, including their addresses, phone numbers and Local 
Government Areas (LGAs). All clients should be assigned a client number or code, and all 
“assistance” made available to the client by the rural financial counsellor should be recorded. 
Further decisions on mandatory fields would be based upon the Department’s assessment.
The ability to report on a rural financial counsellor’s activities on a specific day needs to be 
included in the reporting functionality of ARC. This would facilitate the accurate recording 
and reporting of actual time spent on particular activities, and to determine whether the current 
split of time between administrative functions and providing the required services is 
appropriate.
The search facility should include LGA as a criterion.
The finance screen should include a text box for Date of last financial update to ensure data is 
kept up to date.
Any new version should maintain data back-up functionality.
Any new version should retain the mail merge functionality, as rural financial counsellors and 
administration staff have found this useful.
Implementation of a structured accounting framework
It is recommended that the Department implement a structured accounting framework which is 
applied to all RFCS projects for funding applications, annual financial reporting and financial 
record keeping. The framework should include the following:
A standardised chart of accounts, which lists all anticipated income and expenditure for a 
project. This should be used by all RFCS projects for budget applications, acquittals of funds 
at the completion of a funding period and day-to-day financial record keeping. Projects should 
be encouraged to limit their operating accounts to the standard accounts. Use of the standard 
chart of accounts should be mandatory in all reporting to the Department.
A formalised assessment process for each funding cycle that involves establishing parameters 
for each category in the chart of accounts, and then assesses all applications against these 
parameters for reasonableness and completeness. It was noted during the review that a number 
of projects had no budgetary records for utilities, yet incurred expenditure for electricity, gas 
and telephone services. Such anomalies would be identified and removed by applying a 
formalised assessment process.
Provision of guidance in the Resource Manual on how to establish an appropriate audit trail 
for expenditure incurred and income received.

30
Review of funding applications and annual acquittals of funds
It is recommended that the Department employ a more formalised process for review of funding 
applications and of annual acquittal of funds. This process should be implemented in parallel with the 
structured accounting framework, as the ability of the review process to work effectively will depend 
on the accuracy, completeness and comparability of information provided by RFCS projects. 
It is recommended also that the formalised process be outsourced, as it will be required only for 
defined periods; that is, it will be required only once in a funding cycle for funding applications, and 
once at the end of each financial year for annual acquittals of funds. 
The process should involve establishing acceptable parameters for each category of income and 
expenditure, then assessing the application or acquittal against this measure. Once an agreed 
funding amount is determined, this should form the basis for the annual acquittal. Assuming the 
implementation of a structured accounting framework, the acquittal process will involve the 
comparison of actual expenditure against budgeted funding, a process that should take a matter of 
minutes. A policy should be established for the resolution of all instances where over- or under-
spending of budgeted funds occurred.
Communications strategy
It is recommended that the Department develop a communications strategy that details what 
information needs to be provided to RFCS projects and the channels through which this information 
will be communicated. During the review, projects regularly noted that they felt that communication 
with the Department could be improved, particularly in the event that there were changes in the 
Departmental staff administering their project. The strategy should include a formal mechanism for 
recording queries and responses, to ensure that similar queries are answered consistently.
It is recommended that the communications strategy include a policy on who provides 
information from RFCS projects. We believe that, in the first instance, the Department should 
communicate only with the chair of the management committee or their nominated representative, 
except if the issue raised is a technical one, in which case it should be directed to the ARC help 
desk. Establishing a clear protocol for communication will reduce the risk of misinformation 
arising, or inconsistent responses from the Department occurring being reduced. The 
communications strategy and any associated policies should be made available to RFCS projects 
for comment before they are implemented.
Update of RFCS Resource Manual
It is recommended that the Department update the Resource Manual to overcome a number of 
problems that were identified during the audit phase. In particular, the Resource Manual should 
include:
the Department’s policy on treatment of RFCS projects that fail to adhere to the terms of their 
funding agreements
the Department’s policy on what constitutes a client and where time should be recorded when 
work is performed that is not specifically related to a client created in ARC
what constitutes a service outside the parameters of a funding agreement
a number of check sheets to guide operations and corporate governance of rural financial 
counsellors and committee members.

31
Beneﬁts
A number of benefits can be gained by implementing each of the aforementioned action items 
recommended. These benefits must be assessed against the costs and resources required to 
implement the actions.
The benefits of improving ARC functionality include improved reporting from the system. This 
will lead to improved decisions-making, and an increased usage of ARC as it more closely reflects 
the activities being performed by RFCS projects.
The benefits of implementing a structured accounting framework include the following:
There would be improved comparability and consistency of financial information from 
projects. Comparability of information is important to ensure that RFCS projects do not 
overstate their funding requirements, and to identify any anomalous expenditure they incur.
Requests for funding would be simpler and more accurate if funding categories matched day-
to-day financial records of the RFCS projects. In addition, projects would be less likely to omit 
essential expenditure at the funding application stage, reducing the likelihood that they will 
have to seek additional funding at a later date.
The benefits of implementing a formal review process for funding applications and annual 
acquittals would include:
improved accountability for provision of funds to RFCS projects, as each project is assessed 
against predetermined criteria
funds being allocated to those services that have a greater need
outsourced providers completing the job for a fixed fee each period, removing the need for 
additional resources to be allocated to the program by the Department
applications from outsourced providers being assessed solely on their merits, since the 
applicants have no relationship with any of the projects 
variations from previous levels of expenditure and approved funding amounts being identified 
and followed up promptly.
The benefits of updating the Resource Manual flow from the current pattern of usage. In most 
instances, RFCS projects audited in the review indicated that they relied on the manual in the first 
instance for guidance if a problem arose, so updates to it will immediately benefit the projects if 
and when they encounter problems. 
Improving delivery of services to rural communities
Introduction
For the Department to be able to demonstrate that the Rural Financial Counselling Service is 
meeting the objectives of the Agriculture Advancing Australia program, it must be able to show 
that it understands the needs of communities and is delivering a service that directly meets those 
needs. The Department must strike an appropriate balance between maintaining accountability 
and autonomy to use the funds in the way that best meets their needs.

32
The key issues of service delivery were identified during the review were that:
RFCS projects are delivering services outside their current funding agreements; in particular, 
all projects were found to be providing some form of personal counselling to the community
management committees did not have sufficient corporate governance mechanisms in place to 
ensure the projects were effectively and efficiently run
RFCS projects were run inefficiently when management committees were not in control and 
no administrative support was provided.
These weaknesses affect the ability of the Department to ensure that the RFCS program is 
efficiently and effectively delivered to rural communities.
SWOT analysis
The results of a SWOT analysis of the Department’s delivery of the RFCS program follows.

33
Strengths
Weaknesses
Threats
Opportunities
COSO element strengthened 
by addressing weaknesses
Provision of services
• RFCS projects audited were 
able to articulate the broad 
needs of the communities 
they were operating in and 
appeared to be addressing 
their ﬁnancial counselling 
needs
• Services adapted to the 
communities they were 
operating in — where no 
other services (ﬁnancial 
counselling, legal services, 
mental health workers and 
banks) were available, rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors offered 
broader services than those 
of major regional centres
• RFCS projects are delivering 
services outside the current 
parameters of their funding 
agreements
• RFCS projects and/or rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors were 
involved in activities that 
would be considered as 
conﬂicting with their 
obligations to deliver free 
services under the program 
(e.g. fee for service activities 
provided in program, which 
is supposed to provide free 
services to the rural 
community)
• The Department may be 
criticised for lack of control 
over the delivery of its 
program.
• Review the efﬁciency and 
effectiveness of service 
delivery in areas where 
services are located 
geographically close 
together, or where 
management committees are 
not exercising appropriate 
corporate governance 
• Different options for delivery 
of Rural Financial 
Counselling Services can be 
explored
Monitoring and review
Control activities
Information and 
communication
Assessment of need for 
services
• RFCS projects are able to 
apply for additional funding 
where needs in an area 
change
• Services are operating at 
capacity, primarily due to the 
effects of drought on 
farmers, and may not be able 
to service others in need in 
the community
• New rules excluding RFCS 
projects from completing 
FarmHelp forms will reduce 
available operating capital 
considerably
• The Department may be 
criticised for failing to 
recover Australian 
Government funds provided 
to projects but not expended 
during their annual activities
• Review the efﬁciency and 
effectiveness of service 
delivery in areas where 
services are located 
geographically close 
together, or where 
management committee are 
not exercising appropriate 
corporate governance
• Different options for delivery 
of RFCS help can be 
explored
Monitoring and review
Control activities

34
Efﬁciency and effectiveness 
of service delivery
• RFCS responsive to needs of 
community
• Services provided in timely 
manner
• Services responding to all 
needs rather than those they are 
funded for (ﬁnancial 
counselling), leading to 
inefﬁcient delivery of services
• Delivery of services to those 
who can afford to pay for them 
(to the potential detriment of 
those who cannot)
• Poor corporate governance 
exercised by management 
committees — no RFCS project 
audited was assessed to have 
appropriate corporate 
governance mechanisms in 
place
• Failure to segregate the roles of 
rural ﬁnancial counsellor and 
committee — in a number of 
projects, the rural ﬁnancial 
counsellor was performing 
administrative roles such as 
completing funding 
applications and was 
participating in management 
committee meetings
• Client records did not 
adequately document meetings 
between the client and rural 
ﬁnancial counsellor or the work 
performed by the rural ﬁnancial 
counsellor
• Where no administrative 
assistant was employed, 
projects were found to be less 
efﬁcient
• Lack of community 
involvement in RFCS projects 
that are seen to be inefﬁciently 
run — it was observed that 
committees of well run 
projects had less difﬁculty 
attracting members 
• Funding agreements may not 
be adhered to where projects 
are inefﬁciently run
• RFCS projects may be unable 
to defend the actions of the 
rural ﬁnancial counsellor 
where poor records are 
maintained
• Liability exposure — 
competitive neutrality issues 
with private fee for service 
providers
• Review the efﬁciency and 
effectiveness of service 
delivery in areas where 
services are located 
geographically close together, 
or where management 
committees are not exercising 
appropriate corporate 
governance
• Different options for delivery 
assistance through the Rural 
Financial Counselling Service 
can be explored
Control environment
Monitoring and review
Control activities
Strengths
Weaknesses
Threats
Opportunities
COSO element strengthened 
by addressing weaknesses

35
Action plan
Options for the delivery of the Rural Financial Counselling Service program
It is recommended that the Department explore options for the delivery of the program other than 
the current model of one management committee in each location managing one RFCS project. 
The options which the Department could consider include the following: 
RFCS projects that are located close to each other could be amalgamated, either by combining 
the provision of services under one management committee, or by combining aspects of 
project function, such as financial management.
An “area manager” or “executive officer” could be appointed, with responsibility for 
overseeing day-to-day management of a group of RFCS projects located close to each other. 
The area manager would report to the management committee of each project. It is envisaged 
that area managers would be funded by the Department and would be responsible for all 
reports to the Department, including prompt provision of ARC records and acquittals of 
funding amounts.
RFCS assistance could be delivered through other government service providers such as 
Centrelink.
A two-tier system based on degree of isolation could be developed, in which services are 
provided and funded according to the role they provide within their communities. Isolation 
would be judged on the basis of a number of criteria, including whether banks, Centrelink, 
Medicare, accountants, solicitors, personal counsellors and other professional services existed 
in the immediate vicinity of the RFCS project.
Beneﬁts and costs
Consideration and implementation of the above recommendations provides an opportunity for the 
Department to significantly improve a number of aspects of service delivery and the overall 
accountability of the program at a departmental and operational level. The benefits would include:
improved accountability for provision of funds to RFCS projects as each project would be 
assessed against predetermined criteria
potential savings through the creation of consolidated services and reduced administrative 
costs.
The benefits and costs of the changes are summarised in the following table.

36
Other issues
The performance review of the Rural Financial Counselling Service program focused on RFCS 
project operations and activities. It did not include a review of departmental processes and 
procedures to administer and monitor the program. Information on procedures currently in place 
for improving ARC, communicating with RFCS projects and assessing applications was provided 
to the reviewers during the review.
It is recommended that the processes and procedures in place within the Department to assess, 
administer, vary and acquit funding to RFCS projects be formally reviewed. The benefits of such 
a review would include the opportunity to identify additional opportunities for efficiency gains 
and areas where accountability can be further improved.
Action
Beneﬁts
Costs to the Department
Merging or partial merging of 
RFCS projects
• Saving of expenditure on rental of 
accommodation, administrative 
assistance and other running costs
• More consistent delivery of 
corporate governance
• Initial supervisory costs to ensure 
merge is effective — possible 
support of service
• Loss of coverage of some rural 
areas if rural ﬁnancial counsellors 
relocate. It is envisaged that RFCS 
projects will be merged only 
where counsellors are currently 
located close to each other and 
service delivery will not be 
affected. Where partial merging 
occurs it is anticipated that 
counsellors will not be relocated.
Employment of area manager 
or executive ofﬁcer
• Improved information ﬂows to both 
management committees and the 
Department
• Independent supervision of rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors by individual 
with detailed knowledge of the area.
• Better accountability/control of the 
rural ﬁnancial counsellor
• Corporate governance may be 
strengthened where it is 
implemented/enforced by paid 
coordinator rather than volunteers
• Employment costs of area 
manager. Should be partially off-
set by reduction in administration 
costs experienced by the RFCS 
projects. In some areas, ex-rural 
ﬁnancial counsellors may be able 
to be employed part-time to carry 
out this role.

37
FINDINGS OF A SELF-AUDIT 
INVESTIGATION
Introduction
It was not possible for the Acumen review team to conduct first-hand audits of all 68 projects in 
the RFCS program. Those projects not included in the main review (24) were provided with a self-
assessment checklist to complete and return (44).
The checklist was developed from the audit plan used during the main review. The self-
assessment process had a two fold aim. First, it was designed to provide the Department with 
information on the activities of individual RFCS projects, including levels of current expenditure, 
in-kind support and expenditure on rural financial counsellors’ salaries. Second, the process was 
designed to alert management committees to the types of information they should be continually 
seeking and reviewing to ensure they are complying with their obligations to the Department 
under their funding agreements.
This section of the report provides a summary of the overall findings from the assessment of 
completed checklists. 
Methodology employed
The self-assessment checklists were mailed to the chairs of the 44 RFCS projects which had not 
been included in the first-hand review. Each project was provided with instructions on how to 
complete the checklist and an electronic file to use in preparing their response. 
The checklist was built around the following main questions:
Funding Agreement
1.
Was the service established in accordance with the funding agreement?
2.
Were funds spent in accordance with the funding agreement and in accordance with the 
approved budget? 
Management of funding
3.
Has a bank account been established with a deposit-taking institution solely for the purposes 
of accounting for and administering any funding provided under this agreement?
4.
Are records maintained for all other funding provided to the service?
5.
Have financial records been maintained to enable:
– all income and expenditure to be identified
– preparation of financial statement
– audit of records
6.
Has funding been used for the purchase of assets without prior approval?
7.
Are full and accurate records maintained of activities? 
8.
Are insurance policies maintained in accordance with the funding agreement? 
9.
Are there any conflicts of interest? 
10.
Does the rural financial counsellor(s) meet the minimum competencies as specified in the 
Resource Manual? 
11.
Does the rural financial counsellor(s) have an employment contract?

38
Committee
12.
Does the committee meet on a regular basis and operate in accordance with committee 
guidelines provided in the Resource Manual?
13.
What role does the rural financial counsellor play in committee meetings?
14.
Does the committee conduct the program administration?
15.
Are client and stakeholder satisfaction surveys completed?
16.
Does the committee conduct formal performance reviews of the rural financial 
counsellor(s)? 
Client records
17.
Are full and accurate client records maintained in ARC? 
Each project was given a month to complete the checklist. The checklist was completed on time 
by 21 of the 44 projects (48%), which were subsequently assessed in this part of the review.
Summary of ﬁndings and opportunities
The focus of the assessment was to identify areas in which the RFCS projects had failed to 
complete the checklist in an appropriate manner, and to identify responses in the checklist which 
suggested that follow up and further investigation should be undertaken by the Department.
Each RFCS was assessed using the following criteria for guidance:
Was there evidence of adequate corporate governance? This was assessed by looking at the 
person who completed the self audit (whether a committee member or the rural financial 
counsellor), whether any conflicts of interest were declared, and a review of meeting minutes 
where they were provided.
Were funds expended according to the budget and in an appropriate way? This was assessed 
by comparing actual expenditure against the budgeted expenditure and by looking at 
expenditure in specific categories, particularly in relation to rural financial counsellors’ 
salaries. Recommendations were made to the Department to review future funding allocations 
where significant underspending had occurred.
Were adequate financial record keeping mechanisms in place to ensure appropriate records 
were maintained? The ability to provide financial records, details of in-kind contributions and 
bank reconciliations were reviewed when assessing this criterion.
In general, it was rural financial counsellors rather than members of management committees who 
completed the checklists. In such instances, it was likely that the committee did not have 
governance mechanisms in place to ensure they had appropriate control over the project.
A significant number of projects were unable to adequately acquit their budget expenditure, 
evidenced by instances where acquittals on the worksheet provided did not align to profit and loss 
statements also provided.
The self-audits were designed to bring governance issues to the attention of management 
committees. A number of self-audit responses documented actions such as “Management 
committee to discuss LSL and superannuation at next meeting” which suggests the self audits 
achieved this goal. It is unlikely, however, that the goal was achieved where the rural financial 
counsellor rather than a committee member completed the checklist.

39
For each RFCS project self-audited, areas of concern were highlighted and the Department 
informed that the project fell into one or other of the following classes: 
Action required — responses in the self-assessment checklist identified significant areas of 
concern. It is recommended the Department include the project in future audit programs.
Monitoring required — responses indicated that the project may be over/underspending budget 
allocation. The Department should monitor it to ensure that continued patterns of over/under 
spending are followed up.
No action required — self-assessment responses suggested the project is complying with its 
funding agreement and is incurring costs in line with the agreement.
Of the 21 projects involved, 6 were deemed to require action, 5 to need monitoring and 10 as 
requiring no action. 
It should be noted that a further 23 projects did not complete the self audit.