18
1	
Overview
The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) Program is funded under the Agriculture 
Advancing Australia (AAA) package. The program provides grants to non-profit community 
groups that offer assistance with financial decision-making to primary producers, fishers 
and rural small businesspeople who are experiencing financial hardship and who have 
no other sources of financial assistance or information. The current RFCS comprises 63 
community-based, longer-term services and 5 short-term industry adjustment services. 
These cover most of the agricultural regions of Australia (see Appendix 8).
1.1	
The Rural Financial Counselling Service Program 
Review
further funding of $23.3 million for the RFCS program until 30 June 2008. It was also 
announced that a review ‘of the performance of Rural Financial Counselling Services across 
Australia with a view to determining the efficiency, timeliness and suitability of current 
administration and community management structure and delivery mechanisms’ would 
be conducted.
(NRAC) – an independent committee of primary producers and agribusiness professionals 
– to lead the RFCS Review, which would provide advice on:
the nature, distribution and magnitude of need for rural financial counselling services

20
and agricultural 
adjustment
2.1	
The rationale for government intervention in 
adjustment
To measure the effectiveness of the RFCS program, it is important to understand its role as 
part of a suite of public and private-sector initiatives, in enhancing industry and enterprise 
adjustment.
Agricultural adjustment is the process of adapting to change – whether at the industry or 
the individual enterprise level. While adjustment is often characterised as negative, it can 
often be positive, such as when market opportunities are captured or technical or business 
innovations adopted. However, not all enterprises are well-positioned to respond promptly 
to such opportunities or pressures, with negative consequences ranging from missed 
opportunities to hardship for farm families and rural communities.
Government assistance to the farm and fishing sector has taken three forms:
activities that improve enterprise competitiveness but require a scale of investment 
that is beyond the capacity of individual enterprises – for example, border protection, 
market maintenance, research and development
1.
CONTEXT/BACKGROUND

21
programs to improve access to information, enhance uptake of innovation and build 
the capacity of enterprises to respond more effectively to market and other signals
welfare programs that reduce hardship for farm families in the short term.
Forms of intervention, such as welfare programs, have the potential to muffle signals from 
markets, climate forecasters and changes in the operating environment. Government 
policy has attempted to clearly distinguish between these forms of support, and to ensure 
that the ‘welfare safety net’ does not prevent farm enterprises from recognising and 
responding to indicators of a need for long-term change.
By underwriting risk, government policy can discourage self-reliance and 
responsiveness and encourage producers to continue in an industry when it is 
no longer in their best interests to do so. Government intervention should act to 
enhance the responsiveness of primary producers and small rural businesses to 
changing circumstances and to changes in their own viability.
Therefore, to determine how effectively the RFCS program has ‘met need’ in 
the sector, the review committee determined that it would be important to 
determine the extent to which the program operates as a component of the 
government’s welfare safety net for the sector, and the extent to which it builds 
the capacity of farm families to make informed decisions and to respond to 
challenge and change.
2.2	
The drivers of adjustment
Six adjustment pressures continue to affect the farm sector and highlight the need for 
farm families to consider future options to maximise their business outcomes in or out 
of the industry:
terms of trade and farm scale
cost of capital
changes in markets and consumer preferences
resource access
climate change
land value and peri-urban competition for land.
Many of these pressures are generic and also apply to the fishing industry.
2.
3.

22
2.2.1	
Small rural businesses
In the rural sector, the prosperity of the farm sector significantly influences the viability 
of small rural businesses. For this reason, the RFCS provides financial counselling to these 
enterprises as well as to primary producers.
The impact on small rural businesses of downturns in the farm sector is not uniform. Two 
variables determine the extent to which small business viability will be affected by farm-
sector crisis.
1. The nature of the business: small businesses that supply goods and services to only 
the farm sector are more vulnerable than businesses that service the wider community.
These businesses are affected both by a decline in the quantum of goods and 
services purchased and by a change in the pattern of purchasing. When incomes 
fall in the farm sector, enterprises tend to shift from bulk, annual purchasing to 
short-term purchasing as needed, making stock control more difficult.
Small businesses providing goods and services that could be deferred (such as 
furniture and appliances) are also affected, but small businesses selling household 
staples (such as food) are only minimally affected.
2. The region’s economic reliance on the farm sector. The impact of farm-sector 
downturn on small rural businesses is less severe when the local economy is more 
diverse. Figure 1 shows regions where 50% or more of local employment relies 
on agriculture. It is in these regions that farm-sector downturn will impact most 
severely on small business viability. Appendix 5 gives a map of socio-economic 
disadvantage by region.
Other drivers of change
There are other drivers of change for small rural businesses, including demographic 
changes in rural communities that affect purchasing patterns. These include the following:
Youth migration to cities. There has been a rapid decline in the number of persons 
under 25 entering agriculture. Cities and larger regional centres attract young 
people because of educational and social opportunities, and diverse career choices 
(Barr 2004).
Ageing farmers and mature entrants to farming – including those farmers who 
have been unable to attract a younger generation to take over a farm enterprise, 
and those who are new entrants to primary production following a career in a more 
developed rural or regional centre (Barr 2004).

23
Figure 1.  Proportion (%) of workforce employed in agriculture (Bureau of Rural 
Sciences 2001). Farm sector downturn will have the most serious effect on regions 
where 50% or more of the local population relies on agriculture for employment
Ethnic change. There is a growing Indigenous population in the NSW Western 
Division and other remote/semi-arid communities.
Overall population decline in small to medium-size centres. Stayner (1997) 
notes that there has been ‘a continuing trend of depopulation of the hinterland and 
growth of a limited number of regional centres. This decline is an inevitable outcome 
of competitive pressures towards aggregation in agriculture, the decoupling of the 
farm sector from small town economies and the absence of other industries within 
these landscapes.’
Loss of infrastructure and social networks. The economic case for private-sector 
activity and for government funding for infrastructure is closely linked to population, 
and as infrastructure and commercial activity declines, rural communities begin to 
bypass their local centre to shop and do financial business in larger centres. This 
further erodes the viability of infrastructure and small business in small, local centres. In 
addition, the growth of large-scale enterprises in agriculture has been accompanied by 
increased use of the Internet to source – often at some distance from the local region 
– best-price inputs to production.

24
2.2.2	
Adjustment in Australian fisheries
During the state-by-state consultations, the review committee invited input from the 
fisheries sector to determine the sector’s need, current and anticipated, for rural financial 
counselling services, but most organisations did not take advantage of this opportunity. 
The review committee received one written submission from the South Australian Fishing 
Industry Council (SAFIC), while the Tasmanian Fishing Industry Council (TFIC) accepted an 
invitation to address the committee during its consultations in that state.
In its submission, SAFIC said there was a need for part-time counsellors to work with 
smaller groups with special and possibly unique needs – such as the sections of the fishing 
industry subject to structural adjustment pressure:
There is a case to be made for fishing specific rural financial counselling…Other rural 
counsellors, as well as my own experience, shows me it is difficult to have fishers open 
up to rural counsellors who normally deal with farmers and pastoralists. Fishers don’t see 
these services as ‘for them’ and the fishing industry and its issues may be outside of the 
knowledge and experience of some rural counsellors.
This point was reiterated by TFIC, which said it knew little about Rural Financial Counselling 
Services. It would like to see a communication strategy and the inclusion of fisheries in the 
RFCS client group.
A 2004 report by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE) 
(Gooday 2004) found that the three most prevalent pressures for structural adjustment 
in the fisheries sector arise from: capacity management problems, and the associated 
depletion of stocks and decline in operator returns; changing market conditions; and 
resource reallocation. The ABARE report concluded these pressures should result in some 
form of structural adjustment:
Both autonomous and induced structural adjustments may be required to ensure that 
stocks are maintained and that the benefits to the community from the exploitation of 
the fisheries resource are maximised.
The report also examined what should be the role of government in structural 
adjustment of Australian fisheries. It suggested that governments had a specific role to 
play in preventing the market failures that occur with open-access fisheries and lead 
to unsustainable harvests and the dissipation of economic returns. The primary role 
for government in structural adjustment was to establish a management regime that 
removed any incentives that would lead to overcapacity and facilitated autonomous 
adjustment in response to changing economic and biological conditions.

25
2.2.3	
Terms of trade and farm scale
In the past two decades, commodity prices have continued to trend downward (Figure 2), 
while many input costs have climbed. The result has been a relentless squeeze on those 
farms that are on the limits of viability. This continuing downward pressure is one of the 
main reasons why a new group of farm enterprises (estimated at between 10% and 25% of 
enterprises) becomes marginally viable in each decade.
Farm enterprises have responded to these pressures by diversifying, by increasing 
productivity and/or scale, and by innovating in ways that help to reduce input and 
transaction costs. Data for broadacre farming enterprises shows that enterprises operating 
on a larger scale have an advantage over those in the bottom third, as shown in Figures 3 
and 4:
In response to these pressures, the average size of Australian commercial farms has 
continued to grow, as shown in Figure 5.
Three factors contribute to the ability of larger-scale enterprises to achieve greater levels of 
productivity and profitability:
1.	 ability to produce for a price due to:
economies of scale in purchasing inputs
more cost-effective marketing and transport
ability to purchase and use technology that reduces labour inputs
2.	 better networking and consumer/market information
3.	 significantly greater uptake of innovation.
Analysis by ABARE indicates that there is a strong association between the uptake of 
innovation and farm profitability, and that there is a significant difference between the 
top and bottom terciles of the farm sector in the uptake of innovation. Industries such as 
broadacre cropping (Figure 6), which have made significant use of new technology, have 
been far more successful in keeping ahead of price decline than have industries such as 
the wool industry (Figure 7).

26
25
50
75
100
Beef (–2.0%)
Milk (–1.8%)
Wheat (2.8%)
Wool (–2.8%)
125
150
Index
1980–81
1981–82
1982–83
1983–84
1984–85
1985–86
1986–87
1987–88
1988–89
1989–90
1990–91
1991–92
1992–93
1993–94
1994–95
1995–96
1996–97
1997–98
1998–99
1999–00
2000–01
2001–02
Figure 2.  Index of real prices of farm commodities (milk, wheat, wool and beef), 
1980–81 to 2001–02: 1980–81 = 100.
0
40000
80000
120000
160000
200000
2001-02 dollars
Bottom third
Top third
1977–78
1979–80
1980–82
1983–84
1985–86
1987–88
1989–90
1991–92
1993–94
1995–96
1997–98
1999–00
Figure 3.  Cash incomes (2001–02 dollars) of the top and bottom income terciles of farms 
in the broadacre industries (ranked by sheep equivalents), 1977–78 to 1999–2000

27
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
1977–78
1979–80
1980–82
1983–84
1985–86
1987–88
1989–90
1991–92
1993–94
1995–96
1997–98
1999–00
Bottom third
Top third
Figure 4.  Rates of return of the largest and smallest terciles of farms in the broadacre 
industries (ranked by sheep equivalents), 1977–78 to 1999–2000
2000
1960–61
1962–63
1964–65
1966–67
1968–69
1970–71
1972–73
1974–75
1976–77
1978–79
1980–81
1982–83
1984–85
1986–87
1988–89
1990–91
1992–93
1994–95
1996–97
1998–99
2000–01
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Area per farm (ha)
Figure 5.  Average size (ha) of Australian commercial farms, 1960–61 to 2000–01

28
270
Productivity (3.5%)
Real wheat price
240
210
1977–78
1980–81
1983–84
1986–87
1989–90
1992–93
1995–96
1998–99
2001–02
180
Index
150
120
90
60
30
Figure 6.  Australian wheat farming annual productivity growth and real wheat price 
movements
Productivity (0.9%)
Wool price
1977–78
1980–81
1983–84
1986–87
1989–90
1992–93
1995–96
1998–99
2001–02
270
240
210
180
Index
150
120
90
60
30
Figure 7.  Australian wool growing annual productivity growth and real wool price 
movements

29
For all these reasons, ABARE concludes that only farms in the top third of farm size 
distribution achieved productivity increases greater than the compression in the terms of 
trade. Other research showed that only those farms in the top 20% of gross receipts 
generated an average positive return on capital1,2,3,4.
These pressures mean that there is continued adjustment pressure on farms that are small 
relative to industry benchmarks. Fewer and fewer farms will produce more and more of 
agricultural output, and there has been an average annual decline of 1.5% in the number 
of farm establishments in Australia in recent years (Lindsay and Gleeson 1997). These 
trends are especially pronounced in dairy farming. Over the past 25 years, the volume of 
milk production by Australian dairy farms has increased by 50%, while the number of dairy 
cows has hardly changed and the number of dairy farmers has fallen by 80% (National 
Land and Water Resources Audit 2001).
The review committee considers that continuing adjustment pressures indicate 
that there will be a long-term need for information and decision-making support 
for farm and fishing enterprises considering their future in the industry, and for 
small rural businesses dependent on these industries. There is also a need to 
identify at-risk enterprises earlier, before assets are eroded, and for rural financial 
counselling services to act as a front end for other avenues of support or change.
2.2.4	
Cost of capital
As ongoing adjustment occurs and enterprises and operations get bigger, primary 
producers, fishers and rural businesses increasingly need to take into account the cost of 
capital in running their businesses and the options of whether to retain capital, invest or 
obtain new capital from equity or debt.
1	 Australasian Agribusiness Services (1997) Financial Performance of Broadacre Agriculture, Rural Industries 
Research and Development Corporation, Canberra.
2	 Ha, A. & Chapman, L. (2000) Productivity growth trends across Australian broadacre industries, Australian 
Commodities, 7, 2, pp. 334-340.
3	 Knopke, P., O’Donnell, V., and Shepherd, A. (2000) Productivity growth in the Australian grains industry, 
ABARE Research Report 2000.1, ABARE, Canberra.
4	 O’Neill, T. and Strappazzon, L. (2000) Dairy Technology Adoption and Productivity: an Empirical Analysis, 
unpublished manuscript.
1	 Australasian Agribusiness Services (1997) Financial Performance of Broadacre Agriculture, Rural Industries 
Research and Development Corporation, Canberra.
2	 Ha, A. & Chapman, L. (2000) Productivity growth trends across Australian broadacre industries, Australian 
Commodities, 7, 2, pp. 334-340.
3	 Knopke, P., O’Donnell, V., and Shepherd, A. (2000) Productivity growth in the Australian grains industry, 
ABARE Research Report 2000.1, ABARE, Canberra.
4	 O’Neill, T. and Strappazzon, L. (2000) Dairy Technology Adoption and Productivity: an Empirical Analysis, 
unpublished manuscript.

30
Rural businesses need to take into account their cost of capital in assessing business options. 
Where businesses borrow money to invest, the returns from those investments (including 
any income and/or capital appreciation) must exceed the cost of those borrowings over the 
longer-term. The cost of borrowing reflects the servicing of debt and is measured by the rate of 
interest and any associated fees or charges. Continued operation of businesses that are unable 
to meet their cost of capital over the longer-term will likely lead to the erosion of business 
equity, in turn reducing the personal wealth of business owners. Hence, the capacity of an 
enterprise to meet the cost of its capital is an important determinant of business viability.
The cost of capital is affected by many factors, including the prevailing economic climate, 
interest rates, currency movements, and the level of risk and exposure of enterprises. 
Businesses therefore need to be well-informed to manage the cost of capital. Accordingly, 
increasingly complex and comprehensive financial advice should be provided only by 
qualified professionals.
2.2.5	
Changes in markets and consumer preferences
While Australian farmers have benefited from the opportunities of expanding global 
trade, competitiveness has increasingly been determined by their ability to respond to 
consumer and market signals. As a consequence, many Australian farmers have shifted 
from production-based farming to a market-driven approach to agriculture, and have also 
embraced innovative practices that help to increase price efficiency and productivity.
Leading producers in all countries adopt innovations that enable them to produce more 
at lower cost. Increased production does not necessarily lead to an immediate increase in 
demand, however, and successful producers have had to use good market and consumer 
information to achieve market competitiveness.
2.2.6	
Resource access
Changing community expectations, declining resource conditions and a concern for 
resource sustainability have affected access to resources for both farming and fishing 
industries, largely through regulation and pricing mechanisms designed to ensure 
sustainable and equitable access to natural resources. The farm sector is experiencing 
resource access pressures as a result of:
changes to the input costs for water-dependent industries
the allocation of water for environmental flows
water trading
changes in community perceptions about the aims of natural resource management

31
climate change
regulations relating to biodiversity
changes to rules covering clearing and management of native vegetation.
There are predictions that changing resource access, together with declining commodity 
prices will place many producers in a ‘double squeeze’. Reforms and changing regulations 
may impact on the structure of both industries and regions. In some industries, expansion 
by large companies with greater capacity to respond to change is effecting the viability 
of smaller enterprises that cannot compete. The loss of farm families and enterprises 
from a region affects the viability of associated businesses, and ultimately the presence of 
adequate support infrastructure for continuing enterprises.
The results of a survey of rural producers in 2002 by Solutions Marketing and Research Pty 
Ltd (SMR 2002) indicate that producers in a number of industries are already concerned 
that native vegetation and tree-clearing regulations, native title and water reform will 
have a significant impact on the economic viability of their enterprise, as the following 
tabulation shows:
Measure: Level of impact of 
changing resource access on the 
viability of the farm
Major 
impact
Some 
impact
Total 
expecting 
an impact
Water reform
15%
14%
29%
Regulations about native vegetation 
and tree clearing
11%
9%
20%
Native title
6%
3%
9%
Serious drought
46%
29%
75%
2.2.7	
Vegetation
There are both real and notional impacts of native vegetation regulation on productivity 
and land value. Producers, particularly in subtropical areas, believe that failure to clear will 
affect their ability to manage existing agricultural land and maintain productivity. In addition, 
regulations have affected the unrealised development opportunity of uncleared land.

32
A study by the University of New England (Sinden et al. 2002) found that native 
vegetation laws have already reduced farm prices by 20% in the north-west of NSW 
and are expected to reduce farmers’ incomes by as much as 18% by 2005. In Moree, it 
was reported that the impact on the local economy is ‘$20 million [and] expected to 
rise to $37 million in three years’.
By early 2005, ABARE expects to have outputs from current mapping exercises 
designed to quantify these impacts, including analyses from in-depth interviews 
with producers.
The SMR (2002) survey of 2500 farmers across 14 industries indicated that many farmers 
believed that native vegetation regulations would influence the viability for their 
enterprise. Figures 8 and 9 show there was considerable variation in expectations between 
industries and states.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Total (average)
Grain
Sheep, beef & grain
Sheep & beef
Beef
Sheep
Dairy
Sugar cane
Pigs
Cotton
Bananas
Other fruit
Citrus
Vegetables
Grapes
Some impact
Major impact
Figure 8.  Farmer expectations (by industry sector) of the impact on farm viability of 
the regulation of native vegetation and tree clearing. Source: SMR (2002)

33
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
TAS
WA
NT
SA
QLD
VIC
NSW
Total (average)
Some impact
Major impact
Figure 9.  Farmer expectation (by state) of the impact on farm viability of the 
regulation of native vegetation and tree clearing. Source: SMR (2002)
2.2.8	
Water reform
Two factors are transforming irrigated agriculture in Australia: the introduction of water 
markets and competing demands for the use of water flows. Again, the perceived impact 
varies by industry and state (Figure 10).
The most significant impact is likely to occur in those regions where water is currently 
over-allocated and overused (Figure 11). It has been predicted that as many as one in three 
farms may be lost in affected regions, with the possibility of concomitant social dislocation 
and loss of infrastructure.
2.2.9	
Climate change
While there are many uncertainties about the extent of global climate change, it is generally 
agreed that there will be increased variability in rainfall and other climate factors over the next 
several decades. The response to the widespread drought in 2002–04 showed that farmers are 
better prepared for drought and more self-reliant than in previous decades. The 2002 results of 
the 2002 rural producer survey (SMR 2002) showed that 70% of farmers who considered that 
they were at risk from serious drought had strategies in place to manage that risk.

34
However, over a quarter of farmers who expected to be affected by drought had done 
nothing to prepare for its impact.
2.2.10	 Land value and peri-urban competition for land
The growing demand for landscape amenity in areas around major cities and rural 
centres creates two dilemmas for agriculture. The demand occurs particularly in the 
coastal zone, where landowners may enjoy closeness to cities, good views and a benign 
climate (Barr 2003:2). The first dilemma for farmers is that, over and above the recent 
boom in real estate values in Australia generally, these peri-urban areas now attract prices 
that make it difficult for agricultural activity to realise a return on investment. Farmers 
operating in these areas face a choice.
To achieve increased scale of operation, the farmer may purchase land at high prices in 
the current location. This brings a number of business risks and there is little likelihood 
of a return on capital investment for agricultural production that would compare 
favourably with other uses for the capital.
Alternatively, the farmer may decide to sell, and purchase land in an area where land 
prices are lower – an unattractive proposition for many farm families (Barr 2003:2), 
especially those with young children.

35
Some impact (4)
Major impact (5)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Total
Grain
Sheep, beef & grain
Sheep & beef
Beef
Sheep
Dairy
Sugar cane
Pigs
Cotton
Bananas
Other fruit
Citrus
Vegetables
Grapes
Figure 10.  Expected impact (by industry type) of water reform on farm viability. 
Source: SMR (2002)
Some impact (4)
Major impact (5)
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
TAS
WA
NT
SA
QLD
VIC
NSW
Total
Figure 11.  Expected impact (by state) of water reform on farm viability. 
Source: SMR (2002)

36
The farming areas most highly affected by rising land prices include the region around 
Melbourne, dairying areas in Gippsland, and the coastal areas in northern NSW and southern 
Queensland where residential and tourist activity may offer a greater return on investment.
The second dilemma is the masking of the true productive value of land by the increase in land 
value. Because property values have increased sharply over the past five years, debt-to-equity 
ratios have improved. While this has improved the security of borrowings, it has not increased 
the ability of the farm enterprise to service debt, meet input costs or gear-up for reinvestment. 
Many farm families are now living on capital reserves while infrastructure deteriorates.
Moreover, high land values in 2004–05 will transfer risk to a new group of farmers 
acquiring land that will have a poor return on capital investment in the future. While some 
farmers have profited by selling farms at high prices, the adjustment crisis has merely been 
shifted to a new group of industry entrants.
The review committee considers that these are issues about which farm families 
may seek support for decisions about future options.
Given the multiple pressures for adjustment on the farm sector, the review 
committee foresees significant and widespread change to the structure and 
operation of industries and regions. Any consideration of the role of the RFCS 
needs to take place in the context of the full range of policies supporting the 
management of adjustment in agricultural industries.

37
2.3	
The barriers to adjustment and negative impact of 
delayed adjustment
The results of recent national farmer surveys and research suggest that many farmers 
experiencing net negative returns over the long term have considered the need to change 
their current business operation. There may, nevertheless, be significant emotional and 
financial barriers that delay their adjustment. Adjustment in this context includes changes 
to the farm enterprise, diversification, adoption of innovation, changing management 
structures or leaving the industry.
Delaying adjustment can produce negative social, economic and environmental 
consequences, often at multiple levels. On the other hand, research has shown that 
successful adjustment often results in improved outcomes for the farmer, particularly in 
enhanced quality of life. The barriers to adjustment and the negative impacts of delaying 
adjustment were identified in written submissions to the review and during its face-to-
face consultations.
2.3.1	
Barriers to adjustment
Across the rural industries, there are farmers who continue to operate non-viable rural 
businesses because they do not have the physical or financial means to make changes or 
the motivation to adjust, or because they will not acknowledge their financial situation. 
These barriers can broadly be described as farmer attitude, lack of financial capacity, and 
lack of viable alternatives.
Data collected during the 2002 rural producer survey (SMR 2002) provided a great deal of 
information about the future intentions of farmers across industries. Two significant trends 
identified were:
the high proportion (28%) of producers who said they intended to retire or semi-retire 
from the industry within the next five years
the high proportion (18%) of producers who agreed with the statement, ‘If I had the 
chance I would sell up and leave the industry’.
As Figure 12 shows, there are differences between the various rural industries in the 
proportions of producers preparing for retirement.

38
The 2002 survey also identified a large group of farmers who have not planned for 
retirement. Not having exit strategies in place can lead farmers to delay retirement. Exit 
planning often carries with it emotional issues associated with leaving the land. While 
leaving agriculture or pastoralism is one option available to primary producers and their 
families who are exploring the future, it is an option many primary producers would 
rather not consider.
Data gathered from surveys of graziers in the Western Division of NSW revealed the main 
issues that acted as barriers to change among older farmers:
Families contemplating leaving are influenced by their sense of identity as a farming 
or grazing family, by attachments to property and perceptions of finding alternative 
employment.
Finding a suitable place to live may be seen as a problem.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Continuing in agriculture
Working outside agriculture
Semi or fully retired
Total
Grain
Sheep, beef & grain
Sheep & beef
Beef
Sheep
Dairy
Sugar cane
Pigs
Cotton
Bananas
Other fruit
Citrus
Vegetables
Grapes
Figure 12.  Percentages of farmers in different rural industries stating an intention to 
remain in agriculture, work in other industries or to semi or fully retire. Source: SMR (2002)

39
Leaving is likely to be traumatic and stressful and involve feelings of loss and grief. 
Despite this, those who leave can be successful in re-establishing themselves.
Quality of life is a concern, but most who left pastoralism felt their quality of life had 
improved compared with two years before leaving.
Work availability is a concern; most farmers in the survey secured work within a 
reasonable time frame, although job satisfaction fell.
Despite the difficulties associated with leaving, the study found that those who left found 
they were better off on the whole than they were during the last two years on their 
property. In summary, leaving farming to begin alternative employment is an option for 
families exploring their future. But considering such an option raises serious questions 
about self and place. These factors need to be incorporated and considered in any 
decision-making process about farm exits.
2.3.2	
Social impacts of delayed adjustment
Farmers experiencing protracted low returns or losses to the farm business can experience 
significant personal costs that include stress, isolation and depression (Figure 13). The 
reluctance of some farmers to discuss their problems can result in communication 
breakdown within family and social structures, leading to isolation and loneliness. Suicide 
deaths of farmers were reported at the National Rural Public Health Conference in 1997 to 
be around double that of the general male population (Figures 14 and 15).
2.3.3	
Environmental impacts of delayed adjustment
Farmers with low levels of income often express concern about their ability to invest in the 
long-term health of their natural resources. The 2002 rural producer survey (SMR 2002) found 
that on-farm environmental degradation is often given the lowest priority unless the problem 
appears to directly affect production, such as is the case for weeds and feral animals.
The 2002 survey results also indicated that producers’ future intentions for their enterprise 
had a marked impact on whether or not they tackled degradation issues on their property. 
Producers intending to increase or maintain their involvement in agriculture were 3–13 times 
more likely to try to solve a degradation problem (depending on the nature of the problem) 
than those who intended to leave the industry or to reduce their involvement in it.

40
0
10
20
30
40
50
Male farm
managers
General male
population
Female farm
managers
General female
population
Death rate per 100,000 persons
Figure 13.  Death rates due to mental and behavioural disorders in 2001. Source: 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2001)
Male farm
managers
General male
population
Elderly male
farm managers
Elderly male
general
population
0
20
40
60
80
100
Death rate per 100,000 persons
Figure 14.  Suicide death rates (age standardised) in 2000. Source: Australian Bureau of 
Statistics (2001)

41
0
5
15–19
20–24
25–29
30–34
35–39
40–44
45–49
50–54
55–59
60–64
65–69
70–74
75–79
80–84
85+
10
15
20
25
30
Number
Figure 15.  Numbers of suicide deaths in different age groups of farmers and farm 
managers, 1992–95. Source: HealthWIZ National Social Health Statistical Data Library, 
Department of Health and Ageing
2.3.4	
The role for rural financial counsellors
Information, referral and support influence the success of each adjustment process. 
Farmers access many sources of advice, information and referral. These include financial 
planning or business advice, accountants, rural financial counsellors and bank staff 
(Appendix 6 maps the locations of accountants and auditors across the country). A study 
of Western Division graziers (Webb et al. 2002) found that farmers who accessed rural 
financial counsellors during the process of leaving the land were highly satisfied with the 
services they received. Written and oral submissions to the review confirmed that rural 
financial counsellors play a major role in achieving successful adjustment outcomes.
The review committee noted the range of information, referral and support 
services required by farmers. The review committee believes that no single person 
will be able to undertake all of these roles and emphasises the role of rural financial 
counsellors in referring clients to a range of appropriate professionals.

19
how well the current RFCS has met this need
anticipated need over the next three years
approaches to support improved governance of rural financial counselling services
future guidelines and proposed application process for meeting the assessed nature 
and level of need for provision of service.
The review committee comprised Mr Wayne Cornish, NRAC Chairman, as chair, Mr Bill 
Anscombe, Senior Lecturer in Social Work at Charles Sturt University and Mr Rudi Cinc, 
Chairman of the National Association of Rural Counselling Services.
Since the RFCS Review was undertaken under the auspices of NRAC, Senator Troeth asked 
Mr Cornish to consult other members of the council. Two other NRAC members – Mr John 
Woods and Mr Bruce Brown – have participated in the state consultations and directly 
contributed to the review. Mr Brown also has assisted the review committee with advice 
and expertise from the finance sector.
1.2	
The consultation process
A media release announcing the start of the RFCS Review was issued by the Australian 
Government on 31 August 2004. Advertisements calling for public submissions were 
placed in major rural newspapers in each of the states and the Northern Territory in 
the week beginning 30 August 2004. In addition, the review committee wrote to key 
stakeholders to invite them to make written and/or oral submissions.
Forestry’s website on 31 August 2004. General information on the review, an invitation 
for public submissions, the terms of reference (see Appendix 1) and an information paper 
(Appendix 2) were published on the review website.
Face-to-face consultations were held in all states and the Australian Capital Territory and 
Northern Territory during 7–28 September 2004. Written submissions were accepted until 
1 October 2004. Appendixes 3 and 4 list people (and their organisations) who made either 
written submissions or participated in face-to-face consultations.
In making its recommendations, the review committee also took into account a wide 
range of research and data, including previous reviews of the RFCS Program and the 
findings of an audit of 24 Rural Financial Counselling Services in 2003 by the ACUMEN 
Alliance consultancy.

42
3	 The Rural Financial 
Counselling Service 
1986–2004
3.1	
RFCS program rationale from 1986 and the 
changing context to 2004
The RFCS program was established during volatile and uncertain times with the 
deregulation of the finance industry, aggressive lending practices and high interest rates. 
In response to growing financial problems in the rural sector, rural financial counsellors 
were established and funded under a separate Rural Counselling Program (RCP) up 
until 1994.
Action by banks and other financial institutions in the late 1980s and early 1990s led to a 
breakdown in relationships and conflict between them and primary producers. There was 
a willingness to resort to legal processes and forced foreclosure.
This period was regarded as one of the most financially difficult in the past 30 years. It led 
to dramatic action, and scenes such as farmers chaining themselves to their farm gate.
In the early 1990s, continuing high interest rates, exchange-rate fluctuations, low 
commodity prices, the collapse of wool prices and seasonal events contributed to the 
ongoing need for intervention to help primary producers.
In 1994, a range of rural assistance programs was amalgamated under the Rural 
Communities Access Program (RCAP).
The Rural Communities Program, which started in 1997, evolved from the RCAP 
component. It included funding for rural financial counsellors. In 1998, with the division 
of portfolio responsibilities, the administration of the RCP was split, with only the rural 
financial counselling remaining under the Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry portfolio. 
All other components of the program were transferred to the Transport and Regional 
Services portfolio.
Over the past five years, with the exception of seasonal events, commodity prices have 
been generally favourable, as have exchange and interest rates. Broadly, the past five years 
have been seen as a more buoyant period, particularly in comparison to the economic 
pressures faced by primary industries and producers in the early 1990s.

43
3.1.1	
Objectives
The RFCS program was established in 1986 in response to an identified gap in services 
offered to rural communities, particularly farming families. During the difficult times 
described in the previous section, for example, it provided a circuit breaker by giving 
free and independent assistance to primary producers. It helped to re-establish business 
confidence and trust through its direct assistance to primary producers, allowing them to 
make informed decisions.
The RFCS program provides grants to non-profit community groups that offer rural 
financial counselling and information services to primary producers, fishing enterprises 
and small rural businesses experiencing financial hardship and which have no alternative 
sources of help with decision-making. Also, it helps identify enterprise and industry issues 
where change and adjustment are required.
The RFCS program thereby contributes to the goal of a more competitive, sustainable and 
profitable rural Australia.
3.1.2	
Role of RFCS in the Agriculture Advancing Australia package 
1997–2004
flagship rural policy package, Agriculture Advancing Australia (AAA). The package 
comprises an integrated suite of programs designed to ‘secure the profitability, 
sustainability and competitiveness of the farm sector’ through changes to producers’ 
skills, attitudes and practices and by providing risk-management tools, information and 
improved market opportunities.
The package was launched in 1997 and marked an important development in Australian 
Government policy for the agricultural sector. The policy moved from subsidy-based 
mechanisms to greater emphasis on capacity building, risk management and self-reliance. 
While facilitating this shift, the AAA package has also included income and decision-
making support for farm families undergoing financial hardship.
Over the three cycles of the AAA package from 1997–2008, the mix of programs has 
evolved, but core programs have been retained.
AAA programs comprise:
FarmBis subsidises the delivery of training designed to improve business management 
skills and risk management (joint state/commonwealth funding)

44
Rural Financial Counselling Service assists farmers assess their situations and decide 
on future strategies (joint Commonwealth and community contributions, including 
some state funding)
Farm Help – Supporting Families Through Change provides help to farmers 
experiencing severe financial difficulties while they take steps to improve their long-
term financial prospects (Commonwealth funding)
International Agricultural Cooperation (formerly Farm Growth Through Export Growth) 
aims to strengthen bilateral agricultural relationships with key trading partners, 
especially China, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines
Farm Management Deposits promote self-management of financial risks and are 
tax based
Industry Leadership aims to improve recognition of the contribution that women, 
young people and indigenous people make to rural industries and to encourage them 
to become part of the decision-making process in their industry
Industry Partnerships aims to help industries build self-reliance and manage change 
and adjustment pressures. Targeted industries work with government to share 
information and develop a plan for action. By being able to identify their strengths, 
weaknesses and opportunities, industries will be able to build capacity to be ready to 
manage future challenges.
Central to the capacity-building goals of AAA is the FarmBis program, which subsidises 
the delivery of training designed to improve business and risk management. Farm Help 
and the RFCS help primary producers in serious financial difficulty to improve their 
long-term prospects.
FarmBis has been successful in laying a foundation for a continuous learning culture 
among primary producers. Over 150,000 primary producers across Australia have 
participated in FarmBis-subsidised training courses.
Since 1997, 8900 low-income farm families in severe financial difficulty have been assisted 
by the Farm Help – Supporting Families Through Change program through access to 
decision-making and income support while they make changes to their circumstances. 
Re-establishment grants have helped over 1070 primary producers who chose to 
leave farming.
The RFCS provides financial information, referrals and decision-making support for farm 
families in financial difficulties. In the past, counsellors have provided the front-line referral 
service for AAA capacity building and income and decision-making support programs.

45
The AAA package was reviewed in 2002–03, drawing together the findings of 
independent evaluations of individual AAA programs, submissions from the states and the 
Northern Territory and other stakeholders. The review found the AAA package had made 
substantial progress in meeting its original objectives:
to help farmers profit from change
to give farmers access to an effective welfare safety net
to provide incentives for ongoing farm adjustment
to encourage social and economic development in rural areas (DAFF 2004b).
The 2004–05 Commonwealth Budget allocated $236 million to continue the AAA package 
for another four years, reflecting the success of the integrated package of programs. 
The new commitment extended FarmBis and Farm Help and provided for continuation 
of the RFCS, the Farm Management Deposits Scheme and the International Agriculture 
Cooperation program. The Budget also provided for a new one-year industry partnership 
initiative, aimed at helping industries build self-reliance and manage change and 
adjustment pressures. A pilot of the initiative concluded on 30 June 2005 and the program 
received funding for a further three years.
The review committee concludes that the RFCS has a valuable role to play in the 
Agriculture Advancing Australia package of integrated programs and that referral to 
the other programs within AAA should continue to be a high priority for counsellors.
3.2	
Relationship to other programs
Since the inception of the RFCS in 1986, there has been significant change in the 
range and structure of services provided by all levels of government, non-government 
organisations and private suppliers. This has resulted in the potential for significant overlap 
The RFCS currently acts as a conduit between a range of assistance programs 
circumstances, duplicating services that have been initiated by other portfolios.
In response to identified need, financial counselling services have become an integral part 
Centrelink programs.

46
Centrelink currently provides financial guidance through its Financial Information Service 
(FIS) which is available to everyone (Appendix 7 maps the locations of Centrelink outlets 
across the country). FIS services include assistance in:
developing a financial strategy
succession planning
debt management
retrenchment adjustment planning
estate planning and wills
investing
investment options at retirement.
This suite of financial services is more extensive than that offered by the RFCS.
In a Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) survey of clients in 2002 (Magpantay et al. 2002), 
respondents were asked to identify the single most important service provided by their 
rural financial counsellor. The responses fell into the following categories:
options: information and assistance
financial assistance/assessment
negotiation with banks/government
loan application assistance
emotional support
retirement, estate/succession assistance
family communication.
Though clients may expect the RFCS to provide emotional support, succession 
planning and assistance with family communication, these activities fall outside 
those permitted under the RFCS funding agreement. The review committee 
emphasised the role of counsellors in referring clients to appropriate professional 
service providers in these areas.

47
3.3	
Distribution
In the 2004–05 funding round, there were 68 community-based RFCS groups, employing 
more than 80 full-time equivalent rural financial counsellors across Australia. Appendix 8 
maps their locations. Services are located in all states (but not the Northern Territory or the 
Australian Capital Territory), and include five Part B industry-based services. Most of the 
community-based services have operated from the same location for up to 18 years.
services was generally maintained at the same level as for the previous two years, pending 
the outcome of the review. Many services experienced difficulties in 2004–05 due to rising 
costs of fuel, insurance and accommodation.
3.4	
Client numbers
Client numbers recorded in the program database vary widely from year to year and from 
region to region depending on climate conditions and other events. Demand can also 
vary within the year in response to seasonal activities.
In 2002–03, a drought year, the number of clients (12,524) was 35% higher than the 
number (7402) in 2001–02, a ‘normal’ year. The number of clients in 2003–04 was 9402.
The accuracy of these data is dependent on the input of client numbers by rural financial 
counsellors, but the data do provide a reasonable indication of client numbers, as 
counsellors must also report on the activities undertaken with each client.
Although the drought continued into 2004–05 in many areas, in September 2004 many 
counsellors were reporting declining client loads.
The ‘normal’ average number of clients is often cited as being around 100, but the 
definition of ‘client’ remains problematic.
High numbers during drought or other climatic events may reflect numbers of clients 
seeking routine assistance with claim forms, as well as clients for whom the event has 
raised significant viability concerns.
3.5	
Delivery and funding model
years for the RFCS program, from 2004–05 to 2007–08.

48
After the May budget, the then Parliamentary Secretary, the Hon Senator Judith Troeth, 
advised all existing management committees that she had decided to roll over current 
funding arrangements for the next 12 months, citing the continuation of the drought and 
the need to provide time for a new application process for doing so.
Under the 2004–05 arrangements, services are not required to provide written proof of 
matching cash and in-kind contributions, although support from state governments 
will continue.
3.5.1	
Contracts and specified activities
Services are required to sign a funding agreement (contract) with the Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (DAFF) after obtaining approval for service provision.
The funding agreement has been created using a government-wide ‘more accessible 
government’ template.
Under the new funding agreement, all funds, including matching cash contributions, are 
deposited into a single bank account specifically set up for expenditure on goods and 
services directly related to the RFCS program. All income and expenditure related to the 
service is to be identified in financial accounts and should include the preparation of 
financial statements and the audit of yearly accounts.
A copy of the funding agreement, initially signed on behalf of the service and then signed 
the first grant payment is made. Appendix 9 gives a copy of the 2002–2004 funding 
agreement and Appendix 10 a copy of the 2004–2005 funding agreement variation.
3.5.2	
Funding – government, community, cash and in-kind
The service provided by a rural financial counselling service is free and independent of 
financial institutions, welfare agencies or government.
costs, with the remaining costs being met by state and local government and the local 
community. State governments may provide varying levels of contribution towards 
services, depending on their policy and the budgets available to them. Some states 
provide cash and others may provide both cash and in-kind contributions.
Some state governments provided additional funds in 2002–03 and 2003–04 to assist in 
coping with the pressures of drought. This took a number of forms, including both direct 
funding to services and the provision of a pool of resources to support services of more 
lasting benefit. Some states have also assisted with training and equipment.

49
services has generally been maintained at the same level as for the previous two years, 
pending the outcome of this review.
In-kind resources are valued at market rates, with some costs having a maximum allowable 
in-kind value placed on them. All in-kind contributions must be recorded, to meet 
legislative and accountability requirements in each state.
3.5.3	
The principle of matching funding
Many services are experiencing difficulties in 2004–05 due to rising costs of fuel, insurance 
and accommodation. Rural communities have reported finding it more and more difficult 
to obtain community cash contributions. In the 2004–05 financial year, the difficulty is 
largely due to the ongoing effects of drought on community financial health. Services 
have been further affected by their loss of access to Centrelink funds, which are paid for 
the completion of viability assessments for clients wishing to apply for assistance through 
the Farm Help – Supporting Families Through Change program.
Under the terms of Schedule 2 – ‘Activities not to be performed’ in the 2004–2005 funding 
agreement variation, the following paragraph was included:
Rural Financial Counsellors undertaking Initial Farm Help Financial Assessments (currently 
referred to by Centrelink as the Farm Enterprise Viability Assessment/FEVA) and other fee 
these services.
An Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) performance audit recommended that DAFF 
address the interaction between the RFCS program and Farm Help, to ensure that the 
primary producers, and that the operation of RFCS is consistent with its design principles.
Under 1 July 2004 changes to the Farm Help program, customers are required to seek 
‘advice on financial outlook’ as part of their qualification for the program. This service 
cannot be provided by RFCS. The purpose of the initial advice session is to provide farmers 
with advice that there is no reasonable likelihood that the person would obtain a loan 
from a finance institution, given the person’s financial situation. This is an alternative to the 
bank certificate as the primary means of determining this issue. The initial session is also 
required to provide advice on whether there is a reasonable likelihood of improving the 
financial performance of the farm enterprise.

50
Under the funding agreement with DAFF, the primary responsibility of services is to 
provide financial counselling and referral services. In addition, under the terms of previous 
and current funding arrangements, rural financial counselling services are not allowed to 
provide ‘advice’.
Obtaining matching funding and the need for volunteer management committees 
to continue to raise these funds has placed ongoing pressure on the committees, 
particularly during difficult times such as drought. While management committees 
have contributed many valuable hours in time and effort to fundraising in the past, 
alternative funding measures should be investigated for any future program model.
3.6	
Governance
3.6.1	
Role of volunteer management committees
Services are managed by volunteer management committees whose role is to direct 
the delivery of an effective RFCS to needy farmers in the community. The role includes 
providing strategic direction for the delivery of the service and management of the rural 
financial counsellors and other administrative staff.
As a result of increasing emphasis on governance across all organisations in society, 
accompanied by increasing complexity in the wider regulatory and accountability 
environment within which counselling and financial advice services operate, changes have 
been made to the RFCS program model over the past three years. These changes have, in 
turn, raised concerns from management committees that:
they are carrying increased levels of responsibility, accountability and liability
there is a degree of burnout amongst the volunteer management committee 
members, particularly in the smaller and more isolated centres
the time and effort needed to fulfil governance requirements are increasing.
These concerns were also raised during face-to-face consultations – and in written 
submissions – including the dual role counsellors, at times, undertake as financial and 
emotional counsellors to farm families experiencing stress during the adjustment cycle.
Many of the issues, concerns and risks raised in general research on volunteering emerged 
in the submissions made by management committees and in stakeholder concerns raised 
during the RFCS Review consultations.

51
Since the 1980s, there has been a growing emphasis on volunteering as a way of achieving 
improved community outcomes in partnership with government, including a growing 
reliance on volunteer efforts to deliver services previously funded by the public sector 
or private foundations. Research has substantiated the cost-effectiveness of relying on 
volunteer efforts, which significantly extend the resources available from government.
There is widespread acceptance that volunteering also brings a strong sense of local 
ownership and social cohesion by allowing individuals within communities to express 
their values through action. Volunteers can engage with members of the community 
on matters of concern, motivated not by personal gain or coerced by authority, but 
by the conviction they can contribute to better social and economic outcomes for the 
community as a whole.
There is, nevertheless, also a growing resentment at the undervaluing of the ‘cost’ of 
volunteerism – time, resources, skills, managing risk and volunteer burnout. Factors 
contributing to burnout include the struggle to maintain funding and infrastructure, and 
the pressure on one or two individuals to respond to the day-to-day decision making of 
a service. Volunteers are often not prepared for the sustained workload they encounter, 
and the lack of skilling and other support for them to manage increasingly complex issues. 
There have been additional pressures from unrealistic community expectations that 
services will cover issues well outside their core business.
In 2003, the Victorian Department of Land Stewardship undertook a study (funded under 
the National Action Plan for Salinity and Water Quality) of volunteer contributions to 
direction setting for land stewardship policy and programs. Rural landowners and land 
managers favoured maintaining volunteerism but acknowledged that a growing sense of 
burnout and resentment was a cost of such work. There was a trade-off between the social 
cohesion that was gained, and the personal cost of volunteer work.
Attracting and retaining volunteers over the long term presents significant concerns to 
volunteer organisations tasked with delivering services. Research into volunteerism by 
Emergency Management Australia in 2003–04 found there were fundamental risks to 
the continued operation of emergency management volunteer organisations due to the 
increasing difficulty in attracting volunteers. There was a growing attitude of ‘what’s in it 
for me’ among potential volunteers as a result of an economic climate which increasingly 
forced people to choose between competing lifestyle priorities. Changing demographics 
also emerged as a key reason why some organisations had difficulty in attracting 
volunteers. Rural Australia was particularly vulnerable. Falling income opportunities in 
country townships had caused the younger population to migrate to the cities, resulting in 
an ageing population in many rural areas.

52
Meeting legal and insurance requirements and managing risk are major concerns for 
volunteers and volunteer organisations. The risk of personal liability in any legal action 
relating to their involvement in volunteer work, obtaining adequate insurance coverage 
and compliance in an increasingly complex legislative and regulatory environment are 
issues that weigh on volunteers’ time and resources. Conservation Volunteers Australia 
recently carried out a benchmarking trial to identify risk-management processes 
implemented by its membership. Preliminary findings suggested only 1 in 10 of the 
organisations that participated had a risk-assessment process in place. Subsequent 
workshop outcomes indicated that 67% of participants rated their group’s risk 
management as inadequate. Risk management was voted as the most important and 
useful topic covered in the workshop.
The review committee considers that rural community volunteers have been of 
inestimable value to the operation of counselling services since 1986. However, 
due to the changing operating environment and, in consideration of the risks 
outlined in the preceding section, the committee considers that continuation 
of a program of this type through the mechanisms of volunteer governance is 
untenable, particularly for relatively small grants and the high level of governance 
required. Nevertheless, volunteer community management committees can still 
play a valuable advisory and supportive role in the program by providing locally 
grounded information and by supporting a locally employed counsellor.
3.6.2	
Counsellors and qualifications
With an ever-increasing emphasis on corporate governance and liability, the level of 
counsellor skills is often mentioned. There is an acknowledged need for improved 
identification of the skills and qualifications needed by counsellors. Appendix 11 provides 
a summary of counsellor qualifications, experience and salaries, based on information 
collected in November 2003.
One of the major concerns raised by Acumen Alliance following its 2003 performance 
review and audit of 24 services was that some counsellors were providing services beyond 
their expertise (and insurance cover). The audit also found that rural financial counsellors 
may come from a variety of backgrounds. The qualifications of counsellors vary, and 
include former bank employees, qualified accountants and individuals holding degrees 
in agriculture.

53
DAFF provides, in its resource manual for RFCS management committees (DAFF 2004c), 
direction on a minimum standard of qualifications for counsellors that are required in the 
funding agreement with services. This standard requires:
relevant tertiary qualifications and/or strong relevant work experience
recognised counselling qualifications and/or significant demonstrated counselling 
experience, with an ability to understand the boundaries that exist between a rural 
financial counsellor and a social counsellor, and the ability to refer personal issues to 
the appropriate professional
state agencies to permit involvement in representations or applications required on a 
client’s behalf
a current, unrestricted driver’s licence.
Program monitoring of services indicates that not all management committees are 
complying with the minimum standards of qualifications when recruiting counsellors. 
Under the funding agreement, money is allocated for counsellor training and 
development, but management committees are inconsistent in their reporting on what 
training counsellors have undertaken.
The ability of services to meet the objectives of the RFCS program is impeded by 
inconsistencies and lack of uniformity in counsellor qualifications.
Non-uniformity and inconsistencies in counsellor qualifications have the 
potential to impede the RFCS program meeting its goals and objectives. The 
review committee recommends that a mandatory standard of qualifications and 
prescribed skills and competencies for rural financial counsellors be developed 
within the Australian Qualifications Framework in any future RFCS model.
3.6.3	
Program evaluation and monitoring
The RFCS’s monitoring and evaluation strategy relies on:
periodic reviews across Australia, including this one, to determine the efficiency, 
timeliness and suitability of current administrative and community management 
structures and delivery mechanisms;

54
the results of the ongoing independent performance review and audit program of 
25% of services each year
information on milestones achieved, annual reports and audited financial statements 
from each service
the collection, aggregation and monitoring of three four-monthly data reports each 
year from each service
an in-house policy review of the RFCS program to be conducted in 2007.
The independent performance review and audit program of 24 services conducted by 
Acumen Alliance during 2003, focused primarily on the delivery of program outcomes 
and the financial and record-keeping mechanisms being used. The audit program made 
recommendations for improving the accountability and service delivery of the RFCS 
program, to be monitored during the ongoing audit program.
Each RFCS, under contractual obligations, provides a statement of certification as part of 
the ongoing accountability requirements and provision of client statistical data. This is 
each four-monthly periodic grant payment.
The annual report and audited financial statements are prepared to guidelines 
which include information that will allow an evaluation of demonstrated need and 
ongoing demand, and of the performance of the RFCS. This includes a description and 
quantification of the services supplied to clients. The reports generally provide extensive 
quantitative data but few qualitative data.
The RFCS Australian Rural Counselling Client Statistical Database holds extensive 
quantitative data collected by each RFCS as a management and information tool. The 
minimum data requirements are:
client contact details including gender, NESB, ATSI and date of birth
details of dependants and partners
assistance given
referrals, to and from
causes of difficulty
activities/contracts
enterprise types.

55
The aggregated data from the individual databases held by each of the services, excluding 
any confidential or client identification, is exported to a national database held by the 
government and ongoing monitoring. As noted above, the data are mainly quantitative.
Generally, services are encouraged to conduct annual client-satisfaction surveys to gauge 
client interaction with rural financial counsellors and to what degree services are meeting 
client needs. The rigor and veracity of these surveys may be questionable in that they do 
not need to be independently designed or conducted.
Each RFCS collects extensive client and activity data for the RFCS management committees 
and rural financial counsellors. These data are used as a management and information tool.
3.7	
Previous reviews of RFCS and previous reform 
measures
3.7.1	
The 2000 evaluation of the Rural Communities Program
An evaluation of the Rural Communities Program (RCP) in 2000 (Aslin et al. 2000) (see 
Appendix 12) raised the following issues:
the need for a greater focus on ‘agricultural and social adjustment’ rather than 
attempting to meet development or welfare objectives
the need for greater responsiveness to changing circumstances and for government 
assistance
the need for a goal statement and objectives incorporating sustainability (social 
economic and ecological) as a higher priority
improved coordination and integration with other programs
improved monitoring and evaluation that takes equity aspects of program funding 
into account
development of a communication strategy
inclusion in guidelines of advice about size and composition of service management 
committees, rotation of office bearers, role of service staff in relation to management 
committees, and meeting frequency and procedures
the allocation of funds in service budgets for a training and development strategy for 
service staff and management committee members
assessment of percentages for community cash and in-kind contributions on a service-
by-service basis taking into account the community’s capacity to pay

56
adequate lead times for changes to the program.
Many of the efficiency and accountability reforms recommended in the 2000 and subsequent 
reviews were implemented to improve the program model at that time. The RFCS section 
within DAFF has been working with communities, counsellors and management committees 
since 2000–01 to introduce a range of reforms into the operation of the service.
The 2001–04 RFCS program incorporated the following reforms:
counsellors must now spend 75% of their time on client-related activities (direct 
meetings with clients, or with others on behalf of clients; research and data entry 
about the client; and travel to and from client-related meetings)
DAFF may, where necessary, access client files as part of an audit process.
Improved management and accountability processes have been supported by the 
development of:
appropriate training (including regular national conferences for counsellors and 
management committees) and corporate governance and risk-management 
workshops
reference tools, including an updated resource manual and agreed standards for 
service delivery included in the funding agreement
improved identification of skills and qualifications of counsellors
increased scrutiny of service operation through audit and evaluation, and more 
rigorous, regular and meaningful reporting, including a reformed counsellor–client 
statistical database.
Fisheries and Forestry 2004) package also raised some issues that should be examined in 
relation to the RFCS. These included:
improved ability to allocate resources to emerging areas of need
the need for greater consistency in governance and in the skill levels of counsellors 
and management committees
greater accountability and certainty that services were operating within program 
guidelines and that resources were being used appropriately
the need for improved adjustment outcomes for farm families in long-term financial 
difficulty
the need to improve targeting of service clients, so as to use service resources more 
efficiently and avoid competition with private-sector providers of similar services.

57
3.7.2	
The Seven Principles of Reform
In response to the 2000 evaluation of the RCP (Aslin et al. 2000), the then Minister for the 
Department, the Hon Mr John Anderson, identified seven key principles for any new RFCS:
A need for a clear and specific goal statement and objectives
A focus on agricultural (and related social) adjustment, developing productive 
relationships with related programs when other issues arise
Flexible needs-based counselling
Responsive to changing circumstances and changing regional needs
Ownership and funding shared with states and the community
Management devolved to rural communities
A comprehensive performance monitoring and evaluation framework.
These principles were endorsed in community consultations in all states in early 2001.
3.7.3	
Acumen Alliance audits
The 2002–2004 funding arrangements included provision for performance audits to assess 
RFCS compliance with the requirements of the funding agreement. In May 2003, Acumen 
Alliance Consulting commenced a performance review and audit of a third of the services 
around the country.
The overall findings of the audit were that a significant number of services were 
undertaking activities which were considered contrary to the funding agreement and 
that no service was fully compliant with the audit criteria and funding agreement 
requirements.
Among the main findings of the audit were that the level of corporate governance was 
well below that required by the funding agreement and that management committees 
were generally not clear on what constituted a conflict of interest.
Each of the audited services was provided with a copy of the report on its audit and the 
management committee invited to respond to DAFF on how it intended to rectify any 
non-compliancy found. The majority of services reacted positively and began putting 
measures in place to improve their corporate governance and management.
The audit was designed to improve the operation of the RFCS program. To further this 
objective, DAFF arranged post-audit governance training workshops in most state capital 
cities in June 2004. These were presented by Gerry Holmes (of Holmes & Reynolds), an 
experienced barrister and legal academic.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

58
The workshops were tailored for the RFCS and were well attended by management 
committee representatives, who were encouraged to recognise the importance of good 
corporate governance and the risks associated with inadequate management practices.
Problems identified
The Acumen Alliance auditors pointed to a number of areas of risk in the current delivery 
model. Mr Gerry Holmes elaborated on these risks and alerted the department and, where 
appropriate, management committee members, to the potential consequences should 
some of the risks be realised.
One of the major shortcomings identified was the inconsistency of monitoring and quality 
control across the RFCS program. Some services with a dedicated administrative manager 
undertook quality control of a high calibre, and were managing their legal risks extremely 
well. On the other hand, many of the services were, in effect, run by the counsellor and 
management committee members were exercising little or no monitoring and quality 
control over the services delivered.
The following were some of the areas of concern directly attributable to the inconsistency 
and/or failure of corporate governance under the current model:
clear, yet undeclared, conflicts of interest involving decisions and actions that led or 
could lead to significant financial gains for individual counsellors and/or management 
committee members
breaches of competitive neutrality – use of service/government resources in such a 
way to unfairly take business away from professional commercial operators
most commonly by servicing clients that could otherwise afford to purchase 
professional advice
but also including cases where counsellors assisted clients to avoid paying 
legitimate invoices from professional suppliers
the blatant provision of ‘advice’ to clients, exposing services to considerable legal risk
in a number of cases, the advice or assistance given was poor and/or untimely and 
led to significant financial losses by the client
in some instances, court cases against services are underway or pending. 
misuse of service resources (counsellor time and/or facilities) to the benefit of a 
counsellor’s private enterprise and to the detriment of legitimate potential clients who 
were not receiving the counselling services they needed.

59
One common factor in each of these examples is the lack, or inadequacy, of 
governance performed by the services responsible. Mr Holmes identified an ‘excuse of 
confidentiality’, which appeared to be endemic in the current delivery model, as the 
single most important impediment to achieving adequate governance in rural financial 
counselling services.
Even when confronted with the risks and potential consequences of their inappropriate 
interpretation of confidentiality obligations, many management committees were still 
reluctant to improve their governance at (what they saw as) the expense of confidentiality. 
In this light, it is difficult to see how the current model, which lays responsibility for the 
oversight of governance and quality control in the hands of each individual management 
committee, will be able to deliver uniform improvements in quality control, corporate 
governance and accountability across the RFCS.
The review committee acknowledges the value of the governance training 
Fisheries and Forestry to RFCS management committees following the Acumen 
Alliance audit findings. Nevertheless, due to the increasing complexity of the 
legislative and regulatory environment for volunteer community organisations in 
Australia, and in light of the Acumen findings, the review committee recommends 
that any new model should incorporate a best-practice approach to governance, 
accountability and risk management.

60
ADDRESSING THE TERMS OF 
REFERENCE
4	 What is the nature, 
distribution and magnitude 
of need for rural financial 
counselling?
4.1	
Services sought by clients
The intent of the RFCS program is that counsellors provide financial information and 
decision-making support and referrals by identifying the needs of the client and linking 
with other opportunities available. However, research to date shows the expectations 
of clients vary widely and include inappropriate demands on the counsellor. This has 
developed over the years as counsellors strive to assist clients in the adjustment cycle who 
are undergoing a range of social and economic consequences.
In a Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) survey of clients in 2002 (Magpantay et al. 2002), 
respondents were asked to identify the single most important service provided by their 
rural financial counsellor. The responses fell into the following categories:
options: information and assistance
financial assistance/assessment
negotiation with banks/government

61
loan application assistance
emotional support
retirement, estate/succession assistance
family communication.
As noted earlier, though clients may expect the RFCS to provide emotional support, 
succession planning and assistance with family communication, these activities fall outside 
those permitted under the RFCS funding agreement.
The 2003 performance review and audit of 24 services by Acumen Alliance in assessing 
if the ‘rural financial counsellor is performing tasks for which they have been employed’, 
concluded:
Although some of the Services are fulfilling the overall goal of the Rural Financial 
Counselling Program by responding to the needs of rural communities; in some instances 
the services performed go beyond the boundaries identified in the Funding Agreement 
for financial counselling services. The services provided by counsellors varied significantly 
depending on the other services available in the area. For instance counsellors were more 
likely to provide personal counselling services and assistance preparing Centrelink forms in 
rural towns where mental health services and Centrelink were absent.
There is a perception that one of the roles of the rural financial counsellor includes providing 
free succession-planning advice. For example, an article about succession planning 
published in the 30 September 2004 issue of Queensland Country Life, referred to the AAA 
Rural Financial Counselling Service under a heading of ‘Where to get help’ and continues 
‘These counsellors are federally funded and can provide free succession planning advice.’
In fact, the RFCS funding agreements and resource manual specifically preclude 
succession planning activities and advise that clients seeking this assistance should be 
referred to suitably qualified agencies or advisors.
Anecdotal advice indicates that the RFCS role includes preparing annual budgets for 
bank reviews, filling out Centrelink and other types of application forms, and undertaking 
advocacy roles with banks, government agencies and other third parties on behalf of the 
client. Face-to-face consultations have indicated that counsellors find they need to first 
deal with the personal and emotional issues before being able to undertake the financial 
counselling role. This should be done by way of referral to appropriately qualified health 
professionals or advisors, but the 2003 Acumen audit revealed that some counsellors were 
providing personal counselling services.

62
Clients may also see the RFCS as a source of agricultural extension within rural 
communities and this may be a result of the change in agricultural extension delivery by 
public bodies. There has been a move from one-on-one extension to placing the emphasis 
on farmer groups or organisations. An increasing amount of agricultural extension is 
provided by private sources (Marsh and Pannell 1998). Across many areas of Australia, 
agricultural extension services are increasing, and the role of government intervention 
to produce something of value to the public, user pays and cost recovery is being 
questioned. Subsequently, administrative structures are reflecting the funder–purchaser–
provider relationship (Marsh and Pannell 1998).
In light of these changes, there has been increased pressure from clients upon the RFCS to act 
as an extension provider, which is not necessarily a role originally intended for the RFCS.
Pressures for an extension role for the RFCS were also demonstrated in submissions 
to the current review from the Northern Territory mango industry and the Indigenous 
Land Corporation (ILC). The ILC suggested that the RFCS could provide practical skills in 
cash-flow recording and management, long-term financial mentoring, information for 
starting enterprises and corporate governance guidance. The mango industry submitted 
that due to changing industry conditions, people entering the industry required financial 
counselling before entry. Counsellors should also provide advice about current industry 
issues such as marketing, and labour and transport shortages. In industries such as the 
mango industry, high entry rates will shortly prompt client demand for the current range 
of services provided by rural financial counsellors. The trend in demand for the RFCS to act 
in an extension or industry officer capacity was highlighted in these submissions.
The full suite of client expectations cannot be fully provided for by any one 
individual and there is a need for the referral role of rural financial counsellors to be 
re-focused and emphasised.
4.2	
Clarifying the program’s role in adjustment
Adjustment in this context is taken to mean a possible change in direction of the business 
processes or outputs, or adoption of an innovative practice or product, or leaving the industry 
altogether. The counsellor’s role is to facilitate this through the provision of information, 
referrals and decision-making support, which is articulated in the grants management 
process. All guiding documents including the application guidelines, the schedule attached 
to the funding agreement and the resource manual refer specifically to the role of the RFCS.

63
The emphasis is on the provision of information and referrals to assist the client in decision 
making related to achieving their goal of a more sustainable, profitable business. The 
provision of information is related to government assistance schemes, Centrelink and 
other professional counselling services, as well as gathering and coordinating information 
for consideration by a professional succession planner if needed. Counsellors can also 
make assessments of a client’s current financial position and cash-flow budgeting to help 
clients identify their options for the future.
There have been a number of difficulties in measuring the success of the focus on 
adjustment. One problem is that there is no clear definition of ‘adjustment’, so many 
counsellors apply the narrow label of exiting the industry as the main identifier of 
adjustment. Another constraint on counsellors reporting back to government, is that 
adjustment out of an industry is accompanied by loss of contact with the client when 
they move residence or finalise their departure from the industry. Their exact status may 
therefore remain unclear.
The demand for the Part B RFCS services, which are orientated towards short-term industry 
adjustment, brings into question the outcomes from the traditional Part A approach, in 
which services tend to fix themselves to a particular area rather than identifying particular 
issues. Services tend to stay in the one area and the mobility and flexibility to address 
emerging or particular needs in other locations are lost.
Any future rural financial counselling service program should have a primary focus 
on farm sector adjustment, while retaining its capacity for short-term crisis response.
4.2.1	
Determining need and allocation of resources in 2001–04
The intent from the beginning of the RFCS program was to focus on critical need. Services 
were not intended to become ‘institutionalised’. Nevertheless, because of a range of 
adjustment pressures described in the second and third chapters of this report, the 
program has continued to provide funding to management committees that have sought 
to help clients deal with these pressures.
Application forms for the longer-term (ongoing) and short-term industry adjustment services 
under the current structure ask for demonstration of the ‘level of need in the local area or 
region’. The guidelines state that priority will be given to applicants tackling issues for which 
it could be demonstrated that significant numbers of primary producers were experiencing

64
financial difficulty. Applicants need to identify how the region is to be covered and the level 
of need assessed. This information was used by the RFCS advisory panel in its deliberations 
about whether there was a genuine need for the RFCS being applied for. Those organisations 
applying are also expected to identify any special circumstances affecting the delivery of 
service in their area; for example, issues relating to geographic isolation.
The locations of the RFCS services have remained largely the same since the service 
commenced in 1986. However, during the assessment of the 2002–2004 application 
round, the advisory panel recommended some amalgamations between neighbouring 
services. Amalgamation was recommended where the proposed areas to be serviced 
overlapped and where client numbers were low or the organisations faced difficulty 
obtaining sufficient community funding support.
The long-term drought that seriously affected most regions of Australia during 2002–04, 
created a significant increase in the client need for RFCS assistance. However, there are still 
some areas, including the Northern Territory, which do not have reasonable access to an RFCS.
The ‘institutionalised’ nature of the Rural Financial Counselling Service has prevented 
the program, in some instances, from responding to critical need. Any new funding 
model should ensure greater mobility of resources in response to need.
4.3	
Focusing on the target client group
The RFCS target group includes those primary producers, small rural businesses and 
fishing enterprises in rural areas that are experiencing financial hardship and have no 
alternative sources of help with decision-making. As with any funded program, resources 
need to be focused in areas and on clients of greatest need, and where they can have the 
greatest impact. It is the role of management committees to set the strategic direction of 
their service, monitor activities and give frequent feedback to counsellors to ensure the 
strategic path is being followed.
Throughout its audit reports, Acumen Alliance pointed to instances where counsellor 
activities did not appear to be focusing on clients of greatest need. It also noted that many 
of the management committees from the services audited were unaware what sort of 
clients their counsellor was servicing, and to what effect. In many of the services studied, 
this problem was attributed to the counsellors’ wish to keep their files confidential. North 
West Rural Counselling Service argued that: the counsellor must be able to use his/her 
own discretion in assessing if a farming unit should be accepted as a client. If this issue had 
to be approved by management committees, it would compromise client confidentiality’.

65
Acumen Alliance also made the point that management committee members who 
cannot access files are unable to fulfil their legal obligations and responsibilities. However, 
it is the nature of the current RFCS community-based model that increases the exposure 
of management committees to these risks. Management committee members are often 
known to clients, and identification of individual clients becomes an issue that can equally 
expose management committees to risk.
Compared with the current RFCS model the Farm Financial Counselling Service of the 
Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries (QDPIF) does not encounter 
significant problems with client confidentiality, because it is administered by the state 
government and not local communities. Although the QDPIF service does not have 
mandatory file audits, audits are made from time to time. When they are, they are 
performed by senior members of the service from outside the service community being 
audited. Appendix 13 maps the locations of QDPIF Farm Financial Counsellors.
4.3.1	
Resource mobility within the current program
Generally, the rural financial counsellors are located in a rural centre, and service their 
designated area either from that base or by working from ‘outreach’ office space located 
around the region.
However, there have been limited instances of mobility amongst counsellors and 
services under the current program. These were very effective in providing assistance in 
emergency situations, for example:
a South Australian counsellor temporarily relocated to a Queensland RFCS for a 
month to assist with a backlog of clients’ application forms for support under drought 
exceptional circumstances (EC) assistance
a number of Victorian services in the Murray region worked cooperatively to provide 
additional financial counselling assistance to one service in the region that experienced 
a sudden influx of new clients, largely as a result of the cumulative effects of long-term 
drought and bushfires, then sudden severe snowfalls. This arrangement worked 
effectively, with rural financial counsellors from adjoining services providing part-time 
assistance each week.
Funding for short-term industry adjustment services (up to 12 months only) specifically 
targeting industries and regions undergoing change was made available throughout 
2002–04. This new element of the RFCS program offered greater flexibility by enabling 
communities to deal with difficult issues facing particular industries. Short-term industry 
adjustment services were for regions where the community and industry believed that 
a strategic short-term service would help stimulate producers to look at the long-term 
outlook for their industry and to consider adjustment options for their enterprise.

66
4.3.2	
Short-term industry adjustment services and long-term 
community services
The current distribution of the 68 rural financial counselling services, which includes 63 
community-based, longer-term services and five short-term industry adjustment services, 
provides an RFCS across most agricultural regions of Australia, excluding the Australian 
Capital Territory and Northern Territory. These services provide free and confidential 
assistance to help rural enterprises in financial difficulty to assess their current financial 
position and make sound decisions about their business future.
The key activities undertaken by a rural financial counsellor in the community based, 
longer-term services include:
assessment of the enterprise’s current financial position and cash flow
review of contracts and loan applications with lending institutions
communication and facilitation of meetings with lenders and financial institutions
information on government and industry assistance schemes
information on, and referral to, Centrelink and other relevant services
assistance with business decision making in relation to their enterprises
assistance in considering a range of options for the future
collection and provision of data on client-related activities.
The financial counsellors employed under short-term industry adjustment services conduct 
similar activities, with a focus on assisting clients with industry adjustment, which includes 
industry liaison, promotional work and group (as well as individual) service delivery.
The main aims of the short-term industry adjustment services are to:
meet a short-term, or immediate need within a specific industry
provide a coordinated service to producers within a particular industry or region
provide information to assist with industry change and/or adjustment
provide rural financial counselling services to achieve these aims.
When assessing applications for a short-term service, the Rural Financial Counselling 
Advisory Committee considered the availability and location of other rural financial 
counselling services in the area to determine the need for financial counselling under a 
short-term industry adjustment service. Other major considerations were the need for 
adjustment in the industry or region, and the applicant’s proposed adjustment outcomes.

67
Under the current model, short-term industry adjustment services provide flexibility 
for communities to meet a short-term or immediate need within a specific industry. 
Rural financial counsellors provide a coordinated service to producers within a 
particular industry or region by assisting with industry liaison, and group, as well as 
individual, service delivery. The review committee notes that, through the RFCS, this 
flexible delivery approach has assisted industries in need to achieve their aims. Any 
new funding model should retain this component of the RFCS program.
4.4	
The boundaries between social and financial counselling
Counselling may be viewed as a special kind of helping relationship: a repertoire of 
interventions or a psychological process (Nelson-Jones 1995). Zastrow (2003) writes of the 
phases of counselling from the perspective of the client as follows: problem awareness; 
the relationship with the counsellor; client motivation; conceptualisation of the problem; 
exploration of the resolution strategies; selection of a strategy; implementation; and 
evaluation. The focus of the counselling activity can be various, and counsellors typically 
train to provide counselling of a specific type. On numerous occasions, the review 
committee was told of situations in which rural financial counsellors were asked or 
expected to perform roles that were of a purely social counselling nature. Nevertheless, 
the core business of the RFCS is financial. The current qualifications of the RFCS staff are 
almost exclusively in the area of finance and not in psychology, sociology, social work or 
other human-service areas.
‘Social counselling’ requires a special set of skills that complement but are different from 
those of the financial counsellor. Those professionally trained in social counselling, in 
addition to active listening and engagement skills and other basic human relationship 
skills, will also be aware of various therapeutic approaches, various models of professional 
social counselling, approaches to motivating clients, various personality theories, an 
understanding of social models of human behaviour, knowledge of lifespan development, 
a capacity to make sound assessments on a multi-dimensional or systemic level, 
approaches to changing behaviours and beliefs, skills in mediation and negotiation, 
transference, vicarious trauma, family therapy and a range of other skills and abilities. 
Professional counsellors are subject to ethical considerations and codes of behaviour that 
should ensure both the protection of the client and the counsellor, and emphasise the 
need for accountability.

68
The potential exists for RFCS staff and management committees to exceed their 
professional competence and leave the service, the management committees and 
themselves exposed to both legal risk and personal trauma. All stakeholders emphasised 
the difficulty of separating financial counselling from the emotional and relationship issues 
that may contribute to or arise from financial difficulties.
From the submissions, it appears that many RFCS staff have very well-developed 
interpersonal skills and have clear capacity to discern when a referral to a professional 
counsellor needs to be made. Knowing the limits to counselling capacity is important for 
both the counsellor and the client. Generally, no standards appear to exist about when, 
and to where, to appropriately refer clients for social counselling. There is no standard 
minimum entry requirement for RFCS staff in the area of social counselling, no consistent 
training and staff development in social counselling, limited supervision of the issues of 
social counselling and no enforceable code of conduct.
The review committee did not find substantial evidence in many places of a well-
developed support structure for rural financial counsellors, a coherent and mandated 
code of conduct or an accountability structure that would ensure that the RFCS did not go 
beyond its competence in the area of social counselling. Given that some oral and written 
submissions highlighted the issues of mental health, suicide and self-harm, domestic 
violence and social isolation, there is potential for staff and services to go beyond their 
level of competence. Most other providers of financial counselling, on the other hand, 
have established clear protocols to prevent a cross-over between the two roles: in fact one 
said: ‘It is forbidden to do both emotional and financial counselling with the same person’. 
The normal protocol is:
deal with the immediate situation
seek supervisor advice
refer.
It is recommended that any future service delivery model ensure that there 
is minimum entry level knowledge of social counselling, a staff development 
and training focus upon social counselling (particularly the limits of capacity), a 
supervision structure that ensures the health and well-being of RFCS staff and 
clients, and membership of, and adherence to, a code of conduct and behaviour.

69
4.5	
Other providers of social and financial 
counselling and information
The review committee’s consultations indicated that almost all financial counselling 
services, whether in metropolitan or rural and regional areas, are funded by state or federal 
governments, either as an outsourced service through not-for-profit organisations (for 
example, Family and Community Services), through non-profit community organisations 
such as Anglicare, Uniting Care Wesley and Lifeline Community Care, Centrelink 
Commonwealth Financial Counselling Services), or as a direct service by a state agency (for 
example, the QDPIF Farm Financial Counselling Service).
In the time allocated it was not possible for services in all states to be mapped, partly 
because of the difficulty in identifying all the agencies responsible for service delivery. An 
indication of the number of financial counselling services offered can, however, be seen 
in Appendix 14, where services funded by state and other Commonwealth Government 
departments are mapped. It should also be noted that while Anglicare in Tasmania 
is responsible for all financial counselling across the state, it had had no significant 
interaction with the RFCS in that state, despite both counsellors of Anglicare being located 
close to both counsellors in the RFCS. From various reports, this appears to be the case in 
many, although not all, jurisdictions.
Up-to-date maps of financial counselling services across all states would be of benefit, but 
an additional obstacle is the differing accreditation and authorisation standards in each 
state, for recognising and funding ‘financial counsellors’.
The North West Rural Counselling Service argued that: ‘the main criteria should always be 
that there must be a debt, but the availability of other providers, both professional and 
government services, must be taken into consideration’.
The RFCS occupies a specialised role in dealing with farm sector adjustment, 
as opposed to urban-based financial counsellors. In the formation of any new 
program model, a detailed mapping of government and non-government 
providers of financial counselling services in rural and regional Australia should 
be undertaken to more accurately determine where there is duplication and 
overlapping of services.

70
5	 How well has the current 
service met need?
5.1 	
Awareness of the program
The AAA package was introduced in 1997 and reviewed in 2002–03 (DAFF 2004b). Our 
review found there had been a steady increase in both awareness of and participation 
in AAA programs since 1998. The 2002 rural producer survey (SMR 2002) of 2500 primary 
producers showed that 68% of respondents knew of the RFCS program, with 15% of those 
surveyed having either used or otherwise benefited from it. Survey results also highlighted 
the cross-linkages between AAA programs and other DAFF programs. For example, of the 
24% of respondents who had used or benefited from farm management deposits (FMDs), 
18% had used or benefited from the RFCS. Similarly, of the 13% who had used or benefited 
from exceptional circumstances relief, 37% had used or benefited from the RFCS program.
In 2002, BRS undertook an analysis of national client survey data for the RFCS program 
(Magpantay et al. 2002). The survey sample consisted of 3882 respondents drawn from 
rural and regional communities across Australia who were clients of RFCS. Eighty-three 
percent indicated they were primary producers. At a national level, respondents most 
frequently became aware of their local RFCS through informal networks such as a friend 
or colleague (36%). This was followed by industry or farmer associations with which 
respondents had contact (19.4%) and next through advertising (12%). Informal networks 
were the dominant means of gaining awareness of the service for the majority of the 
states. Industry and farmer associations played a prominent role within particular states, 
especially Tasmania (33%), where it was the most frequently cited means of awareness, but 
were important too in New South Wales (21%), Victoria (23%) and South Australia (14%). 
The role of community organisations was important for Queensland and Western Australia, 
while banks and creditors were relevant to respondents in New South Wales, Queensland 
and Tasmania. Telephone directories and websites were the least frequently cited means of 
becoming informed of the RFCS.
Recent studies and anecdotal evidence presented to the review during consultations 
also indicate that those who seek assistance from the RFCS are satisfied with the services 
provided. The study of NSW Western Division graziers, Leaving the land (Webb et al. 2002), 
found that rural financial counsellors were approached for financial and business advice 
by just under 60% of respondents. Very high levels of satisfaction were reported for those

71
who used rural financial counsellors, but respondents noted that the extent and number 
of clients that rural financial counsellors were required to deal with restricted their ability 
to reasonably service clients. Webb et al. (2002) noted:
Rural financial counsellors are expected to service too large an area and more clients than 
they could reasonably be expected to service in the manner they, or the client desired.
The study also noted that rural financial counsellors were most frequently accessed for 
personal or family counselling services.
5.1.2	
The value of client-satisfaction surveys
Under the current RFCS program monitoring and evaluation processes, rural financial 
counselling services are encouraged to circulate and collect client-satisfaction surveys 
annually to gauge client interaction with rural financial counsellors and satisfaction with 
the services provided.
Several submissions made to the review committee produced information and feedback 
from clients on the value of and satisfaction with the current services. The results were 
positive for the services received from their rural financial counsellor. However, details of 
the methodologies used in these customer surveys were not provided.
The review committee believes that this leaves the results of such surveys open to 
accusations of bias. Client satisfaction surveys should be conducted by qualified 
independent survey providers using methodology that minimises bias in the results.
The risk of bias in the results of client satisfaction surveys should be minimised by 
engaging independent survey providers.
5.2	
Anecdotal evidence
Anecdotal evidence suggests rural financial counsellors play a valuable role in farm sector 
adjustment and in providing decision-support for primary producers in difficult times 
such as drought.
In face-to-face consultations, many submissions reiterated the importance of rural financial 
counsellors during drought. Counsellor workloads increased during drought and in the 
adjustment period immediately following it. During these difficult times, RFCS clients 
perceived ‘that counsellors understand us better than anyone else’.

72
The review committee heard that counsellors were often failing to distance themselves 
from the emotional stress affecting their clients. Personal counselling issues often arose from 
financial discussions ‘around the kitchen table’. While there was a need for counsellors to be 
skilled enough to listen and refer clients to appropriate service providers, in more remote or 
marginalised communities where services were inadequate, counsellors filled the gap:
Counsellors tend to ‘own’ the client – and the trust that builds inevitably leads them 
into areas where they didn’t expect the conversation to go, including wider social and 
personal issues.
This relationship between rural financial counsellor and client also led to an advocacy 
role for counsellors that had the potential to compromise their objectivity. The review 
committee heard counsellors were often advocates for primary producers to stay in 
farming, rather than offering options for change, including leaving the land.
There is anecdotal evidence that primary producers would prefer to visit rural financial 
counsellors rather than Centrelink, due to the perception that Centrelink was a welfare 
agency. During consultations, the review committee heard that Centrelink-supervised 
counsellors would be unacceptable to the client, as the agency ‘did not understand 
the primary producer’. However, other submissions said that Centrelink and counsellors 
worked together in complementary roles.
These complementary roles are also evidenced in Farm Help – supporting families through 
change: case studies, compiled by DAFF in 2004 (DAFF 2004a). These case studies profiled 
farmers who had accessed assistance under the Farm Help program, which assists primary 
producers in serious financial difficulty while they improve their long-term financial 
prospects. Farmers initially contacted their rural financial counsellor for assistance, who 
then accompanied them to Centrelink. Those profiled were often surprised by the level of 
professionalism of Centrelink officers:
The Centrelink people were wonderful. They explained all the options and we put a 
plan together to enable me to retire. With the help of the rural financial counsellor and 
Centrelink, everything began to fall into place.
The results of a survey of client perceptions of Centrelink undertaken in 2002 (SMR 2002) 
show evidence of increasing acknowledgment among primary producers that Centrelink 
provides a wider range of services than welfare and social security.
Anecdotal evidence can assist in providing insights into perceptions of the RFCS, but a 
more measured analysis of wider research and data is needed to evaluate the issues and 
concerns raised in consultations and case studies.

73
5.3	
The availability and adequacy of current data and 
evaluation tools
5.3.1	
Data in the Australian Rural Counselling (ARC) client statistical 
database
There are a number of issues concerning the adequacy and reliability of data in the 
ARC database, including the role of the database itself, consistency of data input and 
completeness of data.
The intended purposes of some parts of the database are unclear to users, which calls 
into question the consistency and reliability of some data. For example, information on 
‘enterprise details’ records businesses financial information such as ‘asset value’, ‘cash 
income’ and ‘peak liabilities’, but the accounting convention (cash or accrual basis) used to 
derive these values is not specified. Therefore the input data could vary depending on the 
interpretation used by the individual counsellor, calling into question the usefulness of this 
data for analysis.
Anecdotal evidence from program staff suggests that entries may be being dealt with 
differently between the services. An example in the past related to entries for recording 
succession planning. While preparation for referral to a professional succession planner 
is allowed under the funding agreement, it is understood from field visits and database 
training sessions that some services were not filling-in this field for fear that they may have 
been breaching their funding agreement, even though they may have been supplying this 
initial service to their clients.
During its 2003 audit of 24 RFCS services, Acumen Alliance Consulting found that rural 
financial counsellors:
have an inconsistent definition of clients, leading to lack of comparability of client 
numbers reported
are inconsistent in their use of ARC categories, which has resulted in a lack of 
comparability across services
do not back-up their data regularly, which has resulted in ARC information being lost 
through computer failure, theft or fire.
Acumen recommended that there be mandatory data fields within the ARC database. As 
a minimum, counsellors should be required to enter all of the relevant contact details of 
clients, including their address and phone number. All clients should be assigned a client 
number or code, and all ‘assistance’ made available to the client by the counsellor should 
be recorded.

74
All the above examples lead to questions regarding the reliability of data in the database. 
Additionally, the reliability of data is questionable as there is limited or no performance 
audit/evaluation by employers or supervisors because of the way in which counsellors 
interpret client confidentiality requirements.
Analysing the data
A condition of the RFCS funding agreements is that each service maintains complete and 
accurate client information on the ARC database. However, no formal checking processes 
or regular audits are undertaken to validate data input. In order to provide the review 
committee with a picture of the nature of activities undertaken by services, analyses have 
been conducted on the raw data and information currently held in the database.
The method of storing information in the ARC database has undergone several changes 
since the inception of the RFCS program. In analysing the data, it has been necessary 
to perform filtering procedures to bring it to a common basis for analysis. The filtering 
procedures may affect the absolute accuracy of some calculations but this effect is 
thought to be minimal.
It should be noted that clients’ personal details are accessible only by their counsellor and 
client confidentiality and privacy is completely respected and protected.
Table 1 details the total number of existing and previous clients recorded in the ARC 
database by services. Clients are classified as either:
short term – client 3 years or less
long term – greater than 3 years.
The proportion of clients in the long-term classification is around 45% and this may 
support the view that adjustment is not receiving a high enough priority in the program. 
Various studies and evaluations undertaken by DAFF indicate that adjustment generally 
takes in the order of two years to complete.
Table 1.  Number of years clients have used the RCFS
Total number of 
clients analysed
No. of short-term 
(up to 3 years)
%
No. of long-term 
(greater than 3 years)
%
20,636
11,280
55
9,356
45
1.
2.

75
Table 2 gives details of the relative times spent by rural financial counselling services 
providing various types of assistance to clients, expressed as a percentage of total activity 
hours reported by a random sample of 50% of services for the period from 1 January 2003 
to 30 June 2004. It should be noted that the activity hours reported by some services 
includes drought counselling.
The averages indicate that service activities have moved away from their original core 
purposes of farm debt mediation (2%) and adjustment out of agriculture (2%). Counsellors’ 
main activities are now:
cash flow budgeting (11%)
information on government assistance (12%)
negotiation with creditors (12%)
RAS assistance (9%).
These results are consistent with the indication in Table 1 that services are tending to 
retain clients for longer.
Table 3 shows the main causes of client difficulty recorded by counsellors in the ARC 
database. These are the primary reasons that clients initially consult rural financial 
counsellors.
Reflecting the recent drought conditions, climatic variation (30%) is recorded as the most 
frequent cause of difficulty.
The other entrenched causes of difficulty are:
commodity prices (17%)
debt levels (11%)
finance management skills (11%).

76
Table 2.  Type of assistance provided by RFCS counsellors in 2003–04, as recorded in the 
ARC database
Type of assistance given
Average proportion of 
total hours reported (%)
Highest 
(%)
Lowest 
(%)
Loan restructure
3
16
0
Adjustment out of agriculture
2
20
1
Cash-flow budgeting
11
43
5
Centrelink assistance
9
24
0
Facilitate decision-making
2
38
0
Farm debt mediation
2
12
0
Farm debt planning
1
14
0
Financial contract review
1
6
0
Financial forms assistance
0
7
0
Information on government 
assistance
12
43
0
Information/training referral
0
12
0
Insolvency advice
0
6
0
Loan application
4
12
0
Machinery purchase
0
2
0
Negotiation with creditor
12
30
0
Other
18
49
1
Personal assistance
0
9
0
Personal counselling
1
5
0
Property purchase
0
2
0
Property sale
2
9
0
RAS assistance
9
54
0
Referral to welfare
4
29
0
Succession planning
0
8
0
Viability analysis
7
45
1

77
Table 3.  Main causes of client difficulty recorded in the ARC database
Cause of difficulty
Percentage of total clients in classification
Climatic variation
30
Commodity prices
17
Debt levels
11
Declining land values
1
Farm size
8
Finance management skills
11
Financial environment
0
Illness, other & personal factors
22
Total
100
Table 4 summarises counsellors’ classifications of client viability prospects as recorded in the 
ARC database. All classifications of clients, both existing and previous clients, are included in 
the table. Note that it is not mandatory for counsellors to provide data in this field.
Table 4.  Viability prospects of RFCS clients as recorded in the ARC database
Viability prospects
Percentage of total clients in classification
No change
33
Improving
13
Deteriorating
35
Viable
1
Unclassified
18
Total
100

78
Table 5 contains information on the status of property sales by RFCS clients. The major 
portion of the data (88%) is unclassified and thus provides no indication of asset sale 
intentions of the majority of clients in the database. However, the remaining 12% is 
classified variously as having sold or attempting to sell assets and the assumption could 
be made that a minor proportion of clients in difficulty either intend to sell, or have sold, 
property assets in an endeavour to rectify difficulties. Note that it is not mandatory for 
counsellors to provide data in this field.
Table 5.  Status of property sales by RFCS clients as recorded in the ARC database
Sale status
Percentage of total clients in classification
Attempting sale
5
Part property sale
2
Property sold
4
Part asset sale
1
Unclassified
88
Total
100
Table 6 gives the proportions of business types serviced by counsellors, derived from all 
ARC data of both previous and present client business types. Farmers make up the major 
proportion (89.25%) of clients.
Table 6.  Classification of businesses serviced by rural financial counsellors
 Business type
Percentage of total client base
Farmer
89.25
Small business
 4.58
Fishing
 0.12
Individuals
 1.71
Indigenous farmer
0.30
Other
4.04
Total
100.00

79
5.3.2	
Client files and the need for confidentiality
The RFCS is promoted as providing a free, objective and confidential financial counselling 
service to primary producers, fishers and related small businesses in need. Contracted rural 
financial counsellors and the volunteer members of the RFCS management committees 
need to have access to confidential and sensitive information about their clients.
The Rural Financial Counselling Service Program Resource Manual (DAFF 2004c) provides 
guidance on the issue of confidentiality and client files to assist management committees 
and their staff to gain a clear understanding of confidentiality requirements. The issue was 
also covered in recent corporate governance training.
The interpretation of the confidentiality requirements by management committees 
continues nevertheless to be a barrier to accurate reporting of rural financial counselling 
activities. Further, there is a strong reluctance by many management committee members 
to take on the responsibility of checking the files of the clients of their service as part of 
the work performance review of their rural financial counsellor(s). One of the reasons given 
for this reluctance is that, in the smaller rural communities, the management committee 
members know everyone and have no desire to know the business of their neighbours 
and/or friends or even whether or not they are clients of the service.
A primary responsibility of the management committees is to manage and supervise their 
rural financial counsellors and conduct regular performance reviews of the counsellors’ 
work activities. The resource manual recommends that a performance review of staff 
should be conducted and documented at least every six months. However, the issue of 
confidentiality in relation to the client files has been used by some counsellors to avoid 
checks of their work activities by their management committees. In addition, due to the 
reluctance of management committee members to access client files, there have been 
instances of financial counsellors conducting activities outside the parameters of the 
funding agreement.
The review committee finds that there continues to be a misinterpretation of 
the confidentiality requirements in the management, governance and reporting 
obligations under the current community-based structures and, along with the 
absence of validation processes, this calls into question the accuracy of data for 
the program.

80
5.4	
Measuring the program’s contribution to 
adjustment
Submissions to the review committee strongly argued there is an ongoing community 
need for financial counselling services. However, the review committee, particularly in its 
consultation phase, was frustrated in trying to solicit from key stakeholders direct evidence 
of the RFCS program’s contribution and indicators of success in achieving adjustment.
The interests of successful communities to maintain existing services and obtain funding 
for future services appeared to have a higher priority than fostering adjustment. Similarly, 
the issue of providing services that are free for establishing demand for services, was raised 
in consultations as an area which needs to factored in any analysis on determining need.
An analysis of information on adjustment on the ARC database indicates that the level of 
services achieving adjustment outcomes is low. This is reinforced by the low percentage of 
time recorded by counsellors as spent on farm-sector adjustment:
farm debt mediation (2%)
adjustment out of agriculture (2%).
5.5	
Responding to changing need
There are numerous examples of the requirement for additional rural financial counselling 
services in specific areas to deal with sudden and significant workload increases and 
fluctuations. A regional approach between a number of services was implemented 
recently in Victoria to deliver crisis relief during a drought. There was cooperation between 
two services in South Australia during an industry crisis. An instance of a South Australian 
rural financial counsellor seconded to a Queensland service for a month was reported to 
have worked very well.
In other locations, however, services have struggled to cope with sudden increases in 
workload and a lack of additional assistance from trained relief or neighbouring rural 
financial counsellors.
The review committee recommends that any new funding model should ensure 
greater mobility of resources in response to need.

81
Upper Murray and North East AgCare, Victoria: a regional approach 
between RFC Services.
The region serviced by Upper Murray and North East AgCare Inc. Rural Financial 
Counselling Service experienced a number of hardships in 2003, including almost 
50% of the Towong Shire burnt during the bushfires, drought conditions and huge 
stock losses during snowfalls and extremely cold weather, as livestock had been 
weakened by the drought. 
Following an operation undertaken by the Victorian Department of Primary 
Industries, in partnership with Towong Council, a Drought Response Project was 
established to provide stock feeding advice and to inform all farmers in the Towong 
program. This meant a rapid increase in the service’s workload. To help with the 
influx of new clients requiring follow-up assistance with complex problems and 
ongoing financial counselling, the service received funding to help pay salary 
and related expenses for employment of one locum rural financial counsellor, 
and running costs for further assistance from four to five visiting rural financial 
counsellors from neighbouring, and less-stretched, services for six weeks.

82
6	 Anticipated need over the 
next three years
6.1	
Short and long-term pressures on the sector
 The RFCS program has historically responded to two forms of need: long-term adjustment 
pressure and short-term crisis (such as a climate or market/price event).
Continuing pressures
Farm prices
The continuing downward pressure of commodity prices is one of the main reasons a new 
group of farm enterprises (estimated at between 10 and 25% of enterprises) becomes 
marginally viable every decade. In the past four years, however, rising real-estate values 
have improved debt/equity ratios and have to some extent masked a pessimistic long-
term outlook for enterprises.
The uncertain environment in which primary producers operate, including 
drought, bushfires, flood, fluctuations on global markets, etc. ensures that there will 
always be stress situations, exacerbated by the links between family/business and 
way of life, which differs from most other sectors in the nation’s overall economy.  
Australian Institute of Agricultural Science and Technology, Victoria
Changes in markets and consumer preferences
While Australian farmers have benefited from the opportunities of expanding global 
trade, competitiveness has increasingly been determined by their ability to respond to 
consumer and market signals. As a consequence, many Australian farmers have shifted 
from production-based farming to a market-driven approach to agriculture.
Support for farm enterprises is therefore more effective where it assists farmers to access 
and use market and consumer information and to enhance supply chain integration. 
Attempts to shelter the farm sector from market change have generally served to reduce 
competitiveness in the long term.

83
Resource access
Changing community expectations, declining resource conditions and a concern for 
resource sustainability have affected resource access for both farming and fishing 
industries, largely through regulation and pricing mechanisms.
In some cases, as in the closure of commercial river fishing in South Australia, enterprises 
have disappeared immediately. In other cases, change to resource access and resource 
input costs has been more gradual, and many enterprises have delayed their responses 
to these signals. It has been estimated that as many as 1 in 3 water-dependent farm 
enterprises will become unviable as a result of such changes in the next decade. There is a 
need for financial counselling to assist farm enterprises affected by diminishing access to 
resources, particularly due to water reform.
Climate change
While there are many uncertainties about the extent of global climate change, it is 
commonly agreed that there will be increased variability of temperature, rainfall and other 
climatic factors. Despite some recent rains, many parts of rural Australia have had limited 
opportunities for recovery from drought. There has been agreement amongst the majority 
of stakeholders that future drought policy needs to emphasise better information and 
preparedness for future climate events. At the same time, enterprises need to re-assess the 
sustainability of current farming practices in the context of long-term rainfall patterns in 
the regions.
Generational change
While the average age of farmers and farm managers is in the fifties (SMR 2002), a 
significant number of farmers are in their sixties and seventies and planning for retirement, 
and life after farming is a matter of urgency. The rural producer survey in 2002 also found 
that one in every four farmers was thinking of retirement or semi-retirement within five 
years, but only one in four of this group actually had a retirement plan.
6.2	
The target group – non-viable and marginally 
viable farm enterprises
Non-viable farm businesses are those that have net negative returns in value over the 
long term. If successful adjustment is not achieved, non-viable farm businesses are at a 
high risk of eventually being declared bankrupt. Farm enterprises become non-viable 
for a combination of reasons. Non-viability could be due to unsustainable debt level,

84
long-term downturns in commodity prices or climate favourability, unforeseen costs, 
undersized productive area or the inability of the farmer as an entrepreneur to profitably 
and efficiently manage resources.
It should be noted that non-viable farms are, by their very nature, less prepared for 
significant downturns, most notably drought. As a result, these farms experience the 
negative effects of downturns earlier and more severely than those businesses that plan 
and prepare for such events.
Farmers who are struggling to survive share a range of common characteristics, as 
indicated by financial situation, age, farm size, management style, off-farm income, degree 
of involvement with innovation, education and new enterprise, the specific industry the 
farmer belongs to and the state of the farm’s natural resource assets.
A key AAA adjustment program for non-viable farmers is the Farm Help – Supporting 
Families Through Change program. The focus of this program is on adjustment – not 
welfare. It supports the decision-making of low-income farmers who cannot access further 
finance, to take actions to improve their farm business or leave farming. The program 
emphasises the use of strategic information, analysis and advice to support decision-
making about the future. Farm families work through a ‘pathways plan’ that integrates 
advice, opportunities to gain new skills through training and up to 12 months income 
support. For farm families who decide to leave farming, a re-establishment grant of up to 
$50,000 is available.
Between the start of the program on 1 December 1997 and 3 October 2004, 8968 farmers 
received Farm Help income support and 1084 farmers re-establishment assistance. The 
program has also funded 10,878 professional advice and training sessions for 7666 farmers 
(farmers can access more than one professional advice session and/or training course). 
Appendix 16 details trends in numbers of farmers seeking and receiving Farm Help income 
support between May 1999 and October 2004.
As demonstrated in the second chapter of this report, there are significant barriers 
delaying adjustment, including exit from farming. Farm Help exit surveys suggest farm 
families access other forms of government assistance and hang on for as long as possible 
before adjustment out of farming.
counsellors provide information and referral services for their clients. In many instances, 
programs, including the Farm Help program. They have a crucial role in the identification 
of possible participants and provide encouragement to farmers to contact Centrelink

85
about programs the government is providing for farmers. In relation to the Farm Help 
program, counsellors are able to provide a comprehensive range of assistance to Farm 
Help clients including:
working with farm families to explore their current circumstances and options for the 
future, including information about government programs
referring farmers to Centrelink at an early stage to discuss the range of programs, 
including Farm Help and other industry specific packages
providing assistance to farmers after they take up the Farm Help re‑establishment 
grant to help them to adjust to their new life off the farm.
In its submission to the RFCS Review, the National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) agreed 
counsellors ‘must play an increased role in promoting the new Farm Help arrangements, 
ensuring that farmers take advantage of the $5500 available to seek professional advice 
and to develop an options plan’.
Early intervention was seen as an important role in the face-to-face consultations. South 
West Rural Financial Counselling Services Inc. felt that the program should target not 
only those clients who were in ‘a major financial crisis’, but also those who were ‘in some 
difficulty’ to try to prevent them from reaching a crisis situation. The RFCS program had 
worked well with the Farm Help program to help turn failing enterprises around and ‘assist 
farmers to farm more profitably’.
The McColl report (1997), found that ‘farmers who face losses and an erosion of equity and 
decide to leave farming should be encouraged to do so as early as possible in order to 
maximise their assets on departure’.
The review committee recommends that future program objectives include 
encouraging primary producers, small rural businesses and fishers to make early 
contact and use of services through increased awareness of the benefits of early 
intervention, giving them greater capacity to effectively manage change and 
adjustment by making informed decisions.

86
Viability (%)
0
10
20
RFCS target clients
Potential for intervention
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Timeline
Figure 16  Potential for early intervention, before ‘crisis’ point and assets and equity 
have been eroded.
6.2.1	
Farmers accessing and coming off Exceptional Circumstances (EC)
There are two assistance measures delivered under Exceptional Circumstances 
– Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payments (ECRP) and EC Interest Rate Subsidies (ECIRS).
ECRP is delivered by Centrelink on behalf of DAFF. ECRP provides assistance to farmers 
living in Exceptional Circumstances declared areas who are having difficulty meeting 
personal living expenses. An example of EC might be where an area is affected by rare 
(that is a 1 in 20–25 year) and severe drought.
After an area is declared as experiencing EC, eligible farmers can apply for ECRP with 
assistance available for up to 24 months. Map 1 in Appendix 17 shows areas of Australia that 
were either EC declared or had demonstrated a prima facie EC case, as at 14 September 2004.
Maps 2–4 of Appendix 17 show areas that are nearing the expiry of their two-year EC 
declarations. The majority of change will occur toward the end of 2005 in the pastoral 
zones of Western Australia, southern Queensland and western New South Wales.

87
If an area is EC declared, farmers can also apply for ECIRS on new and existing commercial 
loans of up to $100,000 for two years. The subsidy is 50% of the interest payable. State 
rural adjustment authorities administer ECIRS in all states and territories under agreed 
Australian/state government guidelines issued for each declaration.
The significant number of farmers coming off EC assistance will mean a reduction in the 
number of EC application forms that rural financial counsellors currently assist clients with. 
However, it may also mean that these same farmers then need help with other adjustment 
issues and assistance with decision-making and farm-management options. 
It should be noted that EC areas are subject to some change as an EC declaration is for a 
maximum of two years. The maps in Appendix 17 were correct at the time of the review, 
but a number of areas in which the EC support is due to finish in the 2004–2005 financial 
year may have support extended under a roll-over process that extends assistance for a 
further 12 months.
6.2.2	
Resource access and regulation
Water is a vital, but finite resource. As the world’s driest inhabited continent, Australia 
needs to use its limited water resources wisely.
The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet website (2005) has noted
…the continuing national imperative of increasing the productivity and efficiency of 
Australia’s water use and to ensure the health of river and groundwater systems. This will 
require arrangements that provide greater certainty for investors in the water industry and 
for the environment, and which will allow Australia’s water management regimes to adapt 
to future changes in water availability responsively and fairly in both rural and urban areas.
In 2000, the Australian Water Resources Assessment and the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) 
defined and mapped both surface and groundwater management areas across Australia, 
reporting on water quality, use and allocation. Appendix 18 gives maps showing allocation 
and level of use of surface and groundwater across Australia:
Groundwater – Map 1 in Appendix 18 indicates that groundwater use exceeds the 
total volume available, while Map 2 shows areas of Australia in which water is either 
fully allocated or highly used.
Surface water – Map 3 indicates the surface water areas (river systems) that are 
overstressed and over-allocated, and Map 4 areas that are either fully allocated or 
highly used. 

88
Water rights and water trading will become increasingly important to rural and regional 
improve the sustainable management of water. The water reforms will greatly assist the 
irrigation industry which is the major user of freshwater in Australia, consuming some 70% 
of all water used.1 A further 21% goes to urban and industrial uses and the remaining 9% 
to other rural activities.
Major water reform being implemented through the National Water initiative will 
improve security of water rights for irrigators. At the individual property level, there will 
be expanding opportunities to sell, trade and borrow against water rights. This may 
lead to major structural adjustment in some industries and regions. Many irrigators will 
need to be well-informed on financial matters to assess their options. Irrigators will need 
advice on major restructuring of their enterprise (with greater access to finance, including 
through sale of water rights) or existing agricultural practices (through sale of land and 
water rights).
In relation to other resource access issues, it will be important to have an understanding 
of state-based land regulations in providing options on farm management and therefore 
farm viability. This will be more important in areas where changes in regulations have 
occurred; in Queensland, for example.
6.2.3	
Median age of farmers and future intention in industry
Age is an important indicator of the changing dynamics of the agricultural workforce. 
Regional-level statistics (see Appendix 19) show that in some areas of Australia the median 
age of farmers and farm managers is rising. Farmers are working longer, into their later 
years and younger people are less interested in taking over the farming enterprise.
It is thought that older farmers are less likely to implement sustainable farming practices. 
Younger farmers tend to be more aware of land degradation and are more likely to have 
prepared farm-management plans and budgets but not necessarily any more prepared to 
implement other sustainable farming practices.
The median age of farmers has been rising more rapidly than that in other occupations. 
Change in the median age of farmers is mapped in Appendix 20.
The pressure on smaller farms is making it harder for them to maintain competitiveness in 
the face of continual commercial upheaval and increased farm running costs.
1	
The pilot interstate water trading project information pack, information sheet 1, 
Murray–Darling Basin Commission, 1998–1999.

89
6.2.4	
Property values
Although the value of farming land has increased significantly, commodity prices have 
remained static or improved only marginally and certainly not in proportion to rising land 
value. Consequently, equity has been strengthened, but the ability to service debt has not 
improved. Farmers, whose business position is, at best, marginal, have been encouraged 
to struggle on in the hope of further value increases and improving equity. Expansion of 
viable farm businesses has been made more difficult, putting pressure on profitability and 
increasing exposure to the risk of higher debt loads, adverse seasonal conditions and falls 
in commodity prices.
These issues were raised in written submissions and in face-to-face meetings during the 
Review Committee’s consultations:
…massive jumps in land values for best country from $2000 to $3500 – but no comparable 
increase in price for wheat. People are now leasing their properties and using the income 
as superannuation.
Rabo Bank, WA
The people who present to us today are very different. Haven’t had a client for years who 
was being threatened with being pushed off. Now, with rising farm values, the farmer 
fails to service debt long before bank’s investment is at risk. Now – less stigma, and better 
networks. However, process of sitting down and helping understand situation and options 
has not changed.
Rural Financial Counsellor, Vic
If we can get a farm family through we do. If you think we are taking a softer approach 
because of increasing land values, you are wrong. We used to have rules of thumb of 
equity above 70%; x of 1:1… Now, if a farmer can service his debt, everyone is secured. The 
bottom line does not change – they have to be able to meet their interest.
Bankwest, WA
While the initial objective of the scheme may have been to provide short-term assistance, 
the reality is that where one family has owned a property for many years, there is strong 
resistance to suggestions that the property should be sold. People who have bought into 
the district more recently are more prepared to accept that they have made a mistake and 
that they need to do something about it. The continuing rising levels of farm debt are a 
cause for concern and suggest that the problems will not disappear in the short term.
North West Rural Counselling Service, NSW

90
7	 Approaches to support 
improved governance
7.1	
Understanding the risks to the client, to the 
management committee, to the counsellor and to 
government
7.1.1	
The Financial Services Reform Act 2001 and ASIC licensing/exemption
What are the implications of the Financial Services Reform Act for rural financial 
counselling?
(FSRA), designed to protect consumers and improve the consistency of licensing for 
practitioners in the financial services sector. The Act was the result of an inquiry that 
found that financial system regulation was piecemeal and varied, with room for confusion, 
unfairness and inefficiency. The FSRA was designed to create a competitively neutral 
regulatory system which:
ensures adequate levels of consumer protection and market integrity by giving 
consumers a more consistent framework of consumer protection in which to make 
their financial decisions
establishes a standard of conduct for financial service providers
benefits participants in the industry by providing more uniform regulation, reducing 
administrative and compliance costs
introduces a new disclosure regime for most financial products.
By setting standards for service providers, the FSRA reforms provide enhanced protection 
for clients. This is particularly important where clients are especially vulnerable: those 
without high levels of consumer and financial literacy, those who may already be in 
financial difficulty, and those without ready access to other forms of financial advice. These 
are characteristics shown by many clients of the RFCS.
Do these requirements apply to the RFCS?
For the RFCS, it is important to determine whether the activities of counsellors would 
require licensing. Under the FSRA, three options apply:

91
obtain an Australian Financial Services license through ASIC
or
obtain relief from the licensing regime
or
take steps to ensure that the business does not undertake regulated activity.
Therefore, if the RFCS is to continue to operate, it will need to become licensed; seek 
exemption from the Act because its activities were not covered by the Act; or seek relief 
from licensing.
Should the RFCS seek licensing?
To date it has not been considered desirable to seek ASIC licensing for the RFCS because:
licensing would be difficult to obtain and expensive
RFCS program grants are not intended to cover the kinds of activities that would 
require licensing
RFCS funding would not be sufficient to cover the increased insurance premiums 
associated with licensed activity.
Are the activities of the RFCS exempt from licensing?
not allow services to provide financial advice, but it has not been possible to determine 
whether the service as a whole has adhered to this rule.
Audits of the program show that:
current governance arrangements are highly varied
these arrangements, and the privacy of client files, do not allow certainty about the extent 
to which counsellors may give advice on financial products and other financial matters
practices by some counsellors may include proscribed activities (including advice on 
financial products).
The review committee considers that, under present RFCS program arrangements in 
which governance is devolved to 68 separate volunteer management committees, 
it would not be possible to seek exemption for the service as a whole.

92
Could RFCS grant recipients and counsellors seek relief from licensing?
ASIC recognises that special consideration should be given to agencies offering 
‘professional delivery of financial counselling services to consumers in financial difficulty’. 
In December 2003, it gave financial counsellors relief from licensing requirements under 
the FSRA. A copy of ASIC’s information release (IR 03-39) can be found on the ASIC website 
<www.asic.gov.au> under ‘media and information releases’.
However, this relief was subject to certain conditions:
no fees or charges are charged for any aspect of the service
financial counsellors are appropriately trained to carry out the service
financial counsellors are members of, or eligible for membership, of a relevant financial 
counselling association. 
As discussed later in this chapter, many not-for-profit providers of financial counselling 
services have been able to gain licensing exemption from ASIC because they have 
achieved three things:
their counsellors are required to have specific, recognised skill levels and to maintain 
their currency through ongoing training and professional development
close professional supervision (including file audit) enables providers to ascertain the 
nature of activities that are being undertaken and to manage the risk that counsellors 
may operate outside the program’s guidelines
their counsellors are members of relevant, standard-setting financial counselling 
associations. 
What is ‘information’ and what is ‘advice’?
ASIC advised the review committee that
…a consultation may commence with the intention not to give advice but may end up 
there. The test is whether a reasonable person would assume that a person would make a 
decision in relation to a financial product on the basis of what is said.
The review committee considers that the current governance arrangements for the 
RFCS do not provide sufficient consistency of delivery, supervision or skill standards 
to meet the requirements of the FSRA, whether for licensing, exemption or relief 
from licensing requirements. For this reason alone, any new delivery model for the 
RFCS should ensure that these conditions are met.

93
7.1.2	
False security? Professional indemnity and limited liability
A key issue for consideration by the review committee is whether or not management 
committees are aware of the risks associated with professional indemnity and their 
organisation becoming the subject of litigation. Do volunteer management committee 
members realise the full range of risks involved with these issues, or are they depending 
on protections such as professional indemnity to protect them in case of legal action?
Planning for and managing risk
community organisation managing an RFCS set out the minimum requirement for 
appropriate and current insurance policies. Public liability insurance to the value of at 
least $10 million per claim, directors’ and officers’ insurance and professional indemnity 
insurance are identified as some of the minimum insurance requirements.
The Rural Financial Counselling Service Program Resource Manual (DAFF 2004c) recommends 
that management committees develop a business plan for their service. This plan would 
set the direction of the service and identify the important management issues the 
management committee should focus on. A risk assessment is included as an important 
part of this process, with identified risks to be recorded in a risk table.
Despite this, the 2003 Acumen Alliance performance review and audit found that most 
services did not have business or risk assessment plans in place. The audit identified 
corporate governance and risk management as areas of considerable concern.
As services are incorporated associations, management committee members 
are legally liable – which may not be fully understood by management 
committee members.
In order to raise the awareness of management committee members of their governance 
responsibilities and to improve risk-management practices, DAFF provided training for 
chairs and other representatives from management committees around the country. 
These training workshops were well attended and volunteer management committee 
members were encouraged to recognise the importance of good corporate governance 
and the risks associated with inadequate management practices. At the workshops, 
management committee members were asked to consider the potential risks to the 
organisation; possible adverse outcomes of the risks; the probability of occurrence;

94
level of risk they are prepared to accept; what, if any, measures can be implemented to 
eliminate the risks and what practical measures can be adopted to manage the risks to an 
acceptable level, if they cannot be eliminated. Appendix 21 outlines the coverage of the 
corporate governance workshops.
In recent years, there have been examples where services have faced the risk of litigation 
due to unprofessional actions by a rural financial counsellor. This experience becomes 
quite traumatic and stressful for the management committee members involved, as the 
full impact of the situation is realised and needs to be managed.
Does the current governance model for the RFCS pose unreasonable risk on volunteers?
During the consultations it was apparent that there was growing dissatisfaction with the 
current model because of the legal and financial risk imposed on volunteers. A number of 
stakeholders commented along the lines that the volunteers, while being well-intentioned 
people, ‘often don’t understand the huge risk they are taking on’.
The risk to volunteer management committee members was highlighted by one 
stakeholder who commented that ‘corporate governance of services is the major concern 
of all volunteers on management committees’ and went on to say that ‘the associated risks 
with unsatisfactory counsellor supervision opens the door to major litigation claims on 
management committee members’ (Maranoa Rural Management Centre).
The NSW Farmers’ Association commented that ‘the most capable have attended 
governance courses and then wonder why they should voluntarily take such risks’. As a 
result of the perceived risks, ‘management committees are struggling with less members 
and increasing workloads and responsibilities, leading to further burnout’. Another 
submission commented:
Corporate governance of services is the major concern of all volunteers on management 
committees. Following the recent workshops coordinated by DAFF, it is expected 
that many if not all management committee members should be considering their 
involvement in the RFCS. The current guidelines are too vague and open to mis-
interpretation. The associated risks with unsatisfactory counsellor supervision open the 
door to major litigation claims on management committee members.
Some stakeholders remained optimistic that they would be able to monitor counsellor 
performance and manage risk by keeping ‘an ear to the ground’. However, the NSW Farmers’ 
Association voiced the concern of many stakeholders that this may not be enough.

95
The difficulties of performance measurement, means that if the rural financial counsellor 
is not carrying out his job satisfactorily the management committee may not be aware 
and, in any case, cannot act until clients actually report problems. The long time frame 
can leave a district in the lurch. People living in a close community are reticent to report 
dissatisfaction with the service.
Do insurance and incorporation offer protection?
DAFF sought legal advice about directors and officers liability from the Minter Ellison law 
firm. Minter Ellison advised that ‘limited liability’ can be achieved either by incorporation 
under state and territory incorporated associations legislation, or by incorporation under 
the Corporations Act 2001 (either limited by shares or guarantee). Either course would 
provide members with limited liability for liabilities incurred by the incorporated entity. 
That is, the personal liability of members for the liabilities of the incorporated entity will be 
limited to a nominal amount.
Understanding risk and liability
The review committee considered a number of examples of management 
committees facing legal risk because of the perceived constraints posed by 
‘client confidentiality’.
In 2004, a client advised one management committee that the service’s counsellor 
had given advice that was likely to result in substantial financial loss for the client and 
possible litigation.  The management committee faces the risk that these costs will 
be passed on to the committee if the client takes legal action against the service.
Will the service’s insurance cover this risk?
Some factors that may impact on this include:
whether the client did receive advice on a financial product in breach of the 
service guidelines
whether this advice was negligent
whether the management committee had taken enough steps to ensure that 
the counsellor was acting in accordance with the employment contract and to 
protect the client from risk.

96
The entities would need to satisfy the particular eligibility rules established by each state 
and territory’s incorporated associations act. The Corporations Act 2001 is Commonwealth 
legislation and its requirements are uniform across Australia, but it is a more expensive and 
complex regulatory regime than that of state and territory incorporated association.
Minter Ellison also advised that some exclusions commonly found in insurance policies 
mean that insurance cover is never absolute. Some common exclusions from policies can be:
property damage or personal injury claims arising from intentional or reckless conduct
wilful breach of duty
dishonest, fraudulent or malicious acts or omissions
liability of employees or officers arising from their deliberate disregard of the need to 
take reasonable steps to prevent losses.
The exclusions applicable vary from policy to policy.
Given these considerations, as well as the comments made by stakeholders in 
both written submissions and at face-to-face meetings, the review committee 
considers that:
The level of liability risk placed on volunteer members of management 
committees under the current arrangements is no longer acceptable.
The present governance arrangements with responsibility devolved to 68 
individual employers is not appropriate for a program with such large inherent 
risks of legal liability.
As corporate governance and risk management requirements are likely 
to increase in future years, rather than diminish, structured management 
arrangements for the delivery of rural financial counselling are 
considered imperative.

97
7.2	
The sources of risk
In the course of delivering the RFCS program, each of the parties involved in its delivery 
has different exposure to liability. There are four main legal entities that may be exposed to 
actions that may arise in connection with the program. They are:
the community group that has become an incorporated association (the service)
individual counsellors
the individual members of the management committees of each service.
In delivering the program, the most likely cause of action is an action for negligence and, 
in particular, for negligent misstatement.
For the service, other sources of risk may include:
employment issues such as discrimination, harassment, unfair dismissal and contractual 
liability in relation to contracts that it may enter into for supply of goods or services
the ability to manage and supervise the counsellor’s working hours and conditions has 
posed occupational health and safety risks, which are the management responsibility 
of the management committee. This was an issue that had caused friction between 
counsellors and management committees in a number of instances.
For a counsellor, other sources of risk may include:
practice risks including fraud and failure to comply with the terms of his or her 
employment contract
skill maintenance – for example, failure to maintain or obtain relevant qualifications or 
licences (for example, if a counsellor is involved in the provision of financial services as 
defined by the Financial Services Reform Act 2001). As the counsellors may not have any 
formal training, counsellors must ensure that they do not engage in activities for which 
formal training or qualification is required.
For management committee members other risks may include:
failure by a management committee member to discharge duties under the relevant 
state or territory associations incorporated legislation
personal liability for action that a member takes on behalf of the service – for example, 
provision of advice or a direction to the counsellor
failure to oversee and manage risk to the public from the actions of an employee.

98
7.3	
The barriers to good governance
Stakeholder submissions and consultations suggest that a number of factors may pose 
barriers to good governance and risk management.
7.3.1	
Lack of clear goals and objectives
Governance tends to be driven by what a particular organisation sees as the primary 
reasons for its existence, and its interpretation of and focus on those issues. Lack of 
clarity about program goals and objectives is one of the most serious barriers to good 
governance, to consistency between services and to keeping the program focused on its 
core business.
The Rural Communities Program (RCP) – including the RFCS – was evaluated in 2000 (Aslin 
et al. 2000). One of the principal recommendations of that review was that a clear and 
specific goal statement be written for the RCP together with specific objectives for each 
program element. In particular:
the RFCS should focus on agricultural and social adjustment rather than attempting 
to meet development or welfare objectives, and be responsive to changing 
circumstances for government-supported adjustment assistance
any future goal statement and objectives should have specific reference to 
sustainability (social, economic and ecological), and sustainability issues should be 
given higher priority in the monitoring and evaluation framework as well as in the 
program guidelines and criteria for assessing applications.
In the individual funding agreements, the objective for the RFCS reflects this recommendation 
and is consistent with the goal of the Agriculture Advancing Australia package:
The objective of the RCP is to contribute to the development of vibrant rural communities 
by improving access to information and services and encouraging community ‘ownership’ 
of service demands and delivery. The RFCS will contribute to these and the goal of a more 
competitive, sustainable and profitable rural Australia by:
Engaging and supporting community groups and industry in rural and remote areas 
to assist eligible enterprises with business decision making in relation to change 
and adjustment.
Supporting flexible financial counselling services in rural areas and industries with 
identified need.
Identifying enterprise and industry issues relating to change and adjustment and 
reporting statistical and other information to government.

99
The stated aims of the RFCS published in the resource manual (DAFF 2004c) describe the 
specific task of the RFCS, rather than its long-term goals for the sector:
To provide a rural financial counselling service to primary producers, small rural 
businesses and fishing enterprises in rural areas who are experiencing financial 
hardship and have no alternative sources of financial assistance, and
To provide a direct financial incentive for local self-help organisations/management 
committees, based in rural and regional Australia, to respond to the need for rural 
financial counselling through the employment of a suitably qualified rural financial 
counsellors.
While these broad goals and outcome statements provide some direction, the 
review committee considers that it is important to recommit the service to 
a primary role in supporting industry and enterprise adjustment for primary 
producers, small businesses and fishers. These objectives would also assist in the 
collection and reporting of management data.
7.3.2	
Data and monitoring
One of the concerns that arose repeatedly during the consultation was a lack of 
performance information and qualitative data to measure the success or otherwise of 
enterprise adjustment and contributing to the enhanced profitability, competitiveness and 
sustainability of the rural sector.
Improved data collection and reporting would assist in:
generating robust, credible, quantitative and qualitative reports on the achievements 
of the program for government and for key stakeholders
improve program targeting and the allocation of resources
supporting individual services in planning for the future and directing service activities 
and priorities, and
identifying issues for further investigation and management by RFCS management 
committees.

100
7.3.3	
Monitoring and the ‘confidentiality’ of client files
Given the growing awareness about risk to management committees, a number of 
stakeholder submissions raised concerns about the balance between client confidentiality 
and improved accountability.
Many considered that client confidentiality was still an important principle within the small 
communities served by many rural financial counselling services, and many stakeholders 
did not believe that the service would retain clients if confidentiality were not assured. 
Sunraysia Rural Counselling Service stated that:
our service does not support the Acumen Alliance recommendations that management 
committee members have access to client files because of potential commercial sensitivity 
where a farmer management committee member may become privy to other farmers’ 
financial affairs.
Murray Valley Rural Industries Assistance Group suggested that client confidentiality was 
such an important principle that it should be protected with a ‘rigid code of ethics’.
However, as discussed above, the review committee considers that management 
committees cannot effectively monitor risk and performance merely by keeping ‘an 
ear to the ground’. Many contributing to the consultative process argued that, without 
professional supervision and monitoring of cases, it is difficult to determine whether 
counsellor practices are in line with service guidelines, and whether counsellors are 
achieving adjustment or acting in the long-term best interest of producers and their 
families. For example, some financial institutions felt that, in many cases, counsellors had 
engaged in a ‘level of advocacy’ that did not accord well with the actual circumstances of 
marginal farm enterprises ‘when the most appropriate (but more difficult) pathway was 
to adjust out of agriculture’. However, as the Australian Institute of Agricultural Science 
and Technology in Victoria commented, ‘as counsellors are not able to divulge client 
confidentiality, it is extremely difficult to substantiate this practice’.
A number of suggestions were made to address the issue of client confidentiality and 
monitoring:
The Australian Institute of Agricultural Science and Technology in Victoria suggested 
that a summary spreadsheet should be provided to the management committee by 
the counsellor, setting out the new client (not identified by name or location) together 
with details including frequency of visits, the reason for contact, whether on or off 
farm, and a brief description of outcomes.

101
The service in Moree operates a system along these lines, in which a written report is 
provided to the management committee each month by each counsellor, providing 
statistical information, an indication of the help being sought by clients and the action 
being taken to provide that help, ‘while maintaining the confidentiality of the clients’.
Employ an experienced counsellor from a non-adjoining region to undertake periodic 
external reviews, similar to a peer review process.
Commission an external auditor such as those who provide quality assurance services.
Engage the services of a professional from a kindred organisation such as a Centrelink 
Financial Information Services Officer familiar with issues of client confidentiality.
The most common model suggested a management committee structure that transcends 
the local community, thus reducing the risk of breaching confidentiality.
The Richmond Valley Business and Rural Financial Counselling Service Inc. submission 
suggested that an overarching management committee overseeing 6–8 counsellors 
across a ‘geographically proximate group of Services’ could employ an executive officer 
to oversee day-to-day management and monitor counsellor performance. It was felt 
that this would overcome the problem of management committees accessing files for 
local clients. ‘With the EO carrying out performance reviews, this would erase the fears 
of breaching confidentiality and the Privacy Act.’
7.3.4	
Isolation and inconsistency 
Because of the ‘tyranny of distance’ that affects most rural communities, as well as the 
diversity of local circumstances, there is a pronounced lack of consistency in the way 
the community organisations manage and deliver their RFCS. The members of many 
management committees live hundreds of kilometres away from each other and from the 
regional centre where the RFCS is based. This reduces the level of ‘hands on’ involvement 
of those management committee members.
Not only does this make it difficult for individual services to undertake governance of 
services, but distance also reduces the ability of different services, and of individual 
counsellors, to share resources, skills and experience. A number of counsellors indicated 
that there would be strong advantages in creating clusters of counselling services 
through which counsellors could gain professional support and feedback. This would be 
particularly valuable for new counsellors through their induction period.

102
The review committee acknowledges the important contribution made by state 
associations, such as Victorian and Tasmanian Association of Rural Counselling Groups 
(VTARCG), which provide opportunities throughout the year for counsellors and 
management committees to exchange ideas and develop skills. However, it considers that 
this sort of interaction would be more effective if it were continuous.
It would be important to balance any ‘cluster’ approach with local knowledge and 
ownership, which was seen as one of the program’s core strengths. As one leading 
counsellor argued ‘In remaining a community based service, the local management 
committee have far better insight into the local area issues and hotspots’. It was also 
important that services be seen as ‘being independent of big business and direct 
government control’ in a rural sector ‘already sceptical and suspicious of government 
intervention programs’. Nevertheless, the cluster approach had been used in three or four 
areas in conjunction with local reference groups that provided local support and insight.
While it recognises the arguments relating to local ownership and knowledge, the 
review committee considers that the ‘cluster’ approach outlined by the Richmond 
Valley Service would provide significant advantages over the current approach in 
which individual management committees and counsellors deal with governance 
and practice issues in isolation. Any new approach to the delivery of rural financial 
counselling should aim to incorporate the best of both worlds – local support and 
information, and a sharing of governance and professional development.
7.3.5	
The need for prescribed skills and competencies
Training and recognised skill levels for counsellors have attracted particular attention 
in this review because of the implementation of new requirements under the FSRA, as 
described earlier in this chapter. For the RFCS to qualify even for exemption from the 
provisions of the Act, it will be necessary to ensure that in the future counsellors are:
appropriately trained to carry out the service
receive ongoing training and supervision through formal arrangements 
undertaken within the RFCS, or through membership of a relevant financial 
counselling association.

103
This is important not only as a way of meeting the licensing requirements of ASIC. The 
development of minimum qualification standards, prescribed skills and competencies, 
ongoing training and development and the benefits of membership of professional 
associations also enable better management of risk and compliance with a range of 
relevant legislative and regulatory requirements.
It may not be as difficult as might be imagined for counsellors to achieve an agreed 
standard of skilling. Although the 2003 Acumen Alliance audit of RFCS showed that rural 
financial counsellors may come from a variety of backgrounds with a variety of levels 
of formal qualifications and experience, the previous employment and qualifications 
of counsellors were often highly relevant to the job and included experience as bank 
managers, qualified accountants and individuals holding degrees in subjects such as 
applied science – agriculture. Overall, it was found that the backgrounds and skill sets of 
counsellors were appropriate for the role they were undertaking.
Formal recognition of counsellors’ current competencies, and development of 
training plans to address skill gaps, will go a considerable way towards addressing the 
requirements of ASIC, will help to protect management committees against risk, and will 
give counsellors greater security of employment as the program evolves and resources are 
reallocated to new areas.
The review committee considers that, as a matter of urgency, all counsellors should 
be supported in undertaking a ‘recognition of current competencies’ that identifies 
the skills they already possess. This should be followed immediately by the 
development of a learning plan agreed between services and counsellors, in which 
a program of skill development will be undertaken over the next 12 months to 
address gaps in counsellor skills. In future, such a process should also be included 
in the selection and induction of new counsellors.
 While the review committee considers that such a program of skill recognition and 
development may improve the standard and consistency of counselling delivery, the issue 
is not so easily addressed for management committees. It applauds the work of VTARCG 
and subsequently DAFF in implementing governance training to enhance the knowledge 
and skill of individual management committee members. It also recognises that training 
of this kind brings a benefit to the local community by enhancing the skills of leading

104
individuals in the community. However, the review committee notes that it is in the nature 
of volunteer management committees that membership constantly changes and that 
there is thus a need for a continuing program of skill development.
In the light of the significant legal and financial risks faced by management 
committees, the review committee considers that it may not be practical to 
meet members’ skill needs in this way. It may be more appropriate for the 
number of management entities to be significantly reduced, and for members of 
management bodies to be selected on the basis of existing skills and expertise.
7.4	
Summarising the lessons of good governance
The review committee interviewed a wide variety of other organisations providing 
financial counselling to Australian families and businesses in financial difficulty. These 
organisations were mainly from the not-for-profit sector, although some examples of good 
From these discussions, the review committee developed some insights into the ‘lessons 
of good governance’.
7.4.1	
	‘Good governance begins with good recruitment’
Key competencies
One of the most consistent messages from other providers was the need to ensure 
that counsellors have the right skills to do the job. Ideally, this would involve a standard 
minimum skill level. However, the review committee recognises that in some locations it 
may be impractical to insist on minimum skill levels at the time of recruitment.
Leading counsellors and experienced financial counselling agencies agree that there are 
three key qualities needed:
an ability to communicate with people and to support their decision-making process
financial analysis skills
knowledge of the context – in this case, of rural industries.

105
It was widely agreed that the most important of these was the first – the ability to do the work 
of counselling. Financial analysis skills could be more fully developed through appropriate 
training, but the ability to relate effectively to the clients is a prerequisite for the job.
Recruitment and interview
The QDPIF includes a ‘practical’ session to determine how a counsellor approaches a client 
case study. It was also important to ensure that all checks are completed through the 
recruitment process – including police and referee checks. Services should be encouraged 
to include at least one outsider – a government or professional association representative 
for example – on the management committee to provide an additional perspective.
Establishing common standards for skilling and certification
Some providers have identified specific courses as appropriate preparation for the role 
of counselling. Anglicare in Tasmania is engaging in a ‘national push to have professional 
standards’ – to ‘standardise it and make it a profession’. It was generally agreed that the 
Certificate IV level of training was appropriate for this work, with the Certificate IV in 
Community Mediation or the Diploma in Community Services in Financial Counselling 
suggested as appropriate courses. The Vocational Education and Training (VET) sector can 
play a role in creating and providing appropriate courses of training, and partnerships with 
industry were seen as a useful adjunct.
A practical approach was needed. As one provider commented: ‘It is actually difficult 
to attract specifically qualified workers in these rural areas at low rates of pay. So we do 
training (for example, Community Services Certificate, or short courses in Adelaide) to 
build on the personal qualities that people already bring’. Although some basic training 
in emotional counselling was seen as desirable ‘Most of what we do is not in-depth 
counselling or therapy’. Some providers saw the Lifeline telephone counsellor training 
as a sufficient base for rural financial counsellors, building on more in-depth skills in 
financial counselling.
Induction
The review committee was concerned to hear that it was common for counsellors to 
commence work without formal induction. While this had been addressed through the 
development of an induction manual (VTARCG 2004) by counsellors in Victoria, new 
counsellors need ongoing supervision and support. One provider had a graded degree of 
supervision, with new counsellors receiving the most regular attention and audit, and all 
provided an approach in which individual counsellors had the support of peers under a 
common supervisory framework.

106
Retaining good staff
A number of counsellors raised concerns at their lack of job security and the level of pay 
that many received while working in difficult areas. In fact, one counsellor noted that it 
was a testimony to counsellor’s faith in the importance of the program ‘that we are still 
here’ in spite of these vicissitudes.
The review committee was concerned at the varied levels of remuneration received 
by counsellors, which did not seem to be linked to skill levels or other factors – raising 
questions of equity across the sector. Centrelink and the larger non-government providers 
of financial counselling have standard rates of pay: for Wesley Mission in NSW this was set 
at the Social & Community Services Award (Fed) NSW Grade 3, QLD Grade 4.
The review committee recommends that greater job satisfaction and security 
could be achieved by:
establishing clear role expectations
standardising the remuneration of counsellors
increasing the skill and certification levels of counsellors
encouraging government to make a longer-term funding commitment in 
exchange for better management and outcomes information.
7.4.2	
‘What gets measured gets managed’ – the importance of effective 
monitoring and professional supervision
Other financial counselling providers were in agreement that close supervision and 
professional support are critical to risk management and good governance. A number of 
providers expressed concern at the devolved nature of the RFCS governance model in 
light of the complexity of supervision and liability issues in 2004. As one commented, ‘It’s a 
model from the 1970s that we have devolved all of this to small rural communities’.
One provider noted that supervision would be pointless without a willingness by the 
employer to take corrective action when needed. However, many services had expressed 
concerns about unfair dismissal, and some had sought the advice of professional human 
resources experts in managing difficult employee relationships fairly and appropriately. 
The important principles were:
maintain close supervision of the staff member

107
raise concerns early and document them regularly in formal discussions
give the employee an opportunity to respond to warnings
support staff members in changing practice to address concerns, including access to 
training where needed.
The problem of client confidentiality
None of the other providers who contributed to the review saw client confidentiality 
as a barrier to close supervision. In every case, clients were advised that the work of the 
counsellor may be discussed between the counsellor and the supervisor but that client 
information would remain confidential to the counselling service.
‘Confidentiality exists between the agency and the client not between the client 
and the counsellor.’  
Wesley Mission
Some saw good records as essential to managing risk. ‘You need to keep really accurate 
file notes in case someone files for bankruptcy and later wants to blame the counsellor’, 
one person commented. There was general agreement by other providers that the owner 
of the clients’ files was the agency; under the Privacy Act rules clients are informed that 
the file may be accessed by others, but information stays with the service for seven years 
before being destroyed.
Supervision and support
Other providers of financial counselling note that the following were key components of 
support for counselling delivery:
monitoring, evaluation and review
information and technical support
supervision
peer review and debriefing
file auditing.

108
Anglicare in Tasmania provides supervision, one-on-one and at monthly state staff 
meetings, to ensure that counsellors are aware of changes to bankruptcy laws etc. 
Supervision by other service providers is undertaken at the regional level and includes:
clinical supervision and debrief plus professional in-depth appraisal
‘live management’ of current cases
case management that ‘drills right down’ through files and practices
regular discussion of the case list, particularly of difficult cases.
There is no need for local management committee members to view client files or hear 
specific case details if supervision is conducted by a regional supervisor or by a fellow 
counsellor formally appointed to this role. In fact, one government provider of counselling 
services, the QDPIF, uses a system of senior counsellors who divide their time between 
client counselling and regular supervision and assessment of other counsellors. Many rural 
financial counsellors have expressed support for this approach, which allows:
the supervisor to continue to be a practising counsellor and to keep abreast in skills 
and practice
other counsellors to receive professional review (and opportunity for dialogue) from 
someone who understands practice issues.
A number of other counselling service providers used variations on this model. In general, 
the requirements for this to work effectively were that the supervising counsellor:
 must have done a supervisor’s course
 must have been a counsellor for a number for years.
Linked to supervision is the use of good data to help with resource allocation and to 
monitor activity and outcomes against program objectives. All providers agreed that good 
records, clear objectives and benchmarks were critical.
The review committee strongly recommends the introduction of formal and 
regular supervision of counsellor practice, including file auditing and reporting 
to management committees. This could be undertaken by a third party or a 
regional supervisor if management committees wish to maintain confidentiality 
at the local level.

109
7.4.3	
Clear role expectations
Boundaries and referral protocols
A critical protocol is appropriate referral of clients. One practitioner in the not-for-profit 
sector says that a counsellor ‘needs to be firm when clients want you to cross the line’; 
she will say ‘you need to go back to your solicitor’. To avoid giving options she may 
give examples of how a particular option worked out in some instances. She is closely 
supervised and constantly checks her role.
A number of providers had formal protocols for establishing their role with clients, and 
this helped in clarifying roles with the counsellors themselves. Under the new system 
for Anglicare in Tasmania (based on approaches used by Creditline), clients will have a 
form that they sign off. There will also be a checklist for counsellors, of what they have 
gone through with the client and signed off. This kind of approach provides conformity 
streamlined across all counsellors. It places an emphasis on ISO9001 quality assurance and 
managing files from the beginning.
Protocols for time use: the 75/25 rule
Many rural financial counsellors and their management committees expressed concern 
in 2000 at the introduction of the ‘75/25’ rule which required counsellors to focus more 
strongly on activities related to clients. The intention of the rule was to reduce the 
time that many counsellors were spending on community development and regional 
activities (often hold-overs from the program’s previous role within the Rural Communities 
Program). However, the great majority found that the balance was achievable. Client-
related activities include direct face-to-face counselling; travelling to and from a meeting 
with a client; working on a client’s files; talking to others (such as financial institutions) 
about the client; debriefing from working with a client; and entering data and information 
about the client. In the remaining time (equivalent to one week a month) the counsellor 
might undertake general activities for the management of the service including publicity. 
Some activities, including training and travel to training, meeting government program 
managers, and leave, are not counted in the 75/25 rule.
Other service providers confirmed that this ratio of client-related and general tasks was 
normal practice. It was also noted that for every hour spent speaking to client, a minimum 
of two hours would normally be spent on a client’s file and speaking to others about the 
client. A rural financial counsellor might deal with two or three clients a day in areas that 
did not require lengthy travel.

110
7.4.4 	 Responding to need
The review committee was concerned at the lack of responsiveness possible under the 
current model. ‘With the RFCS, once a counsellor gets into a community they don’t move’, 
one stakeholder commented. The Queensland Department of Primary Industries and 
Fisheries advised that mobility is critical, as is the timing of support. For example, in providing 
support after floods and cyclones, farm financial counsellors are not deployed until two 
weeks after the event ‘when resources need to be shifted’. Farm financial counsellors travel 
to places up to six to seven hours from their base and stay overnight to service these areas. 
Rural financial counsellors are less able to achieve this quick response to crisis.
7.4.5	
Managing counselling projects
Scale of operation
Other service providers strongly supported a shift towards regional or state-wide 
management of financial counselling services. The ability of individual services to 
undertake effective standard-setting and supervision was questioned by other not-for-
profit and government providers of financial counselling: it is more effective to ‘get three 
or four workers in one place for delivery and it improves scrutiny and ethics’. One provider 
noted, ‘Size makes it possible to have protocols and policies. Breaking the code usually 
occurs when a counsellor is isolated.’
At a state-wide scale of operation, it would be possible to employ a professional officer to 
undertake a range of supervisory and management tasks, which would also address issues 
of confidentiality at the local level.
Separating management from support roles
Currently, services are afraid that local knowledge will be lost if local management is 
discontinued, but the two roles should be thought about separately. Supervision and 
governance can occur at a regional or state level without losing local engagement if the state-
level provider creates mechanisms for information exchange to tap into local knowledge.
Fundraising
Other providers of financial counselling agreed that finding the other half of the funding 
is ‘an immense burden’. This was sometimes achieved through local and business 
sponsorship. The review committee considered that system support – for example at 
the state level – should be sought from key stakeholders such as the banking sector that 
benefit from the work that rural financial counsellors do with this client group. However, 
this was more difficult to achieve at the local level.

111
However, fee-for-service was not seen as an appropriate path to pursue, as it would ‘blow 
the ASIC exemption’ that had been granted to some providers of financial counselling 
services. Indeed, as one provider noted, ‘it would seem contradictory to charge fees from 
people in difficulty’.
The review committee considers that a number of problems for the RFCS have stemmed 
from the requirement of small rural communities to source matching funding for services; 
it was particularly anomalous when the need for a financial counsellor arose from a 
significant financial downturn in the sector. In a number of cases, counsellors were 
charging fee-for-service for part of their working week, reducing the access to the service 
by those who were unable to pay. Low rates of pay in some services sometimes prompted 
counsellors to supplement their incomes in ways that involved conflict of interest – such 
as the provision of business or financial advice as consultants.
The requirement led to inequities between regions, frequently diverted the energies of 
management committees and counsellors from the main business of delivering rural 
counselling, and made the program less responsive to need arising in other areas.
The review committee recommends that the requirement for raising matching 
funds be discontinued, even if this results in some reduction in the number of 
counsellors that can be funded.
7.4.5	
The role of professional associations and networks
As noted before, one of the benefits of professional associations is the opportunity for 
ongoing networking, the setting of professional codes of conduct and ethics, and skill 
development to ensure that counsellors adhere to and maintain currency. At the national 
or state level these associations can help set and assess standards that meet requirements 
such as those imposed by ASIC under the Financial Services Reform Act. Some service 
providers, such as the Wesley Mission, also provide online support for counsellors, 
providing technical and legal information to the counsellor and client as needed.
The review committee considers that any future delivery model should ensure 
that counsellors are members of, or eligible for membership of, a relevant 
professional association.

112
8	 Suggestions for future 
guidelines
Under the terms of reference, the review committee was asked to provide advice on future 
guidelines and to propose an application process meeting the assessed nature and level of 
need for provision of RFCS.
8.1	
Recommended structure
Five models were considered by the review committee against the criteria outlined below 
(the pros and cons of all five are tabulated in Appendix 22).
In considering its recommendations about guidelines for RFCS, the review committee took 
into account the features that were perceived as strengths of the current model, as well 
as ways to avoid its risks and inefficiencies. Therefore, in testing each model, the review 
committee posed the following questions:
Would the model deliver improved adjustment outcomes?
Would the model ensure a consistent quality of service – including in those locations/
for those clients that are not well served by other service providers?
Would it minimise the risks associated with the current model?
Would it maintain the involvement and insights of the local community?
Would the program’s resources be able to respond flexibly to changing need?
Would it be acceptable to the target client group?
Would it improve professional standards, support and opportunities for employees?
Would it be cost-effective?
Could it be implemented with minimum disruption?
The review committee ranked each question for each of the models considered against a 
Likert rating scale with the following ratings:
5	
Meets the criteria extremely well
4	
Meets criteria well
3	
Neither meets the criteria well nor poorly
2	
Meets the criteria poorly
1	
Meets the criteria extremely poorly
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

113
Model 1 — Continuation of the current RFCS model
Description
Under the current decentralised model, individual communities write applications for 
grants; form autonomous volunteer management committees; raise matching funds 
from state government and local sources; find, employ and supervise counselling and 
administrative staff; and report activity data to the grant provider three times a year. 
An informal system of state associations has assisted by providing a forum for training, 
information sharing and debate, although participation in this process is optional. A 
national association also exists, but not all participating states are members.
1. Enhancing adjustment outcomes
Rating: 1
The review committee was unable to determine how effective the current program 
is in supporting adjustment, although this question was posed in almost all public 
consultations.
The program’s objectives refer to a series of activities or services that will be provided 
but the program lacks an overarching goal statement.
If the current model were to be retained, a clear goal statement and objectives 
should be developed, identifying industry and farm adjustment as the primary goal 
of the program.
A number of stakeholders provided anecdotal evidence of farm families that had 
been supported in the decision to leave the industry, and of others who had been 
supported in adjusting their business practices to return to profitability. However, there 
was no systematic measurement of adjustment outcomes. Because of continuing 
concerns about client confidentiality, management committees under the current 
model would be unable to measure the effectiveness of their service in achieving 
outcomes against goals and objectives relating to adjustment.

114
If the current model were to be retained, it is essential that it develop methodologies 
to allow benchmarking of performance against the program’s adjustment goal.
Over the life of the RFCS program its contribution to community capacity-building has 
been recognised but this too has been found to be variable.
2. Consistent standards
Rating: 2
Under the current delivery model, broad guidelines are provided to services but 
governance is devolved to management committees and no systemic standards and 
protocols are available. The Victorian and Tasmanian Association of Rural Counselling 
Groups (VTARCG) is to be commended for its efforts (funded by the Victorian Government) 
to support counsellor induction, skill development and information sharing. However, 
participation in skill development and other standard-setting activities is optional and not 
consistent across states.
The qualifications and experience of counsellors are highly variable (see  
Appendix 11).
Protocols may be recommended by management committees, but because 
of continuing concerns about client confidentiality under the current model, 
management committees have demonstrated limited ability to supervise counsellor 
practices or to monitor counsellor performance.
3. Managing risk
Rating: 2
The current devolved approach to service delivery brings a number of risks to 
management committees, counsellors and clients.
Individual communities – particularly those that are small or remote – may have 
difficulty in finding appropriately skilled volunteers to undertake complex governance 
responsibilities; supervision of counsellor activity is limited by concerns about 
confidentiality; and management committees may be inadequately protected by 
insurance where employees act outside prescribed activities.
Counsellors do not have access to systematic skill development, professional feedback, 
debriefing and technical advice to support their role.

115
Without good regulation and continuous skill development for counsellors, clients 
may not be certain of the currency of information, and there may be instances where 
advice is given contrary to service agreements.
Australian and state government funders of the RFCS program could be joined in 
litigation through negligent or other action/s by management committees and 
counsellors.
4. Local ownership and involvement
Rating: 4
Local ownership is high for the current RFCS program and many submissions and 
presentations to the review committee emphasised its importance.
Although many submissions described the overwhelming pressure of fundraising, 
service management and reporting, most agreed that local ownership brought strong 
acceptance of the service by clients, good networking, awareness of local needs and 
issues, and taking responsibility for the program helped build community capacity.
It was also argued that loss of local ownership would see the loss of the local funding 
component. However, a number of stakeholders argued that the requirement for 
local funding is outdated and should be discontinued – ‘communities can no longer 
be expected to contribute to this type of service’, was one comment. Many saw it as 
paradoxical that those communities most in need of crisis and adjustment counselling 
were also those least able to find matching funding.
The NSW Farmers’ Association argued that the greatest difficulty was faced by small 
communities totally dependent on agriculture, and recent shire amalgamations in 
NSW had increased the difficulties faced by services in raising funds.
The NFF expressed the view that community contribution is not appropriate in crisis 
times such as EC drought.
The constant need to raise matching funds also contributed to volunteer burnout 
and distracted both the management committee and the counsellor from the core 
business of the counselling service.
Under 3.5.3, the review committee found that obtaining matching funding and the need 
for volunteer management committees to continue to raise these funds has placed 
continuing pressure on management committees, particularly during difficult times such 
as drought. While management committees have contributed many valuable hours in 
time and effort to fundraising in the past, investigations should be made into alternative 
funding measures for any future program model.

116
Unless the current model continues the review committee recommends that, in 
any future service, the compulsory requirement for community matching funding 
should be discontinued.
While all stakeholders valued local knowledge and support for the program, the review 
committee also noted the wide range of stakeholders who were concerned about the 
burden of increased governance and risk for local management committees. What 
is valued in theory is often hard to achieve in practice, and many communities were 
struggling to recruit and retain new management committee members particularly in 
remote areas.
5. Flexible response to need
Rating: 2
While local ownership and funding are a perceived strength of the current model, they 
can also be a hindrance to the mobility of resources: a number of stakeholders testified 
that shires and local government bodies do not want to see resources move out of a local 
region after funding them.
The review committee heard a number of examples of neighbouring services lending 
counsellor resources to help during short-term crises, providing a degree of flexibility 
on an informal basis. The Bogan Advisory Service noted that, due to the long history of 
the service, there was now a ‘pool of ex-rural financial counsellors available to provide 
locum assistance’. Rural Support Tasmania was also able to draw on a locum following 
the recent death of a rural financial counsellor.
However, climate events and downturns for a particular industry are likely to affect a 
number of neighbouring services within a region, and true flexibility may therefore 
require resources to move on a state or even nation-wide basis. The NSW Farmers’ 
Association argued that ‘the use of mobile or relief counsellors’ should be considered 
when there is a short-term crisis, and there is a need for a more systematic approach to 
provision of locum rural financial counsellors to support counsellors facing burnout in 
stressful situations.
The need for flexibility across boundaries was also raised. The Central West Rural 
Financial Counselling Service had accepted clients from outside its funded catchment 
area, and had benefited from the ‘goodwill and flexibility of present arrangements and 
existing networks’ with neighbouring services.

117
Despite these informal arrangements, because of the autonomy of individual grant 
services, the current model does not provide a system-wide approach to resource 
sharing and it is not sufficiently responsive to ‘hot spots’ that emerge during industry 
or climate crisis. (One submission suggested that the more a counsellor worked with 
clients from outside the region, the more difficult it became to attract local funding 
support.) The South Australian Farmers’ Federation (SAFF) called for a ‘far more flexible 
service that is able to assist in hot spots – that is, EC declared areas – as need be’.
Many RFCS resources are funded in 2004 in locations that were in high need in 
past years – during previous periods of drought or flood or industry downturn. The 
Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries argues that:
Developing a financial counselling service model that is flexible in strategically relocating scarce 
resources from areas of low to high demand…should be a priority for the Commonwealth.
The review committee recommends that in any future service, a systematic 
approach to provision of relief or locum counsellors be adopted.
While arguments can be mounted that long-term allocation of counselling services to 
a specific location builds acceptance and local networks, mechanisms should be put 
in place to ensure that counselling resources remain available for rapid redeployment.
6. Acceptability to the target client group
Rating: 4
Although many RFCS management committees were concerned about risks to themselves 
in the present model, there is no doubt that the service is well accepted and highly regarded 
by those in the target client group, particularly those who have accessed the program. 
Although clients frequently suggested that ‘the present arrangements work well and further 
bureaucratic interference may be detrimental’, the review committee formed the view that 
clients were not fully cognisant of the real risks to volunteer management committees.
Features mentioned as attractive to the client group were that it was:
free
strongly linked to agricultural industries
locally ‘owned’ and embedded in the local community

118
not aligned to any government or welfare agency
confidential
discrete.
The willingness of many counsellors to make home visits was praised by some 
stakeholders. Bannockburn Quality Association in Inverell noted: ‘We hope your review 
results in provision of adequate funding to enable valuable services such as on farm visits 
to be maintained’. This form of delivery is valued because it is confidential and it enables a 
larger number of farm enterprise stakeholders to join in. The Gippsland Farmers Support 
Group argued that on-farm visits and knowledge of the industry were two of the ways in 
which the RFCS was superior to other counselling services. Gunnedah Shire Council also 
noted that home visits may be particularly important during drought because declining 
income makes families less mobile and more isolated. However, many services have 
discontinued the practice as inefficient (or restrict home visits to the first consultation 
only). Some not-for-profit organisations also discourage home visits, citing safety reasons.
It is more difficult to ascertain how acceptable the service is to the full range of those in the 
target client group. Awareness of the service is high – 68% of those surveyed in the 2002 
rural producer survey (SMR 2002) were aware of the service. Although only 15% of the total 
surveyed group had used the service, the proportion was higher (close to 40%) for those 
farmers who indicated that they were in severe financial difficulty – that debt was their 
biggest problem, or that they had difficulty ‘just carrying on’. Leaving the land (Webb et al. 
2002), the Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation’s (RIRDC) study of NSW 
Western Division farm families in transition from farming, found that only 30 of 100 farm 
families who had left farming had used a rural financial counsellor. However, those who had 
used the RFCS reported that they were ‘satisfied’ to ‘very satisfied’ with the service.
A number of stakeholders suggested that the word ‘counselling’ might be a disincentive 
for the target client group because it is often associated with the welfare domain. Many 
services have chosen to adopt a different name to operate under, to avoid using the word 
‘counselling’ and to emphasise the role of business adjustment.
The review committee recommends that any future service be delivered under a 
heading other than ‘counselling’ and that continued efforts be made to promote 
the program amongst farming and fishing families and small rural businesses in 
the greatest need.

119
7. Professional support, standards and opportunities for employees
Rating: 1
Compared with other providers of financial counselling, the RFCS offers its employees 
the poorest level of professional and technical support. Across the 63 groups there are no 
consistent standards for counsellor qualifications, and many stakeholders feel that there is 
a lack of clarity about the counsellor’s role. The NFF argued that:
Many of the uncertainties, inconsistencies and performance issues that have faced 
individual counselling services, or the program more broadly, could be overcome through 
the provision of a defined duty statement for counsellors and through a greater emphasis 
on benchmarking between services.
The NFF and other stakeholders also emphasised the paramount importance of enabling 
counsellors to have sufficient time to build skills and networks. A number of submissions 
commented that counsellors were restricted from participating in training and 
professional development by the 75:25 rule, which requires counsellors to devote about 
75% of their time to activities relating to clients. However, counsellor leave, attending 
meetings with DAFF, attending training and travel to training are all outside this formula 
and should not act as a disincentive.
The review committee felt that a more significant issue was the lack of performance 
standards and agreed levels for skills and qualifications. The shortfall had been addressed 
in some states – particularly Victoria and Tasmania – where active state associations had 
developed solid professional development programs for both counsellors and management 
committees. However, the decentralised nature of the current service has meant that there 
has been no systematic assessment of current skill levels for all counsellors.
The review committee recommends that, as soon as a model is known, all current 
counsellors should be funded to undergo an assessment of their current competencies 
in relation to an agreed benchmark (Certificate Level IV is recommended). Services 
should then develop a plan for overcoming any skill shortfalls in their employees.
Achieving a minimum standard of professional skills should be seen as part of a broader 
framework of professional support for counsellors. This should include up-to-date 
information, debriefing, technical support and peer review. The Queensland Department 
of Primary Industries and Fisheries states that:

120
A professional financial counselling service is most effective in meeting primary producers’ 
needs when it is supported by uniform role responsibilities, standards in service delivery, 
regionally based technical support and regular audit and performance monitoring linked 
to professional development.
However, it argues that the current delivery model for the RFCS ‘does not have the 
processes and systems in place’ to support rural financial counselling services in this way. 
Individual community management groups:
…are unlikely to be equipped to provide high level guidance to financial counsellor 
employees. In these circumstances the RFCS community model in its current form does 
not appear to provide government with a good return on its investment in financial 
counselling.
Given the fragmentation of counsellor employment into 63 separate services, 
consideration should also be given to the management of occupational health and safety 
issues and career pathways for counsellors. The Sunraysia Rural Counselling Service is 
concerned that:
There are no defined career pathways for rural financial counsellors as it is a specialised 
role and all are employed by individual management committees and there is little 
employment transferability.
This situation contributes to counsellor burnout and exacerbates the difficulties of 
attracting and retaining quality counsellors in the system.
The review committee recommends that a more systematic approach to 
counsellor employment will provide improved professional development, peer 
support and career mobility.

121
8. Cost effectiveness
Rating: 2
It is commonly argued that the current model is highly cost-effective because it attracts 
both community and state funding and in-kind support to supplement the funding 
cannot be regarded as ‘cost-effective’ for government when it does not deliver a service 
to agreed standards. Moreover, it is difficult to determine the cost-effectiveness of the 
service when there is little quantitative or qualitative evidence regarding the program’s 
achievement in delivering adjustment (or other) outcomes.
Consideration must be given to the hidden cost in members’ time and personal resources 
in ‘free’ volunteer management committees. A number of stakeholders pointed to an 
under-recognition of the value of management committee members’ time in calculating 
in-kind contributions for matching funding requirements. At the same time, many noted 
that ‘you can’t spend an in-kind contribution’ when you need cash for an electricity or 
vehicle bill.
The ‘cost’ of the program includes the impact of fundraising and governance activities 
on a limited pool of community volunteers who are already stretched over a number 
of other community roles. In most rural communities, volunteers must add significant 
travel time (and costs) to their contribution to the service. Finally, there is an unmeasured 
cost associated with the risks taken on by volunteer management committees without 
adequate skill, infrastructure, information or technical support.
9. Rapid implementation
Rating: 5
Extending the current program in its present form would involve no disruption. However, 
the review committee recommends that:
The current program should not be continued beyond a transition period in 
its present form unless there are compelling or extraordinary circumstances 
and, if lead and set-up time is required for a new model, then not without the 
development of a number of common agreed protocols for service delivery and of 
minimum standards for counsellor skills and practices.

122
Model 2 — Common state-level management committee with an 
executive officer supported by local reference groups
Description
This model was the most often proposed by stakeholders, and is the model favoured 
by the review committee. In this model, governance responsibility is separated from 
local support for counselling services, but both elements remain important. A common 
management committee, assisted by a paid executive officer, manages a large number of 
counselling services with local reference groups providing information and support.
Three options for the level for operation of the management committee were considered:
National
While national-level delivery would ensure the greatest resource mobility and 
standardisation of practice and evaluation, the review committee considers that delivery 
at a national level is too far removed from local community input, which is a valued 
component of the current model. The quality of local information would be diminished.
Client acceptance/engagement with local counsellors may be reduced.
It is likely to operate on too large a scale to be effective in closely managing its 
employees and other local issues.
It is less likely to attract state funding or local management committee members and 
other contributions – leading to a reduction in the number of counsellors that could 
be employed.
State
The review committee considered that this was the optimal level of operation for 
the model.
It would enable selection of high-quality skill-based management committees.
It is large enough to justify the cost of the professional management committee 
and executive officer, while small enough to allow close collaboration between the 
There would be greater availability of skilled candidates for the management committee 
than at the level of a large region, and less potential for local conflict of interest.

123
Confidentiality would be maintained through the use of an executive officer operating 
at the state level.
While there is still potential for divergence of practice between states, there would be 
sufficient scale within a state to provide for resource mobility.
This model would allow robust employer–employee relationships to be established, 
counsellor supervision, mentoring, audit and quality control and improved skills and 
professional development meeting Australian Securities and Investments Commission 
(ASIC) and Financial Services Reform Act (FSRA) requirements.
Counsellor career options would be improved.
Large region
The review committee considered that there was little advantage to conducting 
management of services on this scale: it does not improve enough on the current model.
Compared with operation at the state level, there would be greater fragmentation of 
program delivery and protocols, and division would still occur over within-state boundaries.
Goals of achieving consistent service and skilling standards would be more difficult 
to achieve.
Assuring a sufficiently skilled pool of talent for the management committee would be 
more difficult than at the state level.
There are no consistent or recognised regional structures within states or nationally.
Key elements of the proposed model:
Governance structure
Funding for a whole state would be provided to a single management committee by the 
The management committee would be an incorporated body under state or territory 
incorporated associations legislation, or incorporated under the Corporations Act 2001, 
either limited by shares or guarantee with appropriate directors’ insurance cover.
The management committee would comprise a mixture of dedicated positions 
and expertise, and all positions would receive remuneration. It is envisaged that the 
and a rural background, and both the Australian and state governments would be 
represented on the management committee. An additional 2–4 places would be 
filled by individuals bringing business management capacity, accounting and/or legal 
expertise and/or a background in social welfare.

124
Role of the management committee
The management committee would:
be the direct employer of counsellors and administrative staff and would be 
responsible for the performance of staff (including the executive officer), including skill 
and performance standards and assessment
ensure compliance with the FSRA and other regulations
establish the method of assessing and responding to need, including the allocation of 
long-term and mobile resources in regions
be responsible for managing Australian and state government funding and 
expenditure, and liaison with both levels of government about future funding need
report and be accountable to the Australian and state governments and the local 
community.
respond to appeals and grievances,
offer two-way communication with local reference groups.
Role of the executive officer
An executive officer would be employed by the management committee. Their roles 
would be: to implement counsellor training and skill assessment, supervise counsellors, 
provide technical and professional support and liaison; ensure ‘cross pollination’ to key 
networks; manage input from local management committees; collect data and report 
to the management committee on service performance and areas of emerging need; 
and draft the management committee’s annual report.
Role of the local reference groups
While 3.7.2 of this report outlined seven principles of reform, with a key requirement 
for any new RFCS model including devolution of management to rural communities 
(which was endorsed in community consultations in all states in 2001), the review 
committee considered reform of the current RFCS essential. The important role of the 
local management committee would be retained through the mechanism of a local 
reference groups to the management committee. The local reference group would be 
the management committee’s ‘eyes and ears’ in the local region.
It is suggested that local government be encouraged to provide the base from which 
local reference groups would operate, having both infrastructure coverage in local 
regions where counsellors are placed and jurisdictional powers under legislation 
within each state and territory to establish advisory groups.

125
The local reference groups would provide on-ground support for a locally based or 
short-term counsellor, and would promote the service to the wider community.
The local reference group would gather information on current conditions and on the 
level of need for service provision. It would liaise with the management committee 
through direct dialogue with the executive officer.
The local reference group would be in an advisory role only and would not be required 
to raise funds or to take on governance roles that could attract financial or legal risk.
Role of the Australian and state governments
Agreement on common service goals and objectives, performance criteria and 
benchmarks by the Primary Industries Ministerial Council (PIMC).
A common database and infrastructure; advice and support.
1. Enhancing adjustment outcomes
Rating: 4
The adjustment goals of the service would need to be established at the outset by the 
management committee, as directed by PIMC.
It is envisaged that management committee members would have strong rural and/or 
industry affiliation and would be able to respond in an informed way to intelligence from 
local reference groups about adjustment pressure in regions or industries.
Appropriate training, research and information would be provided to all counsellors in the 
state, relating to farmer adjustment and the outlook for the farm sector.
2. Consistent standards
Rating: 4
Clearly established adjustment goals and performance indicators for the RFCS program 
would be:
established at the national level by PIMC
linked to professional development for rural financial counsellors
benchmarked and reported against by the executive officer
tracked through appropriate software and reporting mechanisms provided by the 

126
3. Managing risk
Rating: 4
The review committee recognises that the proposed model is not completely without 
risk, and that the single state-level management committee would be in a similar position 
with respect to liability as currently occurs with multiple local management committees. 
However, there would be a number of significant differences:
the management committee would be selected on the base of recognised skills, and 
the Australian and state governments would be directly involved as management 
committee members
the program would have clear national goals and agreed protocols enforced at the 
local level
an executive officer would closely supervise counselling staff, audit records and 
monitor performance data
if the review committee recommendation on training under Model 1 is accepted, all 
counsellors would have had a skill assessment in 2004–05 before the start of the new 
model, and would be on track to upgrade skills in areas of need before the end of the 
first year. 
4. Local ownership and involvement
Rating: 3
Local input would be retained by ensuring a critical information and support role for the local 
reference group, as outlined above. Some stakeholders (particularly the WA Association of 
Rural Financial Counsellors) argued that real local engagement would diminish if the tough 
governance work were removed from local management committees. However, the review 
committee considers that the risks and burden carried by local volunteer management 
committees are now widely recognised to be unreasonable. The model proposed – local 
advice and state level governance – was the most widely accepted model discussed in 
face-to-face consultations and written submissions.
5. Flexible response to need
Rating: 4
The model would be highly responsive to need within a single state. The review 
committee recommends that decisions about how to identify and respond to need should 
be left to the individual management committee within the budget provided. However, 
it suggests that a mixture of longer-term and mobile counsellors would be effective and 
would cause least disruption to the service as it is currently known.

127
6. Acceptability to the target client group
Rating: 4
The review committee felt that the target client group would not be significantly affected 
by the change. While it would be a shift from what had been known at the management 
committee level, the service delivered on the ground would be essentially the same. It is likely 
that a large proportion of current counselling positions would remain in the same locations, 
while some resources would be deployed on a mobile basis to meet emerging need.
7. Professional support, standards and opportunities for employees
Rating: 4
One of the principal advantages of the proposed model is the establishment of a common 
service employing eight or more counsellors across a state. This enables the implementation 
of all the best staff support practices observed within the not-for-profit sector and Centrelink:
collegial support and debriefing between counsellors
opportunities for peer review and professional feedback on a regular, formal basis
implementation of a training plan to meet assessed skill needs
reduction in local conflict of interest
a career structure with opportunities for mobility and relief during periods of pressure
opportunity for state or national level infrastructure and support with information and 
technology.
8. Cost-effectiveness
Rating: 3
The model would be less likely to attract community cash or in-kind resourcing, and local 
community funding would need to be made up by the Australian and state governments, 
or the number of counsellors reduced. In addition, there would be increased costs 
for providing remuneration and secretariat support for a management committee in 
each state, and this may result in some reduction of funding available for employment 
of counsellors.
Offset against this, the counselling service would be delivered in a more focused way, 
delivering more effectively against agreed Australian and state government objectives. 
The cost to rural communities would be reduced, both in cash terms and in terms 
of the impact on rural communities of service management, governance risks and 
fundraising efforts.

128
The review committee recognises that any future RFCS will need to operate within the 
current appropriation funding levels. While it has not attempted to cost out the new 
models, including discontinuing the requirement for communities to raise matching 
contributions, the economies of scale, appropriate placement of counsellors to service 
need, productivity gains and removal of the need to provide the administrative 
support to service and maintain 68 management committees should offset the cost 
of engaging full-time executive officers and servicing state and territory management 
committees/boards.
The review committee suggested that an attempt should be made to outsource funding 
beyond the Australian and state governments. Support could be sought from the private 
sector – particularly from the finance sector – and this might occur most effectively at a 
state level. 
9. Rapid implementation
Rating: 2
Start-up time would be significant because of the need to:
reach agreement between the Australian and state government about the level of 
funding to be borne by each under the new arrangements
establish agreed goals, objectives, performance indicators and benchmarks
advertise for and select management committee chairs and members
establish corporate and employment structure
select and train suitable staff
communicate program change and encourage the establishment of local reference 
groups
support existing local management committees through the wind-down phase.
Alternatively, current funding agreements could be extended for up to six months beyond 
the current funding agreements to 30 June 2005 to allow set-up and for transition.
Model 2, with a common state level management committee with an executive officer 
supported by local reference groups is the preferred model of the review committee.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

129
Model 3 — Outsourced not-for-profit provider
Description
The review committee was impressed by the governance and staff development protocols 
employed by organisations already providing financial counselling in the not-for-profit 
sector and through the Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries. It 
considered that a strong case could be made for adopting a ‘prospectus’ approach to 
the delivery of counselling services, with funding being awarded to the service provider 
offering the best resourcing and governance outcomes within a state. Key features of such 
a approach are:
a periodic application process would be held, with tenders called for provision of 
service within a single state for a specified price
successful tenderers may include not-for-profit organisations or state governments 
where good governance protocols could be established and or demonstrated
delivery of services would be supported by the establishment of local reference groups 
in locations where counsellors are deployed
clear goals, delivery protocols and performance indicators would need to be agreed by 
PIMC and would be set out in the tender
the provider would be responsible for staff supervision and support (including 
infrastructure, information and technical support) and for establishing and maintaining 
appropriate skill levels.
Incorporated, non-profit community organisations and local government community 
Counselling Program (CFCP) through a competitive grant funding process. The objective 
of the CFCP is to provide access to quality financial counselling services, free of charge, 
to people in low-income groups and small business operators experiencing personal 
financial difficulties due to circumstances such as unemployment, sickness, credit over-
commitment and family breakdown.
Examples of non-profit community organisations delivering financial counselling services 
include Anglicare, Uniting Care Wesley and Lifeline Community Care.

130
As part of the Sugar Industry Reform Program 2004, the CFCP provides quality financial 
counselling services, free of charge, to individuals and families in the sugar industry who 
are experiencing financial crisis. The CFCP also supports financial counselling services 
through the funding of resource workers who support the financial counsellors in their 
counselling activities.
Conditional licensing relief granted by ASIC generally requires that financial counsellors 
do not give advice to clients about purchasing investment products, no fees or charges 
are payable by the client for any aspect of the service, and financial counsellors are 
appropriately trained to carry out the service and are members or eligible for membership 
of a relevant financial counselling association.
1. Enhancing adjustment outcomes
Rating: 4
As with the preferred model (Model 2), the adjustment goals of the service would need to 
be established as a condition of the tender process, as directed by PIMC.
Compared with Model 2, it is less likely that the outsourced provider would currently have 
an in-depth understanding of rural industry adjustment issues. However, it is likely that 
a considerable proportion of the new counselling staff would be sourced from current 
RFCS counsellors.
2. Consistent standards
Rating: 4
One of the principal advantages of delivering the service through an existing provider 
of financial counselling is the existence of consistent, high-level governance protocols, 
including close staff supervision, training, file audits and debriefing.
3. Managing risk
Rating: 4
This model would offer the best risk management from the point of view of Australian 
and state governments and the local community. Existing providers already manage 
risk successfully and have won FSRA exemption from ASIC in recognition of their strong 
governance protocols, required skill levels and ongoing training for staff.

131
4. Local ownership and involvement
Rating: 2
Local ownership and involvement would be significantly reduced in this model, although 
all the not-for-profit organisations interviewed indicated a willingness to liaise with the 
local community.
A few stakeholders suggested that the model would be unlikely to win support at the local 
level. There was a perception that funds for primary producer support would be dissipated 
to other groups that may have a higher priority with the provider. The Rural Business 
Development Corporation (WA) noted:
If the Commonwealth Government were to provide funds to a not-for-profit organisation, 
then if an area is experiencing financial hardship, most community people would not have 
the energy or resources to get out and write grants for everyone else in the community.
It would be a condition of funding that local reference groups be established in locations 
where counsellors are deployed, but there may be less than current support from rural 
communities to provide volunteers for these management committees.
5. Flexible response to need
Rating: 4
The model would be highly responsive to need within a single state. The review 
committee recommends that guidelines about the allocation of resources to specific client 
groups should be established through the tender process. It suggests that a mixture of 
longer-term and mobile counsellors would be effective and would cause least disruption 
to the service as it is currently delivered.
6. Acceptability to the target client group
Rating: 3
The not-for-profit organisations interviewed during the consultation process are highly 
regarded in the community and have a high volume of clients from their traditional client 
groups. However, this does not mean that they would be readily acceptable to primary 
producers. Some stakeholders were concerned that these organisations might be too 
closely associated with the welfare sector and that this would deter primary producers. In 
addition, one submission suggested that if the RFCS were operated by ‘agripolitical groups, 
social welfare organisations or government agencies’, clients might feel that confidentiality 
and independence would be jeopardised.

132
7. Professional support, standards and opportunities for employees
Rating: 4
As with Model 2, one of the principal advantages of the outsourced provider model is 
the establishment of a common service employing 80 or more counsellors across a state, 
accessing the following staff support practices already well-established within the existing 
not-for-profit service provider operation.
collegial support and debriefing between counsellors
opportunities for peer review and professional feedback on a regular, formal basis
implementation of a training plan to meet assessed skill needs
a career structure with opportunities for mobility and relief during periods of pressure
established infrastructure and support with information and technology.
8. Cost effectiveness
Rating: 3
The model would be unlikely to attract community cash or in-kind resourcing, and 
would need to be made up by the Australian and state governments, or the number of 
counsellors reduced. Overheads for the provider organisation may mean some reduction 
in the number of counsellors.
Offset against this, the counselling service would be delivered in a more focused way, 
delivering more effectively against agreed Australian and state government objectives. 
The cost to rural communities would be reduced, both in cash terms and in terms of the 
impact on rural communities of service management, governance risks and fundraising 
efforts. Significant savings could be made through the reduction of Australian and state 
governments staff currently dedicated to managing service delivery.
The review committee suggested that an attempt should be made to outsource 
funding beyond Australian and state governments. Not-for-profit organisations 
might be well placed to source additional funding from the private sector, but 
they may allocate a higher priority to other client groups served through their 
own fundraising.

133
9. Rapid implementation
Rating: 4
Start-up time would be less than for the preferred model (Model 2) because the agencies 
likely to be selected for delivery already have established governance structures and 
would probably be able to employ a significant proportion of the new counselling 
workforce from the ranks of existing RFCS counsellors.
However, there will still be significant lead-time because:
agreement would need to be reached between the Australian and state governments 
about the level of funding to be borne by each under the new arrangements
PIMC would still need to be involved in establishing agreed goals, objectives, 
performance indicators and benchmarks as a basis for tendering
time would be needed to develop tenders and select the most effective tenderer in 
each state
the new model would need to be communicated to existing service communities and 
time allowed for the wind-up of current management committees (support should be 
provided for services through the wind-down phase).
Again, this model could be expedited if announcement of the new model were to be 
made as early as possible and the new mechanisms were in place before the conclusion 
of the current funding period. This could include skill assessment and development of 
training plans for existing counsellors during the 2004–05 funding year (as recommended 
in Model 1), as existing counsellors are the most likely source of new employees under the 
outsourced model.
Current funding agreements could be extended for up to six months beyond the current 
funding agreements to 30 June 2005 to allow for set-up and transition.
1.
2.
3.
4.

134
Model 4 — Outsourced to single national government agency
Description
The review committee considered that this model was the most effective way to provide 
integrated decision-support across a wide range of locations. The only real contender for 
provision of this model would be Centrelink, which has the capacity to ‘white brand’its 
delivery so that it is not apparent that it is a Centrelink service. The review committee was 
impressed with the governance and staff development protocols available through the 
agency. While the review committee recommends the model for serious consideration, 
it considers that even if the service was not branded as being delivered by Centrelink, it 
would be the least acceptable option for the target client group and rural communities 
used to the current model. However, it could be piloted as a means of delivering RFCS to 
prospective clients in the Northern Territory (particularly in the horticulture sector), where 
the RFCS has not previously operated.
Key features of this model are:
financial counselling services would be provided on an outreach basis in rural locations 
(in many cases continuing existing service delivery in the short term)
recruitment of staff could come from the ranks of existing counsellors, and 
counsellors/counselling offices would not be badged as Centrelink
clear goals, delivery protocols and performance indicators would need to be agreed by 
PIMC and would be set out in the service funding agreement
counselling staff would be trained and managed on a state basis within a national 
structure, and would develop knowledge and competencies relating to all Australian 
and state government programs delivered by Centrelink
infrastructure and procedures for staff supervision and support are already in place.

135
This model:
1. Enhancing adjustment outcomes
Rating: 4
As with the preferred model (Model 2), the adjustment goals of the service would need to 
be established as a condition of the tender process, as directed by PIMC.
Compared with Model 2, it is less likely that the outsourced provider would currently have 
an in-depth understanding of rural industry adjustment issues. However, it is likely that 
a considerable proportion of the new counselling staff would be sourced from current 
RFCS counsellors.
2. Consistent standards
Rating: 4
One of the principal advantages of delivering the service through Centrelink is the 
existence of consistent, high-level governance protocols, including close staff supervision, 
training, file audits and debriefing.
Of all the models, this delivery model provides the most nationally consistent standards of 
delivery, and also provides excellent links to other government programs.
3. Managing risk
Rating: 4
Together with Model 3, this model would offer the best risk management from the point 
of view of Australian and state governments and the local community. Centrelink already 
manages risk successfully and has won FSRA exemption from the ASIC in recognition of its 
strong governance protocols, required skill levels and ongoing training for staff. 
4. Local ownership and involvement
Rating: 1
While Centrelink is managed at a state and national level, its outreach delivery has 
included the use of local advice mechanisms: it has already worked closely with rural 
communities and agricultural industries to delivery outreach services from community 
centres and from industry offices (for example, Canegrowers in Queensland).

136
A few stakeholders suggested that the model would be unlikely to win support at the 
local level. It would be a condition of funding that local reference groups be established 
in locations where counsellors are deployed, but there may be less than current support 
from rural communities to provide volunteers for these groups. 
5. Flexible response to need
Rating: 4
This model would provide the highest flexibility for response to need, because resource 
deployment would not be constrained by state boundaries. 
6. Acceptability to the target client group
Rating: 2
Some submissions argued that rural clients would be suspicious of any service delivered 
by a government agency. ‘At the very least, client perceptions of independence and 
confidentiality would be adversely affected’, was one comment made.
Centrelink delivery was roundly rejected by many stakeholders because of its ‘welfare 
sector’ associations. However, the possibility of white branding the service (so that it was 
largely indistinguishable from the current service delivery) was not understood by those 
who made submissions to the review committee.
In many cases, farmer resistance to the agency is influenced by familiarity and by the 
method of delivery. The 2002 rural producers survey (SMR 2002) of 2500 farmers (spanning 
14 industries and all socio-economic levels) showed that, in industries that had received 
outreach services from Centrelink (such as sugarcane growers and flood-affected farmers 
in NSW and Queensland), close to half agreed that ‘I know I could rely on Centrelink 
to make sure I received exactly what I was entitled to’. Similarly, respondents who had 
used EC assistance were more likely to agree/strongly agree with this statement than 
respondents who had not used EC assistance (36% and 17%, respectively). Even for those 
respondents who either had not used Centrelink or did not know whether they had used 
Centrelink, 54% agreed/strongly agreed with the statement: ‘If I was in financial difficulty or 
hardship, I would be willing to seek assistance from Centrelink’.
Given this information, and the possibility of outreach delivery and white branding, 
government would need to consider whether current client attitudes should be taken 
on board when in all other respects the model is the most effective way of delivering 
integrated information and decision-making support.

137
7. Professional support, standards and opportunities for employees
Rating: 4
Employment by Centrelink would provide the best support and career opportunities for 
counselling staff of any of the models. These would include:
collegial support and debriefing between counsellors
opportunities for peer review and professional feedback on a regular, formal basis
implementation of a training plan to meet assessed skill needs
career opportunities within a large national organisation
established infrastructure and support with information and technology.
8. Cost-effectiveness
Rating: 2
The model would be unlikely to attract community cash or in-kind resourcing, and this 
would need to be made up by the Australian and state governments, or the number of 
counsellors reduced.
While some stakeholders have suggested that state governments would be unwilling 
to contribute funds to a Centrelink-delivered service, this needs to be tested. State 
governments already use Centrelink as a delivery vehicle for some state programs, 
and may be willing to continue to contribute funds (direct to Centrelink) providing a 
proportional level of resourcing was allocated to the primary producer target group in 
their state.
As with the outsourced provider model and the preferred model (Model 2), some 
government funds would be used for overheads including staff development and 
infrastructure. This may in itself mean some reduction in the number of counsellors.
Offset against this, the counselling service would be delivered in a more focused way, 
delivering more effectively against agreed Australian and state government objectives. As 
one review committee member noted, ‘it would be a legitimate cost to government’ as part 
of normal information and support to Australian families in need. Its welfare aspects would 
The cost to rural communities would be reduced, both in cash terms and in terms of the 
impact on rural communities of service management, governance risks and fund raising 
efforts. Significant savings could be made through the reduction of Australian and state 
government staff currently dedicated to managing service delivery. 

138
9. Rapid implementation
Rating: 3
Start-up time would be significant because of the need to:
reach agreement between the Australian and state governments about the level of 
funding to be borne by each under the new arrangements
establish agreed goals, objectives, performance indicators and benchmarks
agree on the funding agreement and service delivery
find and train suitable staff
communicate program change and support existing management committees 
through the wind-down phase. 
Again, this model could be expedited if announcement of the new model were to be 
made as early as possible and the new mechanisms were in place before the conclusion 
of the current funding period. This could include skill assessment and development of 
training plans for existing counsellors during the 2004–05 funding year (as recommended 
in Model 1), as existing counsellors are the most likely source of new employees under 
the outsourced model. Current funding agreements could be extended for up to six 
months beyond the current funding agreements to 30 June 2005, to allow for set-up 
and transition.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

139
Model 5 — No Rural Financial Counselling Service
Finally, the review committee considered whether the RFCS should be continued at all.
It examined a range of arguments to support this action:
Provision of a specialist counselling service for primary producers duplicates services 
already provided by government and the not-for-profit sector.
No similar service is provided to other industry sectors facing adjustment pressure, 
and it is government policy to move specialised service delivery in the direction of 
mainstreaming.
To the extent that current services assist farm families to stay in farming where they 
might otherwise have left the industry, services may have a negative impact.
All forms of government intervention distort the market and affect land values.
A service that might delay a family’s decision to leave until its debt/equity position and 
options have further declined is questionable.
Removal of the existing service would provide an incentive for the private sector to fill 
the gap.
The current effort and expenditure are not proportional to the outcomes, and there 
is no objective evidence that the current service makes a difference to adjustment 
outcomes.
Significant savings could be made through the reduction of Australian and state 
government staff currently dedicated to managing RFCS delivery. 
The review committee considered, nevertheless, that on balance there was a case for 
continuing the service, particularly if the delivery model is changed to one that reduces 
risk and cost to volunteers and government.
There is a role for government in providing information and decision-support where 
Australian citizens are facing financial crisis and lack the skills and information to make 
informed choices.
There are potential negative consequences from unmanaged industry adjustment, 
and concerns that the current program may have unintended negative consequences 
cannot be confirmed.

140
It is accepted that the intimate relationship between the farm household and business 
makes adjustment decisions slower and more complex.
Primary producers in remote locations do not have ready access to alternative service 
providers, and existing financial counsellors in the not-for-profit sector are already fully 
committed with existing clients.
Conclusion
The review committee concludes that:
there is a case for continuing to provide financial information and decision-making 
support (‘financial counselling’) to farm and fishing families and small rural businesses 
in financial difficulty
funding should be provided by government on a more reliable, ongoing basis to 
improve funding security, but the requirement for matching funding to be secured at 
the local level is an unrealistic burden due to the nature of the service to be provided, 
and should be discontinued
the current devolved service management model is in urgent need of reform and 
restructure and should not continue beyond the end of the 2005
management of the service should be separated from local advice and support, with 
management delivered at least on a whole-of-state basis
delivery by an outsourced not-for-profit organisation or state models are equal in 
ranking, followed by Centrelink on a ‘white branded’ outreach basis is the next ranking 
model, but the outsourced models would not likely be acceptable at this stage to the 
client group or rural communities
the review committee recommends delivery under Model 2, as outlined above, but 
suggests that the Centrelink model could be piloted in the Northern Territory where 
no service currently exists (if need is established and appropriate)
ranking of models is as follows: 

141
Current 
model
State level 
management 
committee
Outsource to 
not-for-profit 
sector
Outsource to 
government 
agency
No RFCS
1. Enhancing adjustment outcomes
1
4
4
4
2
2. Consistent standards
2
4
4
4
NA
3. Managing risk
2
4
4
4
1
4. Local ownership and involvement
4
3
2
1
1
5. Flexible response to need
2
4
4
4
1
6. Acceptability to the target client group
4
4
3
2
1
7. Professional support, standards, etc for 
employees
1
4
4
4
NA
8. Cost effectiveness
2
3
3
2
No cost
9. Rapid implementation
5
2
4
3
Lead time 
needed

142
8.2	
Goal statement and objectives
In 7.3.1, the review committee recommended the development of a clear goal statement 
and objectives for the RFCS program, clearly linking them to the related AAA package 
strategic vision, and identifying industry and primary producers, small businesses and 
fisheries adjustment as the primary goal of the program.
It further recommended the development of a program logic map (PLM) identifying long-, 
immediate- and short-term outcomes and an agreed monitoring and evaluation strategy 
to provide a clear linkage between the RFCS program outcomes with the Australian 
Government’s strategic goals and objectives.
Currently the RFCS retains part of the former Rural Communities Program (RCP) goals and 
objectives and the modified objectives from when the RFCS was separated from the RCP.
consider program objectives along the lines outlined below.
long-term vision of:
competitive, profitable and sustainable agricultural, small rural business and fishing 
business enterprises
primary producers, small rural business and fishing enterprises that are self-reliant and 
are equipped to manage change and adjustment through access to and information 
from rural financial counselling services by those primary producers, small rural 
business and fishing enterprises suffering financial hardship and with no alternative 
sources of support, through the achievement of the RFCS program’s objectives of:
providing ready access to free and independent rural financial counselling services
encouraging early contact and use of rural financial counselling services
increased awareness of the benefits of early intervention in accessing information 
and available services
enhanced capacity of eligible enterprises to consider information and options to 
effectively manage change and adjustment and make informed decisions.
Strategies to achieve the objectives include:
provision of financial assistance for the identification and determination of need, 
planning, management and delivery of RFCS in each of the states and territories

143
engagement of suitably qualified rural financial counsellors delivering flexible services 
to meet identified needs from time to time within each of the states and territories
communicating awareness of the services and the benefits of early access and 
intervention
identifying enterprise and industry issues relating to change and adjustment and 
reporting statistical and other information to government
ongoing monitoring and evaluation of the program outcomes to ensure objectives 
are achieved.
consultation and in partnership with the state and territory governments and 
other key stakeholders, develop clear goal statements, objectives, outcomes, 
strategies for the delivery of the program and agreed ongoing monitoring and 
evaluation requirements.
8.3	
Establishing need: criteria for allocation of 
resources
The establishing of need for the allocation of resources, particularly to improve targeting 
and for the more efficient use of resources has been, as with previous reviews, an area that 
has been difficult to assess and determine. The review committee has relied mainly upon 
quantitative data and anecdotal information provided by service grant applicants.
Whilst anecdotal information can assist in providing insights into perceptions of the RFCS, 
the review committee is of the view that a more measured analysis of wide research and 
data is needed to evaluate the issues and concerns raised in audits, consultations and in 
case studies.
The application and interpretation of client confidentiality requirements by management 
committees has impeded ability to determine actual and real need.
The Acumen audit revealed that some services were undertaking activities that were 
there were substantial weaknesses in RFCS financial and other record-keeping processes 
and procedures, and these weaknesses reduce the quality of information provided to the 

144
Previous reviews consistently agreed that there was ongoing need for RFCS.
In the evaluation of the RCP in 2000 (Aslin et al. 2000), the need for ‘… establishing a more 
rigorous basis for assessing whether ongoing government support is needed in particular 
locations’ was identified as part of the important role of monitoring and evaluation in 
program delivery.
In response to the 2000 evaluation, the then Minister for the Department, the 
Hon John Anderson, identified seven key principles for any new RFCS, two of which were 
the need for flexible needs-based counselling and the need to be responsive to changing 
circumstances and changing regional needs. The principles were endorsed in community 
consultations in all states in early 2001.
The 2002–03 review consultations on the AAA package (DAFF 2004b) also suggested that 
one of the issues that should be examined in relation to the RFCS was for an improved ability 
to allocate resources to emerging areas of need.
The review committee has found that continuing adjustment pressures indicate that 
there will be a long-term need for information and decision support by farm and 
fishing enterprises considering their future in the industry, and by small rural businesses 
dependent on these industries. There is also a need to identify at-risk enterprises earlier, 
before assets are eroded, and for rural financial counselling services to act as a ‘front end’ 
for other avenues of support or change.
To determine how effectively the RFCS program has ‘met need’ in the sector, the review 
committee determined that it would be important to determine the extent to which the 
program operates as a component of the government’s welfare safety net for the sector, 
and the extent to which it builds the capacity of farm families to make informed decisions 
and to respond to challenge and change.
It also found that the ‘institutionalised’ nature of the RFCS has prevented the program, 
in some instances, responding to critical need, and that any new funding model should 
ensure greater mobility of resources in response to need.
From the ARC national database, average percentages of time spent by RFCS services on 
delivering key RFCS activities are as follows:
assessment of current financial position and cash flow budgeting – 18%
reviews of contracts with lending institutions, loan applications and communication 
with lenders – 23%
information on government schemes – 21%
information on Centrelink and other professional counselling services – 13%

145
information to assist with family decision-making in relation to financial management – 2%
adjustment out of agriculture – 2%.
Under the current RFCS model, applicants seeking grants are asked to provide the following 
information to assist with the assessment and to help determine the level of need:
the need for funding – enterprises and industries in difficulty in the region
special circumstances affecting service delivery
why government funding is needed to provide the service.
Data and information sources suggested for enterprises and industries in difficulty in the 
region include:
The numbers of primary producers in agriculture, fishing and small rural enterprises in 
the region overall and the proportion you consider to be in ‘severe financial difficulty’.
Any study that has been completed of the region or its industries, or the results of any 
relevant consultations.
For current services: client numbers and trends from the service’s client database, 
including:
numbers of enterprises previously serviced, trends in the number of new clients, 
and your estimate of the level of need for the service that now remains, and
changes in the nature of the reason for client assistance, or industries seeking 
assistance.
Any changes in circumstances for the industries in your region that have placed new 
pressure on primary produces in agriculture, fishing and small rural enterprises.
Any adverse circumstances, such as drought, that your region is facing and whether 
these adverse circumstances are likely to be long or short-term.
If available, information could be included on:
changes to the estimated value of agricultural output in the region
changes to the number of primary producers seeking off-farm work
changes to average farm income for the region
changes to levels of debt relative to equity.
Suggested sources of information:
industry
the DAFF website for rural financial counselling provides statistical information by 
region based on BRS and ABARE data

146
client data held by existing services on the ARC database
state agencies including rural assistance authorities
local government associations
banks and financial institutions, and other rural credit providers.
The current model also asks applicants to describe any special circumstances that may 
have an impact on service delivery. For example:
where considerable distance needs to be travelled
clients with language difficulties
level of support and advisory services locally available
other circumstances that impact on the cost efficiency of client service.
Further, as to why government funding is needed to provide the service, applicants are 
asked to outline:
why government funding is necessary to achieve the service’s outcomes
the range of existing services in the region and whether the service’s outcomes could 
be achieved by improved linkages to existing services.
Despite requiring an extensive list of suggestions for determining need to applicants, it is 
apparent to the review committee that a more rigorous method of data and information 
collection and validation needs to be developed.
The review committee recommends future delivery of the RFCS program by Model 2 
‘Common state-level management committee with executive officer supported by local 
reference groups’. The review committee further recommends that one of the functions 
and roles of the state management committee would be the establishment of the method 
of assessing and responding to need, including the allocation of long-term and mobile 
resources in regions.
It is the view of the review committee that the data and information suggested 
under the current application process model be retained and modified to suit any 
new model. The data and information should be applied more rigorously, with 
measured analysis of wider research and data being undertaken and assessed to 
determine placement of resources.

147
This wider research and data should include the development of ongoing needs analysis 
for both longer-term and mobile placement of rural financial counsellors and active 
seeking of intelligence for identifying structural adjustment hotspots.
At 7.4.2 of this report, the review committee strongly recommends the introduction of 
formal and regular supervision of counsellor practice, including file audit and reporting 
to management committees. This should provide better and more accurate data and 
information of need and activity currently undertaken where rural financial counsellors 
are placed.
As discussed at 4.5 of this report, the RFCS occupies a specialised role in dealing with farm-
sector adjustment, as opposed to urban-based financial counsellors. In the formation of 
any new program model, the review committee has recommended that detailed mapping 
of government and non-government providers of financial counselling services in rural 
and regional Australia should be undertaken to more accurately determine duplication 
and overlapping of services.
As noted in 4.3.2, the review committee found that under the current model, short-term 
industry adjustment services provide flexibility for communities to meet a short-term 
or immediate need within a specific industry. Rural financial counsellors provide a 
coordinated service to producers within a particular industry or region by assisting 
with industry liaison and with group, as well as individual, service delivery. The review 
committee noted, that through the RFCS, this flexible delivery approach has assisted 
industries in need to achieve their aims. Any new funding model should retain this 
component of the RFCS program.
Future guidelines should include the issues and concerns raised in consultations 
and in case studies covered in the report.

148
8.4	
Establishing management capacity: requirements 
for governance and reporting
The requirements for governance and reporting will depend on which model is finally 
agreed upon.
However, as noted in 7.1.1 which deals with the FSRA and the ASIC issues, the review 
committee found the need for improvements in governance and reporting will need to 
be introduced, regardless of the model adopted, if the RFCS is to continue and meet the 
minimum FSRA requirements, whether for licensing, exception or relief from licensing.
The review committee also considers that the level of liability risk placed on volunteer 
members of management committees under the current arrangements is no longer 
acceptable, and the present governance arrangements with responsibility devolved to 
68 individual employers is not appropriate for a program with such large inherent risks of 
legal liability. As corporate governance and risk-management requirements are likely to 
increase rather than diminish in future years, alternative management arrangements for 
the delivery of rural financial counselling are considered imperative.
The review committee is of the view that its preferred model provides (at the state level) a 
model that is manageable but gives enough scale to make reform possible.
In recognition of the arguments for local input and knowledge, the review committee has 
recommended that the governance, delivery, support and development be undertaken by 
an appropriate state-wide corporate structure supported by local reference groups where 
rural financial counsellors are placed for local support and information, aiming to achieve 
‘best of both worlds’.
consultation and in partnership with the state and territory governments and other key 
stakeholders, develop clear goal statements, objectives, outcomes, and strategies for the 
delivery of the program incorporating agreed ongoing monitoring and evaluation.
Throughout this report, the review committee recommends the need for clearer goals and 
outcome statements and for an improved and more rigorous monitoring and evaluation 
framework. Included in this are strategies for more targeted collection of information, and 
management and performance reporting.

149
The review committee believes that the future framework model also needs to address the 
various structural elements, including specific roles and functions of the delivery model 
such as:
the strategic planning and management of the delivery model by the management 
committee or board
the executive officer roles and responsibilities
local reference groups roles, responsibilities and any limitations
roles under each of the strategies to achieve program objectives such as:
the determination of need, planning, management and delivery
engagement and placement of rural financial counsellors
communication awareness and benefits of early access and intervention
identifying and reporting on enterprise and industry issues relating to change and 
adjustment
ongoing monitoring and evaluation.
The findings and recommendations for improved governance and reporting can be 
summarised as follows.
Program design:
RFCS to recommit the service to a primary role in supporting industry and enterprise 
adjustment for primary producers, small businesses and fishers
better integration with, and cross-referral to, other AAA programs
partnership and funding arrangements be established with state and territory 
governments
the requirement for community matching funding contributions to be discontinued
establishment of local reference groups encouraging local government involvement in 
locations where rural financial counsellors are placed.
Governance structure:
single management committee or board for each state or territory
corporate body established limited by guarantee
skills and expertise-based appointment of members to management committee or 
board.

150
Program delivery:
rural financial counsellors to be focused on adjustment and, because not all client 
expectations can be fulfilled, there is a need for appropriate referral
retain capacity for short-term crisis response
communication of the benefits of early access and intervention, giving greater 
capacity to effectively manage change and adjustment by making informed decisions
introduce mandatory standard of qualifications and prescribed skills and competencies 
for rural financial counsellors within the Australian Qualifications Framework
rural financial counsellors to have a minimum entry level knowledge of social counselling
a staff development and training focus upon social counselling (particularly the limits 
of capacity)
a supervisory structure that ensures the health and well-being of RFCS staff and clients
membership of appropriate professional association, and adherence to, a code of 
behaviour/conduct
achieve greater job satisfaction and security for RFCS staff by establishing clear role 
expectations, standardising counsellor remuneration levels, increasing the skill and 
certification levels of counsellors
the introduction of formal and regular supervision of rural financial counsellor practice, 
including file audit and reporting to management committees at least every six months
all current counsellors undertake a Recognition of Current Competencies (RCC) and 
develop a formal learning plan for any skill gaps identified or development needed
future selection and induction of new counsellors whereby counsellors undertake an 
RCC and develop a formal learning plan for any skill gaps identified or development 
needed
client satisfaction surveys be conducted independently to eliminate bias.
Future guidelines should consider and take into account program structural 
elements, including specific roles and functions, design, governance and program 
delivery issues covered in the report.