D E P A R T M E N T O F A G R I C U L T U R E , F I S H E R I E S A N D F O R E S T R Y
AGRICULTURE ADVANCING AUSTRALIA 
RURAL FINANCIAL COUNSELLING 
SERVICE PROGRAM
Review of the Rural Financial Counselling 
Service Program
The Way Forward

Review of the Rural Financial Counselling 
Service Program
The Way Forward
AGRICULTURE ADVANCING AUSTRALIA 
RURAL FINANCIAL COUNSELLING 
SERVICE PROGRAM

[ 2 ]
The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) Program began in 1986 and is now part 
Program provides free ﬁnancial counselling assistance to primary producers, ﬁshers and 
small rural businesses that are experiencing ﬁnancial hardship and do not have access to 
alternative sources of ﬁnancial counselling. 
The Program’s aim is to support adjustment and development in rural and regional 
Australia by assisting clients with relevant information to assist their business decision 
making. Ongoing adjustment pressures in the rural sector highlight the need for the 
Program to continue into the future.
The pressure from declining terms of trade, the increasing cost of capital, market changes, 
reduced access to resources (including water), climate change and increasing land values, 
will continue to drive rural adjustment. Consequently, for some businesses in rural and 
regional Australia there will be a continuing need to consider future options, either inside 
or outside of their current industry.
the RFCS Program by providing a further $23.3 million in the May 2004 Budget over 
four years to 30 June 2008. At the same time the Government announced there would 
be a review of “the performance of the Rural Financial Counselling Services across 
Australia with a view to determining the efﬁciency, timeliness and suitability of current 
administrative and community management structures and delivery mechanisms”.
On 10 August 2004 the former Parliamentary Secretary, Senator the Hon Judith Troeth, 
asked the National Rural Advisory Council (NRAC) to lead this review of the RFCS 
Program. The Review Committee members included NRAC Chairman Mr Wayne Cornish 
as chair, Mr Bill Anscombe, a senior lecturer in Human Services and Social Work at 
Charles Sturt University and Mr Rudi Cinc, the then National President of the National 
Association of Australian Rural Counselling Services. NRAC members Mr John Woods and 
Mr Bruce Brown also assisted the Review Committee with their specialist business and 
ﬁnancial expertise and participated in the State visits and the review process.
The Review Committee wrote to key stakeholders across Australia inviting face-to-face 
consultation with the Committee. Some 148 stakeholders were consulted in face-to-face 
meetings which were held in all States and the Northern Territory during September 
2004. Letters were also sent to stakeholders inviting written submissions and 86 written 
submissions were received.
FOREWORD

During the Review, the Committee sought speciﬁc feedback on the nature, distribution and 
magnitude of the need for RFCS, how well the current service has met this need and the 
anticipated need over the next three years. The Committee also examined approaches to 
support improved governance of rural ﬁnancial counselling services and suggestions for 
future guidelines and application processes.
The Review Committee also took account of previous reviews and performance audit 
ﬁndings on the RFCS Program’s effectiveness. On 7 December 2004 NRAC endorsed the 
Review Report which Mr Cornish submitted to me on 13 December 2004.
Speciﬁcally, the Review found there is an ongoing need for an RFCS across Australia, 
however it concluded the model for delivery of the current RFCS Program needs to 
be reformed to better meet the needs of primary producers, ﬁshers and small rural 
businesses.  It also found that the current devolved approach to service delivery brings a 
number of unreasonable risks to RFCS management committees, counsellors and clients.  
The Review conﬁrmed that rural community volunteers have brought an inestimable value 
to the operation of these services since 1986.  However, the Review also found that due 
to the changing operating environment and the increasing risks to volunteers, continuation 
of a program of this nature through the mechanisms of volunteer governance is now an 
unreasonable expectation and should be discontinued.  
The Review has also recognised the valuable role of the RFCS assisting rural enterprises 
and families in difﬁcult times such as drought.  It found the program needs to be focussed 
on the primary task of assisting primary producers, ﬁshers and small rural businesses to 
manage the challenges of change and adjustment. 
In considering the Review’s ﬁndings, including its suggestions of other methods of 
in exploring a range of options for a number of possible program delivery arrangements.  
The intention is to develop and implement improved RFCS Program delivery 
arrangements, incorporating key principles ﬂowing from the Review, including: 
  The corporate governance and administrative burden on volunteer management 
committees should be alleviated, while maintaining the vital advisory role of local 
volunteer reference groups. 
  The governance arrangements for the RFCS Program should provide sufﬁcient 
consistency of delivery, supervision and skill standards, including ongoing professional 
development. 
[ 3 ]

[ 4 ]
  There should be a focus on ensuring mobility of resources and avoiding becoming 
unnecessarily ‘institutionalised’. 
 State, Territory and local governments should play a more active and direct role. 
 Alternative funding arrangements for the program should be investigated. 
  Duplication of ﬁnancial counselling services in rural and regional Australia should 
be avoided. 
At the Primary Industries Ministerial Council meeting held in Darwin on 14 April 2005, 
Ministers committed to the consideration of possible arrangements for the future provision 
of rural ﬁnancial counselling services across Australia. 
This publication provides the Review Committee’s terms of reference and the executive 
summary from the Review Report. It also sets out the aims, objectives and outcomes for 
the RFCS Program in the future, and presents the key principles ﬂowing from the Review. 
in discussions covering a range of options for improved program arrangements, to ensure 
that an enhanced RFCS Program is developed and implemented in the most effective and 
efﬁcient manner. 
for the RFCS Program, I have agreed with the Review recommendation that existing 
counsellors should be supported to undergo a recognition of current competencies 
process, as a further professional development activity. 
ensure delivery of the best possible rural ﬁnancial counselling service to rural and regional 
Australia. 
The Government acknowledges the work and effort of the Review Committee in preparing 
the Review report, and the valuable contribution from those who provided input into the 
Review of the RFCS Program. 
Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
May 2005

[ 5 ]
REVIEW OF THE RURAL FINANCIAL COUNSELLING 
SERVICE PROGRAM
Terms of Reference 
[6] 
Executive Summary 
[7]  
THE ENHANCED RURAL FINANCIAL COUNSELLING 
SERVICE PROGRAM
Introduction 
[15] 
Aims and Objectives 
[15] 
Program Outcomes 
[16] 
Key Principles Flowing From the Review Report  
[16] 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

[ 6 ]
TERMS OF REFERENCE
This Review of the Rural Financial Counselling Service Program will examine the performance 
of Rural Financial Counselling Services across Australia with a view to determining the 
efﬁciency, timeliness and suitability of current administration and community management 
structure and delivery mechanisms. It should provide advice on the following ﬁve matters:
 The nature, distribution and magnitude of need for rural ﬁnancial counselling services;
 How well the current service has met this need;
 Anticipated need over the next three years;
 Approaches to support improved governance of Services; and
 Suggestions for future guidelines and proposed application process meeting the 
assessed nature and level of need for provision of service.
The Review of these objectives may take account of:
 Service delivery mechanisms;
 Service distribution and links;
 Community equity issues including ability to support matched contributions and 
receive service;
 Funding allocation criteria and program guidelines;
 Service structures;
 Availability of alternative service providers;
 The need for short-term versus long term service provision;
 Success of the Program in improving self reliance;
 Options for provision of regionally-based or issue-related service delivery; and
 Identiﬁcation of need and regions requiring priority support.
The Review may consider also the services required by clients including:
 The level and type of service provided;
 Availability of ‘ﬁnancial counselling’ providers;
 Benchmarking of cost and delivery of services over a variety of demographic and 
geographic scenarios;
 Mechanisms for assessing clients’ ability to pay;
 Structures for program delivery.
Supporting Structures
Supporting data and secretariat functions will be provided, as far as is possible, by the 
Rural Financial Counselling Service Program.
REVIEW OF THE RURAL FINANCIAL 
COUNSELLING SERVICE PROGRAM

[ 7 ]
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY*
This report examines the efﬁciency, timeliness and suitability of the current administration, 
community management structures and delivery mechanism for the Rural Financial 
Counselling Services Program and suggests program guidelines and delivery mechanisms 
for 2005-08.
The ﬁrst Rural Financial Counselling Services (RFCS) were established in 1986 during 
volatile and uncertain times with the deregulation of the ﬁnance industry and high 
interest rates. Rural ﬁnancial counsellors met an identiﬁed gap in services offered to rural 
communities and farm families, providing a circuit breaker through free and independent 
assistance to primary producers, helping re-establish business conﬁdence and trust 
through their direct assistance to primary producers, allowing them to make informed 
decisions.
In the current 2004-05 funding round, there are 68 community-based RFCS Services, 
employing more than 80 full-time equivalent rural ﬁnancial counsellors across Australia. 
The majority of current Services have operated in the same location for up to 18 
years. The RFCS is funded under the Agriculture Advancing Australia (AAA) package, 
an integrated suite of programs designed to secure the proﬁtability, sustainability and 
competitiveness of the farm sector through changes to producers’ skills, attitudes and 
practices and by providing risk management tools, information and improved market 
opportunities. The primary objectives of the RFCS are:
 To provide free rural ﬁnancial counselling services to assist primary producers, small 
rural businesses and ﬁshing enterprises in rural areas, who are experiencing ﬁnancial 
hardship and have no alternative sources of help with decision-making;
 To identify enterprise and industry issues where change and adjustment are required;
and
 To contribute to the goal of a more competitive, sustainable and proﬁtable rural
Australia.
The RFCS program was evaluated under the 2000 Evaluation of the Rural Communities 
Program (RCP), which found there was a need for RFCS to place greater focus on 
“agricultural and social adjustment” rather than attempting to meet development or 
welfare objectives. Among other ﬁndings was the need for the RFCS to operate within 
a comprehensive performance monitoring and evaluation framework. Stakeholder 
consultations for the 2002-03 Review of the AAA package also suggested enhancing 
consistency in governance across the Services and greater accountability and certainty 
* Full Extract from the Report on Review of Rural Financial Counselling Service Program

[ 8 ]
that Services were operating within program guidelines. These consultations suggested 
the RFCS needed to improve adjustment outcomes for farm families in long-term ﬁnancial 
difﬁculty. Better targeting of need was raised in the 2000 Evaluation of the RCP and in 
stakeholder consultations for the AAA Review.
In May 2003, ACUMEN Alliance Consulting commenced a national performance audit 
of a third of the RFCS. The overall ﬁndings of the audit were that a signiﬁcant number 
of Services were undertaking activities which were considered contrary to the Funding 
audit was that the level of corporate governance was below that required by the Funding 
Agreements.
of the AAA package until 30 June 2008 including a further $23.3 million for the RFCS 
Program. At the same time it announced the RFCS Program would be reviewed. A Review 
Committee was established under the auspices of the National Rural Advisory Council 
(NRAC) – an independent Committee comprising primary producers and agribusiness 
professionals.
The Review Committee is of the view that due to continuing adjustment pressures in the 
farm sector, there will be a long term need for information and decision-making support 
by farm and ﬁshing enterprises considering their future in the industry, and by rural 
small businesses dependent on these industries. There is also a need to identify at risk 
enterprises earlier, before assets are eroded. The Review Committee considers that farm 
families will seek support for decisions about their future options and that there is a role 
for rural ﬁnancial counselling services in assisting primary producers adjust to changing 
circumstances through information delivery and referral to other support mechanisms.
Within the context of current and anticipated need for the RFCS in the future, the Review 
Committee considers that Services have tended to become ‘institutionalised’ with the 
majority of the Services remaining in the same location for up to 18 years. However, the 
intent of the program, from its inception, was to focus on critical need. Throughout the 
review, the Committee found numerous examples of the requirement for additional rural 
ﬁnancial counselling services to be located in areas to deal with sudden and speciﬁc 
workloads. However, the Review Committee also considered evidence of the long-term 
ﬁxed nature of Services. During the assessment of the 2002-04 application round, the 
RFC Advisory Panel recommended some amalgamations between neighbouring Services 
due to overlapping, low client numbers and where organisations faced difﬁculty in 
obtaining sufﬁcient community funding to support the Service.

[ 9 ]
The Review Committee notes that in the past, some Services have worked together 
co-operatively to overcome increased client demand, with counsellors in areas of low client 
activity temporarily assisting Services experiencing high demand for services. However, in 
other locations, Services have struggled to cope with sudden increases in workload and the 
lack of available additional assistance. The Review Committee therefore recommends any 
new funding model should ensure greater mobility of resources to respond to critical need.
In its face-to-face consultations, the Review Committee was told of situations in 
which counsellors were asked or expected to perform roles that were of a purely social 
counselling nature. Given the core business of the RFCS is ﬁnancial and the current 
qualiﬁcations of the RFCS staff are almost exclusively in the area of ﬁnances and not in 
psychology, sociology, social work or other human service areas, there is a potential for 
counsellors and Management Committees to exceed their professional competence and 
leave themselves, or their Management Committees, exposed to legal risk.
In determining the need for the RFCS, the Review Committee is of the view that, in 
many cases, client expectations of the counsellors in regard to the provision of emotional 
support, succession planning and assistance with family communication are contradictory 
to the activities counsellors are permitted to undertake under their Funding Agreements. 
The full suite of client expectations is not able to be met by any one person and there is 
a need for the referral role of rural ﬁnancial counsellors to be re-focused and emphasised. 
In considering any future service delivery model, the Review Committee recommends 
a minimum entry-level knowledge of social counselling and a staff development and 
training focus upon social counselling, particularly on the limits of counsellors’ capacity to 
undertake a more complex social counselling role.
In the course of the Review, the Review Committee examined the current funding 
mechanisms including the requirement for communities to raise matching funding. Many 
Services have expressed difﬁculties in 2004-05 obtaining community cash contributions, 
largely due to the ongoing impacts of drought on community ﬁnancial health. Rising costs 
of petrol, insurance and accommodation, are also impacting on the community’s ability 
to match government funds. In recognising the commitment of volunteer Management 
Committees in the past to the requirement of matching funding, the Review Committee 
considered the impost placed upon Management Committees to raise these funds, 
particularly during difﬁcult times such as drought. The Review Committee recommends 
investigations should be made into alternative funding measures for any future RFCS 
funding in the May 2004 Budget of $23.3 million for the RFCS program until 
30 June 2008.

[ 1 0 ]
In considering the role of RFCS volunteer Management Committees in service delivery, 
the Review Committee drew on recent research, the relevant legislative and regulatory 
framework these Management Committees operate within, stakeholder submissions 
and current difﬁculties raised by volunteer Management Committees. The Review 
Committee notes the increasing emphasis on governance across all organisations in 
society, accompanied by increasing complexity in the wider regulatory and accountability 
environment within which counselling and ﬁnancial advice services operate, and the 
potential risks for volunteer Management Committees under the current program model. 
The Review Committee considers continuation of a program of this nature through the 
mechanisms of volunteer governance is now an unreasonable expectation and should 
be discontinued.
However, in making its determination, the Review Committee recommends a strong 
role in any future program model for local advisory groups in providing locally-grounded 
information and supporting a locally-based counsellor. The Review Committee also notes 
the important contribution volunteer Management Committees have made to the RFCS 
program since its inception.
As part of the Review Committee’s terms of reference, the Review Committee considered 
the risks to the client, Management Committee, counsellor and government under the 
current program model. Of primary concern are the implications of the 2001 Financial 
Services Reform Act (FSRA) for rural ﬁnancial counselling, whereby the RFCS will need to 
be licensed or obtain an exemption from the Act because its activities are not covered by 
the Act, or seek relief from licensing. The Review Committee considers that under present 
RFCS program arrangements, in which governance is devolved to 68 separate volunteer 
Management Committees, it will not be possible to seek exemption from the FSRA for the 
Service as a whole. The Review Committee further considers that the current governance 
arrangements for the program do not provide sufﬁcient consistency of delivery, supervision 
or skill standards to meet the requirements of the FSRA, whether for licensing, exemption 
or relief from licensing requirements. Any new delivery model for the RFCS should ensure 
that these conditions are met.
A key issue for consideration by the Review Committee was whether RFCS Management 
Committees are aware of the risks associated with professional indemnity and their 
organisation becoming the subject of litigation. The 2003 ACUMEN Alliance audits found 
that most Services did not have business plans or risk assessments in place and identiﬁed 
corporate governance and risk management as areas of concern. During the Review 
Committee’s consultations, it was apparent there was growing dissatisfaction amongst 
some RFCS Management Committees and State RFCS Associations with the current 

[ 1 1 ]
model, due to the legal and ﬁnancial risk imposed on volunteers. Often Management 
Committees were struggling with less members and increasing workloads and 
responsibilities. Corporate governance of Services was a major concern of all volunteers 
on Management Committees.
In considering the current risks to Services, as well as the comments made by 
stakeholders, both written and at the face-to-face consultations, the Review Committee 
concludes:
 the level of liability risk placed on volunteer members of Management Committees 
under the current arrangements, is no longer acceptable;
 the present governance arrangements with responsibility devolved to 68 individual 
employers is not appropriate for a program with such inherent risks of legal liability; 
and
 as corporate governance and risk management requirements are likely to increase 
in future years, rather than diminish, alternative management arrangements for the 
delivery of rural ﬁnancial counselling are considered imperative.
Under the terms of reference the Review Committee was asked to provide advice on future 
guidelines and proposed application processes to meet the assessed nature and level of 
need for provision of RFCS. 
First and foremost, the Review Committee ﬁnds that there is a continuing need for a Rural 
Financial Counselling Service. 
The Review Committee considered a number of alternative models. In considering its 
recommendations on guidelines for Rural Financial Counselling Services, the Review 
Committee took into account the features that were perceived as strengths of the current 
model, as well as ways to avoid its risks and inefﬁciencies.
In its assessment, the Review Committee ﬁnds that the level of local ownership is high 
for the current Rural Financial Counselling Service program and many submissions and 
presentations to the Review Committee emphasised its importance.
Although many submissions described the overwhelming pressure of fundraising, project 
management and reporting, most agreed that local ownership brought strong acceptance 
of the Service by clients, good networking, awareness of local needs and issues, and 
taking responsibility for the program helped build community capacity. It was also argued 
that loss of local ownership would see the loss of the local funding component. However, 
a number of stakeholders argued that the requirement for local funding is outdated and 

[ 1 2 ]
should be discontinued: “communities can no longer be expected to contribute to this 
type of service”. Many saw it as ironic that those communities most in need of crisis and 
adjustment counselling were those least able to ﬁnd matching funding.
The Review Committee considers the current devolved approach to service delivery under 
the current model brings a number of unreasonable risks to Management Committees, 
counsellors and clients and recommends the current RFCS program model should change.
Among the models considered by the Review Committee was an outsourced not-for-proﬁt 
provider. A strong case can be made for adopting a ‘prospectus’ approach to the delivery 
of counselling services, with funding being awarded to the service provider offering the 
best resourcing and governance outcomes within a State. Not-for-proﬁt organisations 
interviewed during the consultation process were highly regarded in the community, 
however, some stakeholders were concerned these organisations might be too closely 
associated with the welfare sector and this would deter primary producers, ﬁshers and 
small business operators. 
However, the Review Committee considers this model offers the best risk management 
from the point of view of Australian and State Governments and the local community. 
Several existing providers have already managed risk successfully and have won FSRA 
exemption from the Australian Securities Investment Commission in recognition of their 
strong governance protocols, required skill levels and ongoing training for staff. This model 
presents the best alternative for timely implementation, as agencies likely to be selected 
for delivery have already established governance structures and will be likely to be able to 
employ a signiﬁcant proportion of the new counselling workforce from the ranks of existing 
RFCS counsellors. The Review Committee recommends all existing RFCS counsellors 
undergo a Recognition of Current Competencies process and develop a formal learning 
plan for any skills gaps or development. 
The outsourcing of the program to a single national government agency was considered 
the most effective way to provide joined up decision-support across a wide range of 
locations. A contender for provision of this model would be Centrelink, which has the 
capacity to ‘white brand’ its delivery and to deliver a high level of government and staff 
development protocols. 
While Centrelink is managed at a State and National level, its outreach delivery has 
included the use of local advice mechanisms and it has already worked closely with rural 
communities and agricultural industries to deliver outreach services from community 
centres and from industry ofﬁces. The Review Committee recommends this model for 

[ 1 3 ]
serious consideration and, while noting recent research which pointed to a shift in primary 
producers’ attitudes to Centrelink, also notes that during consultations some stakeholders 
suggested the model would be unlikely to win support at the local level. The Review 
Committee recommends that this model, as well as the not-for-proﬁt model, should 
incorporate a condition of funding that Local Reference Groups are established in locations 
where counsellors are deployed. 
The model most favoured by the Review Committee and that would be most accepted by 
the client group, is a model incorporating a common State-level Management Committee 
with an executive ofﬁcer. This model is also the most common to be proposed by 
stakeholders in the Review’s consultations. In this model:
 governance responsibility is separated from local support for counselling projects, 
however both elements remain important;
 a common Management Committee, assisted by a paid executive ofﬁcer, manages 
a large number of counselling services. There would be greater availability of skilled 
candidates for the Management Committee than at the regional level and less potential 
for local conﬂict of interest;
 client conﬁdentiality would be maintained through the use of an executive ofﬁcer 
operating at the State level; and
 while there is still potential for divergence of practice between States, there would 
be sufﬁcient scale within a State to provide for resource mobility and make reform 
possible.
In the State Level Management Committee Model, Local Reference Groups would be 
retained in an advisory role only and would not be required to raise funds or to take 
on governance roles that could attract ﬁnancial or legal risk, however, would provide 
information on current conditions and on the level of need for service provision. However, 
the Review Committee acknowledges the model may be unlikely to attract community 
cash or in-kind resourcing, and local community funding would need to be made up by 
the Australian and State Governments.
Local Government should be encouraged to provide a base from which Local Reference 
Groups would operate, having both infrastructure coverage in local regions where 
counsellors are placed and jurisdictional powers under Local Government legislation in 
each State and Territory to establish local advisory groups.

[ 1 4 ]
The Review Committee considers that cost savings in this model may be gained 
through the devolution of existing administrative structures of Services. The Review 
Committee recommends further investigations into outsourcing funding beyond 
Australian and State Governments. Support could be sought from the private sector or 
in-kind contributions from communities that are successful in their applications for rural 
ﬁnancial counselling services. 
The Review Committee also notes the start up time for this model will be signiﬁcant due 
to the need to reach agreement between the Australian and State Governments regarding 
the level of funding to be borne by each under the new arrangements and the process 
required to implement the proposed framework and structure of this model.
While delivery by an outsourced not-for-proﬁt organisation, followed by Centrelink on a 
‘white branded’ outreach basis may be the best models, it would not likely be acceptable 
at this stage to the client group or rural communities. The RFCS Review Committee 
recommends delivery under the State-level Management Committee model, supported by 
Local Reference Groups.

[ 1 5 ]
INTRODUCTION
will work to develop improved RFCS Program delivery arrangements consistent with 
the principles that ﬂow from the Review Report and, drawing upon recommendations, 
key points and options presented by the Review Committee, will consider the processes 
needed to best deliver and operate the RFCS Program in the future. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
competitive and sustainable agricultural, food, ﬁsheries and forestry industries. The RFCS 
Program has been established with the primary role of supporting primary producers, 
ﬁshers and small rural business enterprises to manage the challenges of industry change 
and adjustment by the achievement of the program’s objectives of:
 ensuring those enterprises suffering ﬁnancial hardship and with no alternative sources 
of impartial support have access to ﬁnancial information, options, decision support and 
referral services;
 enhancing the capacity of enterprises to consider information and options to implement 
their decisions to effectively manage change and adjustment;
 encouraging early contact and use of rural ﬁnancial information services to promote 
awareness of the beneﬁts of early intervention in accessing information and available 
services; and
 providing a needs-based ﬁnancial information and referral service which is free, 
effective, responsive and ﬂexible.
will work with State and Territory Governments to enable:
 identiﬁcation and determination of need for and placement of services and for 
planning, management and delivery of RFCS in each of the States and Territories;
 engagement of resources to deliver a rural ﬁnancial counselling service;
 communication about the RFCS;
 ongoing needs analysis to identify enterprise and industry issues relating to change 
and adjustment; and
 ongoing monitoring and evaluation to ensure objectives are achieved.
THE ENHANCED RURAL FINANCIAL 
COUNSELLING SERVICE PROGRAM

[ 1 6 ]
PROGRAM OUTCOMES
The expected outcomes of the enhanced RFCS Program are:
  enhanced self reliance, proﬁtability, competitiveness and sustainability of primary 
producers and small rural businesses;
 rural and ﬁshing enterprises effectively managing adjustment and change;
 increased adoption of best practice approaches by clients of the RFCS; and
  best practice approaches to governance, accountability and risk management achieved 
by those delivering the RFCS Program.
KEY PRINCIPLES FLOWING FROM THE REVIEW REPORT
In considering the Review’s ﬁndings, including its suggestions of other methods of 
in exploring a range of options for a number of possible program delivery arrangements.  
The intention is to develop and implement improved RFCS Program delivery 
arrangements, incorporating key principles ﬂowing from the Review, including: 
  The corporate governance and administrative burden on volunteer management 
committees should be alleviated, while maintaining the vital advisory role of local 
volunteer reference groups. 
  The governance arrangements for the RFCS Program should provide sufﬁcient 
consistency of delivery, supervision and skill standards, including ongoing professional 
development. 
  There should be a focus on ensuring mobility of resources, and avoiding becoming 
unnecessarily ‘institutionalised’. 
  State, Territory and local governments should play a more active and direct role. 
  Alternative funding arrangements for the program should be investigated. 
  Duplication of ﬁnancial counselling services in rural and regional Australia should 
be avoided. 

©  Commonwealth of Australia 2005
news reporting, criticism or review. Selected passages, tables or diagrams may be 
reproduced for such purposes provided acknowledgment of the source is included. 
Major extracts or the entire document may not be reproduced by any process without 
the written permission of: The Executive Manager, Rural Policy and Innovation Division, 
ISBN 0 9757157 4 7