We recognise that people living and working on farms are subject to economic, climatic and social pressures. These pressures can affect their mental health and wellbeing, particularly during times of drought. We take mental health, wellbeing and suicide in rural and regional Australia seriously.
The Australian Government has a range of initiatives and programs to improve the lives of people living with mental health challenges, as well as their families, carers and communities.
Medicare Mental Health Centres
Australian Government funded Medicare Mental Health Centres are located across Australia. These centres provide a welcoming place for anyone to access free, quality mental health support without a referral or appointment. For people who cannot attend a centre in person, tele-health appointments are also available.
For more information and to access services, please contact Medicare Mental Health on 1800 595 212 or online at www.medicarementalhealth.gov.au.
Primary Health Networks
The Australian Government funds 31 Primary Health Networks, capturing all regions of Australia. These networks assess local health needs and commission services to meet those needs. This includes mental health and suicide prevention services.
The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing is responsible for Australian Government mental health policy and support programs. Further information can be found at www.health.gov.au/topics/mental-health-and-suicide-prevention.
Need help now?
If you or someone you know needs immediate help, contact:
- Lifeline Australia 13 11 14
- Beyond Blue 1300 22 46 36
- 13 YARN 13 92 76 (First Nations)
- Mensline Australia 1300 78 99 78
- Kids Help Line 1800 55 18 00
- Suicide Callback Service 1300 659 467
State and territory government support
Find support in your state:
Give support
You can donate to non-government organisations that help farmers and rural communities in hardship.
Search for a registered charity on the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission website. You can check if your donation is tax deductible. For a donation to be tax deductible, it must be made to an organisation endorsed as a deductible gift recipient.