Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
1 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
BMSB Seasonal Measures 2025-26 Industry Sessions Q & A 
BMSB Seasonal Measures 
Will there be a list the answered questions from both sessions published somewhere, like a Q&A document 
for everyone to see and be guided by? 
Yes. 
Regarding the 120 rule for Break Bulk, it was advised shipped on board date or is loaded on board date the 
same? Sometimes a vessel can take 2-3 days to load. 
The shipped on board date, as indicated on the ocean bill of lading (OBOL), is the date used to determine 
when goods have been shipped in scope for BMSB seasonal measures, including mandatory treatment of 
target high risk goods. In most cases, the OBOL is the most accessible document with a date that reflects the 
loading date. 
However, the legislated requirements for break bulk goods subject to BMSB measures (treated in a target risk 
country prior to 1 December) are that they must be loaded on board the vessel within 120 hours of 
treatment completion.  
If in situations where your goods were loaded inside of the 120 hour window but your OBOL reflects the 
shipping date rather than the loading date, if you can provide evidence from the shipping company of the 
loading date being inside the window, this will support confirmation your goods met the 120 hour 
requirement. This can be in the form of a letter from the shipping company (that meets our minimum 
documentary requirements) stating that goods were loaded on board the vessel on a specific date if this 
differs from the departure date.  
Weather conditions can delay the shipped on board by more than 48 hours especially locations impacted 
by snow and ice? 
If goods have been exported outside the 120 hours but are transhipping through a third country, the 
department highly recommends they be treated in the transhipment port before loading to Australia rather 
than waiting to arrive in Australia to be exported for re-treatment. 
Shipped on board date should be the date the cargo is loaded to the ship, however the vessel may take a 
few days to load & the sailing date will be later. So what is Dept Ag's interpretation of Shipped on Board 
date? Is it date cargo was loaded to ship or date vessel departed? 
The shipped on board date, as indicated on the ocean bill of lading (OBOL), is the date used to determine 
when goods have been shipped in scope for BMSB seasonal measures, including mandatory treatment of 
target high risk goods. In most cases, the OBOL is the most accessible document with a date that reflects the 
loading date. 
However, the legislated requirements for break bulk goods subject to BMSB measures, treated in a target risk 
country prior to 1 December is that they must be loaded on board the vessel within 120 hours of treatment 
completion.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
2 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Therefore, if your goods were loaded inside of the 120 hour window but your OBOL reflects the shipping date 
rather than the loading date, if you can provide evidence from the shipping company of the loading date 
being inside the window, this will support your goods meeting the 120 hour requirement and ultimately 
meeting BMSB seasonal measures. This can be in the form of a letter from the shipping company (that meets 
our minimum documentary requirements) stating that goods were loaded on board the vessel on a specific 
date if this differs from the departure date.  
Why is the 120-hour rule only in effect from November to December? Why not extend it across the whole 
season 
The date of 1 December has been based on risk assessments of pests as well as information provided by 
plant authorities in our target risk countries and other intelligence we are receiving. The risks of possible 
reinfestation of BMSB after December 1 is significantly less than between September and November when 
BMSB are on the move seeking to overwinter.  
If transshipping from a risk country through an emerging risk country, will there be the 120 rule in the 
emerging risk country or will the BMSB treatment at origin suffice?  
The 120 hour rule only applies to goods transhipping a target risk country. It is not applicable to goods 
transhipping non risk or emerging risk countries and as long as the 120 hour post treatment window (if 
applicable) is met in the target risk country the treatment will be acceptable. 
If a breakbulk/Flat Rack/Open top container is treated and subsequently rolled to exceed the 120hour rule 
(and 48hour rule) will we need to collect container from wharf at origin and retreat prior to departure? 
If break bulk (including flat rack and open tops) have not met the 120 hour rule or the requirements of the 
additional 48 hour window due to rolling, the goods will need to be retreated prior to arriving in Australia. 
This can be at the port of loading or at any transhipment port enroute to Australia. Goods that have not met 
these windows and haven’t been retreated prior to arrival will be directed for export. There are no provisions 
to treat these goods onshore. 
Why isn't BMSB season all year round 
Currently there is no evidence that the BMSB seasonal measures need to be implemented all year round, 
however, if data indicates that we need to adjust the season or the measures, industry will be duly advised.  
What percentage of airfreight consignments from US and China will be referred for inspections and what 
turn around times are we looking at for this? 
The intervention rate for verification inspections on target risk goods ex China and USA is low based on other 
verification inspections applied for BMSB emerging risk countries and target risk goods not requiring 
mandatory treatment.  
Follow up on the airfreight question- are you targeting specific target risk goods more than others? 
The 2025-26 BMSB seasonal measures has seen the addition of random inspections to target high risk goods 
shipped as airfreight from United States of America and China between 1 September to 30 April (inclusive). 
BMSB treatment of these goods will not be required. All other airfreight is not subject to BMSB seasonal 
measures.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
3 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Are MPI announcing any changes separately this year as they are usually in this meeting?  
Any queries regarding the BMSB requirements for MPI will have to be raised with MPI directly. 
With 120 hours rule for breakbulk case, will there any exception if the container had been fumigated twice 
due to vessel delay/roll by Carrier? Offshore BMSB fumigation cost is not cheap. 
All break bulk must arrive acceptably treated by a registered treatment provider (if treated in a target risk 
country) and be loaded onboard the vessel within the 120 hour post treatment window if treated between 1 
September and 30 November. There are no exemptions for goods that do not meet these requirements, 
including goods that have been treated a number of times but haven’t met all the BMSB seasonal 
requirements. 
If meeting the post treatment window is a concern, the department recommends treating goods in a non risk 
country at a transshipment port enroute. The 120 hour post treatment window is not applicable to goods 
treated in non risk countries and once treated there is no timeframe for the goods to be loaded on board the 
vessel. 
Is the department considering the rolled goods policy to be available to FCL as well? if not, then why not? 
so double the cost for the importer? at no fault of the importer (Is the department considering the rolled 
goods policy to be available to FCL as well? if not, then why not?) 
The rolled policy allows retreatment onshore of break bulk goods that have been acceptably treated but have 
not met the 120 hours by less than 48 hours. Six hard sided containers only need to be sealed within the 120 
hours and can be retreated onshore without approval under the rolled policy. 
Have all team members been trained from the BMSB processing team to be able to do the ICS reporting FID 
recalc? ABF have said contact DAFF for it. 
ICS system recalculations can only be performed by ABF staff, DAFF staff do not have the ability or the system 
access to perform these functions.  
If my goods are exported can I send it to the closest country for treatment like Singapore  
Yes. The department requires all untreated break bulk to be exported for treatment offshore. However it 
does not mandate that this treatment must be at the port of origin; this treatment can be done at any port. 
Can I use container tracking screenshot for 120 
No, tracking is not acceptable evidence to verify the loading date. In cases where your sailing/laden date on 
your OBOL differs from the actual loading date of your goods, the department will accept a letter from the 
shipping line (that meets our minimum documentary requirements) that states the actual load date of the 
goods where this differs from the departure date. 
Can you show again the screen with the treatment options? 
All acceptable treatment options for BMSB can be found on our webpage Seasonal measures for Brown 
marmorated stink bug (BMSB) - DAFF.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
4 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
BMSB Treatments 
Can we treat with ethyl formate onshore? 
No. Ethyl Formate is currently only approved to be used offshore by treatment providers approved under the 
AusTreat Scheme. 
Do I have to use a registered treatment provider if importing from China? 
No. China is considered a non risk country and treatment certificates from providers in non-target risk 
countries who do not register through AusTreat will be accepted. However, BMSB treatment certificates, 
whether from a registered provider in a risk country or a non-registered provider in a non-risk country, 
must meet the department’s requirements, including overarching minimum documentary requirements, and 
the treatment must be conducted in accordance with the relevant treatment methodology and treatment 
rate.  
It is worth noting that there are now registered treatment providers in China listed on our list of list of 
treatment providers. 
When a fumigator is suspended at the origin or transshipment port, will a formal notice be issued? 
Yes. As with previous years, any change of status to approved treatment providers will be published via an 
Industry Advice Notice. Please sign up for notifications if they haven’t already, to ensure they do not miss an 
update.  
Hi re China there are no "SB" treaters on the list of treatment providers on DAFF website, if i have parts 
shipped say chapter 84 shipped from Germany for example how can we get the container treated n china?  
China is considered a non risk country and treatment certificates from providers in non-target risk countries 
who do not register with AusTreat will be accepted. Treatment certificates issued by a treatment provider in 
non-target risk country will be accepted unless the: 
• 
treatment provider is listed as ‘suspended’, 'withdrawn' or ‘under review’ on the List of treatment 
providers, or 
• 
unregistered treatment provider is listed as ‘unacceptable’ or ‘under review’ on our webpage. 
What happens if treatment providers are not listed with AUSTREAT from target risk country 
Treatment providers not registered under AusTreat at the time of treatment will not be accepted by the 
department and affected goods will be directed for onshore treatment at the container level (where 
approved) or export in case of break bulk (including open top and flat rack containers).

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
5 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Safeguarding 
Can you talk more about the 'consignment' basis declaration? Regarding previous question of 'per 
consignment declaration', according to safeguarding website, it states "Each consignment must be 
accompanied by a completed importer's declaration covering all safeguarded goods within the 
consignment.” 
 
The Importer Declaration is now a requirement for each consignment to provide the department with 
assurance that importers have appropriate oversight of their supply chains and that safeguarded goods are 
being sourced exclusively from their approved supply chains as listed in the approval letter. 
Why are shipments compiling with the Safeguarding requirements cannot be lodged via AEP? 
Safeguarded goods do not meet BMSB seasonal requirements and are imported under an alternate clearance 
pathway that has been assessed and approved by the department; this alternate pathway is not approved 
under class 19.2 for clearance. 
Vessels 
Do all RORO vessels need an SPI at first Australian port? 
Ro-Ro vessels that have berthed, loaded or transhipped from target risk countries will be subject to a 
mandatory seasonal pest (SP) inspection on arrival in Australian territory. This information is available on our 
webpage - https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/before/brown-marmorated-stink-
bugs/vessels#what-are-the-seasonal-measures-for-vessels.  
Can Roro vessels have cargo treated prior to load overseas and be exempt from SPI at first Australian port? 
Carrying only cargo that has been treated with an approved treatment method does not guarantee that the 
vessel will be free from hitchhiker pest risk. Hitchhiker pests such as BMSB are highly mobile flying pests 
which can contaminate vessels during loading. Loading only treated cargo will not exempt the vessel from the 
SPI requirements.   
Regarding RORO treatments, thermal fogging, how many times will this be allowed, per vessel? 
The number of foggings will be determined on a case-by-case basis, dependent on the level of risk associated 
with any hitchhiker pest detections.  
Has there been any changes regarding mandatory inspections being required for RO-RO vessels during 
BMSB season? 
No, inspection requirements will remain the same as the 2024-25 BMSB season.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
6 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
I understand that there is not any mandatory or legal measures to check RORO vehicles regarding stink 
bugs prior to export from Japan to Australia but are there are the specific measures prior to export from 
Japan against stink bugs and seeds which are recommended. 
The department has published a New Vehicle pre-loading biosecurity risk guide on the website which can be 
used to guide exporters of vehicles and machinery to minimise the risk of biosecurity risks on their goods. We 
encourage all shipping lines and exporters to implement effective biosecurity mitigation measures prior to 
export and loading to reduce the risk all biosecurity risks including seeds and BMSB.