MANAGEMENT OF 
LCL / FAK CONTAINERS
15 August 2023
Hitchhiker Pests Policy

Agenda
• Acknowledgement of country
• When to lodge an MC declaration
• How to register as an MC
• How to access the new portal
• Types of MC declarations
•
Nil Risk
•
Treated Onshore
•
Treated Offshore
•
Partially Treated Offshore
•
Unknown Risk
• Common Holds and ICS messages
•
SPHOLD
•
COND REL
•
SPREF
•
GAS
• Common scenarios and solutions
•
Change of SCR type from LCL to FCL / FCX
•
SP Hold still present after lodgement
•
Changing a declaration type
•
FIXLOC directions
• Department contacts
• Questions
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  1

When to lodge an MC declaration
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  2
LCL / FAK containers are managed for BMSB risk at the container level. This includes LCL consignments 
that are manufactured in and / or shipped from a target risk country, between 1 September and 30 April 
(inclusive).
If your LCL / FAK container is subject to the measures when the cargo report is lodged, it will be referred 
for a Seasonal Pest hold (SPHOLD), and the cargo reporter will receive a message that an MC declaration 
is required to be submitted – see below. If you believe your cargo is not subject to the measures, a Nil 
Risk MC declaration will still be required to lift the hold.
Note: You will need to provide appropriate documentation that verifies your container is out of scope.
Important: If your LCL / FAK container does not have an SPHOLD at the container level and you do not 
receive this message in the ICS, DO NOT SUBMIT AN MC DECLARATION – your LCL / FAK container is 
not subject to BMSB seasonal measures and does not require a declaration to be lodged for clearance.

How to register as an MC
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  3
Master Consolidators intending to provide declarations about LCL / FAK containers to the department 
must register their company as a Master Consolidator and identify individual users via a unique email 
address on the Master Consolidator Registration form.
Each user who intends to submit MC declarations, is required to register as a User under the MC ID for 
their company. Each individual submitting declarations is required to have their own User ID and login. 
Sharing of User ID’s will be recorded as a non-compliance for the Master Consolidator and may result in 
increased intervention of LCL / FAK containers.
Once registered, the department will provide users with an email containing your MC ID, a temporary 
password, and a link to the online declaration form to set your own password. You must use your own 
unique login to lodge a MC declaration.
Registration Forms can be found here:
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/before/brown-marmorated-
stink-bugs/lclcontainers#master-consolidator-registrations
Completed Master Consolidator registration forms are to be sent to SPP@aff.gov.au.

How to access the new portal
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  4
Once you have registered and have received your MC ID, log on to the departmental portal using your 
registered username, password and two factor authenticator code.
The Master Consolidator Declaration form can be accessed through the department portal via 
https://portal-forms.agriculture.gov.au
Detailed instructions on how to login and lodge a Master Consolidator Declaration Form and 
troubleshooting information is available at: 
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/master-consolidator-user-guide.pdf.

Types of MC declarations
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  5
There are five risk status types that can be declared:
1. Treated offshore - the entire container with target high risk goods has been treated offshore, or
2. Partially treated - all the target high risk goods inside the container have been treated offshore, or
3. Treatment onshore - the entire container is nominated for onshore treatment, or
4. Nil risk - the entire container does not have any target high risk goods inside, or
5. Unknown risk - the contents of the container are unknown and nominated to be held at an
approved arrangement (AA) site pending further information to be provided.
Important: You must ensure that details entered for the ‘Vessel Id’ and ‘Voyage Number’ match exactly 
what has been declared in ICS on the sea cargo report. If this information does not match, the system 
cannot release the hold on your container.

Nil Risk
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  6
All goods within the container are Nil risk and do not meet any of the criteria outlined in the BMSB 
seasonal measures by the department. This also includes containers that have been shipped out of 
season but have still been flagged whilst the BMSB profiles are active in ICS.
DO NOT use this option unless everything within the container is out of scope for BMSB seasonal 
measures. If there are target high risk goods within the container that have been treated and the 
balance is Nil risk, you will have to use the “Partially Treated” option as the “Nil Risk” option is not the 
correct declaration type to lodge for this scenario and may result in a non-compliance being issued.

Treated Onshore
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  7
Not all target high risk goods OR nil goods have been treated offshore and whole container will need to 
be treated onshore to mitigate the BMSB risk. It is the Master Consolidators responsibility to clear 
treatment of goods with all relevant importers / brokers, as this decision lies solely with the Master 
Consolidator. If any goods within the container cannot be treated for any reason, export will be the 
only option available. Deconsolidation for part treatment is not permitted, if the whole container 
cannot be treated onshore, the container will be directed for export.

Treated Offshore
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  8
All goods within the container can be treated on the one certificate as an FCL, or across multiple 
certificates as LCLs, but ALL goods must have been treated offshore, not just the target high risk goods.
If ALL goods have not been treated, and only the target high risk goods have been treated, please 
select the “Partially Treated” declaration type, as the “Treated Offshore” option is not the correct 
declaration type to lodge for this scenario and may result in a non-compliance being issued.
Important: The container and seal for all goods and package quantities must be linked to the relevant 
treatment certificate(s) via an acceptable consignment link, failure to do so will result in the whole 
container requiring onshore treatment or export.

Partially Treated Offshore
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  9
Only part of the container has been treated i.e. All target high risk goods within the container. These 
goods can be treated on the one certificate as consolidated cargo, or across multiple certificates as 
LCL’s, but ALL target high risk goods must have been treated offshore.
If all target high risk goods have not been treated offshore, then please use the “Treated Onshore” as 
the “Partial Treatment” option is not the correct declaration type to lodge for this scenario and may 
result in a non-compliance being issued.
Important: The container and seal for all goods and package quantities must be linked to the relevant 
treatment certificate(s) via an acceptable consignment link, failure to do so will result in the whole 
container requiring onshore treatment or export.

Unknown Risk
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  10
Any declaration lodged as Unknown will be subject to a Full Import Declaration (FID) assessment. 
Additional information will need to be sent to BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au once the contents and risk 
has been identified, including but not limited to a manifest and bill of lading. The Master Consolidator 
is required to follow up on all containers lodged under this option and provide relevant information 
once all FID’s have been lodged in ICS.
Important: If there is no contact or declaration made by the relevant Master Consolidator for the 
container after 35 business days, the container will be directed for export.

Common Holds and ICS messages
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  11
There are many different hold types within the ICS. The only hold for BMSB relating to LCL / FAK 
containers is:
SPHOLDM – Seasonal Pest Hold
Common holds and/or messages mistaken for BMSB holds are:
CONDREL – Conditional Release (pending department intervention on noted entry)
SPREF – Seasonal Pest Referral
GAS – Aqis Gas Hold
HELD – Consolidated Status with no impediment details
CHAINED UNDERBOND – Underbond movement not approved due to chaining
Important: All LCL/FAK containers subject to BMSB Seasonal Measures will be held at the container level 
on the wharf with an AQIS SEASONAL PEST HOLD (SPHOLDM) until an MC declaration has been lodged. 
Individual House Bills (HBOLs) will not be held by BMSB holds they only apply at the container level.

SPHOLDM
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  12
If you have a AQIS SEASONAL PEST HOLD (SPHOLDM) and you receive a message in ICS directing you 
to lodge an MC declaration, you will not be able to move your container until a declaration has been 
completed. There is no way to have this hold lifted without a MC declaration. 
Important: If you have lodged an MC declaration and ICS is still showing this message, please check that 
your declaration has the correct vessel, voyage and container information as what has been declared in 
the ICS.

CONDREL
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  13
If your FCL is showing a CONDITIONAL RELEASE message, your container is subject to department 
intervention outlined in the noted entry. Your conditional release will clear once you have completed 
all onshore interventions and receive a final release. 
Important: Your consolidated status will remain HELD until your container has been assessed and cleared 
from both DAFF and ABF requirements.

SFREF
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  14
If your House Bill (HBOL) is showing an AQIS SEASONAL PEST REFERRAL (SPREF) message, this is NOT a 
hold. It is a system reference recognising that the goods on this HBOL has been profiled for BMSB and 
applied a SPHOLD at the container level. The AQIS SEASONAL PEST REFERRAL message will remain on 
the status summary review screen. Do not contact the department requesting that the SPREF be lifted, 
it cannot be lifted as it is not a hold. 
Important: If your container is showing as HELD, please check ICS to ensure that there are no other 
ABF or AQIS holds as this is usually what is holding your HBOL if your container has a CONDCLEAR 
or SUBUBMOV.

GAS HOLD
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  15
If your FCL is showing a AQIS GAS HOLD message, your container is subject to Giant African Snail 
measures, this is not BMSB related. These holds cannot be lifted by the BMSB Processing Team, and 
your container will be held until the risk has been investigated and / or mitigated by the Container NCC 
team (containerncc@aff.gov.au).
Important: Hitchhiker Pests Policy (HPP) and the BMSB Processing team cannot action these holds, they 
are not BMSB related.

HELD
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  16
Important: An AQIS SEASONAL PEST REFERRAL is not a hold or an impediment. It will not impede the 
movement of your container. If you have made payment and ICS has not updated your status from HELD, 
ABF may need to do a recalc on the system.
If your FCL or HBOL is showing a consolidated status of HELD, with no underbond conditions or 
impediment details in the supplementary information (AQIS SEASONAL PEST REFERRAL is only a 
system message, it is not an impediment), it is usually being held by ABF. 
Please check that the cargo report has been evaluated and / or the import declaration has been paid as 
these will hold your container on the ABF side. DAFF cannot action these holds.

CHAINED UNDERBOND
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  17
If your FCL is showing a consolidated status of HELD and / or your Underbond Conditions show NO 
MOVEMENT ALLOWED, your underbond may be chained. 
If the state of your underbond is CHAINED, you will need to contact ABF regarding your underbond 
application as DAFF cannot action underbond movements or approvals.

Common scenarios and solutions
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  18
The scenarios below answer the most frequently asked questions regarding the importation of 
goods during the BMSB risk season:
Change of SCR type from LCL to FCL/FCX
Changes to BMSB treatment rates to include timber
FIXLOC Directions
My container is still held in ICS after declaration lodgement

Change of SCR type from LCL to FCL/FCX
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  19
Important: ICS cannot automatically lift this hold once it has been applied. You must contact the BMSB 
processing team to have your container released.
Once a cargo type is reported in ICS as an LCL and referred for BMSB, an SPHOLD will be placed on the 
container. If the cargo type is amended to an FCL / FCX, the SPHOLD will remain at the container level 
even after the LCL report has been withdrawn. The system will not automatically lift the hold. If this 
occurs, please email BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au with your OBOL verifying the FCL cargo type, to have 
the hold lifted.

Changes to BMSB treatment rates to include timber
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  20
Occasionally goods being imported will require onshore treatment for BMSB and treatment to address 
commodity concerns like timber. If this is the case, once you have lodged your declaration you will have 
to contact BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au to amend the automated direction as this cannot be done via 
the portal. 
It is important that the rate gets changed to meet the higher requirements of the timber concern 
otherwise your goods will be subject to a second treatment as the BMSB rate does not meet the timber 
requirements.

FIXLOC Directions
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  21
Important: Do not continue to lodge declarations and / or amendments via the online portal to change / 
fix the location, this can only be amended manually by the BMSB Processing team.
If you receive a FIXLOC direction for your container via AIMS, you will need to contact 
BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au with the location you have nominated, and the entry number associated.
This usually occurs when the selected approved arrangement in the declaration does not have the 
direction required active for their location.
You may need to change your AA nomination to one that has been approved to carry out the required 
onshore intervention. This cannot be fixed via the online portal or by lodging amended or additional 
declarations.

Container is still held in ICS after 
MC declaration lodgement
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  22
Important: The BMSB Processing team is the only team that can advise and /or have this SPHOLD lifted. 
If you have lodged your declaration, please wait up to an hour for messaging to update in ICS. If you 
have waited and the hold still has not been lifted, please log back into the MC portal and review your 
declaration. In most cases, a hold not lifting is due to the Vessel ID and/or the Voyage ID not matching 
what has been reported in ICS on the Sea Cargo Report for the container. 
If this is the case, please see the ‘what happens if I’ve made a mistake’ section of the Master 
Consolidator User Guide. If the details in your lodgement are correct and your container is still held, 
please contact BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au to investigate further.

Department contacts
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  23
Hitchhiker Pests Policy: SPP@aff.gov.au
For questions and information related directly to BMSB Seasonal Measures that cannot be answered 
by visiting the website. Submission of MC registration form.
BMSB Processing Team: BMSBprocessing@aff.gov.au
For questions and information related directly to BMSB LCL / FAK assessment and directions and / or 
MC declaration lodgement only.
BMSB treatments: BMSBtreatments@aff.gov.au
Questions and information related directly to offshore BMSB treatments and treatment providers, 
including treatment certificates.
Treatments: treatments@aff.gov.au
Requests for 4.7 secure unpack directions only and enquiries regarding finalisation of onshore BMSB 
treatment directions.
Import Assessments: ImportAssessment@aff.gov.au
Any assessment or direction queries relating to imports including FIDs lodged via COLs, UPEs and 
Carnets.

Questions
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry  |  24