Strengthening our biosecurity system
Sustainable biosecurity funding supports a stronger biosecurity system with Commonwealth biosecurity policy, operational and technical functions now funded on a sustainable basis, including the Indigenous Biosecurity Ranger Program in Northern Australia. It also supports digital modernisation of biosecurity processing in cargo pathways via implementation of streamlined digital systems through the Simplified Targeting and Enhanced Processing System (STEPS) program for more efficient and effective clearances.
The Australian Government has introduced a broad-based funding model that maximises available funding for biosecurity to protect and grow Australian agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries. This is the first time Australia has had long-term sustainable and predictable funding for the Commonwealth biosecurity system.
The model, as announced in the 2023-24 Budget, significantly increased Commonwealth biosecurity funding, which is sustainable, permanent, and ongoing. The Budget package also included:
- greater transparency and accountability of Commonwealth biosecurity funding and expenditure
- a new low value import biosecurity clearance charge
- introduction of a proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy
In 2023, we reviewed biosecurity cost recovery arrangements for the first time since 2015. Fees and charges were increased and are now aligned with the cost of delivering biosecurity regulatory activity. We have also committed to an annual review of regulatory charges and made changes to legislation to include indexation.
Transparency and accountability
Biosecurity funding and expenditure reporting
The Biosecurity Funding and Expenditure Report 2024-25 is now available. This is the second year of dedicated biosecurity financial reporting and a continuation of the Australian Government’s commitment to provide greater transparency of biosecurity activities, budget and expenditure.
This year’s report expands on the inaugural report by introducing new insights and analysis of biosecurity expenditure. It also includes the department’s first progress update on the DAFF Biosecurity 2030 Roadmap since its release in October 2024.
The report complements existing public reporting such as the portfolio budget statements, annual reports and corporate plans by providing financial information specific to biosecurity. To view all of the department’s financial and non-financial performance reporting for 2024-25 you can read the annual report.
Future iterations of the Biosecurity Funding and Expenditure Report will be published annually on this page.
Sustainable Biosecurity Funding Advisory Panel
On 28 February 2024, the Australian Government announced it would extend its commitment to greater transparency and accountability through a new Sustainable Biosecurity Funding Advisory Panel (Advisory Panel). The work of the Advisory Panel builds closer collaboration between government and key stakeholders, with regular meetings to share insights, discuss biosecurity funding priorities and explain spending decisions. Membership of the Advisory Panel is drawn from major agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors, importers, and environmental and research organisations.
Further details on Advisory Panel arrangements, including membership and key documents are available on the Sustainable Biosecurity Funding Advisory Panel webpage.
Biosecurity cost recovery arrangements for low value goods
From 1 October 2024, a new cost recovery charge commenced for goods valued up to $1,000 that are imported by air or sea. The charge will cover the cost of biosecurity not currently subject to cost recovery. Prior to this date, taxpayers were covering this cost. Please visit the Self-Assessed Clearance cost recovery page for more details.
Proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy
The proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy and Charge (Biosecurity Protection Levy) was intended to be a new levy and charge payable by primary producers.
The bills to introduce the Biosecurity Protection Levy framework were discharged from the Senate Notice Paper on 12 February 2025. Please visit the Biosecurity Protection Levy page for more details.
Further information
- Proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy
- Biosecurity cost recovery
- Previous proposal: Onshore Biosecurity Levy (2018-19)
- Minister’s media release on new Sustainable Biosecurity Funding Advisory Panel
Downloads
Contact us
To find out more about Sustainable Biosecurity Funding, email: secretariatbsf@aff.gov.au