Aquaculture is an increasingly important part of Australia’s seafood production. In 2024-25, the real gross value of Australia’s aquaculture production was estimated to have reached $2.31 billion. This accounts for up to 58% of the total gross value of Australia’s fisheries and aquaculture sector, which is estimated to be close to $4 billion.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) publishes annual reports on Australia’s fisheries and aquaculture industry. The reports contain detailed data on production volume and value for both wild-catch and aquaculture sectors across all states, territories, and the Commonwealth. These reports can be found on the ABARES website.
The majority of Australian aquaculture production comes from high value species such as pearls, salmonids, tuna and oysters. In total, over 40 species are farmed commercially in Australia.
The top 5 aquaculture species groups by production value are:
- Salmonids
- Tuna
- Oysters
- Prawns
- Barramundi
Other commercially farmed species include abalone, freshwater finfish (such as, Murray cod, silver perch), brackish water or marine finfish (such as, snapper, yellowtail kingfish, mulloway, groupers), mussels, ornamental fish, marine sponges, mud crab, seaweed and sea cucumber.
Rules and regulations
Aquaculture in Australia is carefully managed to protect the environment and ensure food safety.
The Australian Government supports national programs for research, biosecurity, aquatic animal health, food safety, environmental protection, and trade. However, the day-to-day regulation of aquaculture operations is primarily managed by state and territory governments.
Aquaculture businesses, especially those that use or release water into public waterways, must follow strict environmental rules. These rules are regularly monitored by state authorities. Food safety standards also apply to all seafood—whether it’s farmed or wild-caught.
Thanks to these strong regulations, seafood produced in Australia is safe to eat and environmentally sustainable.
Market opportunities
Australia is recognised internationally for producing safe, high-quality seafood using environmentally sustainable practices. Australian aquaculture producers target both high value domestic and overseas markets, where there is growing demand for Australian products.