Terri Janke and Company Pty Ltd 
Lawyers and Consultants  
PO Box 780 Rosebery NSW 1445 
T |  02 9693 2577 
Our Knowledge: Your Future 
and the Environment 
DROUGHT RESILIENCE AND INNOVATION IN 
RURAL AND REMOTE FIRST NATIONS 
COMMUNITIES 
GAPS, BARRIERS, AND OPPORTUNITIES  
FINAL REPORT 
   Report prepared by Terri Janke & Company Pty Ltd.

2 
Terri Janke and Company acknowledge the First 
Nations people of Australia as the traditional 
custodians of the lands and waters on which we 
live and work, and everywhere in Australia. We 
offer our respect to the Elders of this Country and 
extend that respect to First Nations Elders past, 
present and emerging. 
Acknowledgments 
This report was prepared by Dr Terri Janke and Laura Melrose of Terri Janke and Company. 
Support and guidance during consultation was provided by Clara Klemski and Anika Valenti. 
Language 
First Nations peoples may refer to themselves and be referred to by others in a variety of 
ways, including as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people; Indigenous people; 
collectively as First Nations, First or Indigenous Australians or Australia’s First Peoples; and 
individually according to language or geo-cultural community groups.  
This document prefers the term First Nations peoples, though terms will be used 
interchangeably throughout. When working with specific communities or language groups, it 
is advisable to seek guidance from those in authority about the respectful and appropriate 
language protocols. 
Cultural notice 
First Nations readers should be aware that this document may contain the names of 
deceased Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.

3 
Contents 
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 4 
1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................... 5 
1.1 
Background............................................................................................................. 5 
1.2 
Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property .......................................................... 6 
1.3 
Integrating Indigenous knowledge ......................................................................... 11 
2 
First Nations Innovation and RDEA&C ......................................................................... 12 
2.1 
What is RDEA&C? ................................................................................................ 12 
2.2 
How do rural and remote First Nations communities currently use RDEA&C? ...... 12 
2.3 
Integrating and expanding Indigenous knowledge ................................................ 21 
3 
Indigenous Business in Remote Australia .................................................................... 21 
3.1 
Background........................................................................................................... 21 
3.2 
Demographics ....................................................................................................... 22 
3.3 
Indigenous entrepreneurship ................................................................................ 25 
3.4 
Existing entities in remote Australia ...................................................................... 26 
3.5 
Factors for success in First Nations business ....................................................... 26 
4 
Barriers to Innovation in Remote Australia ................................................................... 27 
4.1 
Education .............................................................................................................. 27 
4.2 
Trust ..................................................................................................................... 29 
4.3 
Land and waters ................................................................................................... 30 
4.4 
Resourcing ........................................................................................................... 31 
4.5 
Governance and structure ..................................................................................... 33 
4.6 
Community wellbeing ............................................................................................ 35 
5 
Summary of Opportunities and Recommendations ...................................................... 36 
6 
Appendices .................................................................................................................. 38 
6.1 
Methodology ......................................................................................................... 38 
6.2 
Literature Review .................................................................................................. 38 
6.3 
Acronyms and initials ............................................................................................ 43

4 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
First Nations people and communities have unique and interconnected ways of doing, being 
and knowing. Underpinning everything is an understanding of the connections between 
people, culture and Country. Indigenous heritage links to the past but is also a vibrant, 
dynamic and living cultural practice. Any works, projects or partnerships involving First 
Nations people and culture requires respect and understanding of the holistic and all-
encompassing nature of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures.  
Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, or ICIP, is a concept and a mechanism for 
understanding, recognising and protecting cultural values. ICIP may often be referred to as 
traditional knowledge or Indigenous knowledge, though really it encompasses much more 
than this. ICIP refers to all aspects and elements of Indigenous peoples’ cultural heritage, 
and the rights that Indigenous people hold in relation to that cultural heritage. The role of 
ICIP is crucial to an analysis of the gaps, opportunities and barriers to Indigenous business 
and innovation in remote and regional communities. 
First Nations peoples are concentrated in rural and remote regions of Australia. According to 
the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 38.9% of Indigenous people live in regional and remote 
areas of Australia, compared to 9.5% of the non-Indigenous population.1  
Indigenous business in Australia is a growing sector. Many successful businesses have 
been started and expanded by First Nations people in remote and rural areas of Australia, 
often focusing on bringing economic development and opportunity to their communities. 
Factors in successful Indigenous businesses include community control, strong cultural 
connections, local employment, good governance, flexibility, and access to funding. 
Indigenous people and communities are demonstrating innovation in a wide variety of 
sectors. Community groups and First Nations organisations are working in research and 
development (R&D) and taking advantage of commercial opportunities to bring economic 
benefit and socio-cultural advancement to their local areas, and wider communities. Some 
areas in which this innovation has occurred include cultural fire, land and sea country 
management, native nurseries and horticulture, the bushfoods and bush medicine industry, 
education, technology, language, arts, health, and renewable energies.  
Despite these examples of innovation, First Nations people in business face considerable 
adversity in remote and rural communities. These include impacts of past economic 
marginalisation and policies to restrict Indigenous wealth and economic growth 
opportunities, as well as the ongoing impact of poor education, employment and health 
outcomes, and higher rates of incarceration. Barriers to Indigenous innovation include lack of 
education, skills and training, limited inter-cultural competency and literacy, lack of trust in 
non-Indigenous partners and projects, restrictions associated with funding sources, low 
visibility impacting resource availability, limited access to services and technology, poor 
corporate governance, and impacts associated with low community wellbeing and social 
disadvantage.  
Improvement in this sector requires increased access to funding, facilitating knowledge 
sharing and capacity building, support to access services and develop skills on Country and 
1 Australian Bureau of Statistics, Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, June 
2016 Census (online, released 31 August 2018) https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/aboriginal-
and-torres-strait-islander-peoples/estimates-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-australians/jun-2016.

5 
in community, extension of existing technologies and innovative industry practices to remote 
communities, and recognising the value and importance of strong cultural connections and 
community wellbeing not only for social goals, but also organisational and commercial ones. 
1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Background 
The Future Drought Fund (FDF) provides secure, continuous funding for drought resilience 
initiatives. $100 million from this $5 billion dollar fund is made available each year to help 
Australian farms and communities prepare for the impacts of drought.  
The department’s FDF Drought Resilience Research and Adoption Program routinely 
assesses National Drought Resilience Research and Adoption priorities. This helps ensure 
future drought resilience research, development, extension, adoption, and commercialisation 
(RDEA&C) activities stay focused on national priorities and the needs of primary producers 
and rural and remote communities.  
Terri Janke and Company (TJC) is a 100% Indigenous owned and run firm of lawyers and 
consultants, with expertise in Indigenous engagement and Indigenous Cultural and 
Intellectual Property (ICIP). The firm is led by Dr Terri Janke (Solicitor Director), a 
Wuthathi/Meriam woman and multiple award-winning international expert in protection of 
Indigenous knowledge and ICIP. 
TJC brings a First Nations-led lens and perspective to the work of the FDF and has been 
engaged by the department to deliver a desktop research project to identify gaps, barriers 
and opportunities for drought innovation activities in rural and remote Indigenous 
communities. This report discusses the research outcomes and analysis through the lens of 
best practice engagement with First Nations peoples, including the role of ICIP in Indigenous 
innovation and commercialisation, which a particular focus on rural and remote communities. 
The sections of the report include: 
1. Introduction – a background of the project, and introduction to ICIP and the existing 
laws and protection frameworks in Australia; 
2. Indigenous Business in Remote Australia – a characterisation of Indigenous 
corporations and organisations in rural and remote communities, including a 
discussion of factors of success; 
3. First Nations Innovation and RDEA&C – consideration of some examples and 
sectors where rural and remote Indigenous communities currently use RDEA&C, 
including case study examples; 
4. Barriers to Innovation in Remote Australia – a breakdown of identified barriers to 
innovation in rural and remote communities, including associated opportunities for 
improvement and mitigation;  
5. Summary of Opportunities and Recommendations 
6. Literature Review

6 
1.2 Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property 
All engagement with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people requires understanding of 
and respect for Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, or ICIP. ICIP may often be 
referred to as traditional knowledge or Indigenous knowledge, though really it encompasses 
much more than this. ICIP plays a pivotal role in Indigenous innovative capacities. 
1.2.1 What is ICIP? 
ICIP refers to all aspects and elements of Indigenous peoples’ cultural heritage, and the 
rights that Indigenous people hold in relation to that cultural heritage. In terminology, ‘ICIP’ is 
often used interchangeably with ‘cultural heritage’ and vice versa.  
ICIP includes:  
• 
Traditional knowledge (TK) (including scientific, agricultural, technical and ecological 
knowledge, ritual knowledge),  
• 
Traditional cultural expressions (TCEs) (including stories, artworks, designs and 
symbols, literature and language), 
• 
Performances (ceremonies, dance and song),  
• 
Cultural objects (including, but not limited to arts, crafts, ceramics, jewellery, 
weapons, tools, visual arts, photographs, textiles, contemporary art practices),  
• 
Ancestral remains (human remains and tissues), 
• 
Cultural environment resources (including minerals and species), 
• 
Secret and sacred material and information (including sacred/historically significant 
sites and burial grounds), and 
• 
Documentation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ heritage in all forms 
of media such as films, photographs, artistic works, books, reports and records taken 
by others, sound recordings and digital databases.2 
ICIP incorporates both tangible (sites, objects) and intangible (knowledge, oral stories, 
performances) elements. 
Understanding ICIP requires respect for cultural protocols around knowledge holding, 
cultural authority, permissions, and communal ownership. Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander heritage is a dynamic, living heritage that is handed down from generation to 
generation, which means that modern and emerging knowledges that have been developed 
by Indigenous people based on history and culture can also be classified as ICIP. 
ICIP is captured under Article 31 of United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples (UNDRIP): 
Indigenous peoples have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop 
their cultural heritage, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural 
expressions, as well as the manifestations of their sciences, technologies 
and cultures, including human and genetic resources, seeds, medicines, 
knowledge of the properties of fauna and flora, oral traditions, literatures, 
2 Terri Janke, Our Culture: Our Future – Report on Australian Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual 
Property Rights (Report prepared for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission and the 
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 1998).

7 
designs, sports and traditional games and visual and performing arts. They 
also have the right to maintain, control, protect and develop their 
intellectual property over such cultural heritage, traditional knowledge, 
and traditional cultural expressions.3  
Under the UNDRIP, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have the rights to:4  
• 
own, control, maintain and expand their ICIP;  
• 
ensure that any means of protecting ICIP is based on the principle of self-
determination; 
• 
be recognised as the primary guardians and interpreters of their cultures;  
• 
authorise or refuse to authorise the commercial use of ICIP according to Indigenous 
customary laws;  
• 
maintain the secrecy of Indigenous knowledge and other cultural practices;  
• 
guard the cultural integrity of their ICIP; 
• 
be given full and proper attribution for sharing their cultural heritage; and  
• 
control the recording of cultural customs and expressions and the particular language 
which may be intrinsic to cultural identity, knowledge, skill and teaching of culture. 
1.2.2 Intellectual property laws 
ICIP rights are enshrined in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples, but they are not currently protected under law in Australia. Best practice requires 
that ICIP be considered and respected in a similar way to intellectual property (IP) rights 
Legally, ICIP can be protected under Australian IP laws where it meets the requirements for 
protection. 
sound recordings, broadcasts and published editions. It is a requirement that the work be 
protects the work for 70 years after the death of the creator. Generally, the owner of 
painted, sculpted, etched, photographed, produced or otherwise recorded the work), unless 
them being not recorded in material form (i.e. dance, songlines, traditional knowledge) or 
beyond the time period of protection (i.e. ancient rock art). 
1. Be attributed as the creator of the work,  
2. Stop someone else from being credited as the creator, and  
3. Ensure that their work is not subject to derogatory treatment (e.g., acts that are 
harmful to the creator’s honour or reputation).  
These rights are retained by the creator even where they assign (transfer) or licence their 
3 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, GA Res 61/295, UN Doc 
A/RES/61/295 (2 October 2007, adopted 13 September 2007) (‘UNDRIP’). 
4 Janke (1998) p. 47.

8 
creator plus 70 years. Moral rights are limited to individual creators and are not capable of 
recognising communal ownership of the ICIP incorporated in a work, such as where a 
painting depicts a Dreaming story that is held and owned by a whole community.  
Patents: Patents protect invented products and methods of manufacture which are novel 
and include an inventive step. Patents give the patentee control over their invention in the 
form of exclusive rights over their patented material to exploit the invention, or to authorise 
another to exploit the invention, for the term of the patent. Patents have ICIP challenge when 
inventions are derived from traditional knowledge such as medicinal remedies of plants. Any 
use of Indigenous knowledge should be applied with the consent of the traditional 
knowledge holders and should result in benefits back to communities.5 Patents can be 
applied as a way to protect traditional methods but are expensive to obtain. 
Confidential information: The law of confidential information and trade secrets protects 
knowledge that is deemed confidential in nature, where the publication of it would cause 
detriment to the owner of the knowledge. This can apply to secret/sacred information where 
it is given under a duty to keep it secret. 
There are also other forms of IP protection, including design law, plant breeders’ rights, and 
trade marks. Plant breeders’ rights can be relevant when considering Indigenous interests 
relating to traditional ecological knowledge (i.e. medicinal properties in particular plants). 
Trade marks are often used to protect words and logos, but there are no laws to ensure that 
Indigenous language words are only trade marked by or with the permission of Indigenous 
people. 
Any use of First Nations material must comply with IP law where applicable. There should 
also be an appropriate contract in place addressing IP, including any licensing permissions 
or assignment of ownership.  
At the same time, best practice demands that parties identify any ICIP incorporated in the 
First Nations material and seek cultural permission for use. This may include seeking 
consent not only from the creator of the work, but also the wider Aboriginal or Torres Strait 
Islander community, as well as giving proper attribution and sharing benefits.6 
1.2.3 Best practice protocols for ICIP protection 
Where there are gaps in the laws with regard to ICIP, proper protection can be enacted via 
protocols and contract clauses. 
Protocols are a method for implementing best practice standards in the operations of an 
organisation, industry or government. They can outline a framework for action that must be 
adhered to by staff or by partners seeking engagement. 
Dr Terri Janke has developed the sector-leading True Tracks® Principles for best practice 
Indigenous engagement. There are ten principles: 
1. RESPECT - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have the right to maintain, 
control, protect and develop their diverse cultures. ICIP rights should be considered 
in addition to any legal or intellectual property (IP) rights that exist in material that 
contains ICIP. 
5 Terri Janke, True Tracks: Respecting Indigenous knowledge and culture (2021) NewSouth 
Publishing, Sydney. 
6 Janke (2021).

9 
2. SELF-DETERMINATION - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have the right 
to self-determination in relation to their ICIP. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
people must be encouraged and empowered in decision-making processes about 
projects that involve or affect their ICIP. 
3. COLLABORATION, CONSULTATION AND CONSENT - Free prior informed 
consent for use of ICIP should be sought from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples. This is best achieved through collaboration and co-design of projects. This 
includes giving adequate information about the risks and implications of giving 
consent to use ICIP. 
4. INTERPRETATION AND AUTHENTICITY - As the primary guardians of their 
cultures, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people should be involved in any 
representation or interpretation of their ICIP. 
5. CULTURAL INTEGRITY - Maintaining the integrity of ICIP is important for the 
continuing practice of culture. 
6. SECRET, SACRED AND PRIVACY - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples 
have the right to maintain their cultural practices relating to secret and sacred 
information and knowledge. The privacy and confidentiality concerning aspects of 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people’s personal and cultural affairs must also 
be respected. 
7. ATTRIBUTION - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people should be 
acknowledged as the owners and custodians of their ICIP. 
8. BENEFIT SHARING - Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have the right to 
share in the benefits for use of their ICIP. 
9. MAINTAINING ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDER CULTURE - 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures are not static, and measures need to be 
taken so that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can maintain, revitalise and 
advance their cultures 
10. RECOGNITION AND PROTECTION - Use Australian law, protocols and policies to 
recognise and protect ICIP rights. 
Other examples of protocols include: 
AIATSIS Code of Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research: The 
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies has created the AIATSIS 
Code of Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research to ensure that research 
with and about Australian Indigenous peoples follows a process of meaningful engagement 
and reciprocity between the researcher and the individuals and/or communities involved in 
the research.7  
Our Knowledge Our Way: These caring for Country Best Practice Guidelines give a voice 
to Indigenous land and sea managers, allowing them to both strengthen their knowledge and 
build partnerships for knowledge sharing in caring for Country.8 
7 AIATSIS, Code of Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research (2020) 
https://aiatsis.gov.au/research/ethical-research/code-ethics.  
8 NAILSMA and CSIRO, ‘Our Knowledge, Our Way guidelines’ (2020) 
https://www.csiro.au/en/research/indigenous-science/indigenous-knowledge/our-knowledge-our-way.

10 
Australia Council for the Arts, Protocols for using First Nations Cultural and 
Intellectual Property in the Arts: These Protocols are for creative practitioners working 
with Indigenous artists or Indigenous cultural heritage in their creative practice. Those being 
funded by the Australia Council grant assessment panels are required to comply with the 
protocols.9 
Collaborative Science on Kimberley Saltwater Country – A Guide for Researchers: 
This guide was produced by traditional custodians in collaboration with partners and aimed 
to address shortfalls in existing research practice and to provide consistency for researchers. 
It provides access to established network of Aboriginal land and seas management 
professionals, knowledgeable Elders and Aboriginal rangers, and emphasises the need for 
consent, consultation and collaboration.10  
Screen Australia, Pathways and Protocols: A guide to assist all filmmakers working with 
Indigenous content and communities and provide advice about the ethical and legal issues 
involved in transferring Indigenous cultural material to the screen. These Protocols are 
relevant for any projects that involve filming on country.11 
1.2.4 Access and benefit sharing laws  
Access and benefit-sharing refers to the way in which genetic resources may be accessed, 
and how the benefits that result from their use are shared between the people using the 
resources and the people that provide them. 
The Nagoya Protocol: The Nagoya Protocol (2014)12 implements one of the three main 
objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity (1992)13, which is to promote the fair and 
equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources. The Protocol 
contains guidelines for the access to genetic resources, compliance with prior informed 
consent, and mutually agreed terms. Australia has ratified the Convention on Biological 
Diversity but has only signed (not ratified) the Nagoya Protocol. 
The Bonn Guidelines: The Bonn Guidelines14 are a set of guidelines to assist users and 
providers of genetic resources by setting standards in access and benefit sharing strategies. 
The Guidelines promote the use of negotiating mutually agreed terms between contracting 
parties (for example, between private parties or the State and Indigenous communities). The 
Guidelines also promote obtaining free, prior and informed consent from providers. The 
9 Australia Council for the Arts, Protocols for using First Nations Cultural and Intellectual Property in 
the Arts (2019) https://australiacouncil.gov.au/investment-and-development/protocols-and-
resources/protocols-for-using-first-nations-cultural-and-intellectual-property-in-the-arts/.  
10 Kimberley Land Council et al, Collaborative Science on Kimberley Saltwater Country – A Guide for 
Researchers (2017) https://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/sites/default/files/kimberley_indigenous_ 
saltwater_science_project_-_copy_of_collaborative_science_on_kimberley_saltwater_country.pdf. 
11 Screen Australia, Pathways & Protocols: a filmmaker’s guide to working with Indigenous people, 
culture and concepts (2009) https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/about-us/doing-business-with-
us/indigenous-content/indigenous-protocols.  
12 Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits 
Arising from their Utilization to the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity, opened for signature 29 
October 2010. 
13 Convention on Biological Diversity, opened for signature 5 June 1992, 1760 UNTS 79, (entered into 
force 29 December 1993). 
14 Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic 
Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization, (Secretariat 
of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2002).

11 
guidelines do not specifically raise Indigenous Knowledge protection, but provide standards 
for dealing with Indigenous communities, resources and knowledge. 
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cth): The EPBC Act 
and Regulation (2006) regulate access to biological resources in Commonwealth areas via 
permit. Where access is for commercial or potential commercial purposes, the applicant 
must enter into a benefit sharing agreement with the relevant access provider, including 
protection for and recognition of ‘indigenous people’s knowledge’. 
Biodiscovery Act 2004 (Qld): Amended in 2020, the Queensland Biodiscovery Act is the 
only legislation in Australia that is fully compliant with the Nagoya Protocol. It establishes an 
access and benefit-sharing framework for biodiscovery, including a traditional knowledge 
obligation, requiring that biodiscovery entities (e.g. universities, pharmaceutical and research 
organisations) take measures to use traditional knowledge only under an agreement with 
knowledge holders. The legislation is accompanied by an explanatory Code of Practice, 
Traditional Knowledge Guidelines and a Capacity Strengthening Toolkit.15 
See also the Biological Resources Act 2006 (NT) and the Nature Conservation Act 2014 
(ACT). 
1.3 Integrating Indigenous knowledge  
1.3.1 Indigenous Data Sovereignty 
Indigenous people have conventionally not been involved in setting the agenda for what data 
is collected, by whom, and for what purpose. Conventional data collection has resulted in the 
surveillance and control of Indigenous peoples and policies against their interests.16 
The concept of Indigenous Data Sovereignty (IDS) arose in response to the treatment of 
Indigenous people and communities by conventional and colonial data collection and 
management practices.  
IDS requires that Indigenous people have governance of data that is generated by state 
infrastructure, to shift the agenda to give equal weight to Indigenous aspirations rather than 
just deficits. It also requires access and control of data for governance: information that 
adequately reflects Indigenous cultural diversity, worldviews and priorities.17 
15 ‘Traditional knowledge and biodiscovery’, Queensland Government (Web Page, 2020) 
https://environment.des.qld.gov.au/licences-permits/plants-animals/biodiscovery/traditional-knowledge  
16 Lovett, Raymond et al. (2019) ‘Good data practices for indigenous data sovereignty and 
governance’. In A. Daly, S. K. Devitt, & M. Mann (Eds.), Good Data (pp. 26–36). Amsterdam: Institute 
of Network Cultures. 
17 Walter, M. and S. R. Carroll, (2021) ‘Indigenous Data Sovereignty, governance and the link to 
Indigenous policy’. In Walter, M. et al, (eds) Indigenous data sovereignty and policy (pp. 1-20) (New 
York: Routledge, 2021) 10; Smith, D.E. (2016) ‘Governing data and data for governance: the 
everyday practice of indigenous sovereignty’. In Kukutai, Tahu and John Taylor (eds), Indigenous 
Data Sovereignty: Towards an Agenda, CAEPR Research Monograph, 2016/34. Canberra: ANU 
Press, pp. 117–138.

12 
18 
2 FIRST NATIONS INNOVATION AND RDEA&C 
2.1 What is RDEA&C? 
The Department has identified the key action areas for increasing drought resilience as 
research, development, extension, adoption and commercialisation (RDEA&C).  
Research and development, or R&D, is a strategic necessity for innovation, and successful 
outcomes from R&D should be communicated widely. In the drought resilience sector, 
extension and adoption include communicating the benefits of R&D products and assisting 
the uptake of tools and practices that will help to adapt to drought. 
The Department has indicated that due to the wealth of stakeholder organisations already 
operating in the drought resilience research and development space, including CSIRO, BoM, 
research institutes and federal and state and territory government agencies, their focus will 
be on extending already existing tools and strategies to the farm gate and rural, regional, 
and remote communities.  
For First Nations communities, these action areas may have significantly different meaning 
and applications than for agricultural organisations and government agencies. 
2.2 How do rural and remote First Nations communities currently use 
RDEA&C? 
There are some inspiring examples of commercialisation opportunities being advanced by 
First Nations communities and businesses. Some of these examples are described in this 
18 Maiam nayri Wingara Indigenous Data Sovereignty Collective and Australian Indigenous 
Governance Institute (2018), Indigenous Data Sovereignty Communique, Canberra, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b3043afb40b9d20411f3512/t/5b6c0f9a0e2e725e9cabf4a6/15
33808545167/Communique%2B-%2BIndigenous%2BData%2BSovereignty%2BSummit.pdf.  
Maiam nayri Wingara Indigenous Data Sovereignty Collective and the 
Australian Indigenous Governance Institute convened the National Indigenous 
Data Sovereignty Summit in 2018, with more than 40 Indigenous delegates and 
representatives from Aotearoa New Zealand. The Summit delegates asserted 
that in Australia, Indigenous peoples have the right to: 
• 
Exercise control of the data ecosystem including creation, 
development, stewardship, analysis, dissemination and infrastructure. 
• 
Data that is contextual and disaggregated (available and accessible 
at individual, community and First Nations levels). 
• 
Data that is relevant and empowers sustainable self-determination 
and effective self-governance. 
• 
Data structures that are accountable to Indigenous peoples and First 
Nations. 
• 
Data that is protective and respects our individual and collective 
interests.

13 
section, with case studies extracted, though there may be many more. These examples are 
not without their challenges, which will be considered in a later section. 
2.2.1 Cultural fire in environmental management 
Land management through fire and burning presents a unique opportunity for First Nations 
communities. Being a country prone to bushfires necessarily requires environmental 
practices and techniques that may reduce the negative impacts of fire. As Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander peoples have been managing these lands and waters for 60,000 
years, their expertise is invaluable.  
Cultural burning is an environmental practice based on this wealth of Indigenous ecological 
knowledge (IEK). Cultural burns consider biodiversity, times of day, seasons and weather 
patterns, are generally managed on foot and without accelerants, and reduce both needs for 
large scale hazard reduction burns and risks of uncontrolled bushfires. This results in lower 
greenhouse gas emissions, better outcomes for local communities, less harm to wildlife and 
prime conditions for native flora and fauna.19 
In Australia in 2021, there were at least 29 Indigenous-owned fire management projects and 
organisations.20 Other similar examples include the Firesticks Alliance, the West Arnhem 
Land Fire Abatement Project and the Indigenous Carbon Industry Network, all of which use 
networks of relationships between traditional owners, Indigenous Ranger groups, 
government, research institutes and private companies to implement IEK in land 
management.  
2.2.2 Bushfoods: blending old knowledge with new technology 
IEK of native plants creates considerable opportunity for RDEA&C. Many First Nations 
people and businesses are engaged in the bushfoods and bush medicine industry, in 
growing or wild harvesting, farm management, product development, and sales.  
19 Terri Janke, Clara Klemski and Laura Melrose, ‘Bushfires, climate change and Indigenous 
Ecological Knowledge: healing country through holistic environmental management’ (2021) Australian 
Environment Review, Vol 36(4), p. 94. 
20 Fleur Kingham, “The impact of environmental law on Indigenous women in Australia” (Speech, 
International Association of Women Judges Biennial Conference, Auckland New Zealand, 8 May 
2021) http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/QldJSchol/2021/10.html.  
CASE STUDY: Wilinggin Aboriginal Corporation, in the North Kimberley region 
of WA, combines traditional fire management practices with contemporary 
science to achieve both caring for Country outcomes and commercial benefit. 
The corporation trains and employs Traditional Owners as fire specialists and 
rangers who conduct regular savanna burns in return for carbon credits under 
the federal Emissions Reduction Fund. 
The corporation can access commercial benefit from their work by selling 
carbon credits. The profits are reinvested into fire management operations and 
programs that support elders to train young rangers, as well as innovations for 
learning on Country, like incorporating drone technology and engaging pilots for 
surveying. 
Source: ORIC, ‘Credit for mitigating climate change’ (October 2021) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/credit-mitigating-climate-change

14 
The Kakadu plum is an example of a native food with high commercial value. It has 
commercial potential both as a food and as a cosmetic ingredient, for having the highest 
recorded levels of vitamin C, antioxidants, and preservative and antimicrobial properties. 
First Nations peoples in Australia’s top end have been using the Kakadu plum as food and 
medicine for thousands of years.  
The Northern Australia Aboriginal Kakadu Plum Alliance (NAAKPA) is an alliance of 
Aboriginal-owned enterprises supplying Kakadu plum fruit and extracts for the Australian 
market. NAAKPA currently represents 40%-45% of total Kakadu Plum produced in Australia 
(2019) with a retail market value of AU$1.7 million.21 
A discussion of some of the challenges of the bushfoods industry is included in Chapter 4 
below. 
2.2.3 Nurseries and horticulture 
Given that Indigenous people have knowledge of plants, the development of Indigenous 
nurseries is another way that Indigenous peoples and communities are contributing to 
drought resilient objectives.  
Zena Cumpston’s guide to uses of Indigenous plants lists 7 species that are drought tolerant 
including Weeping Grass, Native Flax and Wallaby Grass.22 
21 Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, ‘ANSTO helps verify the origin of 
traditional Aboriginal products to benefit consumer confidence and Aboriginal enterprises’ (Article, 13 
August 2021) https://www.ansto.gov.au/news/ansto-helps-verify-origin-of-traditional-aboriginal-
products-to-benefit-consumer-confidence. 
22 Cumpston, Zena (2020) Indigenous plant use: A booklet on the medicinal, nutritional and 
technological use of indigenous plants, Clean Air and Urban Landscapes Hub, The University of 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, https://nespurban.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Indigenous-
plant-use.pdf. 
CASE STUDY: NAAKPA member organisation Mamabulanjin Aboriginal 
Corporation is working to expand the Kakadu plum industry. Rather than 
harvesting wild trees like other member organisations, Mamabulanjin AC is 
planting orchards and engaging in R&D to increase yields and cultivate tasty 
harvests. 
Mamabulanjin AC is also partnering with the Australian Nuclear Science and 
Technology Organisation (ANSTO) and IP Australia to develop technological 
methods of communicating information about the provenance of the plums. This 
involves isotopic and elemental ‘fingerprinting’ technology and soil analysis for 
geolocation, and a chain of custody ledger via blockchain to authenticate 
transactions in a Kakadu Plum app. 
These projects have been supported by funding from the Department of 
Agriculture, Water and Environment (DAWE) and the Indigenous Land and Sea 
Corporation (ILSC). 
Sources:  
• 
ORIC, ‘Bush food, meet tech’ (Article, September 2021) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/bush-food-meet-tech  
• 
‘ANSTO helps verify the origin of traditional Aboriginal products to benefit 
consumer confidence and Aboriginal enterprises’, ANSTO (13 August 2021)

15 
Since the release of Dark Emu, Bruce Pascoe says that both Indigenous and non-
Indigenous farmers have become more interested in growing native species such as 
murrnong, native millet and kangaroo grass.23 The hard part of this interest and new industry 
is ensuring that Indigenous peoples benefit from the sharing of their knowledge. 
Other nurseries and horticulture projects include: 
• 
Black Duck Foods, co-founded by Bruce and Jack Pascoe. In March 2022, Black 
Duck Foods entered into a partnership with the University of Melbourne-led project, 
‘Whole-system Redesign of Broadacre Farming of SE Australia’. “This project will 
demonstrate how pulses can be used as an integral part of crop rotations in grains 
and graze, and grain farming systems where farm resilience is further enhanced by 
incorporating native crops and grasses.”24 This project has also received grant 
funding from DAWE. 
• 
Western QLD traditional custodians, JCU and UQ – Iningai, Mbarbaram (Atherton 
Tablelands) and Batavia (Cape York) custodians are working on two parallel projects. 
23 Chan, Gabrielle, ‘'All about the land': drought shakes farming to its Indigenous roots’, The Guardian 
(online, 6 October 2018) https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/06/all-about-the-land-
drought-shakes-farming-to-its-indigenous-roots.  
24 Southern Farming Solutions, ‘University of Melbourne led projects receive $2.1m through Drought 
Resilience Innovation Grants’ (Article, 21 March 2022) https://sfs.org.au/article/university-of-
melbourne-led-projects-receive-2-1m-through-drought-resilience-innovation-grants. 
CASE STUDY: The Victorian based First People of the Millewa-Mallee 
Aboriginal Corporation are working in research and production of drought 
resilient native crops. 
The project (funded by a DAWE FDF Drought Resilience Innovation grant) 
conducts research in wattles, grasses and yams that can be grown under 
minimal supervision in the Sunraysia Horticultural Area for use as gluten free 
flour and foods. The Belar Nursey and Biocultural Resource Centre in Irymple is 
Indigenous run and provides education and employment to the local Indigenous 
community.  
The rivers and floodplains in Mallee country have been scarred and destroyed 
by farming. The First People of the Millewa-Mallee Aboriginal Corporation have 
a Country and Water Plan which aims to repair the natural environment by 
caring for Country which includes establishing rangers and establishing a native 
seed bank and nursery. They are working with the Federation of Victorian 
Traditional Owner Corporations to develop this plan. 
Sources:  
• 
Innovation Grants (Web Page, accessed 25 April 2022) 
https://www.awe.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought/future-
drought-fund/research-adoption-program/drought-resilience-innovation-grants 
• 
Tamara Clark, ‘Irymple nursery run solely by indigenous community keen to 
grow’, Sunraysia Daily (online, 20 April 2021) 
https://www.sunraysiadaily.com.au/farming/4145540/irymple-nursery-run-
solely-by-indigenous-community-keen-to-grow  
• 
First People of the Millewa-Mallee Aboriginal Corporation, Action Plan 2020, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/59c30286e3df28fd2295efbb/t/5ef58fcff22
174273c616d73/1593151597366/Low+res+Action+Plan.pdf

16 
They have partnered with James Cook University to turn plants with medicinal 
properties into saleable remedies, and with the University of Queensland to bring 
bush fruits and plants to the market, including a nursery and grow-house on 
Turraburra.25 
• 
Pundi Produce – Dominic Smith is an Indigenous farmer growing native foods and 
botanicals including wattle, river mint, lemon myrtle, quandongs and muntries in the 
Riverland in South Australia. He also studies nursing and is using knowledge sharing 
about sustainable farming practices and native foods to support troubled Indigenous 
youth and people with mental health issues by connecting with country.26 
• 
Pathways Together Aboriginal Corporation operates a native nursery in Dubbo 
and specialises in Aboriginal programs focused on education, employment, mental 
health and well-being.27 
• 
Noongar Land Enterprise were the first Aboriginal grower group in Australia. The 
group currently represents six Noongar landholding groups, aimed at creating 
commercial profit from Indigenous-held land including a tree nursery, honey, bush 
foods, and native revegetation.28  
2.2.4 Regenerative land and water practices 
The connection with country that is experienced by First Nations people has driven some 
Indigenous businesses to work toward outcomes of sustainable farming and regeneration of 
land and waters.  
25 Willis, Carli, ‘Indigenous custodians work with universities to bring bush foods and remedies to 
market’, ABC News (online, 19 March 2022) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-03-19/bush-foods-
remedies-longreach-indigenous-university-project/100921012.  
26 Schremmer, Jessica, ‘Aboriginal farmer sees native bush food as pathway to connect with troubled 
youth’, ABC News (online, 1 March 2021) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-03-01/aboriginal-farmer-
creates-reconnection-through-native-bush-foods/13194092; Smith, Dominic, ‘Empowering people 
through education reconnection’, Pundi Produce (Blog, 30 Aug 2021) 
https://pundiproduce.com.au/empowering-people-through-education/.  
27 ‘Crown land unlocking ‘pathways’ for Aboriginal cultural heritage and health’, Mirage News (online, 
25 March 2022) https://www.miragenews.com/crown-land-unlocking-pathways-for-aboriginal-750892/.  
28 Noongar Land Enterprise, https://www.noongarlandenterprise.com.au/; Cornell, Anna, ‘Improving 
On-Farm Biodiversity and Drought Resilience Day at Gunnado’, Northern Agricultural Catchments 
Council (Blog, 30 March 2022) https://www.nacc.com.au/improving-on-farm-bodiversity-and-drought-
resilience-day-at-gunnado/.

17 
Other opportunities for Indigenous people to be involved in innovation in this sector may 
include desalination plants, such as those being implemented by the South Australian 
government to provide potable water to remote Aboriginal communities.29  
Traditional custodians are also being called on to guide projects funded by non-Indigenous 
organisations. Telstra is conducting technology trials to plant and manage the reforestation 
of 240 hectares of land at Yarrowyck in northern NSW, to store greenhouse gas emissions 
and improve environmental resilience of the land with the guidance of the Anaiwan and 
Kamilaroi/Gomeroi peoples.30  
2.2.5 Land and sea management  
Land and sea management is one of the largest sectors in which Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander businesses are involved.  
Organisations like the Indigenous Desert Alliance offer support for Indigenous rangers by 
facilitating connections and networking, coordinating projects, holding events and advocating 
for important issues like fees for service.31 
Further, research has suggested that funding and support of Indigenous land and sea 
management programs in remote communities will have ‘spill over’ contributions to other 
sectors in the region via several pathways. These include improved skills and experience 
increasing human capital, trickle-down spending by funded Indigenous initiatives to other 
29 Harris, Cecilia, ‘Remote SA town's new desalination plant’ Australian Water Association (online, 24 
June 2021) https://www.awa.asn.au/resources/latest-news/business/assets-and-operations/remote-
sa-towns-new-desalination-plant.  
30 Parry, Danita, ‘Telstra trials technologies to grow the Australian carbon market’, Telstra (Media 
Release, 24 March 2022) https://www.telstra.com.au/aboutus/media/media-releases/carbon-farm-trial.  
31 See for example Commonwealth of Australia, National Indigenous Australians Agency, Fee for 
Service in Indigenous Land and Sea Management: Impact Assessment and Analysis (2018) 
CASE STUDY: Beemurra Aboriginal Corporation is the only Aboriginal-run 
backgrounding business in Western Australia. When first taking ownership of 
the 1200-hectare property in Yallalie Downs, the original plan was to breed 
goats, then lease for crops and run sheep, but the returns were low.  
Beemurra AC took governance training offered by ORIC and were funded by 
the then-Indigenous Land Corporation (now the ILSC) to switch to cattle 
backgrounding. Cattle backgrounding is a gradual transition process to prepare 
cattle for entering a feedlot and minimising their distress, resulting in them 
achieving goal weights without delays. 
The corporation use rotational grazing to ensure the pastures recover. Now that 
Beemurra has established a solid commercial basis, it is looking forward to 
driving regenerative agriculture projects, and supporting young people’s cultural 
connections with country. 
Sources:  
• 
ORIC, ‘Backgrounding cattle, foregrounding community (Article, June 2021) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/backgrounding-cattle-
foregrounding-community

18 
Indigenous-owned goods and service providers in the region, and increasing the productive 
capacity of the region in general, which influences the productivity of other businesses.32 
2.2.6 Education  
Some initiatives by First Nations people include the integration of traditional knowledge in 
western education.  
2.2.7 Technology 
New technologies present great opportunity to First Nations businesses and entrepreneurs, 
when they have access to them.  
32 Jarvis, Diane et al, ‘Are Indigenous land and sea management programs a pathway to Indigenous 
economic independence?’ (2018) The Rangeland Journal, vol. 40, pp. 423-424. 
CASE STUDY: Nyungar elder Clint Hansen is teaching Indigenous land 
conservation methods at Geraldton TAFE, including rehydrating creeks and 
rivers, controlled burning in a holistic way, and regenerative agriculture using 
de-stress stock methods. The course includes practical work on a farm east of 
Geraldton, where students work alongside the owners to help regenerate the 
property. 
Source:  
• 
Barndon, Glenn, ‘Indigenous regenerative land management included in 
agricultural program at TAFE’, ABC News (online, 21 July 2020) 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-07-21/indigenous-regenerative-land-
education-course-at-tafe/12268326 
CASE STUDY: Cherbourg Aboriginal Shire Council is using artificial 
intelligence technology to monitor waste and improve recycling. 
The Council has partnered with the Peregian Digital Hub, Cherbourg and 
Noosa Councils, Advance Queensland and the Indigenous Land and Sea 
Corporation to create and apply the software for waste management.  
“The data analysts segment objects in the images and assign them with the 
correct category. Over time the software gradually learns to differentiate 
between objects like aluminium cans and steel tins that can be in various states 
of disrepair.” 
Cherbourg is home to about 1,200 people, of whom 98% are Indigenous (ABS, 
2016 Census). In addition to the positive environmental outcomes from more 
efficient waste management, the project has created funding and revenue 
opportunities as well as employment and upskilling opportunities in an 
emerging industry for the residents of Cherbourg. 
Source:  
• 
‘AI helps Indigenous Council recycle’, Local Government Focus (1 November 
2021) https://lgfocus.com.au/news/2021/11/01/ai-helps-indigenous-council-
recycle/  
• 
Cormack, Holly, ‘AI tech to put town ahead of the pack’, The Chronicle (online, 
30 March 2021) https://www.pressreader.com/australia/the-chronicle-
8992/20210330/281797106784797

19 
33 
2.2.8 Languages  
First Nations languages carry deep spiritual significance and connections to ancestors, 
Country and values. They may be owned communally and shared by communities or may be 
subject to specific cultural protocols and restrictions as to their meanings and uses.  
Language has been used by Indigenous organisations to empower connection to Country 
and taking care of species and biodiversity, by linking traditional names of flora, fauna, 
seasons and other things to western science. 
33 Case studies provided by Michael Davis, Agribusiness division, Indigenous Land and Sea 
Corporation, consultation on 26 April 2022. 
CASE STUDY: Indigenous digital agency INDIGI LAB collaborated with the 
NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service to create 360-degree, virtual reality 
videos aimed at inspiring kids to learn more about Aboriginal culture in the 
NSW region. 
The partnership trained five Indigenous rangers to use the technology and then 
produced seven videos that explored Sydney Harbour, Katoomba, Kosciuszko 
National Park, Lake Mungo, Dorrigo National Park and the Coffs Harbour 
region. The videos comprise language, Dreaming stories, information about 
plants and animals as well as Aboriginal history that stretches back for 
thousands of years. 
Sources:  
• 
‘Watch: Indigenous Reality adds new dimensions to Virtual Reality’, Welcome 
to Country (16 October 2017) https://www.welcometocountry.org/indigenous-
reality-virtual-reality/  
• 
‘Aboriginal rangers get hands on with the latest technologies’, NITV (14 
October 2017) 
https://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/culture/article/2017/10/12/aboriginal-rangers-get-
hands-latest-technologies   
CASE STUDY: Yugul Mangi Rangers and Ngukurr Language Centre have 
partnered with Macquarie University to enter Western and Indigenous scientific 
knowledge from South East Arnhem Land into the Atlas of Living Australia 
(ALA). It provides two-way Indigenous engagement to encourage more 
Indigenous content, and importantly it creates feedback loops to make the ALA 
more relevant and useful for Indigenous people. 
The Yugul Mangi Rangers, along with Emilie Ens (Macquarie University), the 
Ngukurr Language Centre, and the community have collected and documented 
language and knowledge about plants and animals over 6 years. In 2020 they 
published this knowledge as the Cross-cultural guide to some animals and 
plants of South East Arnhem Land, which is available for purchase.  
Source:  
• 
‘Indigenous Ecological Knowledge’, Atlas of Living Australia 
https://www.ala.org.au/indigenous-ecological-knowledge/

20 
2.2.9 Arts and culture 
First Nations arts and culture is a large industry. Creation and sale of artistic goods like 
paintings, weavings, photographs, artefacts and tools are an area in which many Indigenous 
people are engaged in commercial enterprise.  
Often, these works carry significant meaning or messages.  
2.2.10 Health and wellbeing 
Indigenous communities are spearheading programs to address food and water security.  
2.2.11 Renewable energy  
Indigenous organisations all over the country are getting involved in funded projects and joint 
ventures invested in renewable energies. These projects often involve constructing 
renewable energy facilities such as wind farms on Indigenous owned or managed land.  
CASE STUDY: Pormpuraaw Art & Culture Centre Incorporated has become 
known worldwide for its artists’ creations utilising recycled materials and ghost 
nets. Ghost nets are plastic fishing nets illegally dumped by commercial fishers 
at sea, killing fish, birds and other ocean life. Many of these animals, such as 
crocodiles, sea turtles and barramundi, have significant cultural importance to 
the people of Pormpuraaw. The artists collect the washed-up ghost nets along 
the beach and create sculptures representing their totems. 
As Pormpuraaw’s only export industry the Art Centre provides an opportunity 
for local artists to earn an income from their art practices. The Centre supports 
artists through showcasing and selling their works and it acts as a community 
‘Keeping Place’ of local artefacts, photographs, language, stories, art, and other 
items that need to be preserved and available for future generations. 
Sources:  
• 
Pormpuraaw Art & Culture Centre, https://pormpuraawartculture.com/  
• 
Australian Museum, ‘Ghost net art’ (Web Page, 26 May 2020) 
https://australian.museum/learn/cultures/atsi-collection/ghost-net-art/   
CASE STUDY: The Yuwaya Ngarra-li partnership between the Dharriwaa 
Elders Group, an Association of Aboriginal Elders in Walgett, NSW, and the 
University of New South Wales are coordinating a community-led program, the 
‘Walgett Food and Water for Life Program’ (WFW4L).  
The aim of WFW4L is to improve nutrition and wellbeing outcomes of the local 
Aboriginal community through sustainable solutions to food and water 
insecurity, and develop and evaluate a model for improving outcomes in 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities across Australia. 
Sources:  
• 
Hart, Ashleigh Chanel et al, ‘Indigenous Community-Led Programs to Address 
Food and Water Security: Protocol for a Systematic Review’ (2021) vol. 
18(12) International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 6366 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18126366   
• 
A community in action: How Walgett is redefining food systems’ (Blog, October 
2021) https://www.dharriwaaeldersgroup.org.au/index.php/yuwayangarrali/38-
yn-publications/215-un-food-summit-2021-walgett-case-study

21 
In this sector, First Nations groups, unions, industry bodies and academics have 
collaborated to establish the First Nations Clean Energy Network. They aim to forge 
partnerships between communities and industry to develop renewable energy projects on 
Indigenous land to provide reliable power and end energy insecurity.34 
2.3 Integrating and expanding Indigenous knowledge 
Combining Indigenous knowledge and western science presents a great many benefits for 
both Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. First Nations groups have the opportunity to 
explore, revive and share their culture and knowledge base where past colonial practices 
may have resulted in significant knowledge loss and dispossession. In addition, non-
Indigenous organisations such as governments, researchers and other entities can learn and 
gain from the expertise of the oldest living culture on this planet, who have cared for the land 
and waters of this country for 60,000 years. In other countries, this knowledge has proven 
invaluable. In South Africa, a research survey into implementation of Indigenous knowledge 
in drought risk reduction found that two thirds of respondents relied on Indigenous 
knowledge in their farming practices and drought risk reduction.35 
Having noted this opportunity, it is vital that use and application of Indigenous knowledge is 
done with the consent and co-design of First Nations communities. Partnering organisations 
and research bodies should approach First Nations groups with an understanding of ICIP 
and Indigenous Data Sovereignty, and be prepared to learn and respect any particular 
cultural protocols that apply to that group. 
3 INDIGENOUS BUSINESS IN REMOTE AUSTRALIA 
3.1 Background 
First Nations peoples are concentrated in rural and remote regions of Australia. According to 
the OECD territorial definition, 48% of First Nations people live in predominantly rural 
regions compared to 17% of the non-Indigenous population.36 Data from the Australian 
34 Lannin, Sue, ‘First Nations clean energy network set up to deliver cheap and reliable power to 
Indigenous communities’, ABC News (online, 17 Nov 2021) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-11-
17/first-nations-clean-energy-network-bringing-renewable-power/100623596.  
35 Muyambo, Fummi, Yonas T Bahta and Andries J Jordaan, ‘The role of indigenous knowledge in 
drought risk reduction: A case of communal farmers in South Africa’ (2017) Jamba – Journal of 
Disaster Risk Studies, vol. 9(1), p. 410.  
36 OECD (2020), Linking Indigenous Communities with Regional Development in Australia, OECD 
Rural Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ab4d8d52-en, ch 2. 
CASE STUDY: The Northern Territory Indigenous Business Network (NTIBN) 
has partnered with the Octopus Group to create majority Indigenous-owned JV 
Desert Springs Octopus (DSO) and provide low-cost renewable energy to 
support infrastructure investments in Northern Australia.  
DSO will build both an energy grid for the NT as well as support remote off-grid 
Indigenous communities to shift from diesel power to renewable energies. 
Source:  
• 
Brendan How, ‘NT’s $50 billion Indigenous renewable energy partnership’, 
Innovation Aus (online, 25 February 2022) https://www.innovationaus.com/nts-
50-billion-indigenous-renewable-energy-partnership/.

22 
Bureau of Statistics gives a similar picture, with 38.9% of Indigenous people living in Outer 
Regional, Remote or Very Remote areas of Australia, as opposed to Inner Regional or Major 
Cities. This compares to 9.5% of the non-Indigenous population.37  
On the commercial front, the Indigenous business sector is growing, though it has a long 
way to go before reaching equity with non-Indigenous businesses. Indigenous people are 
involved in business in remote Australia in various capacities, both as employees and as 
business owners. These enterprises operate in a variety of sectors, including mining, 
agriculture, environmental management and tourism. 
3.2 Demographics 
3.2.1 Indigenous business sector 
The National Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA) estimates that of the 2.1 million 
businesses in Australia, around 12,000-16,000 are Indigenous-owned.38 Indigenous 
businesses and involvement of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in commercial 
enterprises are difficult to measure. 
Other sources of data come from non-government organisations and networks like Supply 
Nation. Supply Nation is a national database of Indigenous businesses. With approximately 
2335 registered supplier members, each of which needs a minimum of 50% Indigenous 
ownership to be registered, Supply Nation has estimated that it represents about 20% of all 
business in the Indigenous business sector. These total approximately 11,660 Indigenous-
owned businesses. This statistic is based on Census data on the number of Indigenous 
owner-managers, though Supply Nation have noted this is not a perfect measure of 
Indigenous businesses due to challenges with reporting. Further, as the businesses 
registered with Supply Nation are generally larger than the rest of the sector, their 
representations of total Indigenous revenue and employment are estimated to be higher, 
44% and 51% respectively.39 
There is no one dataset that comprehensively totals all Indigenous businesses in Australia. 
Indigenous businesses are often registered under the Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander) Act 2006 (CATSI Act) but may also be registered under the Australian 
Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC), the Corporations Act 2001, or any state or 
territory legislation (e.g. associations). There are also numerous Indigenous charities and 
not-for-profit organisations registered under the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits 
Commission (ACNC), who may still undertake commercial activities as long as they are 
within the scope of advancing their charitable purpose, and who may also be joint registered 
with the Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations (ORIC) as a corporation.  
The distinction between Indigenous businesses and Indigenous corporations and 
organisations is often blurred. Indigenous businesses may be sole traders or companies 
incorporated under the Corporations Law, state associations laws, or the CATSI Act. 
Indigenous businesses that are incorporated under the Corporations Law are often run by 
37 Australian Bureau of Statistics, Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, June 
2016 Census (online, released 31 August 2018) https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/aboriginal-
and-torres-strait-islander-peoples/estimates-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-australians/jun-2016.  
38 NIAA, Indigenous Business Sector Strategy 2018-2028, (‘NIAA IBSS’) p. 4 
https://www.niaa.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/ibss_strategy.pdf. 
39 Supply Nation, State of Indigenous Business: Driving growth across the Indigenous business sector 
(Research Report No. 1, December 2020) https://supplynation.org.au/research-paper/state-of-
indigenous-business-driving-growth/, p. 6.

23 
Indigenous entrepreneurs, with the shares being majority owned by individual Indigenous 
people. Indigenous corporations incorporated under the CATSI Act are registered with 
ORIC, and instead of shareholders they have members. Their distribution of profits is 
decided by the collective and they operate in accordance with agreed objects for the benefit 
of the group. ‘Indigenous organisations’ is a wider term which includes corporations as well 
as Indigenous companies limited by guarantee or registered under state associations law. 
These Indigenous organisations are not primarily focused on profit returns to the business 
owners but provide community services such as native title representative bodies or other 
community membership-based organisations.  
In one specific class, there are approximately 3400 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
corporations registered with ORIC under the CATSI Act. In this chapter, unless expressed 
otherwise, statistics and information about ‘Indigenous corporations’ in Australia refer to 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations registered with ORIC under the CATSI 
Act.  
3.2.2 Business types 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses cover a range of products and services. 
They include registered native title bodies corporate (RNTBCs), health and community 
services, housing, hospitality, construction, education and training, art centres, community 
stores, tourism ventures, and land management, among others.40  
There are also numerous Indigenous alliances and networks that operate in commercial and 
socio-economic sectors, such as the Indigenous Carbon Industry Network or the First 
Nations Bushfood and Botanical Alliance Australia. These entities are registered as 
companies in their own right, but their work involves bringing together smaller organisations, 
businesses and sole traders in their respective industries, often from diverse and remote 
areas. 
Approximately two thirds of Indigenous corporations have joint registration as charities.41 
The majority of Indigenous corporations are community run, membership based and not for 
profit. There are also many Indigenous organisations registered solely under the ACNC.  
Some corporations are landholding entities. These include organisations holding land under 
legislation like the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 or the Queensland 
Indigenous Land Acts, or other forms of tenure including pastoral leases, land trusts or 
freehold title.  
Some corporations have registered subsidiary companies to manage their commercial 
interests. These are often proprietary limited entities. The Indigenous corporation manages 
members and community services, while the subsidiary may be registered under ASIC or the 
Corporations Act and manages associated commercial functions, such as civil engineering, 
providing services to mining operations, or others.42 
21 March 2022) https://data.gov.au/dataset/ds-dga-2c072eed-d6d3-4f3a-a6d2-
8929b0c78682/details?q= (‘ORIC dataset’). 
41 Consultation with Gerrit Wanganeen, Deputy Registrar, ORIC, 21 April 2022. 
42Ibid.

24 
3.2.3 Geographic location  
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations are spread all across Australia, from 
Tasmania to the Torres Strait, though are largely concentrated in Western Australia, north 
Queensland and the Northern Territory.  
A majority of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations are based in rural and 
regional Australia. Information about the breakdown of these geographic locations by 
postcode is available in public datasets provided by ORIC.43 
3.2.4 Business size 
Under the CATSI Act, corporations are classed as either small, medium or large based on 
their gross operating income, gross assets, and number of employees.44 
The vast majority are small corporations – more than 2500. Just over 700 are medium 
corporations, while large corporations number less than 200.  
In 2020-2021, close to 1200 corporations reported having zero employees. Corporations 
with 1-4 employees and 5-24 employees numbered very similarly, with approximately 270 
each, and 174 corporations reported more than 24 employees.45 
3.2.5 Boards of Indigenous companies  
Indigenous corporations display a much higher percentage of women in board seats than 
ASIC corporations.46 In fact, at time of writing, across all registered Indigenous corporations, 
female board members outnumber male board members.47  
Youth are not as highly represented on Indigenous boards, largely due to the value placed 
on eldership and cultural authority. This may contribute to challenges faced by some 
43 ORIC dataset (21 March 2022). 
44 ORIC, ‘Corporation size and reporting’ (Web Page) https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/catsi-fact-
sheet/corporation-size-and-reporting.  
45 ORIC dataset (21 March 2022). 
46 Consultation with Gerrit Wanganeen, Deputy Registrar, ORIC, 21 April 2022. 
47 Total women: 9628; total men: 9029. Source: ORIC dataset (21 March 2022). 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
QLD
WA
NT
NSW
SA
VIC
ACT
TAS
No. of registered businesses
State or territory
Sizes of Indigenous businesses
Small
Medium
Large

25 
corporations, as younger people may be better informed about methods of western law and 
process.48  
3.3 Indigenous entrepreneurship 
The Indigenous business sector has grown substantially over the past decade since the 
establishment of Indigenous Procurement Policies (IPP) within Commonwealth and State 
governments. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander men are more than twice as likely to be 
self-employed as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women.49 
Supply Nation has supported greater engagement by corporations and government 
members to engage Indigenous business in their supply chains. In 2020, businesses 
registered with Supply Nation had an estimated annual revenue of $3.9 billion and more than 
30,000 total employees.50 
The Indigenous business sector is growing at great speed. Between 2015 and 2019, 
procurement spending on Supply Nations suppliers grew from $31 million to $952 million.51 
The IPP has enabled the growth of Indigenous joint ventures (IJVs) that have been able to 
partner with the energy and mining sector. These opportunities appear to be growing, 
according to media reports. For example: 
• 
Perth-based renewable energy company Infinite Blue Energy has signed an 
agreement with Aboriginal-owned business Boya Energy to build and develop a 
planned 10MW green hydrogen plant in Northam, WA.52  
Green hydrogen requires large quantities of water throughout the process, though it 
can vary depending on techniques and technologies. When compared to the 
extractive industry however, if Australia became a major supplier of a large-scale 
global hydrogen industry by 2050, water consumption may be the equivalent of about 
one-third of the water used now by the Australian mining industry.53 
• 
In the Northern Territory, the NT Indigenous Business Network (NTIBN) has 
partnered with the Australian subsidiary of Octopus Group to create majority 
Indigenous-owned JV Desert Springs Octopus (DSO) and provide low-cost 
renewable energy to support infrastructure investments in Northern Australia.54 DSO 
will build both an energy grid for the NT as well as support remote off-grid Indigenous 
communities to shift from diesel power to renewable energies. 
A concern in the industry is black-cladding, where a non-Indigenous organisation uses an 
Indigenous organisation as a front or pass through. Black-clad JV arrangements often 
48 Consultation with Gerrit Wanganeen, Deputy Registrar, ORIC, 21 April 2022. 
49 NIAA IBSS, p. 4.  
50 Supply Nation (2020) p. 1. 
51 Supply Nation (2020) p. 9. 
52 Joshua S Hill, ‘Infinite Blue signs deal with indigenous energy group for solar hydrogen plant’, 
Renew Economy, https://reneweconomy.com.au/infinite-blue-signs-deal-with-indigenous-energy-
group-for-solar-hydrogen-plant/. See Boya Water Solutions - 
https://www.boyaenergy.com.au/watersolutions 
53 Department of Industry, Innovation and Science (Cth), Australia’s National Hydrogen Strategy 
(COAG Energy Council, 2019) https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-11/australias-
national-hydrogen-strategy.pdf p. 12. 
54 How, Brendan, ‘NT’s $50 billion Indigenous renewable energy partnership’, Innovation Aus (online, 
25 February 2022) https://www.innovationaus.com/nts-50-billion-indigenous-renewable-energy-
partnership/.

26 
feature the bulk of the benefits going to the non-Indigenous partner and disadvantage or 
detriment to the Indigenous business, and/or do not represent a genuine demonstrated level 
of equitable partnership and benefit.55 
3.4 Existing entities in remote Australia 
There are also a number of existing successful Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
organisations and peak bodies active in rural and remote Australia. These include: 
• 
Ninti One facilitates partnerships and projects to create economic opportunity and 
empowerment, improve service delivery and boost the livelihoods of Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander people. https://www.nintione.com.au/  
• 
Desert Knowledge Australia (DKA) is a not-for-profit statutory corporation of the 
NT, committed to developing opportunities for a stronger and more connected desert 
and remote Australia. It supports learning, socioeconomic development, research 
and environmental sustainability in Central Australia. https://www.dka.com.au/  
• 
Centre for Appropriate Technology Limited (CfAT) works to research, design, 
develop and teach appropriate technologies and deliver technical training to 
Indigenous people living in remote communities. It supports sustainable and 
enterprising communities by delivering appropriate fit-for-purpose technology, 
including practical project design, technical innovation, infrastructure, and training 
services. https://cfat.org.au/  
• 
Indigenous Desert Alliance (IDA) is an Indigenous controlled, member-based 
organisation that plays a vital role in 'Keeping the Desert Connected' and building 
resilience for desert ranger programs. https://www.indigenousdesertalliance.com  
3.5 Factors for success in First Nations business 
Understanding the features and reasons for success in First Nations business is important to 
an analysis of their capacity, and to apply lessons to other projects and endeavours. There 
are several factors, some unique to First Nations businesses and others more universally 
applicable.  
Effective Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander-managed businesses often display the 
following characteristics: 
• 
Facilitating community ownership and control 
• 
Embedding culture in business practices and operations 
• 
Employing local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff 
• 
Harnessing existing community capacity and its leaders 
• 
Implementing good governance 
• 
Establishing trusting partnerships 
• 
Keeping the implementation timelines flexible 
• 
Using community development approaches56 
Of course, without cash flow and commercial opportunities, no business can succeed. Other 
factors which may impact an Indigenous business’s ability to grow include access to 
55 Supply Nation, ‘Black cladding’ (Web Page) https://supplynation.org.au/about-us/black-cladding/.  
56 Morley, Sam, ‘What works in effective Indigenous community-managed programs and 
organisations’, CFCA Paper no. 32, Australian Institute of Family Studies (2015) p. 4.

27 
capital/finance and grants, and support from government programs such as IPP, which 
enable opportunities for procurement. 
4 BARRIERS TO INNOVATION IN REMOTE AUSTRALIA 
Chapter 2 of this report outlined some notable examples of innovation in the First Nations 
business sector, but the fact remains that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations 
face considerable adversity when compared to their non-Indigenous counterparts. Ordinary 
business challenges such as product development, market analysis and building a consumer 
base are compounded by circumstances of historic disadvantage and societal 
marginalisation.  
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the business sector contend with a variety of 
challenges. These include impacts of past economic marginalisation and policies to restrict 
Indigenous wealth, home ownership, business ownership and economic growth 
opportunities, low intergenerational wealth transfer, the ongoing impact of poor education, 
employment and health outcomes, and higher rates of incarceration. In many cases, First 
Nations people have been denied the opportunity to enter the market, even where they may 
arguably have the best right to be there. For example, in 2019, the Australian bushfoods 
industry was estimated to be valued at $21.5 million, but less than 15% of Aboriginal 
businesses are engaged in this multimillion-dollar industry.57 Further, survey-based research 
suggests that overall Indigenous representation in the supply chain, from growers to farm 
managers to exporters, was less than 1% in 2019.58  
These circumstances of disadvantage have consequences for First Nations people’s ability 
to acquire land or assets that can be leveraged to grow wealth or start businesses. In 
addition, businesses in remote or rural Australia have to contend with these same 
circumstances, as well as lower access to essential infrastructure, skilled labour, technology, 
business networks and business advice.59 
An analysis of the barriers to innovation faced by businesses in rural and remote First 
Nations communities can be flipped to highlight the opportunities for improvement. It is noted 
that some of the barriers identified in this report are outside of the scope of the Future 
Drought Fund to rectify, however they are still included for completeness of analysis. If the 
department is to meet its aim of increased participation of Indigenous communities in 
drought resilience RDEA&C, these barriers must be mitigated as far as possible.  
4.1 Education  
4.1.1 Skills and training 
Education is a core barrier to economic success for First Nations people. Effective operation 
in business and commercial sectors is hampered by deficits in understanding how to do 
57 Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (WA), ‘Setting up for Success: 
Bushfoods’ (2021), p. 3,  
https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/sites/gateway/files/Setting%20up%20for%20Success%20-
%20Bushfoods%20web_0.pdf. 
58 Mitchell, Ruby and Joshua Becker, ‘Bush food industry booms, but only 1 per cent is produced by 
Indigenous people’ ABC News (19 January 2019) https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2019-01-19/low-
indigenous-representation-in-bush-food-industry/10701986.  
59 NIAA IBSS, p. 4.

28 
business in a general sense, contracting, laws around native title, land ownership 
frameworks, and other complexities.60 
Statistically, people with at least an upper secondary education are more likely to be 
economically active, have higher income and have better health than individuals with lower 
or no education. In predominantly rural regions, the share of Indigenous peoples with at least 
upper secondary education is only 34%, which is less than half that of non-Indigenous 
people.61 
“There are many challenges in creating economy on country.”62 
Many of the skill sets needed to drive potential Indigenous-led industries (e.g. bushfoods) 
don’t exist in rural and remote communities. Innovation and commercial growth require 
people with knowledge of all different aspects of the business, including IP, packaging, 
health, research, product development, etc. This extends further to technical expertise in 
industries like fisheries and aquaculture, where even mainstream Australia struggles to find 
experts in some cases.63 The catch of this challenge is that often, people need to move to 
more urban areas to gain these skills, which then takes them away from the area that needs 
them.  
A further complicating issue for the future is how vulnerable certain jobs and industries are to 
automation. Jobs that perform non-routine tasks that are high skilled (professionals and 
managers) and low skilled (personal and community services) are growing and have lower 
risk from automation and digitalisation. Mid and lower skilled jobs where Indigenous peoples 
have a greater share of employment (machinery operators, drivers and labourers) have 
higher risk of automation. These risks are compounded by regions experiencing 
socioeconomic factors like lower education levels, a more rural economy that relies on a 
smaller number of industries and employers, and a larger tradable sector where Indigenous 
people are statistically less likely to be employed (i.e. professional, scientific, technical or 
financial services). This generates potential future risks for the Indigenous workforce 
because a higher proportion are in rural areas, and they generally have lower skills than the 
non-Indigenous population.64 
OPPORTUNITY: Funding education and training programs where First Nations people 
can learn within their communities and on their Country will help to grow skills and 
expertise in remote communities. 
4.1.2 Language and cultural protocols 
Some Indigenous people in rural and remote First Nations communities speak their own 
languages and may need assistance with translation for communications in English.  For 
many Indigenous groups, it is best to communicate in plain English and to consider using 
Indigenous concepts of communication, such as using more visuals or Indigenous points of 
view. 
60 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
61 OECD (2020). 
62 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
63 Consultation with Michael Davis, Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation – Agribusiness division, 26 
April 2022. 
64 OECD (2020).

29 
Cultural protocols can also be a factor. First Nations communities often have specific rules 
and protocols around decision-making processes. These may impact deadlines set by 
external parties or be a barrier to communication between Indigenous and non-Indigenous 
organisations.  
OPPORTUNITY: Agencies and organisations seeking to engage with Indigenous 
peoples and support growth in remote communities need an understanding of 
cultural protocols and translators or cultural interpreters if necessary.65 This can be 
achieved by engaging Indigenous expert advisors, employing cultural liaisons and 
building relationships with communities. 
4.1.3 Understanding of ICIP rights 
First Nations communities in rural and remote areas often have low knowledge or 
understanding of what is meant by Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, or what 
their rights are in relation to ICIP.  
Some sectors are more protective or concerned about sharing of Indigenous knowledge than 
others. For many areas, including arts and culture, there is a sense that the information is 
already out there, and it is too late to protect it. For bushfoods and native flora, however, 
much still remains unknown to western science, and there is great concern amid First 
Nations communities about protecting that knowledge.66 First Nations people also may have 
low trust in organisations seeking to use and share their knowledge due to past instances of 
information being stolen without attribution or benefit sharing. Recording information, using 
traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expression will require free, prior informed 
consent. The observance of cultural protocols for use of ICIP is key to effective engagement 
and to share knowledge given that Indigenous information has been exploited in the past. 
OPPORTUNITY: Facilitating the extension of the work of First Nations advocates to 
remote communities relating to ICIP, negotiating contracts, respect and protection of 
traditional knowledge and other complexities.67  
4.2 Trust  
4.2.1 Protecting traditional knowledge 
Western legal systems are often insufficient to protect traditional knowledge. Patents have 
been approved for non-Indigenous ownership of traditional medicine practices, without credit 
or profit to the Indigenous sources of that information.68 Indigenous words are trade marked 
without consent, and art styles are mimicked without recourse.69  
65 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
66 Consultation with Michael Davis, Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation – Agribusiness division, 26 
April 2022. 
67 See, for example, the workshops designed and delivered by Terri Janke and Company: 
https://www.terrijanke.com.au/workshop.  
68 See for example the Gumby Gumby patent. https://www.smh.com.au/business/the-economy/a-
native-plant-is-exposing-the-clash-between-traditional-knowledge-and-western-conventions-
20190925-p52upf.html  
69 See for example the Fake Art Harms Culture campaign. 
https://visualarts.net.au/advocacy/campaigns/fake-art/

30 
Past practices such as this can have significant impact on the trust that First Nations people 
and organisations feel when engaging with non-Indigenous organisations and governments 
and in industries.  
OPPORTUNITY: Implement and observe Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property 
Protocols and Indigenous Data Sovereignty and Indigenous Data Governance policies 
to guide engagement and support First Nations groups to build trust in engaging with 
non-Indigenous people and markets. 
4.3 Land and waters 
4.3.1 Access to land 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have a complicated legal relationship to land in 
Australia, as although they are the First Peoples of this country and have been the traditional 
owners of the land and waters for 60,000 years, the law offers only limited recognition of that 
connection. 
Land underpins public and private investment in Australia (including access to resources, 
business creation and home ownership). Our financial system is based on land ownership, 
which presents challenges to Indigenous peoples who either don’t have land or don’t want to 
use it. First Nations communities hold the freehold title to approximately 17% of the country, 
mainly in the Northern Territory and South Australia.70 Often, First Nations organisations will 
have had to fight hard to get their country back, which may limit their willingness to use it as 
security.71  
Noting that Indigenous ownership and access to land is outside the scope of the Future 
Drought Fund, it is still included here for completeness in an analysis of the barriers to 
innovation in rural and remote communities.  
4.3.2 Water rights 
Lack of access to water deprives Aboriginal people of opportunities to exercise self-
determination, care for Country, and generate wealth from agricultural production. Aboriginal 
people currently own less than 1% of water rights in the Murray-Darling Basin.72  
Aboriginal people have been calling for recognition of cultural flows in policy and practice. 
Cultural flows are “water entitlements that are legally and beneficially owned by the 
Indigenous Nations of a sufficient and adequate quantity and quality to improve the spiritual, 
cultural, environmental, social and economic conditions of those Indigenous Nations”.73 
The ILSC is doing a lot of work presently in supporting Indigenous water rights.  
70 Nicholas, Josh, Calla Wahlquist, Andy Ball and Nick Evershed, ’Who owns Australia?’ The 
Guardian (online, 17 May 2021) https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-
interactive/2021/may/17/who-owns-australia.  
71 Consultation with Michael Davis, Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation – Agribusiness division, 26 
April 2022. 
72 O’Donnell, Erin et al, ‘Returning water rights to Aboriginal people’ Pursuit (online, 6 April 2021) 
https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/returning-water-rights-to-aboriginal-people.  
73 Murray-Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations (MLDRIN), Echuca Declaration (19 May 2010) 
https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/sa-mldrin-echuca-declaration-2009.PDF.

31 
As above, it is noted that Aboriginal water rights are not within the work areas of the Future 
Drought Fund. Nevertheless, it is included here for completeness and for awareness of the 
issue.  
4.3.3 Restrictions from funding frameworks  
Many sources of funding and land grants for First Nations peoples carry conditions and 
restrictions on permitted uses.  
Freehold land owners can do what they want with their land. Native title and funding 
framework, by contrast, are too restrictive for commercial agricultural practices for Aboriginal 
people. Grants from the ILSC can take years to yield funding and are often subject to strict 
conditions.  
Current systems for facilitating Indigenous access and management of land are business 
responsive and paternalistic, and present a challenge to remote and rural communities who 
may not have the knowledge or resources to manage compliance.74 
OPPORTUNITY: Reduce ‘red tape’ around grant funding and land use structures and 
make funding sources more accessible for First Nations peoples.  
4.4 Resourcing 
4.4.1 Visibility 
First Nations businesses operating in low-visibility industries face unique challenges. This is 
particularly evident in the bushfoods and bush medicine sector. 
Despite the fact that bushfoods and bush medicine are inherently innovative (in the sense of 
their ‘newness’ to the western market – native flora have of course been in use by First 
Nations people for thousands of years), Indigenous businesses often struggle to profit from 
this innovation. Bushfoods and bush medicines are perceived as microbusinesses, often 
gimmicky markets,75 rather than the impressive industry that they could be. There are some 
notable exceptions, such as the Melaleuca alternifolia or tea tree, though this native 
botanical has been extensively marketed by both Indigenous and non-Indigenous 
businesses. 
Emerging industries don’t have the same existing supply chains and pathways to market as 
conventional farming and agriculture. Indigenous businesses have to work harder to set up 
their own facilities and marketplaces. This comprises product development, patenting, trade 
marking and marketing, and many other aspects.76 Add to this the demands of the food 
safety process and commercial production, and it begins to explain why there are 
approximately 6,400 known native foods and botanicals, but only 18 are in commercial 
production.77  
74 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022; Consultation with Michael Davis, Indigenous Land and Sea 
Corporation – Agribusiness division, 26 April 2022. 
75 Mitchell and Becker (2019).  
76 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
77 Riga, Rachel, ‘Australian bush tucker industry push to transform native foods for international 
consumption’, ABC News (online, 17 Nov 2019) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-11-17/native-
bush-foods-australian-bush-tucker-going-global/11658008.

32 
Low visibility can mean there is often a lack of research in the sector. To continue with the 
bushfoods example, there are exceptions like the Kakadu plum, but many native florae are 
under-researched. For instance, there are approximately 150 edible species of wattle seed 
in Australia, yet only one has a significant scientific backing.78  In many circumstances, First 
Nations groups have been willing to partner with universities or research organisations in 
collaborative partnerships to investigate the properties and develop products using native 
flora. These partnerships can be highly successful and mutually beneficial where they are 
conducted with respect for best practice standards and applicable cultural protocols around 
uses of Indigenous ecological knowledge. It is important that any research that is conducted 
in these fields has respect for the cultural frameworks, restrictions and ICIP of Indigenous 
peoples.  
OPPORTUNITIES:  
Support a vision and picture of a First Nations-led native food and pharmaceuticals 
industry.  
Deliver funding for First Nations-led research projects to investigate and develop 
other native Australian plants and resources, on their terms and with respect and 
protection for Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, and benefit sharing 
arrangements.  
Provide support and resourcing to build supply chains and pathways to market to 
help transition from isolated microbusinesses to a broad First Nations-led industry. 
4.4.2 Funding 
Low visibility of industries and businesses can result in low availability of funding, further 
limiting the capacity of small First Nations businesses to grow and innovate.  
Funding processes can also be complicated and restrictive, making it challenging for First 
Nations organisations without staff experienced in grant writing and acquittal to get access to 
funding.  
Common reasons for funding applications by First Nations organisations being unsuccessful 
include: 
• 
Viability of the project proposal  
• 
Governance of organisation applying and their perceived capability to deliver the 
project 
• 
Lack of technical expertise79 
Indigenous businesses are creative. They have no lack of imagination and are big on 
aspiration, but the practical side is difficult. Community leaders in remote places are 
stretched thin with responsibilities.  
OPPORTUNITY: Support First Nations businesses to apply for funding grants by 
developing viable project plans, building strong organisational governance structures 
and preparing sufficient proposals.  
78 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
79 Consultation with Michael Davis, Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation – Agribusiness division, 26 
April 2022.

33 
4.4.3 Access to services  
Remote communities often have limited access to services. This doesn’t only mean 
healthcare, schools and infrastructure, but extends further to specialised services relevant to 
particular industries. Farmers and agriculturalists in remote communities or regions have to 
be highly self-reliant, with only limited access to the consultants or agronomists that may be 
more readily available in populated areas.80 This exacerbates the impact of problems in 
many cases, as consultants are only called in to deal with problems, rather than to 
proactively assist with growth and expansion.  
In addition, costs of living in remote communities may be much higher for necessities like 
groceries and petrol. For example, average food prices in the Kimberley are 14.5 per cent 
higher than in Perth.81  
OPPORTUNITY: Incentivise or facilitate industry-specific goods and services being 
available to rural and remote communities. 
4.4.4 Technology  
Rural and remote communities often don’t have the same access to developing technologies 
as urban centres.  
The power of technology in Indigenous business is evident, in examples like the 
Mamabulanjin Aboriginal Corporation case study above, and in many more contexts. 
Conversely, the impacts of not having access to industry-specific technology can be severe. 
In consultation, stakeholders referred to an example where 400 cows died on a remote cattle 
station because didn’t have it didn’t have the technology to monitor the water and didn’t 
know the bore was out.82 Technology can assist with remote communities and businesses 
becoming proactive, rather than reactive. 
OPPORTUNITY: Extension of existing technologies to rural and remote Indigenous 
communities and businesses will assist their growth and competitiveness in the 
market.  
Models like NAILSMA83 and others where Indigenous people are collecting data about the 
changes in the environment will be an important opportunity. Indigenous data and 
knowledge of cultural practices, what is happening on Country, seasonal changes, etc., will 
be important for managing drought resilience. These data sets will enable First Nations 
people and organisations to plan and manage the environment and help the wider Australian 
community. Indigenous data sovereignty will need to be considered in managing these 
projects. 
4.5 Governance and structure 
4.5.1 Unincorporated groups  
Many First Nations organisations are unincorporated. There is a degree of difficulty in 
moving from a group of people sitting around and talking to building the commercial structure 
80 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022.  
81 Office of Northern Australia, Green Paper (2014) p. 31. 
82 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
83 North Australian Indigenous Land and Sea Management Alliance Ltd, https://nailsma.org.au/

34 
and productivity of an Aboriginal Corporation under the CATSI Act, or any other kind of 
registered corporation or organisation. Incorporating carries additional costs and legal and 
financial requirements which may be challenging for First Nations organisations.  
Unincorporated organisations carry additional risks for members, as they can be individually 
and personally responsible for any debts, liabilities, or insurance claims. Unincorporated 
organisations are also unable to hold assets and may have difficulty accessing grants as 
funding programs will often require funding recipients to be incorporated. 
4.5.2 Directorship and management 
Research has found that the majority of failed Indigenous corporations resulted from the 
poor performance of their directors and staff, either intentionally or negligently.84 This is 
consistent with trends of corporate failure for non-Indigenous businesses.  
Analysis conducted by ORIC of 93 failed Indigenous corporations between 1996 and 2008 
revealed seven classes of Indigenous corporate failure. Anecdotally, many of the issues 
described in this report are still the reasons for Indigenous corporate failure to date, though 
with some differences in frequency.85 
A significant risk to Indigenous corporations comes from the performance of the people in 
charge of the organisation. 42% of failed corporations experienced a lack of diligence in their 
directors, including not meeting obligations, holding meetings or registering members, while 
25% reported mismanagement in accounting or record keeping. Notably, the corporations 
that failed due to governance issues were largely revived following a period of special 
administration, which suggests that corporate governance support services and training 
would improve outcomes both before and after corporate failure.86 
OPPORTUNITY: Increased access to corporate governance training and funding 
sources to allow businesses and corporations to hire staff with the skills to manage 
accounting, reporting, compliance and other affairs. Once these basic necessities for 
operating a corporation are met, Indigenous businesses will be freer to consider 
opportunities for expansion and innovation in their respective product or service 
areas.  
4.5.3 Competing business models 
First Nations businesses are often social enterprises. They operate with the dual purpose of 
improving social welfare and community connectedness, as well as having a commercial 
mission of profit and economic success.  
Many of these businesses represent an innovation in and of themselves, of being a “cultural 
business”. ‘Cultural business activities are customary activities in which goods and services 
are produced for the market using culturally derived knowledge and skills and communally 
owned resources, and include the manufacture of arts and crafts’.87 Businesses of this 
model, such as Indigenous art centres, bushfoods industries or cultural tourism ventures, 
innovatively apply their ICIP and traditional knowledge in a commercial context. There is 
84 ORIC, Analysing key characteristics in Indigenous corporate failure (Research paper, March 2010). 
85 Consultation with Gerrit Wanganeen, Deputy Registrar, ORIC, 21 April 2022. 
86 ORIC (2010) pp. 47-48, 70. 
87 Jones, Janice et al., ‘Barriers to grassroots innovation: The phenomenon of social-commercial-
cultural trilemmas in remote indigenous art centres’ (2021) Technological Forecasting & Social 
Change, vol. 164, p. 2.

35 
growth in new sectors including energy, mining and facilities management and also JVs with 
larger companies who provide infrastructure.  
Businesses operating with these dual missions face what has been referred to as the ‘social-
commercial-cultural trilemma’. Though enterprises of this type offer considerable benefit to 
remote communities such as employment, economic development and sharing of 
Indigenous culture with Australia and the world, the different values and needs of each 
purpose create tensions. These tensions include: 
• 
Employment models and expectations – Western ideas of schedules and 
performance measures, as compared to Indigenous conceptions of work hours which 
might be contingent on the season, weather or tide; 
• 
Productivity – in the context of art centres, for example, where First Nations artists 
may be driven to create work for cultural or spiritual reasons, rather than in response 
to commissions or profit. Researchers have also pointed out that customary activities 
such as hunting, fishing and spending time on country constitute a productive use of 
time for First Nations people; 
• 
Skilled management – while boards of directors usually comprise elders and cultural 
authorities, low levels of commercial experience among remote First Nations 
communities mean management positions are often filled by non-Indigenous people. 
This causes upset for communities who would rather upskill local people rather than 
bringing in external talent.88 
OPPORTUNITY: Recognising and harnessing the value and importance that 
Indigenous people place on relationships, culture, Country and community may help 
to solve issues. Connecting with key First Nations organisations, families, cultural 
authority figures and elders, and cultivating relationships built on trust, can help to 
advance organisational goals as well as social and cultural ones.89 
4.6 Community wellbeing   
4.6.1 Mental health 
Insufficient access to health and support systems can have significant impacts on rural and 
remote communities. Farmers and agriculture-reliant communities can face severe mental 
health impacts from drought and other environmental circumstances.  
4.6.2 Context of disadvantage 
The poverty and violence that exists in some remote communities presents challenges to 
businesses in some cases. Research notes that these are rarer than the commercial 
tensions described above at 4.5, though they are still worth noting. Challenges resulting from 
this context include lack of work-life balance, minimal support systems, and conflicts over 
money.90 
OPPORTUNITY: Investing in community wellbeing and healing programs and 
community inclusion systems to recognise the significant impact that remote living, 
drought, social disadvantage and other factors can have on community health.  
88 Jones et al (2021), pp. 6-10.  
89 Jones et al (2021), p. 10. 
90 Jones et al (2021), p. 10.

36 
5 SUMMARY OF OPPORTUNITIES AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
1.  
Education 
1.1  
Funding education and training programs where First Nations people can learn within 
their communities and on their Country will help to grow skills and expertise in remote 
communities. 
1.2 
Agencies and organisations seeking to engage with Indigenous peoples and support 
growth in remote communities need an understanding of cultural protocols and translators or 
cultural interpreters if necessary.91 This can be achieved by engaging Indigenous expert 
advisors, employing cultural liaisons and building relationships with communities. 
1.3 
Facilitating the extension of the work of First Nations advocates to remote 
communities relating to Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, negotiating contracts, 
respect and protection of traditional knowledge and other complexities.92  
2. 
Trust 
2.1 
Develop Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property Protocols and Indigenous Data 
Sovereignty and Indigenous Data Governance policies to guide engagement and support 
First Nations groups to build trust in engaging with non-Indigenous people and markets. 
3 
Land and water  
3.1 
Reduce ‘red tape’ around grant funding and land use structures and make funding 
sources more accessible for First Nations peoples. 
4. 
Resourcing 
4.1 
Supporting a vision and picture of a First Nations-led native food and medicine 
industry. Deliver funding for First Nations-led research projects to investigate and develop 
native Australian plants and resources, on their terms and with respect and protection for 
Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, and benefit sharing arrangements. Provide 
support and resourcing to build supply chains and pathways to market to help transition from 
isolated microbusinesses to a broad First Nations-led industry. 
4.2 
Support First Nations businesses to apply for funding grants by developing viable 
project plans, building strong organisational governance structures and preparing sufficient 
proposals. 
4.3 
Incentivise or facilitate industry-specific goods and services being available to rural 
and remote communities. 
4.4 
Extension of existing technologies to rural and remote Indigenous communities and 
businesses to assist their growth and competitiveness in the market. 
5. 
Governance and structure 
5.1 
Increased access to corporate governance training and funding sources to allow 
businesses and corporations to hire staff with the skills to manage accounting, reporting, 
compliance and other affairs. Once these basic necessities for operating a corporation are 
91 Consultation with Amanda Garner, General Manager, First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia, 20 April 2022. 
92 See, for example, the workshops designed and delivered by Terri Janke and Company: 
https://www.terrijanke.com.au/workshop.

37 
met, Indigenous businesses will be freer to consider opportunities for expansion and 
innovation in their respective product or service areas. 
5.2 
Recognising and harnessing the value and importance that Indigenous people place 
on relationships, culture, Country and community may help to solve issues. Connecting with 
key families, cultural authority figures and elders and cultivating relationships built on trust 
can help to advance organisational goals as well as social and cultural ones.93 
6. 
Community wellbeing 
6.1  
Investing in community wellbeing and healing programs and community inclusion 
systems to recognise the significant impact that remote living, drought, social disadvantage 
and other factors can have on community health. 
93 Jones et al (2021), p. 10.

38 
6 APPENDICES 
6.1 Methodology 
This report is informed by desktop research and consultation sessions. A complete list of all 
sources reviewed is included in the literature review at the end of this report.  
Consultation was conducted with Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations (ORIC) 
to understand and characterise the demographics and features of Indigenous corporations in 
rural and remote communities. Also consulted was the National Indigenous Australians 
Agency (NIAA), to discuss their current work areas and build an understanding of how rural 
and remote Indigenous communities use RDEA&C.  
Additional consultation was conducted with the First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals 
Alliance Australia (FNBBAA) and the Agribusiness division of the Indigenous Land and Sea 
Corporation (ILSC). 
We note that a comprehensive understanding of the gaps, barriers and opportunities for 
Indigenous businesses in remote and rural communities requires meaningful, extensive and 
direct on the ground engagement with those businesses and communities. This report 
should be considered as a starting point, to provide an overview of issues in the literature 
relevant to Indigenous drought resilience and a guide to further consultation, research and 
investigation in this sector.  
6.2 Literature Review 
Articles/Books/Research 
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
Australians, June 2016 Census (online, released 31 August 2018) 
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-
peoples/estimates-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander-australians/jun-2016 
(updated 21 March 2022) https://data.gov.au/dataset/ds-dga-2c072eed-d6d3-4f3a-a6d2-
8929b0c78682/details?q= 
Commonwealth of Australia, National Indigenous Australians Agency, Fee for Service in 
Indigenous Land and Sea Management: Impact Assessment and Analysis (2018) 
Cumpston, Zena (2020) Indigenous plant use: A booklet on the medicinal, nutritional and 
technological use of indigenous plants, Clean Air and Urban Landscapes Hub, The 
University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, https://nespurban.edu.au/wp-
content/uploads/2020/08/Indigenous-plant-use.pdf 
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (WA), ‘Setting up for Success: 
Bushfoods’ (2021), 
https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/sites/gateway/files/Setting%20up%20for%20Success%20-
%20Bushfoods%20web_0.pdf

39 
Department of Industry, Innovation and Science (Cth), Australia’s National Hydrogen 
Strategy (COAG Energy Council, 2019) https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/2019-
11/australias-national-hydrogen-strategy.pdf 
Janke, Terri, Our Culture: Our Future – Report on Australian Indigenous Cultural and 
Intellectual Property Rights (Report prepared for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
Commission and the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 
1998). 
Janke, Terri, True Tracks: Respecting Indigenous knowledge and culture (2021) NewSouth 
Publishing, Sydney. 
Janke, Terri, Clara Klemski and Laura Melrose, ‘Bushfires, climate change and Indigenous 
Ecological Knowledge: healing country through holistic environmental management’ (2021) 
Australian Environment Review, Vol 36(4). 
Jarvis, Diane et al, ‘Are Indigenous land and sea management programs a pathway to 
Indigenous economic independence?’ (2018) The Rangeland Journal, vol. 40, pp. 423-424 
Jones, Janice et al., ‘Barriers to grassroots innovation: The phenomenon of social-
commercial-cultural trilemmas in remote indigenous art centres’ (2021) Technological 
Forecasting & Social Change, vol. 164. 
Kingham, Fleur,  “The impact of environmental law on Indigenous women in Australia” 
(Speech, International Association of Women Judges Biennial Conference, Auckland New 
Zealand, 8 May 2021) http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/QldJSchol/2021/10.html.  
Lovett, Raymond et al. (2019) ‘Good data practices for indigenous data sovereignty and 
governance’. In A. Daly, S. K. Devitt, & M. Mann (Eds.), Good Data (pp. 26–36). Amsterdam: 
Institute of Network Cultures 
Morley, Sam, ‘What works in effective Indigenous community-managed programs and 
organisations’, CFCA Paper no. 32, Australian Institute of Family Studies (2015) 
Muyambo, Fummi, Yonas T Bahta and Andries J Jordaan, ‘The role of indigenous 
knowledge in drought risk reduction: A case of communal farmers in South Africa’ (2017) 
Jamba – Journal of Disaster Risk Studies, vol. 9(1), p. 410 
NIAA, Indigenous Business Sector Strategy 2018-2028, 
https://www.niaa.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/ibss_strategy.pdf 
O’Donnell, Erin et al, ‘Returning water rights to Aboriginal people’ Pursuit (online, 6 April 
2021) https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/returning-water-rights-to-aboriginal-people 
OECD, Linking Indigenous Communities with Regional Development in Australia (2020) 
OECD Rural Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ab4d8d52-en 
ORIC, Analysing key characteristics in Indigenous corporate failure (Research paper, March 
2010). 
Smith, D.E. (2016) ‘Governing data and data for governance: the everyday practice of 
indigenous sovereignty’. In Kukutai, Tahu and John Taylor (eds), Indigenous Data 
Sovereignty: Towards an Agenda, CAEPR Research Monograph, 2016/34. Canberra: ANU 
Press, pp. 117–138

40 
Supply Nation, State of Indigenous Business: Driving growth across the Indigenous business 
sector (Research Report No. 1, December 2020) https://supplynation.org.au/research-
paper/state-of-indigenous-business-driving-growth/ 
Walter, M. and S. R. Carroll, (2021) ‘Indigenous Data Sovereignty, governance and the link 
to Indigenous policy’. In Walter, M. et al, (eds) Indigenous data sovereignty and policy (pp. 1-
20) (New York: Routledge, 2021)  
News/Media 
‘A community in action: How Walgett is redefining food systems’, Dharriwaa Elders Group 
(Blog, October 2021) 
https://www.dharriwaaeldersgroup.org.au/index.php/yuwayangarrali/38-yn-publications/215-
un-food-summit-2021-walgett-case-study 
‘Aboriginal rangers get hands on with the latest technologies’, NITV (online, 14 October 
2017) https://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/culture/article/2017/10/12/aboriginal-rangers-get-hands-
latest-technologies    
‘AI helps Indigenous Council recycle’, Local Government Focus (online, 1 November 2021) 
https://lgfocus.com.au/news/2021/11/01/ai-helps-indigenous-council-recycle/  
Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, ‘ANSTO helps verify the origin of 
traditional Aboriginal products to benefit consumer confidence and Aboriginal enterprises’ 
(Article, 13 August 2021) https://www.ansto.gov.au/news/ansto-helps-verify-origin-of-
traditional-aboriginal-products-to-benefit-consumer-confidence 
Barndon, Glenn, ‘Indigenous regenerative land management included in agricultural program 
at TAFE’, ABC News (online, 21 July 2020) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-07-
21/indigenous-regenerative-land-education-course-at-tafe/12268326  
Chan, Gabrielle, ‘'All about the land': drought shakes farming to its Indigenous roots’, The 
Guardian (online, 6 October 2018) 
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/06/all-about-the-land-drought-shakes-
farming-to-its-indigenous-roots 
Cormack, Holly, ‘AI tech to put town ahead of the pack’, The Chronicle (online, 30 March 
2021) https://www.pressreader.com/australia/the-chronicle-
8992/20210330/281797106784797  
Cornell, Anna, ‘Improving On-Farm Biodiversity and Drought Resilience Day at Gunnado’, 
Northern Agricultural Catchments Council (Blog, 30 March 2022) 
https://www.nacc.com.au/improving-on-farm-bodiversity-and-drought-resilience-day-at-
gunnado/ 
‘Crown land unlocking ‘pathways’ for Aboriginal cultural heritage and health’, Mirage News 
(online, 25 March 2022) https://www.miragenews.com/crown-land-unlocking-pathways-for-
aboriginal-750892/ 
Harris, Cecilia, ‘Remote SA town's new desalination plant’ Australian Water Association 
(online, 24 June 2021) https://www.awa.asn.au/resources/latest-news/business/assets-and-
operations/remote-sa-towns-new-desalination-plant.  
Hart, Ashleigh Chanel et al, ‘Indigenous Community-Led Programs to Address Food and 
Water Security: Protocol for a Systematic Review’ (2021) vol. 18(12) International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health 6366 http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18126366

41 
Hill, Joshua S., ‘Infinite Blue signs deal with indigenous energy group for solar hydrogen 
plant’, Renew Economy, https://reneweconomy.com.au/infinite-blue-signs-deal-with-
indigenous-energy-group-for-solar-hydrogen-plant/ 
How, Brendan, ‘NT’s $50 billion Indigenous renewable energy partnership’, Innovation Aus 
(online, 25 February 2022) https://www.innovationaus.com/nts-50-billion-indigenous-
renewable-energy-partnership/ 
Lannin, Sue, ‘First Nations clean energy network set up to deliver cheap and reliable power 
to Indigenous communities’, ABC News (online, 17 Nov 2021) 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-11-17/first-nations-clean-energy-network-bringing-
renewable-power/100623596 
Mitchell, Ruby and Joshua Becker, ‘Bush food industry booms, but only 1 per cent is 
produced by Indigenous people’ ABC News (19 January 2019) 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2019-01-19/low-indigenous-representation-in-bush-food-
industry/10701986 
Nicholas, Josh, Calla Wahlquist, Andy Ball and Nick Evershed, ’Who owns Australia?’ The 
Guardian (online, 17 May 2021) https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-
interactive/2021/may/17/who-owns-australia 
O’Donnell, Erin et al, ‘Returning water rights to Aboriginal people’ Pursuit (online, 6 April 
2021) https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/returning-water-rights-to-aboriginal-people 
ORIC, ‘Backgrounding cattle, foregrounding community’ (Article, June 2021) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/backgrounding-cattle-foregrounding-
community  
ORIC, ‘Bush food, meet tech’ (Article, September 2021) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/bush-food-meet-tech 
ORIC, ‘Credit for mitigating climate change’ (Article, October 2021) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/spotlight/credit-mitigating-climate-change  
Parry, Danita, ‘Telstra trials technologies to grow the Australian carbon market’, Telstra 
(Media Release, 24 March 2022) https://www.telstra.com.au/aboutus/media/media-
releases/carbon-farm-trial 
Riga, Rachel, ‘Australian bush tucker industry push to transform native foods for 
international consumption’, ABC News (online, 17 Nov 2019) 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-11-17/native-bush-foods-australian-bush-tucker-going-
global/11658008 
Schremmer, Jessica, ‘Aboriginal farmer sees native bush food as pathway to connect with 
troubled youth’, ABC News (online, 1 March 2021) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-03-
01/aboriginal-farmer-creates-reconnection-through-native-bush-foods/13194092 
Smith, Dominic, ‘Empowering people through education reconnection’, Pundi Produce (Blog, 
30 Aug 2021) https://pundiproduce.com.au/empowering-people-through-education/ 
Southern Farming Solutions, ‘University of Melbourne led projects receive $2.1m through 
Drought Resilience Innovation Grants’ (Article, 21 March 2022) 
https://sfs.org.au/article/university-of-melbourne-led-projects-receive-2-1m-through-drought-
resilience-innovation-grants

42 
‘Watch: Indigenous Reality adds new dimensions to Virtual Reality’, Welcome to Country 
(online, 16 October 2017) https://www.welcometocountry.org/indigenous-reality-virtual-
reality/   
Willis, Carli, ‘Indigenous custodians work with universities to bring bush foods and remedies 
to market’, ABC News (online, 19 March 2022) https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-03-
19/bush-foods-remedies-longreach-indigenous-university-project/100921012 
Policies/Protocols 
AIATSIS, Code of Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research (2020) 
https://aiatsis.gov.au/research/ethical-research/code-ethics.  
Australia Council for the Arts, Protocols for using First Nations Cultural and Intellectual 
Property in the Arts (2019) https://australiacouncil.gov.au/investment-and-
development/protocols-and-resources/protocols-for-using-first-nations-cultural-and-
intellectual-property-in-the-arts/.  
Kimberley Land Council et al, Collaborative Science on Kimberley Saltwater Country – A 
Guide for Researchers (2017) 
https://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/sites/default/files/kimberley_indigenous_ 
saltwater_science_project_-
_copy_of_collaborative_science_on_kimberley_saltwater_country.pdf 
Maiam nayri Wingara Indigenous Data Sovereignty Collective and Australian Indigenous 
Governance Institute (2018), Indigenous Data Sovereignty Communique, Canberra, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b3043afb40b9d20411f3512/t/5b6c0f9a0e2e725e9ca
bf4a6/1533808545167/Communique%2B-
%2BIndigenous%2BData%2BSovereignty%2BSummit.pdf 
Murray-Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations (MLDRIN), Echuca Declaration (19 May 
2010) https://www.mdba.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubs/sa-mldrin-echuca-declaration-
2009.PDF 
NAILSMA and CSIRO, ‘Our Knowledge, Our Way guidelines’ (2020) 
https://www.csiro.au/en/research/indigenous-science/indigenous-knowledge/our-knowledge-
our-way.  
Office of Northern Australia, Green Paper (2014) p. 31. 
Screen Australia, Pathways & Protocols: a filmmaker’s guide to working with Indigenous 
people, culture and concepts (2009) https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/about-us/doing-
business-with-us/indigenous-content/indigenous-protocols 
‘Traditional knowledge and biodiscovery’, Queensland Government (Web Page, 2020) 
https://environment.des.qld.gov.au/licences-permits/plants-animals/biodiscovery/traditional-
knowledge  
Websites 
Australian Museum, ‘Ghost net art’ (Web Page, 26 May 2020) 
https://australian.museum/learn/cultures/atsi-collection/ghost-net-art/ 
‘Indigenous Ecological Knowledge’, Atlas of Living Australia (Web Page, accessed 28 April 
2022) https://www.ala.org.au/indigenous-ecological-knowledge/  
Noongar Land Enterprise, https://www.noongarlandenterprise.com.au/

43 
North Australian Indigenous Land and Sea Management Alliance Ltd, https://nailsma.org.au/  
ORIC, ‘Corporation size and reporting’ (Web Page) 
https://www.oric.gov.au/publications/catsi-fact-sheet/corporation-size-and-reporting 
Pormpuraaw Art & Culture Centre, ‘Our Story’ (Web Page) 
https://pormpuraawartculture.com/  
Supply Nation, ‘Black cladding’ (Web Page) https://supplynation.org.au/about-us/black-
cladding/ 
International instruments 
Convention on Biological Diversity, opened for signature 5 June 1992, 1760 UNTS 79, 
(entered into force 29 December 1993). 
Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of 
Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity, opened 
for signature 29 October 2010. 
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, GA Res 61/295, UN Doc 
A/RES/61/295 (2 October 2007, adopted 13 September 2007) (‘UNDRIP’) 
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic 
Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization, 
(Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2002) 
6.3 Acronyms and initials 
ABS 
Australian Bureau of Statistics  
AC 
Aboriginal Corporation 
ACNC 
Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission 
AIATSIS  
Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies  
ALA 
Atlas of Living Australia 
ANSTO 
Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation  
ASIC 
Australian Securities and Investment Commission  
BoM 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CATSI Act 
Corporations (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander) Act 2006 (Cth) 
CfAT 
Centre for Appropriate Technology Limited  
CSIRO 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 
DAWE 
DKA 
Desert Knowledge Australia  
DSO 
Desert Springs Octopus  
EPBC Act  
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Cth)  
FDF  
Future Drought Fund

44 
FNBBAA 
First Nations Bushfoods and Botanicals Alliance Australia  
IBSS 
Indigenous Business Sector Strategy 
ICIP  
Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property 
IDA 
Indigenous Desert Alliance  
IDS 
Indigenous Data Sovereignty  
IEK 
Indigenous ecological knowledge  
IJVs 
Indigenous joint ventures  
ILSC 
Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation  
IP 
intellectual property  
IPP 
Indigenous Procurement Policies  
JV  
joint venture 
MLDRIN 
Murray-Lower Darling Rivers Indigenous Nations  
NAAKPA 
Northern Australia Aboriginal Kakadu Plum Alliance  
NAILSMA 
North Australian Indigenous Land and Sea Management Alliance  
NIAA 
National Indigenous Australians Agency  
NTIBN 
Northern Territory Indigenous Business Network  
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
ORIC 
Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations  
R&D 
research and development  
RDEA&C 
research, development, extension, adoption, and commercialisation  
RNTBCs 
registered native title bodies corporate  
TAFE 
Technical and Further Education 
TCEs 
Traditional cultural expressions  
TJC  
Terri Janke and Company  
TK 
Traditional knowledge  
UNDRIP 
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
UNTS 
United Nations Treaty Series  
WFW4L 
Walgett Food and Water for Life Program