Also known as infection with Edwardsiella ictaluri, edwardsiellosis and 
hole-in-the-head disease 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Ulcer in channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) with chronic enteric septicaemia of catfish 
Note: Ulcerative lesions in the joints of the pectoral or dorsal spines. 
Source: L A Hanson 
Figure 2 Cranial ulcer in channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) with enteric septicaemia of catfish 
Note: Cranial ulcer, also known as a hole-in-the-head lesion. 
Source: L Khoo

2 
Figure 3 Internal organs of channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) with enteric septicaemia of catfish 
Note: Signs of infection with Edwardsiella ictaluri include swollen posterior kidney, enlarged spleen, gastro-intestinal 
haemorrhage and ascites fluid. 
Source: L Khoo 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
lethargic swimming 
abnormal behaviour (alternating listlessness and chaotic swimming) 
disorientation and swimming in spirals 
loss of appetite 
surfing, with head protruding from water. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
chronic encephalitic form  
− 
swelling on top of the head, occasionally progressing to the erosion of connective tissue 
and exposure of the brain (a hole-in-the-head lesion) 
− 
granulomatous inflammation of the brain 
acute septicaemic form 
− 
pale gills 
− 
darkening of the skin (observed in species other than channel catfish) 
− 
multiple small white spots on the skin 
− 
raised skin patches progressing to shallow ulcers on the flanks and head 
− 
haemorrhage at the base of the fins, around the mouth, and on the throat, operculum (gill 
cover) and abdomen 
− 
exophthalmos (popeye) 
− 
swollen abdomen (pot-belly)

3 
− 
ascites (fluid in the abdominal cavity) 
− 
lesions on the liver and other internal organs 
− 
intestines frequently bloody, but may be transparent or clear yellow 
− 
red, swollen anal region with trailing faecal casts (observed in infected barramundi) 
− 
soft and pale spleen, anterior kidney or posterior kidney, with petechial (pinpoint) 
haemorrhages. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
gram-negative rods in histological sections (muscle, kidney) 
locally extensive cellulitis in the head region 
necrotising myositis. 
Disease agent 
Enteric septicaemia of catfish (or edwardsiellosis) is caused by infection with the bacterium 
Edwardsiella ictaluri, belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae. 
Host range 
Enteric septicaemia of catfish is a highly infectious bacterial disease of the catfish families Ictaluridae, 
Plotosidae, Clariidae, Siluridae, Pangasiidae and Ariidae. Ictalurids are particularly susceptible. 
Several non-catfish species are also susceptible, including salmonids. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to Edwardsiella ictaluri 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Ayua 
Plecoglossus altivelis 
Barramundi 
Lates calcarifer 
Berney’s catfish 
Neoarius berneyi 
Black bullheada 
Ameiurus melas 
Black catfish 
Neosilurus ater 
Blue catfisha 
Ictalurus furcatus 
Brown bullheada 
Ameiurus nebulosus 
Channel catfisha 
Ictalurus punctatus 
Chinook salmon 
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha 
Glass knifefisha 
Eigenmannia virescens 
Rainbow trout 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
Rosy barba 
Puntius conchonius 
Sind danioa 
Danio devario 
Sutchi catfisha 
Pangasius hypophthalmus 
Tadpole madtoma 
Noturus gyrinus 
Toothless catfish 
Anodontiglanis dahlia 
Walking catfisha 
Clarias batrachus 
Wet tropics tandana 
Tandanus tropicanus 
White catfisha 
Ameiurus catus

4 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Yellow bullheada 
Ameiurus natalis 
Yellow catfisha 
Pelteobagrus fulvidraco 
Zebrafisha 
Danio rerio 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: All other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible. 
Presence in Australia 
Edwardsiella ictaluri has been isolated from healthy wild wet-tropics tandan catfish, from the Tully 
River valley in north Queensland, at a prevalence of 40%.  
Enteric septicaemia of catfish has also been officially reported in Australia from imported aquarium 
fish (danios, rosy barbs) held in contained facilities in the Northern Territory and Tasmania. In 2010 
and 2011, native black catfish, toothless catfish and Berney’s catfish held near imported aquarium 
fish in a facility in the Northern Territory became infected, resulting in mortalities. There have been 
no detections of the disease in the wild in the Northern Territory or Tasmania.  
Map 1 Presence of Edwardsiella ictaluri, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
Edwardsiella ictaluri has been linked to disease outbreaks in barramundi (also known as Asian 
seabass) and Pangasius (basa catfish). 
Enteric septicaemia of catfish was originally considered primarily a disease of channel catfish. 
However, the bacterium has since been reported to cause disease in other catfish and non-
catfish species. Most of the epidemiological knowledge about the disease is based on its 
occurrence in channel catfish. 
Horizontal transmission is via the faecal-oral route, cannibalism, and contact with contaminated 
water and materials used in handling infected fish. 
Faeces are the main source of shedding and dissemination. The disease may also be spread via 
dead fish and contaminated equipment such as fishing nets and sorting devices.

5 
The intestinal tract is the primary site of infection for the acute septicaemic form. The chronic 
encephalitic form is thought to establish after entering fish via the olfactory epithelium. 
Surviving catfish carry the bacterium, which also seems to be able to survive in the intestinal 
tracts of other fish species. 
Disease occurs primarily at water temperatures between 18°C and 28°C, making spring and 
autumn the most common times for outbreaks. Stress is often a predisposing factor. 
The bacterium can survive 3 to 4 months in pond water, mud and vegetation. 
Environmental stressors can influence the expression of clinical signs and extend the incubation 
period. 
Morbidity and mortality can be high in heavily stocked ponds. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Channel catfish virus disease, European catfish virus and European sheatfish virus, infection with 
Aphanomyces invadans and spring viraemia of carp. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency.

6 
Microscope images 
Figure 4 Histopathological section of skeletal muscle of channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) with 
Note: Necrotising myositis in the skeletal muscle. Scale bar = 600µm. 
Source: G Storie and H Prior 
Figure 5 Histopathological section of head of channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) with enteric 
septicaemia of catfish  
Note: Locally extensive cellulitis involving connective tissue surrounding cranial bones and cartilage. Scale bar = 600µm. 
Source: G Storie and H Prior

7 
Figure 6 Gram staining of histopathological section from kidney of channel catfish (Ictalurus 
punctatus) with enteric septicaemia of catfish 
Note: Gram-negative rods are Edwardsiella ictaluri. Scale bar = 600µm. 
Source: G Storie and H Prior 
Figure 7 Gram staining of histopathological section from skeletal muscle of channel catfish 
(Ictalurus punctatus) with enteric septicaemia of catfish 
Note: Gram-negative rods of Edwardsiella ictaluri. Scale bar = 600µm. 
Source: G Storie and H Prior

8 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium Enteric septicaemia of catfish 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Enteric Septicaemia of Catfish 
(Edwardsiellosis) 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.