Also known as infection with epizootic haematopoietic necrosis virus (EHNV) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Mass mortality of redfin perch (Perca fluviatilis) due to EHN 
Note: Affected individuals showing signs of EHN including swollen abdomen (a) and small size. 
Source: J Humphrey 
Figure 2 Redfin perch (Perca fluviatilis) experimentally infected with EHNV 
Note: Grossly visible multifocal necrotic foci in the liver. 
Source: R Whittington

2 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
hundreds or thousands of small (less than 10cm long), dead fish found on the downwind bank of 
the water body 
large numbers of fish-eating birds (such as seagulls) at the water surface 
loss of appetite 
juveniles (less than 25mm long) swimming in a disorientated fashion at the surface 
occasional adults affected when the disease first arrives in an area. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
swollen abdomen 
darkened skin colour 
petechial (pinpoint) haemorrhages at the base of the fins 
haemorrhaging of the gills 
dead fish 
enlargement of the kidney, liver and spleen 
focal white to yellow liver lesions. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
coagulative or liquefactive necrosis of the liver, kidney and spleen 
necrotic lesions in the heart, pancreas, gastrointestinal tract and gills 
small numbers of basophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies surrounding necrotic areas of the 
liver and kidney. 
Disease agent 
EHN is caused by infection with epizootic haematopoietic necrosis virus (EHNV), belonging to the 
genus Ranavirus within the family Iridoviridae. Closely related ranaviruses cause similar systemic 
necrotising iridovirus syndromes in sheatfish and catfish in Europe (European sheatfish virus and 
European catfish virus; also in this guide).

3 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to EHNV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Macquarie perch 
Macquaria australasica 
Mosquito fish 
Gambusia affinis 
Mountain galaxias 
Galaxias olidus 
Murray coda 
Maccullochella peelii 
Rainbow troutb 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
Redfin perchb or European perch 
Perca fluviatilis 
Silver perch 
Bidyanus bidyanus 
Piscivorous birds 
Various genera and species 
a Demonstrated to carry EHNV subclinically. b Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be 
experimentally susceptible. 
Presence in Australia 
EHN has been officially reported from the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, South 
Australia and Victoria. 
Map 1 Presence of EHN, by jurisdiction

4 
Epidemiology 
EHN is usually seen in Australia as large kills of small redfin perch. High mortality can also occur 
among older perch in newly affected areas. 
Clinical outbreaks are typically seen in fingerlings and juvenile fish, associated with poor water 
quality and/or certain water temperatures (between 11°C and 17°C in rainbow trout and 
above 12°C in redfin perch). 
Mortalities occur over a short period (several weeks) in summer, and then the disease may 
disappear from an area for years. 
Low mortality rates over a period of months have been reported in young, farmed rainbow 
trout. 
Infectivity is less severe in rainbow trout than in redfin perch, with the disease mainly affecting 
fingerlings less than 125mm long. 
Low-grade mortalities with covert EHNV infection can also occur in juvenile fish. Care must be 
taken when moving redfin perch and rainbow trout from the known geographical range of EHNV 
to areas where it is exotic, unless freedom from disease can be adequately demonstrated. 
EHN is a resistant virus, surviving for months in water, persisting in frozen fish tissues for more 
than two years and in frozen fish carcases for at least one year. 
EHNV may be carried on equipment including nets and boats, in fish (live or dead) used for bait 
and via the gut, feathers, feet and bill of piscivorous birds. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Enteric red mouth disease, furunculosis, infection with HPR-deleted or HPR0 infectious salmon 
anaemia virus, infectious haematopoietic necrosis (IHN), infectious pancreatic necrosis (IPN), viral 
haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS) and whirling disease. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling.

5 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Epizootic Haematopoietic Necrosis 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.