Also known as bonamiosis 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Diseases caused by any of the microcell species are similar. In cases of light infection, few signs or no 
clinical or gross signs may be present. Concurrent infections with more than one species of Bonamia 
may also occur. Definitive identification of infection with Bonamia or Mikrocytos species requires 
histological laboratory examination and molecular diagnostic techniques. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
dead or gaping oysters 
increased mortality. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
stunted growth and poor condition 
weakened shell closure, leading to slight gaping 
watery flesh, pale atrophied digestive gland in clinically diseased oysters 
algae-covered shell lips after the mantle shrinks and no longer reaches the edges 
deformities to the gill margins. 
Infection with Bonamia spp. rarely results in gross pathological signs of disease in oysters under 
natural conditions.—Most infections are asymptomatic. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
microcell parasites in or near epithelia-may be in very low numbers 
microcells may also occur within haemocytes and vesicular connective tissues (especially the gill 
or mantle) 
individual microcells are basophilic, spherical or ovoid parasites, 2 to 3µm in diameter 
some species of exotic Bonamia spp. produce spores (such as B. perspora). 
Disease agent 
Bonamiosis is caused by infection with Bonamia spp., intrahaemocytic protists classified in the order 
Haplosporidia (class Ascetosporea). Both flat and cupped oysters may become infected. 
This disease listing includes B. perspora and unidentified Bonamia spp., but excludes B. exitiosa and 
B. ostreae, which are addressed in separate disease listings.

2 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be naturally susceptible to infection with Bonamia spp. 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Crested oyster 
Ostrea equestris 
Dwarf oyster 
Ostrea stentina 
European flat oyster 
Ostrea edulis 
Hawaiian oyster 
Dendostrea sandvicensis 
New Zealand dredge oyster 
Ostrea chilensis 
Pacific oyster 
Crassostrea gigas 
Southern mud oyster or Australian flat oyster 
Ostrea angasi 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Bonamia exitiosa has been recorded from flat oysters in Victoria and New South Wales, and in a very 
low percentage of Sydney rock oysters in New South Wales. It is likely that Bonamia spp. previously 
recorded in flat oysters in Tasmania, South Australia and Western Australia are also B. exitiosa. 
Bonamia ostreae and other Bonamia spp. are exotic to Australia, so any differential diagnosis of 
Bonamia spp. infection in Australian oysters requires specific confirmation using molecular diagnostic 
techniques to differentiate between the endemic B. exitiosa and exotic B. ostreae and Bonamia spp. 
Map 1 Presence of Bonamia spp. (excluding B. exitiosa), by jurisdiction

3 
Epidemiology 
Mortalities may occur all year, but usually happen in spring and summer. 
In most cases, oysters are lightly infected without mortalities. Factors that contribute to disease 
outbreaks are often unclear. 
Bonamia spp. are thought to be spread by human movements of subclinically infected oysters, 
and via infected hosts carried in biofouling on shipping. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with Bonamia exitiosa, infection with Bonamia ostreae and infection with 
Mikrocytos mackini. 
There are few or no visual cues to the presence of this disease other than poor condition, shell 
gaping and increased mortality. Consequently, it is impossible to use gross signs alone to 
differentiate between infection by Bonamia species and Mikrocytos species. Concurrent infections 
with more than one species of Bonamia may also occur. Any presumptive diagnosis requires further 
laboratory examination. 
Light microscopy can contribute diagnostic information (such as in the case of B. perspora infection 
when spores are present), but further laboratory examination and molecular diagnostic techniques 
are required for a definitive diagnosis. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency.

4 
Microscope images 
Figure 1 Histological section of digestive gland of crested oyster (Ostrea equestris) with 
Bonamia perspora sporocysts 
Note: Sporocysts of B. perspora (a). 
Source: R Carnegie 
Figure 2 Histological section of digestive gland of crested oyster (Ostrea equestris) with 
Bonamia perspora spores 
Note: Individual spores of B. perspora (a) released into the lumen of the digestive gland tubule. Scale bar = 10µm. 
Source: R Carnegie

5 
Further reading 
Australia and New Zealand standard diagnostic procedure Bonamiosis in Australian ‘Ostrea angasi’ 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Bonamiosis 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.