Infection with infectious myonecrosis virus (IMNV) 
Also known as infectious myonecrosis 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Gross signs of infectious myonecrosis in naturally infected farmed Pacific white shrimp 
(Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei) 
Note: Various degrees of skeletal muscle necrosis, visible as an opaque, whitish discolouration of the abdomen. 
Figure 2 Gross signs of infectious myonecrosis in naturally infected farmed Pacific white shrimp 
(Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei) 
Note: Reddened tail, and skeletal muscle necrosis visible as an opaque, whitish discolouration of the abdominal segments. 

2 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
lethargy 
• 
large numbers of moribund animals and significant mortalities (up to 70%), during or following 
stressful events 
• 
The acute form of the disease produces gross signs and elevated mortalities, but disease 
progresses to a chronic phase with persistent low-level mortalities. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
focal to extensive white necrotic areas in the striated muscle commonly observed in distal 
abdominal segments 
• 
necrotic and reddened tail fan 
• 
lymphoid organs increased to 3 to 4 times normal size 
• 
moribund prawns with a full stomach because affected individuals may continue to feed until 
death. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
coagulative necrosis of skeletal muscle by haemocytic infiltration and fibrosis. 
Disease agent 
Infectious myonecrosis is caused by infection with infectious myonecrosis virus (IMNV), a putative 
totivirus. Phylogenetic analysis based on its RNA-dependent RNA polymerase gene coding sequence 
groups IMNV most closely with Giardia lamblia virus, a member of the family Totiviridae. 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to IMNV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Black tiger prawn 
Penaeus monodon 
Brown tiger prawn 
Penaeus esculentus 
Gulf banana prawn 
Penaeus (Fenneropenaeus) merguiensis 
Pacific blue shrimp 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris 
Pacific white shrimpa 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei 
Southern brown shrimp 
Penaeus (Farfantepenaeus) subtilis 
a Naturally susceptible.

3 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of IMNV, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
• 
IMNV was originally identified in northeastern Brazil in cultured Penaeus (Litopenaeus) 
vannamei. The virus has since been reported in South-East Asia, including Indonesia, India and 
Sri Lanka. 
• 
Clinical signs may have sudden onset following stressful events (such as capture by net, reduced 
feeding or sudden changes in temperature or salinity). 
• 
Affected life stages include juveniles and subadults. Significant mortalities occur in juvenile and 
subadult pond-reared populations. 
• 
Horizontal transmission has been demonstrated via cannibalism. Vertical transmission (direct 
passage from parents to offspring via eggs or sperm) is likely but not confirmed. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
The clinical signs described and shown here may also be symptomatic of other bacterial or viral 
infections or poor water quality. Further laboratory examination is needed for a definitive diagnosis. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with Macrobrachium rosenbergii nodavirus (MrNV) and infection with shrimp haemocyte 
iridescent virus (SHIV).

4 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Microscope images 
Figure 3 Skeletal muscle of Pacific white shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei) infected 
with IMNV 
Note: Coagulative necrosis of skeletal muscle accompanied by haemocytic infiltration and fibrosis. Normal skeletal muscle 
can be observed in the upper right corner. Haematoxylin and eosin stain Scale bar = 50μm. 

5 
Figure 4 Muscle cells of Pacific white shrimp (Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei) infected with IMNV 
Note: Perinuclear pale basophilic to dark basophilic inclusion bodies in a group of muscle cells (a).Haematoxylin and eosin 
stain. Scale bar = 20μm. 
Figure 5 In situ hybridisation of skeletal muscle tissue using a digoxigenin-labelled IMNV probe 
Note: Black precipitate is present in areas where probe has hybridised with target virus. Bismarck brown counterstain. Scale 
bar = 50μm. 

6 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium Infectious myonecrosis 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Infectious myonecrosis 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.