Infection with HPR-deleted or HPR0 
infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) 
Also known as infectious salmon anaemia (ISA) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with ISA 
Note: Gross internal signs of ISA include dark liver, ascites and enlarged spleen. 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
mortality rate up to 100% 
fish congregating near the surface 
fish gasping at the surface 
lethargy 
loss of appetite. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
pale gills and heart 
swollen abdomen 
exophthalmos (popeye), bleeding eyes 
fin rot 
ecchymotic (bruise-like) skin haemorrhages

2 
scale-pocket oedema 
swollen and dark liver, kidney and spleen (early sign); liver may be almost black 
petechial (pinpoint) haemorrhages in internal fat, peritoneum and skeletal muscle 
dark red intestinal wall mucosa 
ascites (fluid in the abdominal cavity) 
surface haemorrhages on liver. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
renal interstitial haemorrhage and tubular necrosis 
branchial lamellar and filamental congestion 
congestion of the intestine and pyloric caecae 
perivascular inflammation and focal necrosis in liver. 
Disease agent 
ISA is caused by infection with the pathogenic highly polymorphic region (HPR)-deleted infectious 
salmon anaemia virus (ISAV), or the non-pathogenic HPR0 (non-deleted HPR) ISAV, a single stranded 
RNA virus classified within the genus Isavirus within the family Orthomyxoviridae. Infection with 
HPR-deleted ISAV may cause severe disease in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). However, Detection of 
HPR0 ISAV has never been associated with clinical signs of disease in Atlantic salmon. 
Host range 
The only species known to display clinical signs of ISA is the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Several 
other fish species have been confirmed to be asymptomatic carriers of the virus. 
Table 1 Species known to display clinical signs of ISA 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Atlantic salmon 
Salmo salar 
Table 2 Species known to be asymptomatic carriers or vectors of ISAV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Arctic char 
Salvelinus alpinus 
Atlantic cod 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic herring 
Clupea harengus 
Brown trouta 
Salmo trutta 
Coalfish or pollock 
Pollachius virens 
Coho salmona 
Oncorhynchus kisutch 
Masu salmona 
Oncorhynchus masou 
Rainbow trouta 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
Salmon louse 
Lepeophtheirus salmonis and Caligus coryphaenae 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible.

3 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
The distantly related pilchard orthomyxo-like virus (POMV) has been reported from wild caught 
pilchards and cultured Atlantic salmon in Tasmania, but infectious salmon anaemia caused by 
infection with HPR-deleted or HPR0 ISAV has not been recorded in Australia and is considered exotic. 
Map 1 Presence of ISAV, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
ISA occurs mainly in the northern hemisphere in spring and early winter (water temperatures 
from 3°C to above 15°C). 
The disease has caused major epizootics and severely impacted Atlantic salmon aquaculture 
production in Norway, Scotland, Canada and Chile. 
Mortality rates vary from 15% to 100%; mortality may occur over a prolonged period, not 
necessarily as acute outbreaks. 
ISA is mainly transmitted horizontally through the water column, but also by vectors (sea lice 
and populations of asymptomatic wild fish carriers). 
Experimental infection demonstrated mortalities within 15 days of exposure to ISAV. 
Spread of the disease has occurred with the movement of live juvenile salmonids between fish 
farms, with the discharge of organic waste from fish processing plants into the marine 
environment and via water movement. 
The majority of natural outbreaks seem to occur in salmonid post-smolts. 
ISA has been the subject of extensive eradication campaigns in several countries. These can be 
successful, but require vigilance to maintain 'free' status.

4 
It appears that stressors such as husbandry practices (including treatment against salmon lice or 
infectious diseases), rising or falling temperatures, and poor water quality can predispose 
salmon to outbreaks of ISA. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Bacterial kidney disease (BKD), enteric red mouth disease (ERMD), infection with Aeromonas 
salmonicida atypical strains, infection with salmonid alphavirus (SAV), infectious haematopoietic 
necrosis (IHN), infectious pancreatic necrosis (IPN) and piscirickettsiosis. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Histopathology of liver of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with ISA 
Note: Multifocal bridging necrosis, leaving viable tissue around smaller veins. 
Source: T Poppe.

5 
Figure 3 Histopathology of kidney of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with ISA 
Note: Renal interstitial haemorrhage. 
Further reading 
Infectious salmon anaemia 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.