Infection with Enterocytozoon hepatopenaei (EHP) 
Also known as hepatopancreatic microsporidosis 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
unusually retarded growth in the absence of other gross signs of disease. 
There are no specifically distinctive gross signs of infection by EHP. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
the presence of basophilic, cytoplasmic inclusions (microsporidian sporocysts) containing 
clusters of elliptical to somewhat ovoid spores of 1.1 ± 0.21µm by 0.6–0.7 ± 0.1µmin 
haematoxylin and eosin stained tissue sections of hepatopancreas tubule epithelial cells 
free spores released from lysed cells occasionally observable in the tubule lumens. 
Disease agent 
Hepatopancreatic microsporidosis is caused by infection with Enterocytozoon hepatopenaei (EHP), a 
microsporidian parasite classified within the family Enterocytozoonidae. It was first discovered in 
Penaeus monodon in Thailand in 2004. 
Host range 
Species known to be susceptible to E. hepatopenaei are listed in Table 1 and Table 2. A similar 
microsporidian has been reported to infect kuruma prawns in Queensland, but the taxonomic 
affinities of that parasite are unclear. E. hepatopenaei has also been detected in frozen Artemia 
biomass and live polychaetes. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to EHP 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Black tiger prawna 
Penaeus monodon 
Pacific white shrimpa 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) vannamei 
Pacific blue shrimp 
Penaeus (Litopenaeus) stylirostris 
a Naturally susceptible. 
Table 2 Non-crustacean carriers 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Brine shrimpa 
Artemia salina 
Polychaetesa 
Various genera and species 
a Naturally susceptible.

2 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
EHP is considered exotic to Australia. However, other microsporidians have been reported to infect 
kuruma prawns (Penaeus (Marsupenaeus) japonicus) in Queensland. 
Map 1 Presence of Enterocytozoon hepatopenaei, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
EHP is known to infect only the tubule epithelial cells of the hepatopancreas of prawns. 
EHP should therefore not be confused with other microsporidians with different tissue trophism, 
such as Agmasoma penaei that infects muscle tissue and connective tissue leading to the gross 
signs of 'cotton shrimp disease' or 'white back' disease. 
EHP can be transmitted horizontally among prawns cohabiting in rearing ponds. 
Heavily infected prawns may display white faeces that are packed with microsporidian spores. 
Infection with EHP may be a significant risk factor in the development of acute hepatopancreatic 
necrosis disease (AHPND). 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND) and infection with Hepatobacter penaei (NHP).

3 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Microscope images 
Figure 1 Histopathology of hepatopancreas of Pacific white shrimp 
Note: Sloughed tubule epithelial cells containing many microsporidian spores in the cytoplasm. Scale bar = 20µm. 

4 
Figure 2 Histopathology of hepatopancreas of Pacific white shrimp 
Note: Numerous spores inside sporocysts (plasmodia). Scale bar = 20µm. 
Figure 3 Electron micrograph of spore of Enterocytozoon hepatopenaei 
Note: Polar filament (a) with 5 or 6 coils, in lamellar portion of polarplast (b). Scale bar = 200nm 

5 
Figure 4 Electron micrograph cross-section of polar filament in Enterocytozoon hepatopenaei spore 
Note: Cross-sections of coils (a) of the polar filament. Scale bar = 250nm 
Further reading 
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific Hepatopancreatic microsporidosis caused by infection 
with ‘Enterocytooon hepatopenaei’: disease card 
This hyperlink was correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.