Also known as infection with salmon pancreas disease virus (SPDV), salmon pancreas 
disease (SPD), pancreas disease (PD) and sleeping disease (SD) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) chronically infected with SAV 
Note: Very thin carrier fish in poor condition a few months after infection. 
Source: T Poppe 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
Lack of appetite a week or two before a disease outbreak 
clinically diseased fish may swim against the current close to the surface or corners of the cage, 
or be found resting at the bottom of the tank or cage (sleeping) 
one to several months after the onset of mortality, a portion of the survivors usually fail to grow 
and become thin and slender (runts).

2 
Gross pathological signs are: 
yellow mucoid gut contents 
petechiae in pyloric fat, pale hearts and/or haemopericardium due to heart rupture 
scale pocket oedema 
exophthalmos 
ascites 
atrophy of red skeletal muscle in chronic cases. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
necrosis of exocrine pancreas develops shortly before cardiomyocytic necrosis 
severe or total loss of exocrine pancreas, myocarditis and skeletal muscle necrosis, degeneration 
and myositis 
damage, primarily of the pancreas, and severe cardiac and skeletal. 
Disease agent 
SPD is caused by infection with salmonid alphavirus (SAV), a member of the family Togaviridae in the 
genus Alphavirus. Various genetic subtypes of the virus have been detected. SPD first emerged in 
Scotland and subsequently recognised in France, Ireland, England, Norway, Germany, Italy and Spain. 
Host range 
Clinical signs of salmon pancreas disease have been reported in Atlantic salmon, sea-reared rainbow 
trout, brown trout and Arctic char. Wild fish (such as flatfish and wrasses) can be subclinically 
infected and may act as potential vectors or reservoirs of infection. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to SAV 
Common name 
Scientific name 
American plaicea 
Hippoglossoides platessoides 
Arctic chara 
Salvelinus alpinus 
Atlantic salmona 
Salmo salar 
Brown trout 
Salmo trutta 
Daba 
Limanda limanda 
Plaicea 
Pleuronectes platessa 
Rainbow trouta 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
Wrassea 
Labrus bergylta 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible.

3 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of SAV, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
SAV is horizontally transmitted, via water and water currents, transport of infected fish, 
contaminated equipment, well boats and other vehicles. The virus can survive for extended 
periods in seawater. 
Vertical transmission is considered unlikely but has not been ruled out. 
Water temperature may affect the duration and level of mortality. 
Subtypes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 may have different virulence in different hosts. 
All marine life stages of Atlantic salmon are susceptible to disease, from smolts to adult fish. 
Different strains of Atlantic salmon may have different susceptibility to SAV. 
Farmed rainbow trout in fresh water and salt water are susceptible to disease at all stages of 
production. 
Mortality varies significantly, from negligible to over 50% in severe cases. Up to 15% of surviving 
fish will develop into long, slender fish (runts). 
Management and environmental factors that induce stress in fish probably increase mortality 
significantly. 
Natural reservoirs of SAV may include wild fish. SAV has been detected in some wild flatfish 
species in Scotland and in wrasses used for sealice management in Ireland.

4 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with HPR-deleted or HPR0 infectious salmon anaemia virus and infectious pancreatic 
necrosis (IPN). 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
This hyperlink was correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.