Also known as marteilioidosis 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) infected with Marteilioides chungmuensis 
Note: Nodular yellowish lesions visible in the gonad. 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
spawning failure 
high mortalities. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
visible distension of the mantle surface due to infected eggs retained within the follicle 
nodule-like structures on the gonad surface. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
paramyxean parasites within oocytes.

2 
Disease agent 
Marteilioidosis is caused by infection with Marteilioides chungmuensis, a protozoan parasite (order 
Paramyxida, class Ascetosporea) that infects the oocytes of oysters. 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with Marteilioides chungmuensis 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Iwagaki oyster 
Crassostrea nippona 
Pacific oystera 
Crassostrea gigas 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible. 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Marteilioides chungmuensis has not been recorded in Australia and is considered exotic. Other 
species of Marteilioides have been reported in the ovary of Saccostrea echinata from the Northern 
Territory and Western Australia. The related M. branchialis causes focal lesions in the gill lamellae of 
Sydney rock oysters in northern New South Wales. 
Map 1 Presence of Marteilioides chungmuensis, by jurisdiction

3 
Epidemiology 
Marteilioides chungmuensis infects the cytoplasm of mature oocytes and can affect a substantial 
proportion of eggs. 
Prolonged spawning activity of infected oysters has been observed, resulting in nutritional 
wasting and mortality. 
Prevalence of infection increases during spawning in summer and decreases after spawning in 
winter. 
Infected oysters lose their marketability, due to their abnormal appearance. 
Mode of transmission is unknown. However, as for other paramyxeans, intermediate hosts may 
be involved in the life cycle of the parasite. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
No diseases listed in this field guide are similar to infection with Marteilioides chungmuensis. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency.

4 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Histological section of ovary of Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) 
Note: Intracellular (within oocytes) Marteilioides chungmuensis parasites. 
Further reading 
European Union Reference Laboratory for Molluscs Diseases ‘Marteilioides chungmuensis’ 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada ‘Marteilioides chungmuensis’ of oysters 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.