Infection with Aeromonas salmonicida—
atypical strains 
Also known as infection with atypical strains of Aeromonas salmonicida, marine 
aeromonad disease of salmonids (MAS), goldfish ulcer disease, carp erythrodermatitis 
and ulcer disease of flounder, eel and salmon 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Goldfish ulcer disease in goldfish (Carassius auratus) 
Note: Characteristic ulcers on the body. 
Source: J Carson 
Figure 2 Greenback flounder (Rhombosolea tapirina) infected with greenback flounder strain of 
Aeromonas salmonicida 
Note: Ulcer on ventral side of body. 
Source: J Carson.

2 
Figure 3 Infection with atypical Aeromonas salmonicida in silver perch (Bidyanus bidyanus) 
Note: Ulcers on body. 
Source: M Landos 
Figure 4 Infection with Aeromonas salmonicida biovar Acheron in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) 
Note: Haemorrhagic lesion on the flank typical of MAS. 
Source: K Ellard 
Figure 5 Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with blood filled MAS ulcerations 
Note Blood-filled furuncles in MAS are rarely noted, because they rupture easily. 
Source: K Ellard

3 
Figure 6 Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with MAS ulcer exposed below the surface of the skin 
Note: The MAS lesion extends into the underlying muscle. 
Source: K Ellard 
Figure 7 Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) infected with greenback flounder strain of atypical 
A. salmonicida after cohabitation with infected flounder 
Note: Haemorrhagic lesions around the isthmus and branchiostegal membranes. 
Source: J Carson 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
lethargic swimming 
• 
abnormal swimming and disorientation 
• 
loss of appetite 
• 
increased mortality.

4 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
white raised patches on the skin that progress to ragged-edged red ulcers 
• 
haemorrhages on the skin and fin bases (usually the paired fins) 
• 
fingernail-sized ulcers found anywhere on the fish, most often on the upper side of the lateral 
line behind the head or at the base of the tail fin 
• 
pale gills with petechial (pinpoint) haemorrhages 
• 
intestinal protrusion through the abdominal wall following severe ulceration 
• 
haemorrhages in muscle and internal organs 
• 
swollen kidneys and spleen. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
hyperplasia of the gills, which may contain bacterial colonies 
• 
ulcerated areas that show oedema, hyperaemia, leukocyte infiltration and considerable 
degenerative changes 
• 
hyperaemia and haemorrhage in the spleen and kidneys 
• 
fibroblast-like cells, which may produce granulomas in the dermis, spleen and kidney. 
Disease agent 
Atypical strains of the Aeromonas salmonicida bacterium within the family Enterobacteriaceae differ 
from the typical strain causing furunculosis in salmonids. Atypical strains affect mainly non-salmonids 
(wild and cultured, marine and freshwater). Infection with atypical A. salmonicida does not 
necessarily result in the acute mortality and septicaemia that are characteristic of the typical 
furunculosis strain, but manifests more as external lesions and ulceration, often involving secondary 
infection. An exception is MAS in Tasmania; in such cases, Atlantic salmon are most commonly 
affected, and clinical presentation is similar to furunculosis. 
There are five subspecies of A. salmonicida. A. salmonicida salmonicida is known as the typical strain 
and is the only one to cause furunculosis (listed separately in this guide). The other four subspecies 
(achromogenes, masoucida, smithia and pectinolytica) are referred to as atypical A. salmonicida and 
are recognised worldwide. All except A. salmonicida pectinolytica cause disease in fish.  
A. salmonicida biovar Acheron is a new atypical strain recently described in Australia (Tasmania),  
causing MAS in Atlantic salmon. 
Host range 
Laboratory experiments indicate that all trout and salmon species, as well as many non-salmonids, 
are potentially susceptible to atypical strains of A. salmonicida. For example, Atlantic salmon and 
striped trumpeter can be infected by cohabitation with infected flounder. 
Rainbow trout are relatively resistant to atypical strains.

5 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to atypical strains of Aeromonas salmonicida 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Amago salmona 
Oncorhynchus rhodurus 
American eela 
Anguilla rostrata 
American plaice 
Hippoglossoides platessoides 
Arctic char 
Salvelinus alpinus 
Atlantic coda 
Gadus morhua 
Atlantic herringa 
Clupea harengus 
Atlantic salmona 
Salmo salar 
Ayu 
Plecoglossus altivelis 
Black sea salmon 
Salmo labrax 
Black rockfisha 
Sebastes schlegelii 
Brook trouta 
Salvelinus fontinalis 
Brown trouta 
Salmo trutta 
Bull trout 
Salvelinus confluentus 
Chuba 
Leuciscus cephalus 
Chinook salmon 
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha 
Chum salmona 
Oncorhynchus keta 
Coho salmon 
Oncorhynchus kisutch 
Common carp and koi carpa 
Cyprinus carpio 
Common roacha 
Rutilus rutilus 
Crucian carpa 
Carassius carassius 
Cutthroat trout 
Oncorhynchus clarkii 
Daba 
Limanda limanda 
Dacea 
Leuciscus leuciscus 
Danube salmon 
Hucho hucho 
Eels 
Anguillidae all species 
European eel 
Anguilla anguilla 
Floundera 
Platichthys flesus 
Fourbeard rocklinga 
Enchelyopus cimbrius 
Freshwater breama 
Abramis brama 
Gila trout 
Oncorhynchus gilae 
Golden trout 
Oncorhynchus aguabonita 
Goldfisha 
Carassius auratus 
Goldsinnya 
Ctenolabrus rupestris 
Graylinga 
Thymallus thymallus 
Great sandeela 
Hyperoplus lanceolatus 
Greenback floundera 
Rhombosolea tapirina 
Haddocka 
Melanogrammus aeglefinus

6 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Hybrid (rainbow trout × coho salmon) 
Oncorhynchus mykiss × O. kisutch 
Japanese eel 
Anguilla japonica 
Japanese floundera 
Paralichthys olivaceus 
Lake trout 
Salvelinus namaycush 
Lake whitefish 
Coregonus clupeaformis 
Lesser sand eel 
Ammodytes tobianus 
Masu salmona 
Oncorhynchus masou 
Minnowa 
Phoxinus phoxinus 
Pacific halibuta 
Hippoglossus stenolepis 
Pacific salmona 
Oncorhynchus spp. 
Pike 
Esox lucius 
Pink salmon 
Oncorhynchus gorbuscha 
Plaicea 
Pleuronectes platessa 
Rainbow trouta 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
Redfin or European perch  
Perca fluviatilis 
Rudda 
Scardinius erythrophthalmus 
Sablefish 
Anoplopoma fimbria 
Salmonids (all presumed susceptible)a 
Salmonidae all species 
Shortfin eel 
Anguilla australis 
Shotted halibuta 
Eopsetta grigorjewi 
Shubunkina 
Carassius sp. 
Silver breama 
Blicca bjoerkna 
Silver percha 
Bidyanus bidyanus 
Smallmouth bassa 
Micropterus dolomieu 
Sockeye salmona 
Oncorhynchus nerka 
Splake (lake trout × brook trout) 
Salvelinus namaycush × S. fontinalis 
Spotted wolfisha 
Anarhichas minor 
Striped trumpetera 
Latris lineata 
Tomcoda 
Gadus microgadus 
Turbota 
Scophthalmus maximus 
Viviparous blennya 
Zoarces viviparus 
Whitefish (Muksun) 
Coregonus muksun 
Whitefish (Peled) 
Coregonus peled 
Whitefish 
Coregonus spp. 
Whitespotted char 
Salvelinus leucomaenis 
Whitinga 
Merlangius merlangus 
Wrassea 
Labrus bergylta 
Wrasses 
Labridae all species

7 
Common name 
Scientific name 
Yellow bassa 
Morone mississippiensis 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species likely to be susceptible. 
Presence in Australia 
Atypical A. salmonicida has been officially reported from New South Wales, Queensland, 
South Australia, Victoria (goldfish ulcer disease only) and Tasmania (greenback flounder biovar and 
Acheron biovar only). Movement controls are in place to prevent the spread of goldfish ulcer disease 
to Western Australia and Tasmania. The Acheron biovar has been reported only from Tasmania and 
is limited to an isolated production area. 
Map 1 Presence of atypical strains of Aeromonas salmonicida, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
• 
Transmission occurs horizontally (between fish via the water). 
• 
Susceptibility to the disease increases with damaged mucus and skin, which occurs when fish are 
handled with nets. 
• 
Outbreaks are expected to occur at water temperatures above 10°C (summer months in 
southern waters of Australia) and may be precipitated by stress (such as handling, 
overpopulation and rapid temperature fluctuations). 
• 
Secondary infection with other bacteria often occurs. 
• 
Fish that survive disease outbreaks are recognised as carriers of the disease. Carriers may 
continue to infect the remaining population without themselves exhibiting signs of infection. 
• 
Diagnosis based on clinical or external signs of disease is difficult because clinical signs vary and 
skin ulcers are often infected with opportunistic bacteria and fungi. A definitive diagnosis 
requires laboratory examination.

8 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Channel catfish virus disease (CCVD), furunculosis, infection with Aphanomyces invadans (EUS), 
koi herpesvirus disease (KHV) and spring viraemia of carp (SVC). 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
Menanteau-Ledouble S, Kumar G, Saleh M, El-Matbouli M 2016, ‘Aeromonas salmonicida’: updates 
on an old acquaintance, Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 
Whittington RJ, Djordjevic SP, Carson J, Callinan RB 1995, Restriction endonuclease analysis of 
atypical ‘Aeromonas salmonicida’ isolates from goldfish ‘Carassius auratus’, silver perch ‘Bidyanus 
bidyanus’, and greenback flounder ‘Rhombosolea tapirina’ in Australia, Diseases of Aquatic 
Organisms 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.