Also known as marteiliosis and Aber disease 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 European flat oyster (Ostrea edulis) infected with Marteilia refringens 
Note: A healthy oyster (left) with full, creamy-coloured digestive gland. The infected oyster (right) has a translucent, watery, 
shrunken digestive gland. 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
• 
high mortality 
• 
reduced growth rate 
• 
gaping shells. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
• 
poor condition and emaciation 
• 
pale, watery digestive gland 
• 
inhibited gonad development. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
• 
tissue necrosis 
• 
massive infection of the digestive gland tubule epithelium with sporogenic stages.

2 
Disease agent 
Marteiliosis (or Aber disease) is caused by infection with Marteilia refringens. This is a protozoan 
parasite (order Paramyxida, class Ascetosporea) that affects the digestive system of multiple bivalve 
species, including oysters, mussels, cockles and clams. Other closely related species of Marteilia may 
cause similar diseases, including M. pararefringens in oysters and mussels, M. cochillia in cockles, 
M. octospora in razor shells and M. sydneyi in Sydney rock oysters. 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to infection with Marteilia refringens 
Common name 
Scientific name 
American oystera 
Crassostrea virginica 
Argentinian flat oyster 
Ostrea puelchana 
Asiatic oystera 
Ostrea denselammellosa 
Blue mussela 
Mytilus edulis 
Calico scallop 
Argopecten gibbus 
Common cocklea 
Cerastoderma edule 
Dwarf oyster 
Ostrea stentina 
European flat oystera 
Ostrea edulis 
European razor clama 
Solen marginatus 
Mediterranean mussela 
Mytilus galloprovincialis 
New Zealand dredge oystera 
Ostrea chilensis 
Olympia oystera 
Ostrea conchaphila 
Pacific oyster 
Crassostrea gigas 
Rock oystera 
Saccostrea cucullata 
Small brown mussel 
Xenostrobus securis 
Southern mud oyster or Australian flat oyster 
Ostrea angasi 
Striped venus clama 
Chamelea gallina 
Planktonic copepodsa 
Paracartia grani 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible.

3 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Marteilia refringens has never been recorded in Australia and is considered exotic. However, related 
species of Marteilia have been detected in various oyster species in Queensland, New South Wales 
and Western Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of Marteilia refringens, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
• 
Marteilia refringens infections result in high cumulative mortality (50 to 90%) and is associated 
with sporulation of the parasite in the epithelial cells of the digestive tubules. 
• 
Highest cumulative mortalities usually occur during summer and autumn. 
• 
Earlier stages of sporulation occur in epithelia of the digestive ducts and possibly the gills. 
• 
Several intermediate hosts or a free-living stage are thought to be required during the life cycle 
of M. refringens. The planktonic copepod Paracartia grani is one intermediate host and may be 
involved in transmission of M. refringens between bivalves. 
• 
Marteilia refringens can exist in a carrier state in apparently healthy oysters, which can be 
potential reservoirs of infection. 
• 
Factors triggering a pathogenic host response are not clearly established. Factors may include 
environmental stresses and differences in susceptibility to disease between different host 
populations. 
• 
The temperature threshold for parasite sporulation and transmission is 17°C. However, this is 
thought to vary with other environmental factors.

4 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Infection with Marteilia sydneyi. 
The clinical signs of infection with M. refringens are almost identical to those of infection with other 
Ascetosporea. These include high mortalities associated with colourless and translucent tissue, poor 
condition, pale digestive gland and a shrunken body. Any presumptive diagnosis requires further 
laboratory examination. Light microscopy can contribute diagnostic information, but further 
laboratory examination and molecular diagnostic techniques are required for a definitive diagnosis. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Stained digestive gland imprint from European flat oyster (Ostrea edulis) infected with 
Marteilia refringens 
Note: Several dark-staining M. refringens sporonts containing pairs of spores. 120x magnification. 

5 
Figure 3 Histological section through digestive gland of European flat oyster (Ostrea edulis) 
Note: Large numbers of sporogenic stages of M. refringens in the tubule epithelium. 80x magnification. 
Figure 4 Histological section through digestive gland of European flat oyster (Ostrea edulis) 
Note: Sporogenic stages of M. refringens in the tubule epithelium. 120x magnification. 

6 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium Infection with ‘Marteilia refringens’ 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Infection with ‘Marteilia refringens’ 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.