From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
spots that increase in size and develop brown centres as the tissue dies, leaving a hole in the gill 

Iridoviroses are diseases caused by infection with one of several iridoviruses. Infections include gill 
necrosis virus, an icosahedral deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) virus with affinities with the Iridoviridae. 
Various species of oysters are known (or suspected) to be susceptible to infection with iridoviruses. It 
is reasonable to assume that the Sydney rock oyster (Saccostrea glomerata) is susceptible. 
Table 1 Species known or suspected to be susceptible to infection with iridoviruses 
A number of iridoviruses that cause disease in oysters have been identified. Not all are 
Horizontal transmission occurs directly via the water column through the surface of the gills. 
Little is known about the distribution of the organisms responsible for this condition, but 
molluscan iridoviruses are generally considered to be distributed in oceans worldwide. 
A protist, Thankatostrea polymorpha in the phylum Sarcomastigophora, has also been 
Surviving oysters do not repair perforated gill structures and are potential carriers of the virus.

The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Infection with Irido-like virosis