Also known as infection with red sea bream iridovirus (RSIV) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 Red sea bream (Pagrus major) from South Korea infected with RSIV 
Note: Swollen abdomen due to enlargement of internal organs and fluid accumulation. P. major is a close relative of the 
Australian snapper. 
Source: S I Park. 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
low to high mortality 
lethargic swimming 
obvious opercular movement (increased respiratory effort). 
Gross pathological signs are: 
dark skin (change in skin colour is a significant gross sign) 
petechial (pinpoint) haemorrhage of the gills 
pale gills and enlarged spleen. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
enlarged cells, deeply giemsa positive, in the spleen, heart, kidney, liver and gills of infected fish, 
which are characteristic of this disease 
small dark spots within fresh wet mounts of gill lamellae (melano-macrophage centres).

2 
Disease agent 
RSIVD is caused by infection with red sea bream iridovirus (RSIV), from the genus Megalocytivirus 
within the family Iridoviridae. 
Host range 
Table 1 Species known to be naturally susceptible to RSIV 
Amberjack 
Seriola dumerili 
Barramundi 
Lates calcarifer 
Black rockfish 
Sebastes schlegelii 
Black sea bream or black porgy 
Acanthopagrus schlegelii 
Brown marbled grouper 
Epinephelus fuscoguttatus 
Chicken grunt 
Parapristipoma trilineatum 
Chinese emperor 
Lethrinus haematopterus 
Chinese perch or mandarin fish 
Siniperca chuatsi 
Chub mackerel 
Scomber japonicus 
Cobia 
Rachycentron canadum 
Coral trout 
Plectropomus leopardus 
Crescent sweetlips 
Plectorhinchus cinctus 
Crimson seabream 
Evynnis japonica 
Devil stinger 
Inimicus japonicus 
Estuary cod 
Epinephelus tauvina 
Giant  grouper 
Epinephelus lanceolatus 
Girella or rudderfish 
Girella punctata 
Japanese flounder  
Paralichthys olivaceus 
Japanese horse mackerel 
Trachurus japonicus 
Japanese parrotfish 
Oplegnathus fasciatus 
Japanese seabass 
Lateolabrax japonicus 
Japanese spanish mackerel 
Scomberomorus niphonius 
Large yellow croaker 
Larimichthys crocea 
Largemouth bass 
Micropterus salmoides 
Longtooth grouper 
Epinephelus bruneus 
Malabar grouper 
Epinephelus malabaricus 
Northern bluefin tuna 
Thunnus thynnus 
Orange-spotted grouper 
Epinephelus coioides 
Red sea bream 
Pagrus major 
Red-spotted grouper or Hong Kong grouper 
Epinephelus akaara 
Samson fish 
Seriola hippos 
Seabass 
Lateolabrax spp.

3 
Seven-band grouper 
Hyporthodus septemfasciatus 
Silver trevally 
Pseudocaranx dentex 
Six-bar grouper 
Epinephelus sexfasciatus 
Snapper 
Chrysophrys auratus 
Snubnose dart 
Trachinotus blochii 
Spangled emperor 
Lethrinus nebulosus 
Spotted coralgrouper 
Plectropomus maculatus 
Spotted halibut 
Verasper variegatus 
Spotted knifejaw 
Oplegnathus punctatus 
Tiger grouper hybrid 
Epinephelus fuscoguttatus × E. lanceolatus 
Tiger puffer 
Takifugu rubripes 
Yellow grouper 
Epinephelus awoara 
Yellowback seabream 
Evynnis tumifrons 
Yellowfin seabream 
Acanthopagrus latus 
Yellowtail kingfish 
Seriola lalandi 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of RSIV, by jurisdiction

4 
Epidemiology 
RSIVD is highly contagious. 
Juveniles are more susceptible to disease than adults. 
Mortality is highly variable (0% to 100%) and can depend on water temperature, with higher 
mortalities occurring at higher water temperatures. 
Transmission is horizontal, via the water column from other infected fish. Vertical transmission 
has yet to be confirmed. 
Outbreaks of disease occur at water temperatures greater than 20°C, with viral multiplication 
increasing with water temperatures up to at least 28°C. 
The virus is stable within tissue to –80°C, and can be inactivated by ether, chloroform and 
formalin. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Epizootic haematopoietic necrosis (EHN), grouper iridoviral disease, infection with infectious spleen 
and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV)-like viruses and Tilapia lake virus (TiLV) disease. 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency.

5 
Microscope images 
Figure 2 Giemsa positive staining of enlarged cells within tissue section of spleen of fish with RSIVD 
Note: Enlarged cells are characteristic of the disease. 
Source: K Nakajima. 
Further reading 
CABI Invasive Species Compendium Red Sea Bream Iridoviral Disease 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Red Sea Bream Iridoviral Disease 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication. 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.