Also known as infection with spring viraemia of carp virus (SVCV) 
From Aquatic animal diseases significant to Australia: identification field guide, 5th edition 
Figure 1 SVC in common carp (Cyprinus carpio) 
Note: Characteristic haemorrhagic skin, swollen stomach and exophthalmos (popeye). 
Source: H J Schlotfeldt. 
Signs of disease 
Important: Animals with this disease may show one or more of these signs, but the pathogen may 
still be present in the absence of any signs. 
Disease signs at the farm, tank or pond level are: 
mortality rates of 30 to 100% 
lethargy 
separation from shoal 
lethargic swimming 
accumulation of fish at the water inlet and sides of the pond. 
Gross pathological signs are: 
exophthalmos (popeye) 
swollen abdomen and a protruding vent 
possibly a trailing white or yellowish faecal cast 
petechial (pinpoint) haemorrhages of skin, gills and eyes 
haemorrhages on skin and base of fins and around the vent 
darker body colour, with pale gills

2 
diffuse swelling and haemorrhage of internal organs and degeneration of gill lamellae 
ascites (fluid in abdominal cavity) 
intestines containing mucous instead of food. 
Microscopic pathological signs are: 
liver hyperaemia and oedematous perivasculitis 
pericarditis and infiltration of the myocardium 
hyaline degeneration and vacuolation of the renal tubules, which are clogged with casts 
inflammatory and hyperaemic changes in all major organs. 
Disease agent 
SVC is caused by infection with spring viraemia of carp virus (SVCV), a rhabdovirus classified within 
the genus Sprivivirus. SVCV is closely related to infectious haematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) and 
viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV). 
Host range 
SVCV infects a range of fish species and has been detected infecting amphibians (newts) imported 
from Asia into the USA, as well as on several non-fish carriers. 
Table 1 Species known to be susceptible to SVCV 
Breama 
Abramis brama 
Bighead carpa 
Hypophthalmichthys nobilis 
Common carp and koi carpa 
Cyprinus carpio (species most susceptible) 
Common roach 
Rutilus rutilus 
Crucian carpa 
Carassius carassius 
Goldfisha 
Carassius auratus 
Grass carpa 
Ctenopharyngodon idellus 
Guppy 
Poecilia reticulata  
Ide or orfea 
Leuciscus idus 
Largemouth bass 
Micropterus salmoides 
Pikea 
Esox lucius 
Pumpkinseed 
Lepomis gibbosus 
Rainbow trouta 
Oncorhynchus mykiss 
Silver carpa 
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix 
Tencha 
Tinca tinca 
Wels catfish or sheatfisha 
Silurus glanis 
Zebrafish 
Danio rerio 
a Naturally susceptible. Note: Other species have been shown to be experimentally susceptible.

3 
Table 2 Non-fish carriers 
Chinese fire belly newt 
Cynops orientalis 
Salamanders, newts and sirens 
Order Caudata 
Fish louse 
Argulus foliaceus 
Grey heron 
Ardea cinerea 
Leeches 
Piscicola spp. 
Piscivorous birds 
Various genera and species 
Presence in Australia 
Exotic disease—not recorded in Australia. 
Map 1 Presence of SVCV, by jurisdiction 
Epidemiology 
SVC is very contagious among common carp. 
Clinical disease is linked closely to environmental disturbances. 
Mortality rate is usually less than 40% but can range from 5% to 100%, with younger fish less 
than 1 year old more susceptible. 
Fry are susceptible to disease at temperatures up to 23°C. However some SVCV strains from Asia 
replicate in-vitro at up to 28°C and can cause disease at water temperatures up to 26°C. 
Disease may also occur in older fish (greater than 1 year), usually when water temperatures are 
between 11°C and 17°C (associated with the stress of an abnormally cold spring in Europe, and 
possibly due to cold temperatures weakening the fish's immune system during the spring). 
Fish that survive SVC are presumed to carry the virus.

4 
Outbreaks are most likely to occur with increased stress levels, such as around the time of 
spawning, and coincide with increased levels of virus excreted with spawning fluids. 
Transmission of the virus to uninfected fish is horizontal, and the virus enters fish through the 
gills and skin. 
The virus enters the water in faeces, urine and spawning fluids. Transport of live infected fish, 
contaminated water and contaminated eggs of infected fish (suggestive of vertical transmission) 
contributes to disease spread. 
The virus also infects and causes disease in some salamanders.  
Blood-sucking parasites such as fish louse and leeches can transmit the virus from fish to fish. 
Piscivorous birds can also spread the disease. 
Stressors (such as overcrowding) can trigger an outbreak in apparently healthy populations. 
The virus can remain viable outside the host for 5 weeks in river water at 10°C or more than 
6 weeks in pond mud at 4°C. 
Differential diagnosis 
The list of similar diseases in the next section refers only to the diseases covered by this field guide. 
Gross pathological signs may also be representative of diseases not included in this guide. Do not rely 
on gross signs to provide a definitive diagnosis. Use them as a tool to help identify the listed diseases 
that most closely account for the observed signs. 
Similar diseases 
Enteric redmouth disease (ERMD), enteric septicaemia of catfish, infection with Aeromonas 
salmonicida—atypical strains and koi herpesvirus disease (KHV). 
Sample collection 
Only trained personnel should collect samples. Using only gross pathological signs to differentiate 
between diseases is not reliable, and some aquatic animal disease agents pose a risk to humans. If 
you are not appropriately trained, phone your state or territory hotline number and report your 
observations. If you have to collect samples, the agency taking your call will advise you on the 
appropriate course of action. Local or district fisheries or veterinary authorities may also advise on 
sampling. 
Emergency disease hotline 
See something you think is this disease? Report it. Even if you’re not sure. 
Call the Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline on 1800 675 888. They will refer you to the right 
state or territory agency. 
Further reading 
CEFAS International Database on Aquatic Animal Diseases Spring Viraemia of Carp 
World Organisation for Animal Health Manual of diagnostic tests for aquatic animals 
These hyperlinks were correct at the time of publication.

5 
Contact details 
Emergency Animal Disease Watch Hotline 1800 675 888 
Email AAH@agriculture.gov.au 
Website agriculture.gov.au/pests-diseases-weeds/aquatic 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2020 
the source and no commercial usage or sale.