Renewing Australia’s national approach to animal welfare.
The Australian Government has invested $5 million from 2023-2027 to develop a renewed Australian
Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS), using a joint leadership approach with state and territory
governments.
The renewed AAWS will provide a national framework for collaboration on animal welfare issues of
national significance. This work reaffirms Australia's commitment to modern, sustainable, evidence-
and science-based animal welfare. Read on to learn what's being delivered and why it matters.
Learn about the renewed AAWS
Read about why the AAWS is being renewed
View the roadmap and latest progress updates

Read how stakeholder feedback is shaping the AAWS strategy
Learn about the shared direction for animal welfare in Australia
Access examples of good animal welfare practices and the cross-sectoral animal welfare scan

Subscribe to the newsletter and view media releases
The AAWS artwork
Cowal Makiya
The Australian Government commissioned artwork for the renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare
Strategy (AAWS), titled Cowal Makiya, the Mayi-Yapi word for “today’s land”.
Cowal Makiya was created by artist Leah Cummins, a proud Mayi woman from North-Western
Queensland.
This vibrant piece showcases the six animal group chapters in the AAWS, highlights cultural
connections to animals and promotes respect for traditional knowledge.
Mayi-Yapi is a language of the Mayi Nations of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Artwork story
This artwork is inspired by the Australian environment, ever-changing landscape and animals. In the
centre are the innovations and technologies used for centuries to hunt and protect the environment; the
footprints represent the animals that make Australia unique.
From the land to the waterways, the lasting connections to the animals and environment where the
research and information is gathered is a journey into the future learnings of how to make the
Australian agricultural future stronger.
The resilience of the animals that exist from the lands, to the animals introduced, all play a vital role in
keeping this country prospering.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/aaws