Licensed exporters must have an approved Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System (ESCAS) to export
Your application email must set out the supply chain details of the proposed export, including:
independent auditing and reporting in relation to points (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g) above
an Initial Independent Audit Report (IIAR) for all facilities in the proposed supply chain.
You must include documents that demonstrate control and traceability arrangements. These may
agreements confirming animal welfare and control and traceability requirements can be met.
a management strategy or similar that outlines how requirements for animal welfare, control and
You must include details of any upcoming consignments the proposed ESCAS will apply to in your

We will notify you in writing if we approve your application. An application for an ESCAS does not
We will give you a Supply Chain Number (SCN) if we approve your ESCAS application.
We may approve your application subject to conditions. We will let you know the conditions when we
Initial independent audit report (IIAR) for changed infrastructure or processes at existing
You can include details of upcoming consignments your variation will apply to. However, this is not

We may require independent audits of facilities 1, 2 or 4 times a year. We determine the number by the
IPARs will identify non-compliance during the audit or in the preceding reporting period.
By submitting this, you attest that you can account for all livestock exported on your approved ESCAS.
You can also submit End of Processing reports, as they account for all livestock from each export
consignment. These can be used to demonstrate accounting and traceability of your ESCAS.
We may approve ESCAS applications subject to conditions. We may require further audits or reports.
Our Export Advisory Notices (EANs) and Market Access Notices (MANs) keep you updated of new
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/exporters/escas/