Exporters must meet our minimum animal health and welfare conditions to export livestock. These are

outlined in the Australian Standards for the Export of Livestock (ASEL). ASEL applies to cattle, sheep,

goats, buffalo, deer, and camelids (including alpaca).

We enforce ASEL under our regulatory framework.

We regularly review ASEL requirements. Find out more about ASEL updates and reviews.

Download ASEL

Use our quick-find reference tables to locate more departmental webpages, documents and information

relevant to livestock exports.

In some cases, you can apply for approval of alternate export arrangements under ASEL. These

approvals apply to a specific consignment only. Apply when you submit a notice of intention to export

livestock.

Download policies

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

The ASEL rejection criteria are conditions and criteria that make animals ineligible for export. We have

developed guidance material to promote their understanding and consistent application.

The guidebooks aim to:

outline the rejection criteria and provide clarification and technical information to promote

consistent application

improve welfare outcomes through better management before loading

provide guidance on livestock that are unsuitable for export or to enter the export supply chain.

Read the relevant guidebook in conjunction with the ASEL. Note that that importing country

requirements may also apply.

We encourage feedback, photos and videos to improve the guidebooks. You can email us your

questions, feedback and media to aselreview@aff.gov.au.

Download the guidebooks

ASEL rejection criteria guidebook for cattle and buffalo (PDF 5.4 MB)

ASEL rejection criteria guidebook for cattle and buffalo (DOCX 43.92 MB)

ASEL rejection criteria guidebook for sheep and goats (PDF 5.51 MB)

ASEL rejection criteria guidebook for sheep and goats DOCX (45.71 MB)

If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Contact us

You can contact us at one of our live animal export offices.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/australian-

standards-livestock