If you are an Accredited Veterinarian (AAV), you must keep up to date of any changes to your

requirements as an AAV. You must maintain your veterinary registration in the state or territory you

work in.

Renew or vary your accreditation

Accreditation is valid for up to 5 years from the date of notice.

To renew or vary your accreditation, complete the Application for accreditation as an Accredited

Veterinarian for livestock.

You must supply the relevant documents as stated on the application form.

A fee applies to renew or vary your AAV accreditation.

Submit your application and a valid Accredited Program for Australian Veterinarians (APAV) number

to livestockexp@aff.gov.au.

Requirements of your accreditation

You must be familiar with your requirements under our regulatory framework.

This outlines your obligations when undertaking AAV activities including:

criteria for rejection of livestock prior to export

reporting requirements for a notifiable incident.

You must report notifiable incidents as soon as possible and within 12 hours. Notifiable incidents must

also be reported in the daily or end-of-voyage report. The Australian Standards for the Export of

Livestock (ASEL) defines notifiable incidents and reporting requirements.

You must keep all records, including copies of any documents, that are:

relevant to activities you have undertaken

given to, or generated by, you in connection with export operations or while carrying out export

operations

required to be kept under our regulatory framework.

You must keep all records for at least 2 years. The time starts from the date the livestock left the

registered establishment or other premises where livestock were prepared for export.

Shipboard AAVs must provide us with daily (where applicable) and end-of-voyage-reports. These

are required under ASEL.

Submit your reports using the LIVEXCollect Data Collection Tool.

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

We use information from these reports to:

monitor and assess voyages

raise animal welfare concerns

analyse exporter performance and animal welfare outcomes.

We may audit AAVs to check compliance with:

our regulatory framework

the relevant exporter’s approved export program (AEP)

Not all AAVs will be audited every year. We take a risk-based approach to auditing. You are more likely

to be selected for a routine audit if you:

undertake a large number of consignments as an AAV

complete AEPs for markets with complex importing country requirements.

We may also undertake an audit in response to identified issues or other incidents as appropriate and in

line with our Compliance Statement for the Export of Livestock.

Currently audits are desk-top based.

We recover the cost of delivering export regulatory services, including audits. We apply time-based fees

to audits.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/accredited-

veterinarian/current-aavs

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•