Decision process
Until 1 May 2028 the export of live sheep by sea may continue under the Export Control Act 2020
without caps or quotas. The export regulatory requirements, including the animal welfare
requirements, remain in place.
Other livestock exports continue, including of live cattle and live sheep by air.
Timeline
careful consideration of the advice of an independent panel.
March 2023
The panel was appointed and undertook extensive consultation. It considered over 800 written
submissions, 3,300 survey responses, a wide range of existing data and specifically commissioned
analysis.
A summary of the panel’s consultation process and copies of information are available our Have Your
Say page.
The panel's report was provided to government on 25 October 2023.
May 2024
The government response to the panel recommendations was released with the report on 11 May
2024.
Legislation to prohibit the export of live sheep by sea on and after 1 May 2028 was introduced
into the House of Representatives on 30 May 2024.
June to July 2024
The proposed legislation was referred to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Agriculture for inquiry on 3 June 2024.
The department made a submission to inquiry.
The amendments to the Export Control Act 2020 to end the trade on 1 May 2028 came into effect
on 10 July 2024.

Co-design of transition programs
design process to enable industry to inform how funding under the Producer and supply chain program
would be allocated.
Workshops
A total of 16 co-design workshops were held in February 2025.
The first 8 workshops focused on challenges and opportunities to identify transition needs.
The remaining 8 focused on ideas to meet those needs by designing possible transition packages.
Sessions were also held with peak bodies and industry representatives to help identify key areas for co-
design and ensure the right people contributed to this process.
Objectives
The key objectives of the workshops were to:
explore the challenges and opportunities presented by the transition process
co-design ideas and measures to assist industry to respond to the phase out
identify features of a future thriving sheep and wool industry.
Participants
We partnered with peak bodies from the sheep and farming sectors to identify 300 participants across
the supply chain who were invited to the workshops.
This approach ensured that perspectives from all parts of the industry—from producers, livestock
agents, exporters, shearers and beyond—were heard and considered.
Locations
Co-design sessions have now been held in 13 locations. These were Albany, Boyanup, Cranbrook,
Darkan, Esperance, Fremantle, Kojonup, Lake Grace, Merredin, Moora, Narrogin, Perth and York.
Key ideas
The discussions brought together a diverse range of expertise from industry and community
representatives. They also generated many ideas to enhance confidence and profitability in the industry.
Strengthen marketability
Improve the value of light lambs through commercially viable confined feeding and feedlots (on-
farm, satellite, and near processors)

Genetic improvements to produce faster-finishing lambs.
Increase competition and demand for wether lambs
Support new processing facilities and forward price contracts
Rebrand hogget lamb
Secure trade with the Middle East and the European Union.
Secure logistics and processing capacity
Ensure reliable processing and supply chain operations through:
accurate demand forecasting
maintaining west-to-east road transport route
extended operational months of abattoirs
increased air freight for chilled meat exports
competitive port pricing.
Enhance supply chain transparency
Leverage electronic identification (EID) systems to provide growers with feedback on carcase
values
Integrate forward contracts from abattoirs as a condition of funding
Support government efforts to establish large offshore markets to facilitate forward contracts
with growers
Expand extension services to strengthen collaboration between researchers, grower groups, and
producers
Foster trust across the supply chain.
Provide a clear industry strategy
Establish a long-term strategy for the sheep and wool industry in WA. Ensure it is underpinned by
sound economic analysis and accurate forecasts of future flock sizes and wool production volumes.
Strengthen government-industry collaboration
Develop an ongoing mechanism for a more coordinated industry voice in government discussions. This
could include a strong focus on highlighting the economic, food security, community, animal welfare,
and environmental contributions of WA’s sheep and wool sector.
Ongoing collaboration
Discussions also underscored the importance of continued dialogue between industry, government, and
regional communities. They also highlighted the need to strengthen public understanding of
agriculture’s role in both regional and urban contexts.

Participants emphasised that any new programs should build upon, rather than duplicate, existing
initiatives across all levels of government.
Programs and grants
Final programs were decided based on the key findings and priorities identified through the workshops.
See more information on the co-designed programs and grants.
Download resources
Transition Assistance Package – July 2025
Sheep Industry Transition Assistance Package: Transition assistance for sheep producers and the
supply chain for the phase out of live sheep exports by sea (PDF 1.1 MB)
Sheep Industry Transition Assistance Package: Transition assistance for sheep producers and the
supply chain for the phase out of live sheep exports by sea (DOCX 894 KB)
Think Place report into co-designing the $45.5 million producer and supply
chain assistance package– July 2025
Response to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Agriculture advisory report – November 2024
Agriculture advisory report: Inquiry into the Export Control Amendment (Ending Live Sheep
Exports by Sea) Bill 2024 (PDF 114 KB)
Agriculture advisory report: Inquiry into the Export Control Amendment (Ending Live Sheep
Exports by Sea) Bill 2024 (DOCX 95 KB)
Submission to the House Committee Inquiry into the Export Control
Amendment (Ending Live Sheep Exports by Sea) Bill 2024 – June 2024
(PDF 917 KB)
(DOCX 3.3 MB)
Response to the Independent Panel Report – May 2024

Independent Panel Report into the phase out of live sheep exports by sea –
Phase Out of Live Sheep Exports by Sea: Independent Panel Report 2023 (PDF 5.6 MB)
Phase Out of Live Sheep Exports by Sea: Independent Panel Report 2023 (DOCX 6.0 MB)
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/live-sheep-
exports-phase-out/decision