The Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System (ESCAS) is a regulatory requirement. Exporters must
meet requirements in ESCAS to export feeder or slaughter livestock from Australia.
For the purpose of export, we define livestock as sheep, goats, cattle, deer, buffalo, and camelids. ESCAS
only applies to feeder and slaughter livestock. It does not apply to breeder livestock.
ESCAS requires exporters to have arrangements in place for the humane handling and slaughter of
livestock in the importing country. Australia is the only country in the world with this kind of regulatory
system.
Exporters must apply for an ESCAS if they want to export feeder and slaughter livestock.
We are reviewing ESCAS. We will update this page after our review.
How ESCAS works
If an exporter wants to export feeder or slaughter livestock, they must:
apply to us to have the supply chain in the importing country approved
provide details of the supply chain including feedlots, depots or abattoirs
ensure all livestock are handled and slaughtered in the importing country in accordance with the
approved ESCAS.
See more about how to apply for an ESCAS.
Non-compliance
Exporters must comply with their approved ESCAS.  Failure to do this could result in compliance
investigation and actions. For more information on our current and previous investigations see ESCAS
investigations.
Principles
We base ESCAS on 4 principles.
Handling and slaughter of livestock in the importing country must be in accordance with World
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) animal welfare recommendations. Our ESCAS animal welfare
standards are based on these recommendations.
The ESCAS application must include evidence that the arrangements meet these standards. This applies
to all feedlots, depots and abattoirs. It must include information about facilities, transport
arrangements including discharge from the vessel for livestock arriving by sea and processes.
Our ESCAS animal welfare standards can be found here.

Attachment B – ESCAS animal welfare standards (PDF 539KB)
Attachment B – ESCAS animal welfare standards (DOCX 48KB)
The exporter must control all supply chain arrangements. This includes:
transport
handling and husbandry
slaughter.
All livestock must remain within the approved ESCAS up to and including slaughter.
The exporter must be able to trace the location of all livestock at all points of the supply chain. This
must occur from when they are unloaded overseas, to their slaughter at an approved abattoir.
The supply chain in the importing country must be audited.
Exporters must use an auditor who:
is independent
has no conflict of interest
has an appropriate level of competence and expertise (through qualifications and experience).
We define independent as ‘free from outside control and not subject to another’s authority’.
Audits are conducted as part of the ESCAS application and to maintain the ESCAS.
Initial Independent Audit Report (IIAR)
An exporter must provide an IIAR as part of their application:
for the approval of new supply chains
to add new facilities to an existing supply chain.
The IIAR reports on the exporter’s control of:
supply chain
traceability system
The IIAR also reports on whether the ESCAS animal welfare standards can be met in the supply chain.

Independent Performance Audit Report (IPAR)
Exporters must provide an IPAR to show the existing supply chain has met, and continues to meet,
certain requirements during the reporting period. These include:
control of the supply chain
traceability within the supply chain
animal welfare requirements.
The frequency of audits depends on several factors. This number may change based on risk or
compliance matters.
Here are some examples of these audit reports.
Sheep and Goat Independent Audit Report Sample (Initial and Performance) (PDF 995KB)
Sheep and Goat Independent Audit Report Sample (Initial and Performance) (DOC 308KB)
Cattle and Buffalo Initial Independent Audit Report Sample (PDF 946KB)
Cattle and Buffalo Initial Independent Audit Report Sample (DOC 288KB)
Cattle and Buffalo Independent Performance Audit Report Sample (PDF 989KB)
Cattle and Buffalo Independent Performance Audit Report Sample (DOC 301KB)
Exporter Supply Chain Assurance Operations (ESCAO)
Since 2021, legislation has allowed exporters to demonstrate compliance with ESCAS by using exporter
supply chain assurance operations (ESCAO). Third party providers of assurance services (TPPAS)
administer ESCAO under approved arrangements granted by us.
To apply for an approved arrangement for ESCAO, third party providers must use the approved
application form. Applicants must be an Australian company, and the proposed arrangement must
meet legislative requirements.
For enquiries relating to ESCAO, contact LAE.compliance@aff.gov.au.
Download
Guideline for exporter supply chain assurance operations approved arrangements (PDF 510 KB)
Guideline for exporter supply chain assurance operations approved arrangements (DOCX 787 KB)
ESCAO Application Checklist (PDF 313 KB)
ESCAO Application Checklist (51 KB)

TPPAS Periodic Reporting Requirements (PDF 262 KB)
TPPAS Periodic Reporting Requirements (DOCX 42 KB)
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/exporters/escas