You can apply for an exemption from one or more provisions of the legislation in relation to relevant
This includes the ability to apply for an exemption from an approved arrangement to export livestock.
Some exporters only export small numbers of animals or consignments per year. In these cases, we may
consider an approved arrangement unnecessary. An exemption for a small and infrequent exporter may
To be eligible for this exemption, there is a limit on how many livestock and consignments you can
export. You must export no more than 400 livestock in no more than 4 consignments during a calendar
For all live animal export exemptions other than for small and infrequent exporters, use the Application
for an exemption in relation to exporting livestock, live animals other than livestock, and animal
You must have or have applied for an export licence before you can apply for an exemption.
If you are a new exporter, you may make an application online via the Export Service to apply for an
You must develop and submit an operations and governance manual. Information on developing this
If you can’t access the Export Service or would prefer to use the application form, you can contact us via

You may apply to vary your export licence to apply for an exemption via the Export Service. If you
currently hold an approved arrangement for export, this will need to be revoked if your application for
If you can’t access the Export Service or would prefer to use the application form, you can contact us via
Submit your application online, including your operations and governance manual, via the Export
Service or email your PDF application form and a copy of your operations and governance manual
You must include a consignment risk management plan that sets out how you will meet:

ASEL requirements, including management plans for exporting certain types of livestock.
See the approved arrangement guidelines appendices for guidance on management plans.
To maintain your exemption, you must reapply for your exemption before it expires. The process is the
If we approve you to hold a small and infrequent exemption you must operate under your operations
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/livestock/exporters/