We regulate the export of live animals and animal reproductive material from Australia.

Types of animals exported

Animals that can be exported from Australia include:

livestock

horses

companion and assistant animals

birds

laboratory animals

zoo and exotic animals.

Our definition of livestock includes sheep, goats, cattle, buffalo and camelids.

How to export live animals

If you export live animals, you must comply with:

export legislation

animal welfare standards

importing country requirements.

Preparations to export live animals is important. There are specific regulatory export requirements you

need to follow.

Find information related to what you are exporting.

Our role in live animal exports

We play a vital role in live animal exports through regulation, partnership and engagement.

The standards we set and enforce reflect values of the Australian community and those involved in the

export of live animals.

These standards protect the health and welfare of exported animals, supported by research and

evidence, and ensure the requirements of importing countries are met.

We also ensure we have a robust regulatory framework for ensuring exporters and others involved in

the live export trade meet our regulatory requirements.

This includes a framework of verification and assurance activities, that can provide confidence to the

Australian public and importing countries that our high standards are being met.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

For livestock exports, exporters must also comply with:

Australian Standards for the Export of Livestock (ASEL);  and

Exporter Supply Chain Assurance System (ESCAS) for feeder and slaughter livestock.

ASEL sets out the minimum animal health and welfare requirements that must be met. This must occur

throughout the entire supply chain, from sourcing to arrival overseas.

Following arrival overseas our regulatory oversight continues for some livestock. For livestock entering

the local meat supply chain, this oversight continues up to and including the point of slaughter. This

occurs through ESCAS. 

ESCAS provides assurance on the humane treatment and handling of livestock in the importing

country. We have the only regulatory system in the world that requires exporters to have arrangements

in the importing country. This ensures strict animal welfare standards are met.

Australia continues to positively influence and improve animal welfare standards in international

markets.

Ongoing investments in export markets include:

developing infrastructure

providing education and training to improve animal handling practices.

Providing these opportunities to improve animal welfare standards can benefit the welfare outcomes for

all animals.

As a regulator, we actively engage with people involved in exporting live animals where appropriate.

There are stakeholders we will engage with more frequently than others, depending on the

circumstances.

Our stakeholder communication and engagement policy outlines the circumstances, practices and

platforms we may use to engage with stakeholders.

Download

Stakeholder communication and engagement policy (PDF 323 KB) Stakeholder communication and

engagement policy (DOCX 247 KB)

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals

• 

• 

• 

•