We’ve reviewed live sheep exports to, or through, the Middle East during the Northern Hemisphere
summer. The review assessed the effectiveness of regulation for exports during the Northern
We introduced temporary restrictions during 1 May to 31 October 2019. This was pending the
Regulation Impact Statement (RIS) process. The RIS process reviewed policy options for the live sheep
In 2020 we implemented prohibition periods and more export conditions. The Export Control Act 2020
(the Act) and associated legislation continued these conditions. The Act took effect from 28 March
studied animal welfare outcomes on ships during the Northern Hemisphere summer period from
studied the effectiveness of regulation in lowering the risk of heat stress in sheep
We released a draft report on 17 December 2021. We invited public consultation and received nearly

We updated the Export Control (Animals) Rules 2021 on 5 April 2022 for May and June export
conditions, to manage heat stress risks pending finalisation of the review. This gave industry time to
We based these changes on updated climatology data. Data indicated a greater heat stress risk than
previously known for sheep travelling to parts of the Persian Gulf in late May. It also indicated a
sheep sea exports from Australia to the Persian Gulf must meet extra heat stress risk mitigation
standards. This applies for ships leaving Australia between 22 May and 31 May. These
sheep exports to, or through, the Red Sea can now occur from 1 to 14 June. Export during this
improve heat tolerance of sheep, such as shorter wool or hair length and maximum weight limits
lower the deck wet bulb temperatures, such as minimum pen air turnover rates and increased pen
The review makes several recommendations to improve or maintain animal welfare. These include:
sheep should be fed a minimum of 3% of their liveweight daily while on vessels travelling to, or
through, the Middle East during the non-prohibited periods of the Northern Hemisphere
each vessel exporting sheep must deploy a minimum of 1 data logger on the bridge to record
We’ll implement these recommendations. They’re in addition to the requirement for environmental
The review makes several recommendations to reduce the prohibition period during the Northern
Hemisphere summer to certain destinations where heat stress risks are less than previously

Final Report Review of live sheep exports by sea (PDF 6.55 MB) Final Report Review of live sheep
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/live-animals/animal-welfare/livestock-