If you want to bring your cat or dog to Australia, you may need to apply for an import permit. Cats and dogs from some countries or territories do not need a permit.
Read the right step-by-step guide for importing your cat or dog.
Before you start
You will need to allow at least 6 months to complete all steps in the import process.
Before you apply for a permit, you must make sure your cat or dog can meet all import conditions.
This is a complex process. Not every application leads to a permit being issued.
How to apply
Apply for an import permit through our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON).
You’ll need to register first. See how to register an account in BICON.
When you apply, you will need to:
- make sure all details are accurate and complete
- pay any application fees
- provide copies of supporting documents required for your application type.
We cannot issue a permit if information or supporting documents are not provided, are unclear or unsatisfactory.
Supporting documents
You need to submit the right supporting documents for your application type. Scan and include these documents with your online permit application.
Type of documents
Documents you must submit will depend on whether your cat or dog is coming from a Group 2 or a Group 3 country.
Group 2 applications
The competent authority must provide a copy of the identity verification directly to us. We use the copy they provide to verify your pet’s identity.
You must indicate in your application that your pet has undergone identity verification.
Group 3 applications
You must provide:
- a copy of the rabies neutralising antibody titre test (RNATT) report issued by the testing laboratory
- the corresponding RNATT declaration, endorsed by the official government veterinarian employed by the competent authority.
You may also need to provide previous RNATT laboratory reports and corresponding RNATT declarations. This is needed if your pet has more than one RNAT test.
A RNATT declaration is not needed for RNAT test samples collected in Australia and analysed at the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness laboratory.
If you want your pet to qualify for a minimum 10-day quarantine period, you must provide a copy of either the:
- official identity declaration endorsed by the official government veterinarian, OR
- Australian Export Health Certificate if your pet is of Australian origin.
Your pet must be identifiable by the microchip listed on either document.
Get your documents endorsed
If your supporting documents need to be endorsed, this must be done by an official veterinarian. They are employed by the competent authority of the approved country of export.
Endorsement requires:
- a signature of the official veterinarian
- date (of endorsement)
- the competent authority stamp.
Each page of a multi-page document must be endorsed. Except if pages are linked by a unique certificate number provided by the competent authority.
You need to scan these endorsed documents to include in your permit application. The original documents will travel with your animal to Australia.
Follow these tips
These tips will help us finalise your permit application faster.
- Make sure scanned copies are clear and legible.
- Make sure all documents are in English or bilingual.
- Do not provide extra documents that are not needed. For example, pet photographs, medical details, routine vaccinations and pet passports. We’ll contact you if we need extra information.
- If applying for more than 1 pet, make sure the supporting documents are named specific to each pet. For example, ‘Spot RNATT declaration’ and ‘Fluffy RNATT declaration’.
- Don’t provide multi-page documents as individual images or files. Where possible provide multi-page documents as a single file.
- Provide laboratory reports issued by the testing laboratory (not the forwarding laboratory).
- Amendments to the RNATT declaration or identity declaration can only be done by an official veterinarian. Amendments must be endorsed by an official veterinarian.
- We do not accept amendments to critical details on laboratory reports. These include the place and date of sample collection, submitting veterinarian, microchip number and result.
Incomplete applications and supporting documents will cause unnecessary delays.
Extra charges may apply if information is missing or incorrect.
Assessment
Most permits are issued in 20-40 business days. But it can take up to 123 business days to get your import permit.
We assess each application:
- in order of receipt
- according to our service charter and the Biosecurity Act 2015.
This method is fair to all. If we prioritise applications based on individual circumstances, it may unfairly disadvantage others. This also means that others won’t be prioritised ahead of you.
Fees
Fees apply to import permit applications and are charged per animal in a consignment.
A consignment refers to cats and/or dogs that are:
- Sent to Australia,
- Departing at the same time from the same country of origin,
- Listed under the same importer and exporter details on the import permit application.
Note: The assessment fees listed below are minimum charges. Additional fees may apply if your application is incomplete, contains errors or requires a variation.
| Table of fees |  |  |  | 
|---|---|---|---|
| Service | Lodgement | Assessment | Total (AUD) | 
|---|---|---|---|
| First cat or dog in a consignment | $135.00 | $491.00 | $626.00 | 
| For each additional animal in the same consignment | $135.00 | $164.00 | $299.00 | 
All fees are in Australian dollars ($AUD).
For full details on fees and charges that may apply to import permits, please visit our website.
Important: Fees and charges are reviewed annually and are subject to change. It is your responsibility to check the website for the most up-to-date information.
When to pay
You must pay fees in full when you submit your application.
An import permit will not be issued until payment is cleared. Payments do not process on the day your application is submitted.
The fee is non-refundable once you submit your application.
If a permit is issued
Be aware that not all cats and dogs are eligible for import to Australia. Your application may not lead to an import permit being issued.
If your permit is issued, make sure you read it carefully.
Your import permit will detail all the conditions you must meet. This includes:
- vaccinations, tests and treatments
- travel requirements
- import conditions on arrival
- quarantine in Australia.
How long your permit is valid
The length of time your permit is valid will depend on your country of export.
If you’re coming from a Group 2 country, it is valid for 12 months.
If you’re coming from a Group 3 country, it is valid until the expiry of your Rabies Neutralising Antibody Titre (RNAT) test. This will be 12 months from the date the blood sample is taken from your cat or dog.
See more
Find out more about our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON).