Importation of cats and dogs from Middle East conflict-affected areas
If you and your pets are currently impacted by the Middle East conflict, please contact the department for advice on your specific situation, by phone on 1800 900 090 or via email at imports@aff.gov.au.
Cats and dogs that do not meet Australia’s import requirements pose a biosecurity risk to Australia and Australia’s import requirements for cats and dogs from Middle Eastern countries have not changed.
Cats and dogs must arrive in Australia with a valid biosecurity import permit and meet all import requirements.
Australia is free from many animal diseases. We help protect this status with strict conditions for cat and dog imports.
Be aware of the many steps to import a cat or dog to Australia. You will need to meet all import conditions and prepare well ahead of your travel date.
Our detailed step-by-step guides can help you meet all import conditions.
Need to know
- This is a complex process. We recommend you use an experienced pet transport agent or shipper.
- Allow at least 6 months to complete all steps in the import process.
- Fees apply for our services, such as permit assessment and quarantine in Australia.
- Some countries are not approved for cat or dog imports to Australia. You will need to complete all steps in an approved country.
Find the right step-by-step guide
These guides are to import cats or dogs (or frozen canine semen) from approved countries.
If your country is not in this list, it means it is not approved. You will need to choose an approved country to reside in while completing all import steps. Read the detail in the relevant guide.
Cats and dogs must be accompanied by a county-specific veterinary health certificate when imported to Australia.
We have negotiated these certificates directly with most approved exporting countries. If we have not negotiated a certificate with an approved country, you cannot export your cat or dog to Australia from that country.
These approved countries do not currently have a certificate in place.
Group 2: Christmas Island, Cook Islands, Iceland, Kiribati, Micronesia, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Tuvalu, and Wallis & Futuna.
Group 3: Antigua & Barbuda, Bahamas, Bermuda, Gibraltar, Jamaica, Seychelles, St. Kitts & Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent & Grenadines, Virgin Islands British.