Options for the Development of National Standards and Guidelines for Animal Welfare
AWTG 24-01 noted an update from the secretariat that stakeholder engagement materials are being finalised, and meetings with targeted stakeholders to discuss the draft standards development framework will commence shortly.
Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at Processing Facilities and Establishments
AWTG 24-01 noted an update from Queensland that the assessment of the substantial volume of feedback on the draft standards and guidelines provided by members of the Stakeholder Advisory Group and AWTG members is almost complete. Public consultation is planned for commencement in the first half of 2024.
Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land Transport of Livestock - horses
AWTG 24-01 noted an update from the Commonwealth that the proposed amendments to the Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land Transport of Livestock to improve the welfare of horses will be presented for endorsement to Senior Officials at their first meeting for 2024. The amendments will then be brought to the next meeting of Agriculture Ministers for their final endorsement.
Virtual Fencing Technology
AWTG 01-24 provided in-principle support for a preferred approach for the mechanism to facilitate harmonisation of virtual fencing regulations. Terms of reference and participants for the stakeholder reference group have been agreed by the subgroup. Work on engaging an independent facilitator for the stakeholder reference group is underway.
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS)
AWTG 24-01 noted an update from the Commonwealth that Minister Watt has written to state and territory Ministerial counterparts seeking formal agreement to a joint leadership approach to develop AAWS, and to an underpinning framework. Broad stakeholder consultation will commence shortly.
Further Information
If you would like further information on current AWTG projects or to engage with the AWTG on projects from the work plan, please contact the secretariat: awtg@aff.gov.au
Post: AWTG c/- Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia