Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Poultry
AWTG 04-23 noted an update from all jurisdictions following endorsement of the poultry standards by all agriculture ministers. Implementation of the standards and guidelines including timeframes will take place at the state and territory level having regard to the specific operational environments of each jurisdiction. Implementation will be reported via the AWTG Annual Report.
Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at Processing Facilities and Establishments
AWTG 04-23 noted an update from Queensland that drafting of the new standards and guidelines continues. An informal initial consultation phase with targeted stakeholders on the drafting is being planned, after which the drafting will be subject to public consultation impact assessment.
Suitability of horses under existing Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Land Transport of Livestock
AWTG 04-23 noted an update from Queensland that a draft decision regulatory impact statement has been prepared for submission to the Australian Government Office of Impact Assessment, following AWTG endorsement.
Virtual Fencing Technology
AWTG 04-23 noted an update from the Commonwealth that the virtual fencing harmonisation project had been paused for prioritisation of urgent projects. The virtual fencing subgroup will be reconvened soon to progress next steps.
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS)
AWTG 04-23 noted an update from the Commonwealth that work on the development of a stakeholder engagement strategy was the priority for the new team within the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry working on the renewal of AAWS. There will be a high level of ongoing engagement with AWTG on this national process.
Options for the Development of National Standards and Guidelines for Animal Welfare
AWTG 04-23 noted an update from the secretariat that following discussion at the Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting and subsequently by senior officials via the Agriculture Senior Officials’ Committee (AGSOC), work will continue via the AWTG on options for the process for developing nationally consistent animal welfare standards and guidelines.
Further Information
If you would like further information on current AWTG projects or to engage with the AWTG on projects from the work plan please contact the secretariat: awtg@aff.gov.au
Post: AWTG c/- Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia