We recognise and support the important role that community, farming and industry organisations play
as part of the Landcare movement.
This involvement builds community capacity to sustainably manage natural resources including
reducing adverse impacts and improving the condition of:
soils
water
vegetation
on-farm biodiversity
Good condition of natural resources underpins the productivity and profitability of the agriculture,
fisheries and forestry industries. It also delivers wider community and environmental benefits.
Phase 2 of the National Landcare Program (NLP) provided financial support for Landcare activities
and the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water.
The sustainable agriculture-focused components of NLP are detailed below.
Smart Farms
The funding supported the development and uptake of best practice, tools and technologies for:
farmers and land managers
fishers
foresters
regional communities.
This helped improve the protection, resilience and productive capacity of our soils, water and
vegetation which underpin successful primary industries and regional communities.
Smart Farms focused on improving farming and land management practices and biodiversity. It also
supported agricultural systems to adapt to significant changes in climate, weather and markets. The
final report of the Smart Farms program is available here:
Smart Farms program 2017–18 to 2022–23 end of program final report PDF
2.2 MB
Smart Farms program 2017–18 to 2022–23 end of program final report DOCX 984KB

The program was made up of the following three elements:
Smart Farming Partnerships
Smart Farming Partnerships ($57.5 million over 6 years) offered grants ranging between $250,000 and
$4 million (GST exclusive). These larger, innovative projects are being delivered through effective
partnerships between experienced and skilled organisations and individuals and were offered over two
rounds. No further rounds are anticipated at this time. Smart Farming Partnerships objectives are to:
develop, trial and implement new and innovative tools that lead to practice change and more
sustainable, productive and profitable agricultural industries and systems
protect Australia’s biodiversity
protect and improve the condition of natural resources
assist Australia to meet its obligations under relevant international treaties.
Round 2
Applications for the second and final round of Smart Farming Partnerships closed on 17 May 2019.
Round 2 funded 11 projects valued at up to $30.13 million (GST exclusive) and are due for completion
during 2023 and 2024.
The Round 2 guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are
Smart Farming Partnerships Round 2 list of successful applicants PDF
233 KB
Smart Farming Partnerships Round 2 list of successful applicants DOCX 84 KB
Round 1
Applications for round 1 closed 21 December 2017. This round funded 15 projects to a value of up to
$27.35 million (GST exclusive), of which several have concluded, and the remainder will be completed
during 2023.
The Round 1 guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are
Smart Farming Partnerships Round 1 list of successful applicants PDF
404 KB

Smart Farming Partnerships Round 1 list of successful applicants DOCX 44 KB
Smart Farms Small Grants
Smart Farms Small Grants (up to $43.5 million over 6 years) has funded projects ranging from $5,000
to $250,000 (GST exclusive) per grant over rounds 1 – 5. Organisations and individuals have been
funded to undertake sustainable agriculture projects and build the capacity and capability of Australia’s
farmers, fishers and foresters to adopt best practice natural resource management methods.
SFSG funding is:
delivering more sustainable, productive and profitable agriculture, fishing, aquaculture and
forestry industries
protecting and improving the condition of natural resources
assisting in protecting Australia’s biodiversity.
Organisations and individuals applying in rounds 1 – 5 were encouraged to develop projects that
promote and support adoption of best practice sustainable farming and land management. Applicants
were also able to apply for projects that strengthen the capacity of Landcare and other groups to
improve adoption of best practice.
The final round of SFSG provided $13.80 million in funding for soil extension activity grants worth
between $100,000 to $250,000 per activity for up to two years. Applicants were able to apply for a
maximum of $2 million per application.
Extension Activities have been funded through the Smart Farms Small Grants program to improve our
understanding of Australia’s soil condition and how to:
better manage our soils;
assess the impact of land management practices on soil;
assist farmers to improve their productivity and profitability; and
better support farmers to participate in the Emissions Reduction Fund.
Soil extension activities are supporting farmers and land managers to better understand the benefits of
soil testing and take practical action to improve the management of their soil and land. This includes
working with farmers and land managers to participate in the National Soil Monitoring and Incentives
Pilot Program, assist land managers to interpret results and improve decision making as part of
improving soil health and productivity.

Smart Farms Small Grants: Soil Extension Activities (final round)
Applications for the final round of Smart Farms Small Grants closed on 12 October 2021. The final
round funded 32 grantees to deliver over 200 extension activities across the country to a value of
$13.80 million (GST Exclusive).
The round guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are
Smart Farms Small Grants: Soil Extension Activities (final round) PDF
220 KB
Smart Farms Small Grants: Soil Extension Activities (final round) DOCX 84 KB
Round 4
Applications for the fourth round of Smart Farms Small Grants closed on 9 October 2020. Round 4
funded 84 projects to a value of $6.48 million (GST Exclusive). These projects are currently underway
and are due to be completed in 2023 and 2024.
The round 4 guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are
Smart Farms Small Grants round 4 - list of successful projects PDF
397 KB
Smart Farms Small Grants round 4 - list of successful projects DOCX 130 KB
Round 3
Applications for the third round of Smart Farms Small Grants closed on 19 December 2019. This round
funded 113 projects to a value of up to $5.03 million (GST Exclusive). Projects commenced in May 2020
and all will be completed by June 2023.
The round 3 guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are

Smart Farms Small Grants round 3 - list of successful projects PDF
704 KB
Smart Farms Small Grants round 3 - list of successful projects DOCX 119 KB
Round 2
Applications for round 2 closed on 11 January 2019. This round funded 110 projects to a value of up to
$9.25 million (GST Exclusive). Projects will be completed by June 2023.
The round 2 guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are
Smart Farms Small Grants round 2 - list of successful projects PDF
648 KB
Smart Farms Small Grants round 2 - list of successful projects DOCX 84 KB
Round 1
Applications for round 1 closed on 7 December 2017. This round funded 77 projects up to a value of up
to $4.75 million (GST exclusive). Most projects have been completed, with a few extended into 2023.
The round 1 guidelines are at the Community Grants website. Projects funded through this round are
Smart Farms Small Grants round 1 - list of successful projects PDF
548 KB
Smart Farms Small Grants round 1 - list of successful projects DOCX 80 KB

Building Landcare Community and Capacity
The Building Landcare Community and Capacity Program ($39.51 million over 6 years) provides ad-
hoc grants for initiatives that directly support the Landcare community and farmer organisations.
Activities suitable for funding are based on consultation and emerging issues. This Program has funded
53 projects, with project activities including, but not limited to:
awards and recognition for excellence among the Landcare community
leadership development opportunities
conferences and networking events
communication and community engagement activities and other projects that strengthen the
social and technical capacity that underpins the delivery of Landcare
efforts by Landcare and farming groups to deliver on-the-ground improvements in land
management.
Projects funded through the BLCC Program are listed at the links below:
Building Landcare Community Capacity Program list of successful applicants PDF
397 KB
Building Landcare Community Capacity Program list of successful applicants DOCX 71 KB
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/natural-resources/landcare/national-landcare-
program/australian-government-investment-in-landcare