Salt is a natural part of the Australian landscape but can become a serious problem when carried by

water to where it threatens:

agricultural land

infrastructure such as roads and buildings

water resources

the environmental assets such as wetlands

This process is called salinisation, and careful natural resource management is needed to manage the

impact of past salinisation and reduce the potential, where possible, for future problems. Investment in

salinity has included:

major programs

research and development

salinity reviews

salinity mapping

Major programs

Dryland Salinity Program (1993-2004) and the National Action Plan for Salinity and Water Quality

(2001-2008). Currently, salinity management is supported in the context of broader natural resource

management issues through the Caring for our Country initiative. Funds have been available through

the sustainable Farm Practices national priority area to encourage landholders to maintain cover on salt

affected land.

National Dryland Salinity Program (1993-2004)

The National Dryland Salinity Program (NDSP) provided a major communication network for

distributing salinity information and management support tools in Australia. Land and Water Australia

maintains a list of NDSP’s web-based products. They include:

Breaking Ground: Key Findings from 10 Years of Australia’s National Dryland Salinity Program

National Action Plan for Salinity and Water Quality (NAP)

(2001-2008)

As part of the NAP, new mapping methods for salinity were developed using Airborne Electromagnetics

(AEM). More information on the technology and the results of the salinity mapping program.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Salinity reviews

There have been several reviews, including two by parliamentary committees, in the past decade into

progress on addressing salinity in Australia and the techniques for managing it.

Research and development

through the Future Farm Industries Cooperative Research Centre (CRC).

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/natural-resources/salinity