DAFF job no. 950573

Biotechnology

briefs

So what are the main issues?

Marketers of GM canola and of products from livestock 

fed on GM materials, including GM canola, are unlikely 

to be disadvantaged in the Australian and world 

markets — GM canola seems to be finding ready 

markets throughout the world at prices very similar to 

those received for conventional canola. 

There may be niche markets that pay premium prices 

for certified non-GM canola. The best prospect for the 

development of more widespread premiums may come 

from the  reduced availability of conventional canola 

arising from the commercialisation of GM canola in 

Australia.

Finally, in deciding whether to grow a GM crop after it 

has been licenced for commercial release, market access 

issues are only part of the consideration. These should 

be weighed against the:

•	 agronomic benefits (such as higher yields or reduced 

inputs) 

•	 environmental benefits (such as reduced chemical 

use) 

• 	 any costs associated with keeping GM and non-GM 

separate in the handling and storage process.

How do I find out more?

This brochure is one in a series of Biotechnology briefs 

presenting summaries of key reports on biotechnology 

and Australian agriculture.

How can I get copies?

For hard copies of these and other DAFF publications 

please email: agbiotech@daff.gov.au

Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website for regular 

updates and information on agricultural biotechnology:

www.daff.gov.au/agriculture-food/biotechnology

‘We want to ensure that developments in 

biotechnology are captured for the benefit of the 

Australian community, industry and the environment, 

while safeguarding human health and ensuring 

environmental protection.’

Market acceptance of 

GM canola

More information is available in the report:

Foster, M. and French, S. 2007, Market Acceptance of 

GM Canola, ABARE Research Report 07.5 prepared for 

Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra, March 2007.

Other titles in this series?

Biotechnology briefs: GM grains in Australia - Identity 

preservation

Biotechnology briefs: GM oilseed crops and the 

Australian oilseed industry

Biotechnology briefs: GM canola - Potential impacts on 

organic farming in Australia 

Strategy funded the production of these reports and 

brochures. 

DAFF job no. 950573

Marketers of genetically modified (GM) canola are 

unlikely to be disadvantaged in the Australian and world 

markets. GM canola seems to be finding ready markets 

throughout the world at very similar prices to those 

received for conventional canola.

Is canola the same as rapeseed?

Canola is a cultivar of rapeseed developed by Canadian 

scientists in the 1970s. It has lower levels of certain 

anti-nutritional compounds than are typically found in 

rapeseed. 

Virtually all Canadian and Australian rapeseed meets 

the canola standard and is usually termed ‘canola’. 

Elsewhere, notably in the European Union (EU), the crop 

is typically called rapeseed, though the bulk of it meets 

the canola standard.

Is genetically modified canola grown in 

Australia?

Two varieties of genetically modified (GM) canola were 

approved by the Gene Technology Regulator in 2003 for 

commercial release in Australia. However, a number of 

concerns related to market acceptance have meant that 

the main canola producing states in Australia have put 

in place legislation preventing commercial plantings of 

GM canola.

What are the concerns about GM canola?

The concerns arise mainly from the perception that 

there is considerable consumer resistance to GM crops 

throughout the world. This includes resistance to 

products that are obtained from livestock fed on GM 

feedstuffs. Opponents of GM canola believe that its 

commercial production in Australia will lead to losses of 

markets for Australian canola and the loss of price 

premiums for non-GM canola.

These attitudes are very much at odds with consumer 

buying patterns. Countries that produce GM products 

dominate world trade in grains and oilseeds. Figure 

1  provides a comparison of the amounts of GM and 

non-GM grains produced throughout the world between 

2003 and 2006.

Marketers of wheat and barley in Australia have claimed 

that the unintended presence of GM canola in their 

shipments could jeopardise some of their markets, 

which are crucial for the Australian economy. Worldwide 

experience since the introduction of GM grains in 1996 

has shown that it is difficult to avoid the unintended 

presence of GM materials through cross pollination in 

fields and co-mingling in the grain handling and storage 

system. 

What is Australia’s role in the world canola 

market?

The world canola market is very concentrated. Canada 

dominates the export trade with a market share of 71 

per cent in the three years to 2005–06 (if intra-European 

Union trade is excluded). Over the same period, 

Australia accounted for 19 per cent of world canola 

exports. Australia’s main customer for canola is Japan. 

Figure 2 documents the importance of Canada and 

Australia as canola suppliers to Japan.

What is Canada’s experience with GM 

canola?

When Canada introduced GM canola, it lost access to 

the EU market for its canola seed. However, Canada has 

found ready markets for its increased canola supplies 

elsewhere, particularly in Mexico, the United States, 

Pakistan and China. Today, virtually all Canada’s export 

canola can be considered GM, but this has not stopped 

its exports reaching record levels in 2006. Japan readily 

accepts Canada’s GM canola at very similar prices to 

those paid for Australian non-GM canola (figure 2). 

What are the markets for canola?

At the world level, the canola market has differentiated 

into the following segments:

•	 GM

•	 conventional

•	 certified non-GM

•	 organic

The EU is likely to be a growing market for canola or 

rapeseed over the next decade, especially for biofuel 

production. Australia currently has the advantage of 

being able to supply non-GM canola to the EU market,  

but this could largely disappear if the EU lifts its ban on 

GM canola imports1.

1 In March 2007 the EU listed the Moatoria on the approval of GM seed for 

animal feed and industrial use.

What about GM stockfeed?

In Australia, farmers use GM feedstuffs widely 

– particularly locally produced cottonseed and imported 

soybean meal. However, some food manufacturers 

prefer not to use GM products and some livestock 

producers prefer not to use GM feed.

Some exporters of livestock products, most notably pig 

meat and dairy foods, believe that there is a market 

advantage in countries such as Japan from not using GM 

feedstuffs in animal production processes. However, the 

preference for products from livestock not fed on GM 

materials appears to be very much a niche market and 

is largely confined to dairy products.