Biotechnology

briefs

GM canola: 

An information 

package

How can I get copies?

For hard copies of these and other DAFF publications 

please email: agbiotech@daff .gov.au

Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website for 

regular updates and information on agricultural 

biotechnology:

 www.daff .gov.au/agbiotech

‘We want to ensure that developments in 

biotechnology are captured for the benefi t of the 

Australian community, industry and the environment, 

while safeguarding human health and ensuring 

environmental protection.’

DAFF job no. 950573

What about the impact on other Australian 

agricultural or food products?

As with most agricultural activities, canola is 

produced in an open environment where there is 

the potential for it to impact on other agricultural 

activities. However, canola is largely a self-pollinating 

plant with some potential for outcrossing. This means 

that the potential gene fl ow from GM canola is limited 

to close relatives of canola growing in close proximity 

to the GM crop. Low levels of cross-pollination can be 

obtained by utilising appropriate crop management 

which aims to avoid outcrossing. 

The low potential for gene fl ow has been recognised 

and addressed in stewardship principles developed 

by the grains industry. 

What are the legal issues?

Some farmers will want to grow GM crops and 

others will want to be GM free. Possible grounds for 

dispute exist because of concern that the use of GM 

technology may impose costs on a GM free business 

for which it may not be compensated. Also there is 

potential for misdescription of traded canola through 

the unintentional co-mingling during storage and 

transport. However existing laws and systems of 

negotiation are adequate for dealing with such issues. 

How do I fi nd out more?

This brochure is one of a series of Biotechnology 

briefs on biotechnology and Australian agriculture.

More information is available in the report:

ACIL Tasman Pty Ltd and Innovation Dynamics Pty Ltd 

2007, GM canola: An information package, Australian 

Forestry.

Other titles in this series of Biotechnology briefs:

GM crops: Tools for insect pest and weed control

GM canola: Potential impacts on organic farming in 

Australia

GM grains in Australia: Identity preservation

GM oilseed crops and the Australian oilseed industry

Market acceptance of GM canola

Value of biotechnology applications to Australian 

agriculture

Strategy funded the production of these brochures 

and reports.

This brochure presents an overview of recent 

information on genetically modifi ed (GM) canola. It looks 

at the main arguments for and against the commercial 

release of GM canola in Australia from a range of 

viewpoints - including that of farmers, producers and 

consumers - and investigates what the best available 

published information says on the subject. 

Growing canola in Australia

Canola is a variety of rapeseed. ‘Canola’ was originally 

the trademark name of a Canadian rapeseed cultivar 

which off ered improved quality characteristics. Today, 

the terms ‘canola’ and ‘rapeseed’ are sometimes used 

interchangeably.

Canola is a versatile plant, providing oil and meal 

for stockfeed. Oil from the seed has a number of 

applications and is found in a variety of end products, 

ranging from margarine and other spreads to 

soaps, plastics and bio-diesel. Canola is important 

in Australian winter crop rotations, yielding good 

farm returns and providing agronomic benefi ts such 

as improved soil management, pest control and 

yield increases in subsequent crops in the cropping 

rotation.  

Since the fi rst commercial plantings in Australia in the 

late 1960s, the area sown has increased to an annual 

average of one million hectares, producing up to 

2.4 million tonnes of seed. In Australia, 

Western Australia is the largest canola producer, 

followed by Victoria, New South Wales and 

South Australia.

Australia is still a relatively small producer of canola 

compared with the rest of the world. The largest 

producers are the European Union, China and 

Canada. However, Australia is a signifi cant exporter of 

canola seed and canola oil.

What is the current state of play with GM canola in 

Australia?

Today, weed resistance and pressure from diseases 

are threatening canola’s contribution to farming 

systems in Australia. GM canola can make a valuable 

contribution to overcoming some of these problems.

Non-GM herbicide  tolerant canola currently 

accounts for almost 50 per cent of the Australian 

crop. However, triazine resistant weeds are becoming 

an increasing problem for growers. One option to 

manage this would be to introduce canola varieties 

that are resistant to other herbicides, providing 

alternative weed management regimes.

Since 2001, Australia has had a uniform, national 

approach to the regulation of gene technology, 

underpinned by the Gene Technology Act 2000 

and the Gene Technology Agreement between 

Commonwealth, state and territory governments. 

The regulation is designed for the health and safety 

of humans and to protect the environment by 

identifying and if necessary, managing any risks 

posed by or as a result of gene technology. 

In 2003, the Offi  ce of the Gene Technology Regulator 

(OGTR) approved the commercial release of two 

varieties of GM canola on the basis that they are as 

safe as conventional varieties and pose no additional 

risks to humans or the environment. 

They are:

InVigor® canola, which tolerates the herbicide 

• 

glufosinate ammonium and has hybrid 

characteristics to improve yield; and 

Roundup Ready® canola which tolerates 

• 

glyphosate, the active ingredient in  Roundup®.

Farmers in Canada, the world’s largest exporter of 

canola, have been using genetically modifi ed (GM) 

canola for 10 years, with no appreciable loss of 

market share or price. 

GM canola is being grown commercially in Australia, 

with the fi rst plantings in New South Wales and 

Victoria in 2008. 

What are the technical aspects of GM technology?

GM plant breeding technology enables physiological 

and physical attributes to be transferred between 

species and varieties. Examples of potential attributes 

include longer shelf life, disease tolerance and 

enhanced quality.

GM herbicide tolerant canola is not a panacea for the 

problems facing crop producers. To be eff ective the 

technology needs to be used in conjunction with 

other wider industry innovations.

What about market acceptance?

Market acceptance of GM canola is currently mixed. 

Consumers appear to have some concerns about GM 

crops. These concerns do not appear to be translating 

into signifi cant or sustained price premiums being 

paid for non-GM canola products.

What are the impacts of introducing GM canola to 

Australia?

Once farmers have access to GM canola they can 

adapt it to their individual cropping rotation. 

Australian and international evidence indicates that 

GM canola confers some cost, yield and gross margin 

advantages to growers.

Economic modeling suggests that not adopting GM 

canola would cost Australian farm business $1.5 to 

$5.8 billion in the period 2005 to 2015.

Can GM canola and non GM canola co-exist?

Segregation is already a routine function of the grain 

supply chain. This can be achieved at a relatively 

low cost for current international trade and market 

specifi cations. While these costs are likely to be met 

by non-GM canola growers, they will only incur them 

if there is a market premium for non-GM canola that 

exceeds the segregation costs.

The coexistence of GM and non-GM canola relies on 

good farm management practices and maintenance 

of machinery and crop hygiene if market 

specifi cations for GM content are to be met. 

Grain processors and the manufacturing sector will 

determine acceptable levels of adventitious presence 

of approved GM canola in non-GM canola.

Accurate testing for the presence of GM traits is 

important for the coexistence of GM and non-GM 

grains. Testing for the presence and level of novel 

DNA in non-GM canola can be done in a number of 

ways and at diff erent points along the supply chain to 

deliver market choice to consumers and confi dence 

to international markets.

,