D E P A R T M E N T O F A G R I C U L T U R E , F I S H E R I E S A N D F O R E S T R Y
2007
A review of non - GM biote chnology— it s abilit y and p otential  
to improve Aus tralian agricultural pro duc tivit y
T he Value of Biotechnology
Applications to Australian Agriculture

D E P A R T M E N T O F A G R I C U L T U R E , F I S H E R I E S A N D F O R E S T R Y
A review of non - GM biote chnology— it s abilit y and p otential  
to improve Australian agricultural produc tivit y
T he Value of Biotechnology
Applications to Australian Agriculture 
2007

June 2007
ISBN 978-0-9804204-0-1
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the time spent by the case study companies in providing information for use in this report and their 
contribution to editing of the case studies that were prepared as a result. The authors would also like to thank the industry association 
representative and researchers who attended the workshops which were an integral part of data gathering for this project.
Authors 
The authors of this report are Dr Lyndal Thorburn and Ms Shahana Parbeen of Innovation Dynamics Pty Ltd; and Ms Denise Ironﬁeld of 
ACIL Tasman; with input from Dr Ian Edwards of Edstar Genetics, and Mr Paul Lloyd and Ms Miranda Bailey of Innovation Dynamics. 
Innovation Dynamics Pty Ltd
ABN: 77 109 316 949; ACN 109 316 949
Internet: www.innovationdynamics.com.au
Email: contact@innovationdynamics.com.au 
Canberra
3/16 Iluka Street
Narrabundah ACT 2604
PO Box 7066
Canberra Business Centre ACT 2610
Telephone: 
(+61 2) 6239 9500
Facsimile: 
(+61 2) 6239 9599
Melbourne
4 Laviah Court 
Templestowe Vic
Telephone: 
(+61 3) 9846 1277
Facsimile: 
(+61 3) 9846 1966
Sydney
Suite G.01
Biomedical Building
1 Central Avenue
Australian Technology Park
Eveleigh NSW 1430
Telephone: 
(+61 2) 9209 4231 
Facsimile: 
(+61 2) 9209 4242
Perth
145 Stoneham Road 
Attadale WA 6156
Telephone: 
+61 413 322 057
Facsimile: 
+61 26239 9599
Brisbane
24 Laurette Avenue
Thornlands QLD 4164
Telephone: 
(+61) 408 155 803 
Facsimile: 
(+61 2) 6239 9599
The authors have based this Report on information provided to them from numerous sources. While this information has not necessarily 
been veriﬁed at source, it is provided here in good faith. Innovation Dynamics Pty Ltd makes no representations or warranties (expressed 
or implied) as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this Report. The company, its employees and agents do not 
accept any liability in negligence for the information (or the use of such information) which is provided in this Report. Where actions are 
suggested the client should independently verify that these are sound and should bear in mind any other internal or external issues which 
might aﬀect the potential to meet any ﬁnancial or business objectives set by the client.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
i i i
Conte nt s
E xe cut ive Summar y 
1
1 
I nt roduc t ion  
5
1.1 
Definitions and conceptual framework 
5
1.1.1 
Type of biotechnology 
6
1.1.2 
Where in the supply chain is biotechnology used? 
6
1.1.3 
Agricultural sectors to which biotechnology can be applied 
7
1.2 
Overview of the technologies identified 
8
1.3 
Structure of this report 
10
2 
D NA / R NA te c hnologie s 
11
2.1 
What are DNA/RNA technologies? 
11
2.2 
Where are DNA and RNA technologies used in the supply chain? 
11
2.2.1 
Growing and husbandry 
11
2.2.2 
Processing 
20
2.2.3 
Logistics 
20
2.2.4 
Waste management 
21
2.3 
Australia’s use of DNA technologies compared to use in overseas countries 
21
2.4 
Further potential applications of DNA technologies  
in the Australian supply chain 
23
2.4.1 
Growing and husbandry 
23
2.4.2 
Processing  
24
2.4.3 
Logistics 
24
2.4.4 
Waste management 
24
2.5 
Conclusions 
25
3 
Prote ins and ot he r mo le cule s 
27
3.1 
What are Proteins and other molecules? 
27
3.2 
Where are protein technologies used 
27
3.2.1 
Plant growing and animal husbandry 
27
3.2.2 
Processing 
29
3.2.3 
Logistics 
31
3.2.4 
Waste management 
33
3.3 
Australia’s use of protein technologies compared to overseas countries 
33
3.4 
Further potential applications in Australia 
35
3.4.1 
Growing and husbandry 
35
3.4.2 
Processing 
35
3.4.3 
Logistics 
36
3.4.4 
Waste management 
36
3.5 
Conclusions 
36

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
i v
4 
Ce ll and t issue cul t ure and e ngine e ring 
37
4.1 
Where are cell and tissue culture used? 
37
4.1.1 
Plant Growing and animal husbandry  
37
4.1.2 
Logistics 
41
4.2 
Australia’s use of cell and tissue culture  
compared to use in overseas countries 
42
4.3 
Further potential use of cell and tissue culture in Australia 
45
4.3.1 
Growing and husbandry 
45
4.3.2 
Processing 
46
4.3.3 
Logistics 
46
4.4 
Conclusions 
46
5 
Proce ss biote c hnolog y ( B ioproce ssing) 
47
5.1 
What is process biotechnology? 
47
5.2 
Where is process biotechnology used? 
47
5.2.1 
Growing and husbandry 
47
5.2.2 
Processing 
47
8.2.3 
Waste management 
50
5.3 
Australia’s use of process biotechnology  
compared to use in overseas countries 
53
5.3.1 
Functional Foods and nutraceuticals 
53
5.3.2 
Bioethanol 
54
5.3.3 
Fibre processing 
55
5.3.4 
Phytoremediation 
55
5.4 
Further potential applications of bioprocessing in Australia 
55
5.4.1 
Processing 
55
5.4.2 
Logistics 
56
5.4.3 
Waste management 
56
5.5 
Conclusions  
56
6 
Summar y and conc lusions  
57
6.1 
Biotechnology’s current application in Australian agriculture 
57
6.2 
Biotechnology’s impact 
59
6.3 
Conclusions 
59
7 
Re fe re nce s 
61

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
v
List of t able s
Table A: 
Scale of use of technologies along supply chain 
2
Table 1-1: 
Supply chain positions and sub-positions 
7
Table 1-2: Agricultural sector classes and sub-classes 
8
Table 2-1: Examples of current marker-assisted plant breeding programs 
14
Table 2-2: DNA-based tests for cattle in the United States 
22
Table 3-1: Summary of approaches to test for Bovine Johne’s Disease 
28
Table 4-1: Selected vaccines for sheep and cattle industry in Australia 
40
Table 4-3: Selected emerging vaccines for sheep and cattle internationally 
44
Table 5-1: Recent selected enzymes considered for approval  
by Food Standards Australia and New Zealand 
48
Table 5-2: Sample applications of functional food ingredients in Australia 
49
Table 5-3: Sample bioactives, source and applications 
53
Table 6-1: Scale of use of technologies along supply chain 
60
List of f igure s
Figure 1-1: Projects identified by technology type  
9
Figure 2-1: Traditional and DNA-based approaches to plant breeding 
13
Figure 3-1: Protein-based technology and traditional approaches to sheep shearing  
30
Figure 4-1: Traditional and modern biotechnology approaches to AI 
39
Figure 4-2: Development of traditional vaccines and Sub-unit vaccines 
43
Figure 5-1: Bioprocessing approaches to toxic waste remediation 
50
List of boxe s
Box 1-1: 
Method 
5
Box 1-2: 
OECD List-based definitions of biotechnology 
6
Box 2-1: 
Case Study 1 – High throughput sequencing of strawberry  
plant genomes for variety improvement 
15
Box 2-2: 
Case Study 2 - Using whole genome profiling to  
support plant breeding programs 
16
Box 2-3: 
Case Study 3 - Identifying soil-borne pathogens  
17
Box 2-3: 
Case Study 3 - Identifying soil-borne pathogens (continued) 
18
Box 3-1: 
Case study 4 - Protein profiling of grains for purity testing 
32
Box 4-1: 
Vaccines for the poultry industry 
40
Box 4-2: 
Case study 5 - Benefits of vaccinating cattle against Bovine Herpes Virus-1 
41
Box 5-1: 
Using biotechnology to remediate and add value to waste from feedlots  
51
Box 5-2: 
Case study 6 - Bioremediation of pesticide residues using biotechnology 
51

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
v i
a b b r e v i a t i o n s
Abbreviat ions
CRC
Co-operative Research Centre
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Organisation
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic Acid
ELISA
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays
GM
Genetically modiﬁed
GMO
Genetically modiﬁed organism
HAL
Horticulture Australia Ltd
R&D
Research and Development
RIRDC
Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation
RNA
Ribonucleic Acid
SARDI
South Australian R&D Institute

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
v i i
g l o s s a r y
G loss ar y 
(for additional terms, see www.biotechterms.org)
Amino acids
The building blocks of proteins.
Antibody
A large defence protein made by the immune system.
Biobleaching
Treatment of paper, pulp or wood ﬁbres with enzymes
Biodesulfurisation
The removal of organic and inorganic sulfur (a pollution source) from coal 
by bacteria and soil micro-organisms
Bioﬁltration
The removal and remediation of compounds from air using micro-organisms 
– usually to control odour and/or toxic emissions 
Bioinformatics
The generation/creation, collection, storage in databases, and eﬃcient utilisation 
of data and information from genomics, chemistry, screening, proteomics, and 
DNA sequencing
Bioleaching
A process to recovery precious metals from ores using micro-organisms
Bioleaching 
The removal of metals from ore using biological processes
Biopharming
The production of pharmaceuticals (or intermediate chemicals utilized 
to manufacture pharmaceuticals) in crop plants that have been 
genetically engineered. 
Bioprocessing
The use of any living cells (bacteria, plants, animals) for the production of chemicals
Biopulping
Treatment of paper, pulp or wood ﬁbres with enzymes
Bioremediation
The use of plants, bacteria, fungi, etc. to help remove toxic chemical wastes, 
metals, etc. from a contaminated site.
Biodesulfurisation
removal of sulphur from fuel oil using enzymes
Chromosomes
Discrete units of the genome carrying many genes, consisting DNA wrapped 
tightly by histone proteins. Found in the nucleus of every plant and animal cell 
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid – The chemical building blocks of which genes 
are constructed.
ELISA
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays
Functional foods
Foods or dietary components that may provide health beneﬁt beyond basic 
nutrition, usually marketed for these health beneﬁts e.g. omega-3 fortiﬁed margarine
Gel Electrophoresis
A methodology to separate the various proteins, DNA or RNA within a given 
biological sample, prior to their analysis. In 2-D gel electrophoresis the proteins are 
moved by applying an electrical ﬁeld in two distinct directions.
Gene Expression
Conversion of the genetic information within a gene, into a protein (or RNAs).
Gene
A natural unit of the hereditary material, consisting chain-like molecules of 
nucleic acids in a linear arrangement that (in part) constitutes a chromosome.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
v i i i
g l o s s a r y
Gene Sequencing
The process used to obtain the sequential arrangement of genes in the DNA. 
Germplasm
The total genetic variability to an organism, represented by the total available pool 
of germ cells or seed.
Genetic  
modiﬁcation (GM)
The selective, deliberate alteration of genes (genetic material) by man.
Marker-assisted 
selection
The use of DNA sequence “markers” by breeders to select the organisms  
(e.g., crops) which possess gene(s) for a particular performance trait desired; 
for subsequent breeding/propagation
Microbial 
Fermentation
A process in which chemical changes are brought about in an organic substrate 
through the actions of enzymes elaborated (produced) by micro-organisms
Molecular Markers
A speciﬁc sequence of DNA that is associated with a speciﬁed trait, because of 
“linkage” between that DNA sequence (the “marker”) and the gene(s) that cause 
that particular trait. 
Nanobiotechnology
Refers to the application of biotechnology within the ﬁelds of nanotechnology.
Nanotechnology
Technology in which man manipulates objects whose dimensions are 
approximately 1 to 100 nanometres.
Nutraceutical
A component of food (e.g., a vitamin, essential amino acid) that possesses medical 
or health beneﬁts and is delivered in tablet or capsule form.
Peptides
Two or more amino acids joined by peptide bonds. 
Phytoremediation
The use of speciﬁc plants to remove contaminants or pollutants from either soil 
(e.g., polluted ﬁelds) or water (e.g., polluted lakes).
Polymerase  
Chain Reaction
A reaction that uses a DNA enzyme to multiply DNA strands in a sample.
Proteins
Compounds composed of a variety of amino acids joined together.  
Each protein is the ultimate expression product of a gene.
Proteomics
The scientiﬁc study of an organism’s proteins and their role in its structure,  
growth, health, disease etc. 
Recombinant DNA
DNA formed by the joining of genes into a new combination
RNA
A long-chain nucleic acid whose primary function is to translate the genes 
into proteins through a series of steps in the cell.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
1
e x e c u t i ve s u m m a r y
E xe cu t ive Sum m a r y
This study gathered information on the range of non-genetically modiﬁed (non-GM) biotechnology tools and 
techniques (i.e. those excluding genetically modiﬁed organisms as a ﬁnal product) which are applied (or are 
likely to be applied) in Australian agricultural industries. The report documents, through six case studies and 
other examples, current successful non-GM biotechnology applications and, where possible, comments on the 
degree to which biotechnology adds value to these industries. The report also provides general comment on 
the extent to which Australia currently uses biotechnology tools and techniques, with reference to the situation 
in Australia’s agricultural competitor countries. 
The study was based on desk research and a series of workshops held in capital cities during 2006 and  
attended by representatives of industry associations and scientiﬁc researchers. The study also gathered 
information on projects undertaken in R&D institutions and details of products available commercially in 
Australia. Case studies were developed through face to face interviews, mainly with companies with  
products in the market. 
The main categories of biotechnology examined were:
• 
DNA and RNA technologies—used to study genes and gene expression; 
• 
protein technologies—used to study protein production and function in diﬀerent species and varieties;
• 
cell and tissue culture and engineering—used to understand and manipulate cellular processes, 
including immune reactions and embryonic development; and
• 
process biotechnology—using micro-organisms or their chemicals for the purpose of transforming a 
materials into a product. 
Major findings 
The degree to which the various categories of non-GM biotechnology are used at diﬀerent points in the 
agricultural supply chain is summarised in Table A. Non-GM biotechnology is only currently used extensively 
in Australia for growing and husbandry, which includes plant and animal breeding and disease management. 
This is due to the value this technology can add to animal and plant industries; the long-established systems 
in Australia for developing and commercialising new varieties of plants and improved livestock; and the major 
role of agricultural research institutions in developing diagnostic tests and strategies for disease management. 
Non-GM biotechnology was used in a limited way in other supply chain positions; however some valuable and 
relevant examples were found in most categories in all areas of the supply chain.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
2
e x e c u t i ve s u m m a r y
Table A: Scale of use of technologies along supply chain
Technology 
Supply chain position
Growing and 
husbandry
Logistics 
and support
Processing
Waste 
management
DNA and RNA
Extensive
Limited 
Limited
Limited
Proteins and other molecules
Intermediate
Limited
Intermediate
Limited
Cell and tissue culture 
engineering
Intermediate
Not found
Limited
Limited
Process biotechnology
Not applicable
Limited
Limited
Limited
Sub-cellular organisms
Limited
Limited
Not found
Not found
Based on project reviews and comments from workshop participants 
Some of the most relevant examples of non-GM applications discussed in the report include: 
Growing and Husbandry:
Breeding: Marker-assisted selection (MAS) is widely used, particularly in the grains and cattle industries. MAS 
helps breeders obtain detailed genetic information about breeding stock and allows new, more productive or 
higher value varieties of plants and breeding lines of livestock to be developed more quickly than through use of 
conventional technology. Examples include development of strawberry varieties with superior ﬂavour and ﬂowering 
characteristics (Case study 1), rapid development of new barley varieties with improved quality and disease 
resistance, and use of genetic markers to identify cattle with improved meat quality (e.g. marbling and tenderness). 
New, more rapid and less expensive, genome screening techniques are being developed (Case Study 2) which 
may enable a greater proportion on agricultural industries to capture the value of this technology. 
Disease diagnosis: The use of biotechnology for disease diagnosis is well established and Australia has the 
capacity to develop new diagnostics for emerging threats. Examples detailed in this report include use of 
DNA technologies: to measure the genetic diversity of sugar cane smut and enable production of Australian 
sugarcane smut-resistant cultivars; to screen soil to identify and semi-quantify the presence of certain fungi and 
nematodes which allows choice of the most suitable rotation crops and increases returns to farmers (Case Study 
3); and to develop a vaccine against bovine herpes virus-1, a cause of sickness and death in Australian feedlot 
cattle (Case Study 5). 
Logistics and support: 
Commercial applications of both protein and DNA techniques are being developed to improve product quality 
and meet increasing domestic and international requirements for veriﬁcation and traceback. Examples include: 
the WheatRite® test which allows identiﬁcation and separation of wheat and barley damaged by preharvest 
sprouting, the commercial availability of tests to verify grain variety and purity (Case Study 4); the availability of 
genetic tests that enable cattle feed eﬃciency to be maximised; and the development of genetic identiﬁcation 
systems to prevent product substitution in the ﬁsh industry.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
3
e x e c u t i ve s u m m a r y
Processing: 
There is limited use of biotechnology in processing of agricultural products in Australia beyond traditional food 
manufacture. A few Australian companies are developing functional food or nutraceutical ingredients, mainly 
those processing dairy or bovine ingredients as this development is an important way of adding value to some 
agricultural products or waste. 
Waste management: 
There are only a small number of biotechnology applications in waste remediation in Australia. Examples 
include the development of Landguard™ OPA to speed remediation of organophosphate chemicals used 
on crops and in sheep dip (Case Study 6) and research by the Environmental Biotechnology CRC on a 
demonstration processing plant that uses bacteria to remove excess nitrogen and phosphorus from heavily 
contaminated abattoir wastewater. 
Australia’s use of biotechnology in  
agriculture in relation to competitors
In many cases, Australia’s competitors are also placing considerable eﬀort in developing biotechnology 
applications for agriculture. Australia is considered generally to be ahead of competitors in the use of genetic 
markers and artiﬁcial insemination for breeding, and is on par with competitors in the use of DNA-based and 
protein-based diagnostic tests and disease treatments. However, Australia’s agricultural competitors are well 
ahead in many other areas, including:
• 
some genome sequencing projects involving Australian species, e.g. Eucalyptus spp;
• 
proteomics for agriculture (Australia being on par regarding proteomics for human health);
• 
development of new vaccines (e.g. sub-unit vaccines) for livestock applications;
• 
biofuels;
• 
functional foods and nutraceuticals (based on waste products from agriculture); and
• 
use of biotechnology in the ﬁbre industry.
Further, competitors that have been considered behind Australia in the past, including Brazil and China, are 
catching up fast. Australia needs to ensure that eﬀorts continue to be applied to developing biotechnology 
applications where domestic challenges are presented (e.g. high boron soils, salinity, drought, region speciﬁc 
disease strains, and biosecurity). Australia also needs to ensure it captures international developments which are 
relevant to Australian agriculture (e.g. vaccines and diagnostic tests for diseases which are common elsewhere). 
Further applications of biotechnology to Australian agriculture
Many of the successful applications of biotechnology identiﬁed in the case studies may be applicable in other 
Australian agricultural sectors. These include:
• 
the development of high throughput automated DNA sequencing and low cost genotyping (Case Study 2) 
could reduce costs, making it economically viable for smaller agricultural industries to capture the beneﬁts 
of marker assisted selection and identiﬁcation;

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
4
e x e c u t i ve s u m m a r y
• 
the expansion of soil diagnostic tests to incorporate other diseases for soil-borne pathogens (Case Study 3) 
could allow more productive use of land and increase returns to farmers;
• 
greater utilisation of the technology to verify crop identity and purity (Case Study 4) could improve 
the accuracy and reliability of agricultural product certiﬁcation and create increased export market 
opportunities for Australian agricultural produce, including in speciality high value products;
• 
extension of the pesticide cleanup technology (Case Study 6) to include other intractable pesticides in 
conjunction with greater uptake of the technology could provide economic, environmental and health 
beneﬁts to the farming industry.
There is considerable potential for non-GM biotechnology to be applied more broadly, but there are also a 
number of limitations. Limitations are due to a mix of technical, regulatory and commercial issues and can be 
summarised as follows; 
• 
for disease diagnosis, biotechnology techniques are already established .New techniques are often quicker 
but more expensive. It will take time for slower, but commercially well-established laboratory-based 
techniques to be replaced by ﬁeld based methods;
• 
for disease prevention, new vaccine development techniques (e.g. sub-unit vaccines, peptide vaccines) are 
just emerging and technical limitations are still apparent. It is likely that these limitations will be overcome in 
development of new vaccine types for humans (and then be extended to domestic animals);
• 
in waste management, there have been few domestic regulatory drivers compared to overseas. This may 
change with increased interest in recycling of water and the potential to value add to waste streams. 
Conclusions
The examples presented in this report demonstrate that there have been beneﬁts from use of biotechnology 
(excluding GMOs as ﬁnal products) in Australian agriculture. These beneﬁts often accrue to producers through 
improved speed to market; reduced environmental damage; healthier and more valuable livestock and crops: 
and maintenance of or improvements in productivity. Where biotechnology contributes further down the 
supply chain, then the beneﬁts will usually accrue to those later in the chain. Regardless the economy as a 
whole may beneﬁt.
Australian agricultural industries appear currently to be using commercially available biotechnology-based 
tools and techniques in a limited manner. Applications may be extended to the beneﬁt of other Australian 
agricultural industries, the uptake of these technologies as commercial products will depend on cost and 
eﬃcacy, rather than technical capacity. 
Many of Australia’s competitors are at a similar stage of development to Australia but seem to be pursuing 
additional, more valuable, opportunities in plant or animal processing with downstream applications in human 
medicine. Research and development is very expensive so Australia will need to continue working in major 
international consortia to remain fully informed and capture information required to develop biotechnology 
applications speciﬁc to Australian conditions.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
5
i n t r o d u c t i o n
1 
Int roduc t ion 
Agricultural biotechnology is much more than genetically modiﬁed (GM) crops or animals. It covers a whole 
range of tools and techniques which can be utilised to increase the competitiveness of our primary industries. 
It is this non-GM biotechnology which is of interest in this report. The purposes of this study were to: 
• 
collate and present information on the full range of biotechnology tools and techniques (excluding 
genetically modiﬁed organisms as ﬁnal product) which could be applied in Australian primary industries;
• 
develop short case studies of examples of current successful application of the tools and techniques 
in Australian primary industries;
• 
provide general comment on the extent to which Australia currently uses biotechnology tools and 
techniques, with reference to the situation in competitor primary industries exporting countries;
• 
identify further opportunities for application of these tools and techniques in Australia; and
• 
indicate where current and potential non-GM biotechnology add value to Australian primary industries.
1.1 
Definitions and conceptual framework
The broad conceptual framework developed for this project was based around three key factors: the type of 
biotechnology, where in the supply chain biotechnology is used, and the agricultural sub-sector in which it can 
be applied. 
The method used for the study is summarised in Box 1-1. 
Box 1-1: Method
The method used for the project was based on a combination of literature reviews, desk research and 
industry consultation. 
The project team reviewed published information and the Australian Agricultural and Natural Resources 
Online website to compile information on 213 non-GM biotech projects in Australian agricultural industries
The team also gathered information about the types of use of these tools and techniques internationally. 
This was achieved initially by desk and internet research, consultation with key individuals and 
research organisations overseas. A series of workshops was also held in major capital cities. At these, 
representatives of industry associations, State governments and R&D institutions discussed the scope of 
information gathered in the ﬁrst phase of the project. They contributed comments and suggestions on 
Australia’s position relative to competitors internationally and discussed barriers to uptake of agricultural 
biotechnology tools and techniques by Australian primary industries.
The study included a number of case studies on the use of biotechnology and its economic impact on 
agriculture. By necessity these covered only those technologies which had been used commercially for 
some time so that impact on agriculture could be addressed. The focus of these case studies was on 
technologies applied in the cereals and cattle industries, because these are the largest agricultural sub-
sectors in Australia and so they oﬀer large markets for companies that develop new technologies for 
agricultural industries.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
x
6
i n t r o d u c t i o n
1.1.1 Type of biotechnology
The deﬁnition of both biotechnology and agriculture can be varied according to the audience and their 
understanding of the sector and related issues. For this report, we are concentrating on so-called “modern” 
biotechnology. As a basis, we adopted the basic deﬁnition used by the OECD (2005), which deﬁnes 
biotechnology as: 
The application of science and technology to living organisms, as well as parts, products and models 
thereof, to alter living or non-living materials for the production of knowledge, goods and services.
There is also a more detailed deﬁnition of biotechnology used by the OECD. This deﬁnition was used to classify 
the technologies reviewed during the project and in the chapter by chapter analysis (Box 1-2). 
Box 1-2: OECD List-based definitions of biotechnology
DNA/RNA: Genomics, gene probes, genetic modiﬁcation (engineering), DNA/RNA sequencing (gene 
sequencing) DNA/RNA /synthesis/ampliﬁcation, gene expression proﬁling.
Proteins and other molecules: Sequencing/synthesis/engineering of proteins and peptides (including 
large molecule hormones); improved delivery methods for large molecule drugs; proteomics, protein 
isolation and puriﬁcation, signalling, identiﬁcation of cell receptors.
Cell and tissue culture and engineering: Cell/tissue culture, tissue engineering (including tissue scaﬀolds 
and biomedical engineering), cellular fusion, vaccine/immune stimulants, embryo manipulation.
Process biotechnology techniques (bioprocessing): Fermentation using bacteria, bioprocessing, 
bioleaching, biopulping, biobleaching, biodesulfurisation, bioremediation, bioﬁltration and 
phytoremediation.
Gene and RNA vectors: Gene therapy, viral vectors.
Bioinformatics: Construction of databases on genomes, protein sequences; modelling complex biological 
processes, including systems biology.
Nanobiotechnology: Applies the tools and processes of nanotechnology and micro-fabrication to build 
devices for studying biosystems and applications in drug delivery, diagnostics etc.
1.1.2 Where in the supply chain is biotechnology used?
Biotechnology has potential to be used at all points along the agricultural supply chain. As detailed in  
Table 1-1, activities have been grouped along the supply chain into four main positions (growing/husbandry; 
processing; logistics and support; and waste management). Each of these is divided into several more 
detailed sub-positions.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
x
7
i n t r o d u c t i o n
Table 1-1: Supply chain positions and sub-positions
Supply chain position
Supply chain sub-position
Growing/Husbandry
Breeding/selection
Pre-harvest testing
Agronomy
Pre-slaughter testing
Husbandry
Harvest
Soils/feeds etc
Slaughter
Diagnosis of disease
Other growing/husbandry
Treatment of disease
Processing
Processing/milling
Processing for therapeutics
Post harvest treatments/extraction
Fibre processing
Traditional food processing
Biofuels
Nutraceutical/functional food 
processing
Industrial chemicals
Processing for cosmetics
Other processing
Logistics and support
Extension
Marketing
Grain accumulation
Export
Feedlotting
Border control
Transport
Other logistics (incl. tracking)
Waste management
Waste reduction
Waste treatments
Energy reduction
Other waste management
1.1.3 Agricultural sectors to which biotechnology can be applied
The agricultural sub-sectors where biotechnology may be applied are shown in Table 1-2. Technologies can 
be applied to the main sectors of plants; animals; either plants or animals; or to micro-organisms. Traditional 
agricultural sub-sectors are grouped into these main sectors.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
8
i n t r o d u c t i o n
Table 1-2: Agricultural sector classes and sub-classes
Agriculture sector 
Agricultural sector sub-class
Plants
Grain crops
Forestry
Cotton or other ﬁbre crops
Marine plants
Sugar
Plant biosecurity
Horticulture
Other plant crops
Viticulture
All Plants
Animals
Beef
Sheep
Wool
Fisheries/aquaculture
Dairy
Other animals
Pork
Animal biosecurity
Poultry
All animals
Either plants or animals
Either Plants or Animals
Micro-organisms/fungi
Fungi/mushrooms
Other micro-organisms
Other
Other
1.2 
Overview of the technologies identified
A major part of this project was the collection of information from publicly available sources on projects 
currently underway in both research institutions and companies which use biotechnology, as deﬁned in Box 
1-1. The project reviewed the current activities of all universities, all R&D Corporations, all State government 
agriculture departments, the CSIRO and approximately 30 Co-operative Research Centres; together with 
approximately 80 agricultural biotechnology companies in Australia. The authors believe the ﬁndings are 
indicative of the scope of current agricultural biotechnology activity as well as how frequently the technologies 
are being used. Nevertheless, the information collected cannot be used to provide a deﬁnitive indication on 
absolute levels of eﬀort. 
The technological focuses of projects identiﬁed for the study are shown in Figure 1-1.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
9
i n t r o d u c t i o n
Figure 1-1: Projects identified by technology type 
Source: public information on current projects; See box 1-2 for deﬁnitions of each technology type
Projects using “DNA/RNA technologies” made up approximately 57 per cent of the identiﬁed projects and 
products. These projects apply mainly to plant and animal breeding (discussed in Chapter 2).
Projects using “proteins and other molecules” are the second most common project type representing 21.6 per 
cent of projects. Almost all of the research and development in this area is being undertaken in publicly funded 
R&D centres, and relatively little has been fully commercialised through private companies. In many instances, 
publicly funded research institutions or State-funded laboratories undertake the projects through extension 
services or contract research. These companies and centres oﬀer services to growers and breeders.
Eleven per cent of all projects involved plant or animal “cell and tissue culture and engineering”. The most 
common of these were in-vitro fertilisation services and vaccines, both of which are well established in 
agricultural industries and are in wide commercial use.
Eight per cent of projects reviewed were “process biotechnology” projects. These largely related to enzyme use 
in food processing. 
The sub-group termed “gene and RNA vectors” is relatively limited as it excludes the use of whole organisms 
for applications such as biological control of pests. The main application in agriculture is the use of viruses to 
carry vaccines or immune stimulants to livestock. The majority of applications in this area involve production of 
genetically modiﬁed organisms, which are outside the scope of this report. 
Only 0.5 per cent of projects were classiﬁed directly as “bioinformatics”. These techniques are used quite 
often, but usually underpin other technologies described above. Projects using bioinformatics have not been 
recorded separately, which explains the small number of projects in this category. 
DNA and RNA 56.8%
Cell and tissue culture engineering 11.3%
Bioinfomatics 0.5%
Sub-cellular organisms 1.9%
Proteins and other molecules 21.6%
Process biotechnology 8.0%

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
10
i n t r o d u c t i o n
1.3 
Structure of this report
The next four chapters detail the types of non-GM technologies which have the greatest application along 
the agricultural supply chain – DNA and RNA (Chapter 2), proteins and other molecules (Chapter 3), cell and 
tissue culture and engineering (Chapter 4) and process biotechnologies (Chapter 5). Each chapter commences 
with an introduction to the technology and its broad applications and then discusses applications along the 
supply chain, highlighting applications in the agricultural sub-sector (plants and animals) as appropriate. Where 
relevant, examples are provided comparing traditional methods with those used in biotechnology-based 
applications. Each chapter then comments on the use of these technologies in Australia compared to overseas 
countries and concludes with a discussion of emerging uses in Australia. 
It is important to recognise that many of these technologies do not stand alone. Thus, the chapters cross-
reference areas where the technologies are used together, or where they rely on each other for particular 
applications. Chapter 6 discusses overall ﬁndings and conclusions.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
11
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
2 
D NA / R NA te c hnologie s
2.1 
What are DNA/RNA technologies?
DNA and RNA technologies are used, in broad terms, to identify the location, purpose and activity of particular 
genes in a plant or animal species. DNA/RNA technologies enable genes to be sequenced, synthesised and 
manipulated for speciﬁc purposes. Genomics is the study of all the genes in a particular organism. Gene 
expression proﬁling enables researchers to understand when, where and at what level genes are expressed. 
Once a particular gene has been identiﬁed in one species, similar genes in other species are likely to have 
comparable functions – the level of similarity depends in part on the evolutionary relationship between 
the species being studied. The analysis of genes, rather than the physical characteristics which result from 
expression of a gene/s, enables scientists to identify genes which give a plant or animal particular economic 
value – for example disease resistance, drought tolerance or desirable production characteristics.
In Australia, DNA technologies play a signiﬁcant role in plant growing and breeding and animal husbandry (the 
ﬁrst supply chain position) including diagnosis and management of disease. There are emerging applications 
in logistics, such as those associated with border control, and limited applications in the processing and waste 
management positions in the supply chain. 
RNA technologies appear to be limited to research into RNA interference, which is not yet commercially 
available (but is discussed at the end of the chapter). For this reason, most of the discussion in this chapter 
focuses on DNA technologies and is referred to as such.
2.2 
Where are DNA and RNA technologies used in the supply chain?
2.2.1 Growing and husbandry
Traditional plant and livestock breeding usually requires a considerable amount of time and resources 
to produce a new breeding line of animal or variety of plant, and is largely dependant on the organism’s 
reproductive cycle. Using traditional approaches it typically takes many years to produce a new variety – for 
example, breeding a new malting quality barley typically takes 14 years from the ﬁrst cross-breeding to when 
the cultivar is released – and success rates are low, from 1 per cent to 2 per cent of plants originally cross-bred 
(Langridge and Barr 2003).
In traditional livestock breeding, producers select breeding animals based on their appearance or other 
observable characteristics such as the amount of ﬂeece or milk produced. Animals with valuable traits are 
mated and the breeding oﬀspring selected on the basis of observable and desirable characteristics. 
Tracking the lineage of key performers in any animal species, be it sheep, cattle, or other livestock, can be of 
high value to the animals’ owners, who can charge higher stud fees for animals which have proved to have 
valuable characteristics. However, even with an understanding of basic genetics, it can take a long time for 
producers to breed a ﬂock or herd with particular strengths – for example, the dairy industry estimates it takes 
six years to prove, using traditional methods, an elite sire bull. Further, as highlighted in other studies (Cregan 
and Noble, 2000), it can be diﬃcult to separate the impact of changes in genetics and breeding outcomes from 
other inﬂuences such as other technologies (e.g. pasture improvement) and agronomy. 
DNA technologies allow genes and/or organisms to be identiﬁed quickly and desirable characteristics to 
be analysed more accurately at the genetic level. This speeds up breeding or disease diagnosis and may 
be less expensive than traditional approaches. Often, DNA or “molecular markers” are used as signposts to

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
12
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
analyse for characteristics of interest; hence the use of DNA technologies in breeding is termed  
“marker-assisted selection” (MAS). 
The value of MAS to plant and livestock breeders is that it allows animal and plant species to be investigated 
at the level of their DNA. The knowledge generated in this way can be used to manage genetic variation and 
diversity in livestock and plants, and makes it possible to speed up the selection process. For example, a desired 
trait may only be observable in the mature animal or a plant, but MAS allows scientists to screen for the trait at 
a much earlier stage of development. Markers also make it possible to select simultaneously for more than one 
characteristic in an animal or plant. MAS can also improve animal welfare and increase safety, as it can be used 
to identify individual animals or plants that are resistant to particular diseases, without exposing the host to the 
pest or pathogen in question (adapted from Seedquest, 2006).
Today, MAS is one of the standard components used in estimating the breeding value of plants or livestock, the 
others being appearance (phenotype) and pedigree (Van der Werd, 2000). One particular beneﬁcial use of MAS 
in breeding is to ﬁnd the genetic location of characteristics which are diﬃcult to identify from the appearance 
of the animal or plant (Holland, 2004). Examples of this application include:
• 
characteristics which “skip” one generation before showing up again in later generations; 
• 
genes that confer resistance to rare diseases; and 
• 
when one characteristic is controlled by many genes (e.g. drought tolerance in plants).
The disadvantage of MAS is that it may be more expensive than traditional approaches. The cost eﬀectiveness 
of MAS depends on the:
• 
direct cost of screening using appearances compared to use of genetic testing; 
• 
time saving achieved through genetic testing; and
• 
economic beneﬁts of bringing new, higher value varieties to market more quickly.
Generally MAS has required sequencing of the organism’s DNA to identify the gene or organism of interest. 
High throughput sequencing methods have been developed to decrease the time required for this step. 
Increasingly, screening technologies are being developed which reduce the reliance on DNA sequencing. This 
technique can be used to identify individual genes or complete organisms. To identify a sample, its DNA is 
tested against known gene sequences using microarray technology. Protein-based tests developed for a similar 
purpose are discussed in Chapter 3.
Plant Breeding
DNA markers increase the speed and improve the accuracy and focus of plant breeding programs. The advent 
of these technologies is said to have halved the time for development of new plant varieties in Australia. For 
example, in rice it has been claimed that marker-assisted selection saved 2 – 5 years time over conventional 
approaches to developing a new variety, which would have taken 10 years (Harden, 2000). 
The diﬀerences between traditional plant breeding and MAS are shown in Figure 2-1. 
In plants, MAS has been in use commercially since 1991 (Barr and Langridge, 2001). Based on the projects 
reviewed, coupled with comments from participants at the workshops, the main use of these technologies in 
plants in Australia is in the cereals industry and Australia is now recognised as a world leader in the application 
of molecular markers to cereal breeding. At present, over 2000 markers derived from published sequences are 
available to cereal breeders, along with a marker database, bioinformatics tools and streamlined procedures that 
support the technology (Bancroft, 2002).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
13
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Figure 2-1: Traditional and DNA-based approaches to plant breeding
Source: Derived from Barr and Langridge, (2001)
Shorter breeding 
and testing program
Existing variety with  
traits of interest
Map the location of  
trait on chromosome
Identify and test the 
molecular markers  
associated with traits
Develop laboratory  
methods to test samples  
for the markers 
Modify the breeding  
strategy to optimise  
the use of markers
Implement the  
breeding program
Marker-assisted
Seed accumulation, 
release and marketing  
after 2 – 5 years
Induce mutations 
using chemicals
Grow progeny, identify  
those that show  
desired traits
Multiply progeny by  
cuttings, grafting or seed
Field trials
Seed accumulation, 
release and marketing  
after 10 years
Traditional
Existing variety with  
traits of interest
Breeding and  
testing over  
several generations

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
14
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
The National Barley Molecular Marker Program, a research program operating since the 1980s, is credited with 
providing the industry with the means to overcome serious yield limitations due to disease (Langridge and Barr, 
2003). While these advances may have been possible with traditional approaches, progress would have been 
much slower. It would normally take up to 15 years to release a new variety of malting barley (Langridge, 2002). 
In that time, a disease could seriously damage the industry. However, between 1994 and 1999, use of markers 
enabled the fast track development of the “Sloop” barley variety resistant to cereal cyst nematode (Langridge 
and Barr, 2003).
Of particular beneﬁt is the ability of DNA markers to allow breeders to select for many desirable traits at one 
time, and these traits may be suitable for speciﬁc markets. The barley cultivar ‘Flagship’ is a successful example 
of this with the variety particularly suited for the malting barley market in South East Asia. The variety has 
outstanding malting quality as well as excellent early vigour and weed competitiveness, in addition to a broad 
spectrum of disease resistance which gives it signiﬁcant agronomic advantage (GRDC 2005a). Use of markers 
has enabled the development to be very focused, rather than relying on these characteristics emerging by 
chance in random crosses. 
Many R&D Corporations (including those in grains, sugar and rice) and Co-operative Research Centres have also 
funded MAS to address similar issues (disease, environmental stress and quality) in their crops (Table 2-1). 
Table 2-1: Examples of current marker-assisted plant breeding programs
Species
Program
Funding agency
Cereal 
crops
Australian Winter Wheat Molecular Marker Program
National Barley Molecular Marker Program
Grains R&D Corporation
Rice
Marker-assisted selection in rice improvement
Rural Industries R&D Corporation 
Sugar
Application of molecular markers to sugar cane breeding
Sugar R&D Corporation
Cotton
DNA marker projects – fungal resistance
Cotton Catchment 
Communities CRC
Source: public sources
The Rural Industries R&D Corporation’s rice marker program, for example, has announced development of 
markers for:
• 
fragrant and non-fragrant rice (important because consumers will pay more for fragrant rice); 
• 
rice starch gelatinisation temperature (an important component of rice eating quality); and 
• 
resistance to blast disease, which is not present in Australia but has caused crop losses of 60 per cent 
overseas (Henry and Waters, 2006). The latter is important because of the potential impact on the rice crop 
of blast disease entering Australia.
Box 2-1 provides a case study of the use of DNA technologies in strawberry breeding in an R&D Corporation 
funded program.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
15
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Box 2-1: Case Study 1 – High throughput sequencing  
of strawberry plant genomes for variety improvement
R & D Corporations have funded use of high throughput DNA sequencing technologies to develop markers 
for emerging crops. Strawberries are one such crop, and about 40,000 tonnes are grown annually in 
Australia. The majority of the crop is sold on the domestic market, returning some $200 million p.a. at the 
farm gate. Until recently, all varieties grown in the temperate areas of Australia initiated their ﬂower buds 
during the short days of late autumn and early winter (‘short day’ varieties). This led to a short ﬂowering 
period and associated production peak during late spring to early summer with no fruit after January. 
A small autumn crop was occasionally produced during April from new plants established during the 
heat of summer. 
During 1988 ‘day neutral’ varieties ﬁrst became available in Australia. This new type of strawberry initiated 
ﬂower buds throughout the year, so fruit can be marketed continuously for nine months. Unfortunately 
these new day neutral strawberries lack the ﬂavour of the old short day varieties and are susceptible to 
many pest and diseases. 
In response, the Department of Primary Industries in Victoria, together with Horticulture Australia Ltd and 
Strawberries Australia Inc developed a program to develop high-ﬂavoured, day neutral varieties adapted to 
a range of environments in southern Australia. They solicited the assistance of AgGenomics Pty Ltd, a joint 
venture between Genetic Technologies Ltd and Department of Primary Industries in Victoria. This project 
commenced in 2003 and was funded by Horticulture Australia Ltd and aimed to develop markers for 
Australian strawberry breeders (Genetic Technologies Corporation, 2003). At the time, this was the largest 
private sector genetic marker discovery program in Australia, and was worth $2.1 million. AgGenomics 
retains the exclusive right to commercialise Intellectual Property generated by this project (AgGenomics, 
2004). The research also involved the Victorian Bioinformatics Consortium and has resulted in 14 primary 
markers that can be associated with functional genes (Keniry, et al., ,2006). 
As part of the same project, researchers at Latrobe University have also developed a library of 23,600 
expressed sequence tags (short DNA strands) from a range of strawberry DNA samples to help identify 
genes associated with fruit characteristics (e.g. ﬁrmness, ﬂavour, taste, aroma and colour) as well as 
ﬂowering times and sensitivity to day length (www.hornbill.cssp.latrobe.edu.au/strawberry.html). 
The Victorian Department of Primary Industries, in conjunction with Strawberries Australia Inc, is now 
trialling a range of new day neutral varieties which produce heavy crops of large, ﬁrm, ﬂavoursome 
strawberries which were developed using conventional phenotyping. Varieties recently released include 
the short day varieties Kiewa, Millewa and Bunyarra, and the day neutral variety Kalinda. The department 
believes the new varieties will “set a new benchmark for strawberry quality” (Morrison, 2006). It is expected 
that the day neutral markers, when combined with markers currently being developed for ﬂavour, will 
constitute a large step forward in technology allowing the advantages of day neutrality to be fully realised 
throughout the temperate areas of Australia. 
The Queensland government is also using genetic markers in strawberries to distinguish between closely 
related strawberry cultivars in a quality control process for runner production. Correct identiﬁcation of 
varieties is critical to the industry as any mistakes will not be discovered until the ﬁeld is planted and the 
strawberries begin fruiting, which can be very costly to the producer.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
16
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
As mentioned previously, the beneﬁts and costs of developing markers for breeding and disease management 
need to be carefully weighed up. For example, although Horticulture Australia Ltd (HAL) co-funded MAS 
programs with the strawberry industry, the stone fruit growers (also part of the HAL portfolio) recently decided 
against funding a project to identify molecular markers suitable for peach, apricot, cherry and almond breeding. 
This is due to insuﬃcient investment capacity in the industry as well as lower priority on breeding technologies 
in this industry (Horticulture Australia, 2005). 
A case study of an Australian company providing molecular marker services to support Australian crop breeding 
programs is detailed in Box 2-2. 
Box 2-2: Case Study 2 - Using whole genome  
profiling to support plant breeding programs
Triticarte provides a genome proﬁling service to wheat and barley breeders in Australia and world-wide. 
Triticarte Pty Ltd is a joint venture formed by Diversity Arrays Pty Ltd (DArT®) and the Value Added Wheat 
CRC Ltd. In 2004/2005 DArT® supplied cereal breeders with information on one million molecular markers. 
Although Triticarte concentrates on cereal crops, the parent company DArT® oﬀers technology development 
and genotyping services in other areas including crops like rice, sorghum, chickpea, sugarcane and apples.
Before the DArT® technology was developed, it was diﬃcult to proﬁle whole-genomes in a cost- and time-
eﬃcient manner and tests were very expensive. Production of whole genome maps took many months or 
years and cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. It was usually not possible to produce genome proﬁles on 
short notice. DArT® can now produce a genome proﬁle in two days and three genome maps per week, which 
is ten times faster than standard approaches. This provides an enormous cost and time saving while providing 
high quality data which enables rapid identiﬁcation by breeders of the genetic makeup of particular varieties.
The DArT® technology is a novel genotyping method that provides low cost, high throughput genotyping 
that does not rely on breeders having any pre-existing knowledge of the genome sequence. Each DArT® 
marker is hybridised on a genotyping array and high throughput screening then gives a result showing 
the presence or absence of each marker (Triticarte, 2004). Any standard genetic analysis software can be 
used to interpret the data. Clients are sent either the raw data or a report which provides interpretation and 
analysis of the raw results. Clients are located in Australia and overseas.
An important beneﬁt from the use of DArT® technology is that it can simultaneously select for more than 
one characteristic and can also speed up the breeding selection process. The maps produced by DArT® 
are “equivalent to, if not superior to” genetic maps produced by restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(Wenzl, 2004).
When DArT® was launched, most clients sought DNA proﬁles in order to characterise breeding parents, 
clean up seed stocks and create genetic maps. For example, DArT® assisted a rice supplier to identify rice 
cultivars that had been mixed up. This ensured the correct variety was grown and optimum returns gained. 
However, clients now also request more information on marker sequences and the locations of speciﬁc 
genes which may enable them to development superior varieties. The technology can give breeders 
guidance on how to develop better varieties more quickly as DArT® methodology can provide analytical 
results more quickly than previously possible. 
DArT® technology has also been used to assist with biosecurity issues. Sugarcane Smut was ﬁrst identiﬁed in 
northern Australia in 1998, with the expected source being Indonesia. This smut spread through susceptible 
varieties grown in the region. DArT® technology was used to measure genetic diversity in 95 smut samples, 
with further statistical analysis showing that only six isolates were genetically diﬀerent. The Bureau of 
Sugar Experiment Stations then identiﬁed smut-resistant cultivars and these have been imported for cross-
breeding with Australian varieties to impart smut-resistance into the Australian cultivars (Braithwaite, 2005).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
17
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Disease diagnosis in plants
DNA technologies are used to identify plant pathogens and to determine the eﬀectiveness of treatments 
for disease. For example, the Queensland Department of Primary Industries is using molecular diagnostic 
techniques to identify diﬀerent strains of sunﬂower rust and to map variability in rust strains – this enables 
the Department to identify when new strains of rust overcome the natural resistance of diﬀerent varieties of 
sunﬂowers. This also allows the Department to identify rust infestation in seeds or seedlings in the absence 
of symptoms, as the disease is normally diﬃcult to identify until the infestation is well established (Qld Dept 
of Primary Industries, 2006). The Department is also using genetic markers to identify which strains of the 
pathogen are resistant to certain treatments. In the longer term, this information can also contribute to 
breeding programs for development of varieties with resistance to these particular strains.
Box 2-3 provides a case study on the use of DNA testing technologies to identify plant pathogens. 
This technology has been developed by two R&D organisations and successfully commercialised to  
the beneﬁt of cereal growers.
Box 2-3: Case Study 3 - Identifying soil-borne pathogens 
A range of soil-borne pathogens and nematodes live in the soil and infect plant crops reducing their 
vigour and yield. Cereal crops in Australia are aﬀected by a number of fungal diseases including Takeall, 
Rhizoctonia and Crown Rot and are also aﬀected by pathogenic nematodes. These infestations can 
decrease yield by 5 per cent to 60 per cent depending on the level of crop infection. 
Crown Rot is a major disease of wheat in Australia and North America. Up until 1999, the most serious crop 
losses in Australia usually occurred in northern NSW and Queensland, where Crown Rot disease in wheat 
and barley was caused by Fusarium pseudograminearum. However, the distribution and incidence of Crown 
Rot changed with the introduction of new wheat and barley varieties – the disease has now become 
prevalent in southern and Western Australia in association with the rapid expansion into these regions of 
susceptible durum wheat varieties (Backhouse, 2004). While heavy fungal infestations cause visible damage 
to the crop above the ground, light infestations may have little visible impact above ground, but yield can 
still be aﬀected. 
Cereal cyst nematodes, also called eel worms, are parasitic nematodes that attack and multiply on the roots 
of susceptible cereals such as wheat, barley and oats. They cause major crop losses - in Western Australia, 
root lesion nematodes (RLN) cause yield reductions of at least 5 per cent per annum with peak losses of 
up to 20 per cent in some areas (Vanstone, 2007). Two species of RLN are commonly found in southern 
Australian soils and these have increased in recent years due to changes in crop rotations that favour them. 
It is not so much a question of whether RLN is present, but how many nematodes are present in the soil.
Traditionally, farmers try to manage fungal and nematode infestations in crops through crop rotation. 
As most commercially damaging pathogens are species-speciﬁc, crop rotation removes the host plant, 
resulting in the pathogen population in the soil decreasing signiﬁcantly. The host species can be 
reintroduced some time later, (usually one or more years later) and as the pathogen takes time to build up 
to its former numbers in the soil, the crop can be grown successfully in this soil until this occurs. 
While cereal crop rotation does help to reduce the impact of cereal diseases, diﬀerent diseases may 
also aﬄict the rotation crops themselves. A common rotation crop for cereals in South Australia is peas, 
a legume which returns nitrogen to the soil. However, peas are susceptible to another fungal disease, 
Blackspot. Blackspot is caused by a group of closely related fungal pathogens. The fungus survives in soil, 
infecting crop residues and seed for several years. Spores are spread within the soil, by rain splash and by 
wind from adjacent paddocks (GRDC, 2005b).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
18
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Box 2-3: Case Study 3 - Identifying soil-borne pathogens (continued)
Bayer CropScience has licensed from the CSIRO and the South Australian R&D Institute (SARDI) a diagnostic 
product (Predicta B) which tests soil samples for DNA speciﬁc to each of the main cereal pathogens as 
well as pea Blackspot. The test uses a standard method to amplify small amounts of DNA until there is 
enough of the DNA to be tested for the species to which is belongs. Predicta B is oﬀered to farmers by local 
agronomists, who have been trained to interpret the results of testing. Soils samples are mailed to SARDI’s 
laboratory in Adelaide, where each pathogen is identiﬁed and its prevalence in the sample is measured 
– fungal DNA is measured in picograms per gram of soil, and nematodes are measured as whole organisms 
per gram of soil. Diﬀerent amounts of DNA represent low, medium or high levels of infection and can be 
correlated with likely impact on yield. Thresholds have been set, below which the organism is undetectable 
and the soil sample can be declared relatively free of that particular disease.
The use of Predicta B means that farmers and their advisers can sample a crop grown across a wide area, 
send in samples, and receive information on the potential impact (low, medium or high risk) of a particular 
pathogen on crop yield. To provide more extensive coverage, Bayer CropScience is now developing a test 
for Bipolaris spp. another cereal fungal pathogen. 
It takes only 8 – 10 days from taking the soil sample to receiving the report back by mail, so farmers can 
use the test to make decisions on what crops to plant in what paddocks year by year. By way of example, 
agronomists in South Australia have used Predicta B on land that had been planted with durum wheat, 
bread wheat and malting barley in a three year cycle and had suﬀered unexplained yield declines of 30 
per cent to 40 per cent. The testing found heavy infestations of cereal cyst nematode and as a result crop 
rotations were changed. These farms now grow a nematode-resistant variety of barley and, as a result of the 
information provided by the biotechnology tests, may be able to plant higher value crops in more rotations 
and plant lower-valued pulse crops less frequently between cereal crop rotations. 
The cost of the test to the farmer is about $250 per sample submitted, with the resulting reports covering 
the following nine major pathogens: cereal cyst nematode, Take-all, Rhizoctonia, Pratylenchus neglectus, 
Pratylenchus thornei, Blackspot, Take-all Oat Race, Crown Rot Fusarium pseudograminearum and Crown Rot 
Fusarium culmorum). The reports identify the pathogens and also provide a risk analyses which diﬀerentiates 
between high priority issues (for example potential yield loss in per cent from diﬀerent pathogens if a cereal 
crop is planted in the paddock from which the sample was taken); and low priority issues (for example, 
where risk of yield loss in cereals is minimal).
It is expected that, over time, farmers will use the test to establish a benchmark and to identify those 
paddocks that have higher risks from season to season. This may eventually lead to changes in cropping on 
a farm basis and more proﬁtable returns per hectare as the farmer could choose to plant something else in 
the paddocks classed as high risk in any one year. 
Bayer CropScience is now conducting further research with SARDI on the use of Geographic Information 
Systems and satellite data to provide more objective measures of crop damage by soil-borne pathogens. 
This will provide a farm-wide measure of visible damage caused by soil-borne fungal and nematode 
attack. Bayer CropScience can use the data being gathered on incidence and prevalence from its existing 
customers to help develop a deeper understanding of longer term trends within regions and within crops 
as part of this product development.
Prior to development of similar tests for other crops, R&D needs to be completed to develop appropriate 
genome markers for each pathogen, and to validate density of infection in the ﬁeld against laboratory 
measures. Recently Meat and Livestock Australia funded further development for pasture applications. 
Research into the detection of soil-borne pathogens such as Black Dot and Later Blight in potatoes is also 
underway (co-funded by Bayer CropScience, HAL and SARDI).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
19
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Biotechnology-based diagnosis can provide a measure of insurance for agriculture and can supplement 
quarantine procedures. One example of this is the biotechnology disease work undertaken for the Australian 
banana industry. Bananas are susceptible to a number of diseases including Fusarium wilt, Black Sigatoka 
and Banana Bunchy Top Virus. Since the 1980s, the Australian banana industry has beneﬁted from a range of 
biotechnology tools including the use of plant tissue culture and a wide range of viral diagnostic tools that allow 
the industry to maintain virus-free planting material. Through the use of new resistant varieties (developed with 
the aid of DNA and RNA technologies) and excellent diagnostic tests (Hamill, 2005), Australia has been able to 
eradicate Black Sigatoka disease from the industry. Therefore there is now no need to apply a weekly fungicide 
application to control this pathogen, an additional cost faced by banana industries in other countries. 
Livestock Breeding
Major industry research groups including Meat and Livestock Australia (MLA) and Australian Wool Innovations 
Ltd (AWI) are currently utilising and developing DNA markers. For example research is being conducted to 
identify markers that will enable wool growers to breed sheep with better growth and carcass traits, and is 
also being used in dairy cattle breeding and aquaculture programs (Australian Wool Innovations Ltd, 2007). In 
general, work in animal breeding is concentrating on traits that:
• 
are diﬃcult to measure in other ways (e.g. parasite resistance);
• 
are expensive to measure (e.g. staple strength);
• 
are usually measured post-slaughter (e.g. meat quality); and
• 
may be usually measured later in life (e.g. sire quality or dam fertility). 
One of the issues still to be addressed is how to deliver this new information in a cost-eﬀective way to growers. 
For example, AWI is developing a set of standards that must be achieved before pedigree information can be 
included in the Sheep Genetics Australia database. Other markers need to be validated in commercial ﬂocks 
before they can be released commercially. 
Aquaculture, like the livestock sector, is also beneﬁting from biotechnology. The application of biotechnology 
techniques to determine distinct genetic populations and monitor growth studies have facilitated the 
development of a selective breeding program for improved growth which has assisted in the development 
of yabby aquaculture in Australia. The program is based on knowledge of the yabby gained through DNA 
sequencing of selected genetic regions (de Nys, 2005). 
The Innovative Dairy CRC fused genetics and breeding with information, communications (through bioinformatics) 
and assisted reproductive technologies to develop new generation breeding techniques. The CRC used bovine 
marker-assisted selection to improve production eﬃciency by; increasing milk protein levels, increasing milk 
output, enhancing fertility, maintaining udder health and lengthening the time of lactation (Donnelly, 2006).
The work in lactation, for example, compares bovine biology with a range of species that have extreme 
lactation characteristics (e.g. goats, mice, seals and wallabies). The CRC used gene expression arrays, gene 
sequencing, gene function tests, bioinformatics databases and other techniques to develop a combined quality 
trait genetic map for dairy cattle which is available through the University of Sydney. The CRC has also worked 
to develop markers for a range of inherited characteristics including resistance to mastitis and it has created a 
database of 24 million gene markers based on 1500 bulls and 15000 markers of small genetic changes (some 
provisional patents relating to this have been ﬁled). Markers for milk protein levels are correlated with higher 
average breeding values, meaning that dairy producers can use these to select higher value animals.
Disease management is another issue being targeted through the use of DNA technologies. There are several 
hundred disorders in cattle and the genetic causes of around 10 per cent of these have now been identiﬁed 
(Tammen, 2006). DNA-based markers are being developed to test for and identify individual animals which

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
2 0
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
have inherited particular cattle diseases, or a genetic tendency towards diseases (e.g. mastitis and milk fever 
in dairy cows). 
Overall, DNA testing is being used to identify desirable traits in cattle, including quality traits such as high 
volume milk production, high fat milk production, high fertility and disease resistance (CRC for Innovative Dairy 
Products, 2006). This testing is completed using hair samples and the improved productivity gains are expected 
to add around $20 million in value to the industry every year. It has been predicted that these technologies may 
be available to farmers as early as 2008.
2.2.2 Processing
There are currently few applications of DNA technologies in other supply chain positions. In plants, the limited 
current applications identiﬁed in processing relate to the use of MAS to identify the diﬀerent genes involved 
in control of amylose content of grains. The focus on amylose is related not only to processing characteristics 
but to health applications of the grain, as high amylose varieties resist digestion and are therefore suitable for 
low glycaemic index foods (CSIRO, 2006). Research projects have been conducted in this area by the CSIRO, the 
CRC for Sustainable Rice Production and the Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation (RIRDC). 
Although the CRC for Rice ceased operations in 2006, RIRDC continues to support projects to identify markers 
for determining variations in genes for fragrance, gelatinisation temperature and disease resistance in rice 
(Henry and Walters, 2006). 
With regard to the potential applications of high amylose wheat, including nutraceuticals, the GRDC is now a 
partner in a high amylose wheat joint venture with the French company Groupe Limagrain and the CSIRO. The 
current project on high amylose wheat, funded by the GRDC, is being co-ordinated through the Value Added 
Wheat CRC and uses the Triticarte technology (see Box 2-2) for DNA proﬁling (Value added Wheat CRC Ltd, 2005).
In animals, Genetic Solutions Pty Ltd sells MAS tests for meat marbling (distribution of fat through the carcass) 
and tenderness (GeneSTAR Marbling4 and GeneSTAR Tenderness4). As with the other GeneSTAR test, these are 
a valuable genetic selection tool for cattle breeders. However, they also provide the ability to draft or sort cattle 
at the feedlot or abattoir on marbling and tenderness potential. Cattle selected for particular properties could 
be managed diﬀerently, for example, cattle with greater marbling potential would be suited to a longer feeding 
program for export sale than those with less potential (www.geneticsolutions.com.au).
2.2.3 Logistics
There are three main applications of DNA technologies in the logistics supply chain position. 
The ﬁrst is in identity tracking (“paddock to plate”) of animals which is becoming increasingly important 
worldwide due to food safety considerations, environmental and animal welfare issues. The SureTRAK® identity 
system developed by Genetic Solutions Pty Ltd is a DNA veriﬁcation traceability system which links the end 
product to the carcass, the supplier and sometimes the live animal. It is used to prevent product substitution, 
to protect branded products and to track food sources for safety reasons. The SureTRAK test uses a paper-thin, 
ﬁngernail-sized carcass sample taken at slaughter or grading which is stored for future use if required.
A variation on the system applies to live animals, where hair samples can be taken on-farm and stored to enable 
livestock to be traced back to their herd of origin. The same company, working with Allﬂex, has also created an 
animal-based DNA tag which can be combined with the electronic National Livestock Identiﬁcation System 
(NLIS) tag, and a visual management tag. 
Identity tracking in plants uses protein technologies rather than DNA technologies and is covered in Chapter 3.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
21
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
The second application of DNA technologies in logistics is in biosecurity. DNA tests are widely used to identify 
plant and animal varieties and can be used to track movement of pathogens within and between countries. These 
tests also serve the purpose of identifying diseases and were covered in more detail in Section 2.2.1 and Box 2-2. 
The third application is in feed eﬃciency. The Australian Company Genetic Solutions Pty Ltd supplies a ‘feed 
eﬃciency test’ (GeneSTAR Feed Eﬃciency4). The test screens livestock for four separate DNA markers that aﬀect 
feed eﬃciency. The four DNA markers are independent and additive, meaning that the result for each marker 
has an individual value and the total potential eﬀect of the markers is gained by adding the four individual 
results. The greater the score, the less an animal will eat to gain the same amount of weight as its peers. Test 
results can be utilised at the feedlot level to sort cattle into groups for diﬀerent feeding programs.
2.2.4 Waste management
There were few applications found of DNA techniques in agricultural waste management and none in 
commercial use. It is possible to create DNA proﬁles and libraries for a range of organisms including those that 
are active in waste decomposition. This is the focus of research being undertaken at both the Environmental 
Biotechnology Co-operative Research Centre (EBCRC) and Flinders University. Flinders University created a spin-
oﬀ company, Flinders Bioremediation Pty Ltd, which oﬀers commercial bioremediation services. The company 
and the CRC use DNA technologies to identify microbes in the environment, with the aim of understanding 
their growth and interaction during remediation.
2.3 
Australia’s use of DNA technologies  
compared to use in overseas countries
Australia’s focus to date in DNA and RNA technologies appears to have been on breeding and disease 
management in major plant crops (cereals) and major livestock (cattle). This section discusses the use of DNA 
technologies by competitor countries focussing ﬁrst on plants, then animals.
At the sectoral level, the other countries examined also focus on crops that are important to their economy. For 
example, Brazil has invested heavily in sugar genomics. The Brazilian government’s project is called SUCEST – the 
Sugar Cane Expressed Sequence Tag Genome Project (Vettore, da Silva, Kemper and Arruda, 2001). The project 
commenced in 1998 and involved more than 200 scientists from 22 R&D organisations. The project also involved 
development of state-of-the-art data-mining tools and resulted in the full sequencing of the sugar cane genome. 
This was then used as the basis for an alliance with Belgian company Crop Design NV in 2001. The knowledge 
gained from the project has helped to develop the country’s bio-ethanol industry which, as of 2005, drew raw 
materials from 330 sugar mills. Growers of sugar cane are now paid on an end-use formula according to whether 
their sugar cane is to be used as ethanol feedstock or for food (Martines-Filho, Burnquist and Via, 2006). 
China is also investing large amounts of money and resources in particular sectors. According to workshop 
participants, it is heavily involved in the International Cotton Genome Initiative, whose members also include 
Brazil, India and the United States and has over 400 active members across more than 30 countries on four 
continents (but not Australia). Workshop participants also reported that China has also been developing 
techniques to use microsatellite loci from DNA to identify the impact of sea aquaculture cages on the local 
environment. Waste from ﬁsh held in aquaculture cages concentrates on the sea ﬂoor immediately under the 
cage and induces signiﬁcant changes in fauna and ﬂora naturally found on the sea ﬂoor. 
The International Eucalyptus Genome Consortium was an Australian initiative founded in 2004 to obtain 
funding to sequence the Eucalyptus globulus genome. Although the funding bid was unsuccessful, the Oji 
Paper and the Kazusa DNA Research Institute of Japan commenced a project to sequence E. camaldulensis.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
2 2
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Funding was subsequently obtained from the US Department of Energy for sequencing E. grandis, with the 
aim of identifying markers that relate to pulp yield. The project is supported by 15 countries including Australia 
(Ingram, 2004).
In relation to livestock, other countries appear, in the main, to have a similar focus on gains through breeding 
programs. Table 2-2 presents examples of the use of these technologies in the United States. The table shows 
that tests to support breeding and growing predominate, with a more limited range of tests available for 
processing and a few tests available in logistics. The situation is similar in Australia.
Table 2-2: DNA-based tests for cattle in the United States
Company
Breeding and growing
Processing
Logistics
Biogenetic 
Services
Parentage, coat colour, leptin 
hormone levels*, freemartin**
Meat quality
Bovigen 
Solutions
Parentage
GeneSTAR marbling***, 
GeneSTAR tenderness***
Genaissance 
Pharmaceuticals
Parentage, coat colour
Tenderness
Identity tracking
Genmark
Parentage, coat colour, BLAD, 
citrullinemia, MSUD
Kappa-Casein,  
beta lactoglobulin, 
alphaS1 casein
GeneSeek
Parentage, coat colour
Genetic Visions
Coat colour, BLAD,> citrullinemia, 
DUMPS,> CVM>
Kappa casein, beta 
lactoglobulin
Igenity
Parentage, double black 
coat colour
Leptin, TenderGENE 
Immgen
Parentage, CVM,> BLAD,> 
DUMPS,> Pompe’s disease
Kappa casein, 
beta lactoglobulin
ReproTec
Cattle fertility associated antigen
Maxxam
Parentage
MMI Genomics 
(MMIG)
Parentage, MMIG double black 
coat colour, polled/horned
Veterinary 
Genetics 
Laboratory
Parentage, freemartin
Viagen
Breed identiﬁcation
Animal identiﬁcation 
(tracking)
Source: http://animalscience.ucdavis.edu/animalbiotech/Biotechnology/MAS/index.htm  
* leptin is a hormone that regulates feeding;  
** a freemartin is a female cow that behaves like a male;  
*** these are produced by Genetic Solutions Pty Ltd in Australia 
> DUMPS = Deﬁciency of Uridine Monophosphate Synthase;  
BLAD = Bovine Leukocyte Adhesion Deﬁciency;  
CVM = Complex Vertebral Malformation

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
2 3
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Despite these sectoral focuses there was general agreement amongst workshop participants that all Australia’s 
major competitors (the United States, European Union and Canada) were ahead of Australia in DNA and RNA 
technologies. In addition, participants considered that countries which have been considered behind us in 
the past are catching up fast - Brazil was thought to be at about the same level as Australia and China and 
Argentina were thought to be slightly behind Australia overall. The increased adoption of these technologies 
in developing countries has been supported by a number of aid programs and is now extending to Africa 
(Reifschneider, 2006).
Participants at the workshops also discussed emerging competition from China and India, indicating that in the 
past these countries have been hampered by poor quality cold chain management and high levels of pesticide 
residues so their products have not been competitive with those from Australia. China and India are now both 
investing in cold chain infrastructure and have resolved many spoilage issues. As a result, they are now able 
to compete with Australia on quality. Some workshop participants suggested that the only way that Australia 
will be able to compete eﬀectively with these countries will be through widespread use of biotechnology and 
marker-assisted selection to develop improved varieties for which consumers are willing to pay a premium, or 
to develop products to which we can value-add (such as functional foods) or which can be utilised in other 
markets (such as biofuels). 
2.4 
Further potential applications of DNA  
technologies in the Australian supply chain
The use of DNA technologies is currently focussed on breeding as well as identiﬁcation and management of 
disease. Few applications were recorded in processing, logistics and waste management. Further applications in 
each of these areas are discussed in turn.
2.4.1 Growing and husbandry
Development of markers necessary for crop improvement is expensive, because usually the whole genome of 
a species needs to be mapped before markers can be identiﬁed. In Australia, the cost of genome mapping has 
meant that these techniques were ﬁrst used in the more signiﬁcant agricultural sectors such as grains crops 
and dairy and beef breed cattle. Crops that are less signiﬁcant in agricultural terms have had less research eﬀort 
spent on such developments. In some cases, including cotton, it appears that markers are being imported from 
overseas rather than developed in Australia. This is likely to have a positive economic impact for those markers 
which relate to characteristics important in diﬀerent countries and common in diﬀerent varieties. However, 
reliance on these common characteristics may not meet Australia’s needs for characteristics unique to Australia 
such as high levels of soil boron, drought and salt tolerance.
DArT Pty Ltd (see Box 2-2) has developed a novel genotyping method that provides low cost, high throughput 
genotyping. This technology is already being used for the genome analysis of approximately 20 crops 
an international consortium from North America and Europe); sugarcane (supported by local industry and 
the International Consortium for Sugarcane Biotechnology); sorghum (for private Australian clients) and hops 
(with an international consortium and HAL). This technology could also be used to identify cultivars of other 
internationally important crops which may be suited to Australia’s climate, for example peanuts, pigeon peas or 
other legumes.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
2 4
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
Diagnosis and Management of Disease
Research is being conducted into how RNA may be used to induce disease resistance in plants, and how to 
use RNA technologies to develop methods of inducing resistance of plants to diseases. CSIRO has developed 
a method of using specialised RNA to “vaccinate” plants against viruses before they attack (CSIRO, 2001). RNA 
which matches that produced by a virus is introduced to the plant and is destroyed by the plant’s defence 
mechanisms. This primes the plant to attack the RNA produced by the virus when it is infected at a later date 
(discussed further in Chapter 4) as it involves cell culture. 
2.4.2 Processing 
It is likely that there will be other applications of DNA technologies in breeding programs associated with the 
development of the ﬁbre and oil processing industries. In particular there are potential applications in the 
identiﬁcation of genes in ﬁbre crops (such as cotton) that inﬂuence ﬁbre traits such as strength (Australian 
Cotton Shippers Association, 2003). Also, RIRDC has funded development of DNA libraries for tea tree, with the 
intention of using them to identify oil processing characteristics (RIRDC, 2001). 
2.4.3 Logistics
The applications of DNA technologies in logistics are just emerging and are based around tracking of individual 
animals and crop varieties along the supply chain. Traceability is important for a number of reasons, including:
• 
international customers (e.g. the European Union) want to be able to ensure that agricultural products have 
been raised or produced in accordance with their requirements and regulations (e.g. avoiding antibiotics in 
livestock production, livestock welfare issues); and
• 
the capacity to trace and recall batches is required if the food supply chain is compromised.
The red meat industry has implemented a National Livestock Identiﬁcation System (NLIS) for the identiﬁcation 
and tracking of livestock. NLIS is a permanent, lifetime system that enables individual animals to be tracked. NLIS 
uses either radio frequency tags or DNA technologies to track individuals. There are likely to be applications 
for these technologies in other domestic animal species beyond cattle. The Pig Traceability Project is currently 
auditing the eﬃcacy of traceability in the pork industry (Australian Pork, 2006). 
The main focus of plant traceability systems is on identiﬁcation of plant varieties for the purpose of paying end 
point royalties – these mainly use protein technologies and are discussed in Chapter 3. In the United States the 
Homeland Securities Presidential Directive 9 of 30 January 2004 highlights the need to develop “systems that, 
as appropriate, track speciﬁc animals and plants, as well as speciﬁc commodities and food” in order to protect 
agricultural and food systems against terrorist attacks, major disasters and other emergencies (Bush, 2004). 
Traceability systems for agricultural and food products may be required in the future and biotechnology may 
have a role in this. 
2.4.4 Waste management
In the longer term these technologies will have application in waste management, particularly in intensive 
agriculture, where waste products are highly concentrated and can have signiﬁcant environmental eﬀects. For 
example, EBCRC and the SARDI are working together on a $1.2 million project researching the use of integrated 
biosystems for organic waste and waste water treatment in livestock and food processing (SARDI, 2006).
SARDI is also developing novel methods for cost-eﬀective assessment of the environmental impact of cage 
aquaculture, under a research project funded by the Aquaﬁn CRC and the Fisheries R&D Corporation

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
2 5
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
(www.sardi.sa.gov.au). The project is developing a system based on DNA techniques to rapidly identify the 
organisms in sediment samples under sea cages. The aim is to be able to characterise the impact of waste on 
sea ﬂoor ﬂora and fauna as part of environmental management strategies. The technique, when developed, will 
replace current laborious laboratory identiﬁcation methods.
2.5 
Conclusions
In Australia, DNA technologies are mainly being used in the development of new plant varieties (particularly 
the grains industry) and breeding of livestock (particularly cattle). As these are Australia’s largest agricultural 
sectors greater funding opportunities are available for research and development of the genetic markers which 
until recently have been required before these technologies can be transferred to commercial use. As more 
genomes of important agricultural species are sequenced it will be possible to build DNA marker libraries that 
can be used in other species. Other technologies are also emerging that will not require prior development of a 
genome sequence. Such technologies will reduce costs and may be viable tools in smaller sectors.
The beneﬁts and costs of developing markers for breeding and disease management need to be carefully 
evaluated. Some R&D corporations have considered and rejected molecular marker programs when these 
initiatives are competing with other promising projects for scarce funding. However, other R&D Corporations 
and Co-operative Research Centres have strongly supported marker-assisted selection and have used this 
technology in plant and animal varieties to identify:
• 
genetic traits for disease resistance; 
• 
genetic markers associated with drought tolerance; and 
• 
genes which confer resistance to pests and diseases.
Cost and the need for highly skilled technical expertise has been a major barrier to the use of this technology. 
However, recent innovations have seen the cost fall dramatically and there have been signiﬁcant commercial 
outcomes in major agricultural sectors. 
There are also beneﬁts apparent in terms of quality and returns to growers:
We are starting to see DNA-based diagnostics for productivity and product quality traits.  
In cattle, as an example, the two major price determinants for a piece of meat are tenderness and 
intramuscular fat distribution (marbling). Increasingly we have genetic tests for those in beef cattle,  
and they have been commercialised successfully (Willadsen, 2005).
At present, the use of DNA markers for breeding is limited to traits that have a large eﬀect and which are 
inherited in a simple way (Holland, 2004). Many inherited traits are controlled by a number of genes and use 
of DNA markers in this instance is complex and is unlikely to inﬂuence productivity or yield. Development 
of markers may not be technically viable for these characteristics, or may be too expensive for the beneﬁt 
obtained. Further research is needed to develop techniques to extend DNA and RNA technologies to more 
complex situations in genetic analysis (Willadsen, 2005). 
While Australia is working strongly in this area, and has been a leader in development of DNA technologies 
in some agricultural sectors, many of Australia’s competitors are catching up. This may aﬀect Australia’s 
ability to maintain the productivity gains that have beneﬁted its producers in the past. Many commentators 
believe Australia has already gained all we can in yield improvements using current methods (Higgins, 2007). 
Competitors are also sequencing genomes of species of interest to Australia and have a similar capacity to use 
these technologies to improve productivity through selective breeding. Hence, Australia cannot aﬀord to stop

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
2 6
D N A / R N A t e c h n o l o g i e s
work in these areas. According to workshop participants, the emphasis should be on the development or use of 
technologies that remove the need to undertake a full genome analysis ﬁrst. The use of such technology would 
provide productivity gains at the research stage. 
There is clearly the potential for applying DNA and RNA technologies in processing, logistics and waste 
management. It is expected that demand will come ﬁrst in the logistics of animal tracking and identiﬁcation, 
because of the introduction of the National Livestock Identiﬁcation System. However, demand is also growing 
for reliable trace-back systems, and with emerging emphasis on resource use there will also be growing 
demand for these technologies in environmental management.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
27
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
3 
Prote ins and ot he r mole cule s
3.1 
What are Proteins and other molecules?
The genes in an organism provide instructions to the cell for the manufacture of proteins. Proteins are used by 
cells in a number of ways: they may inﬂuence the rates of chemical reactions (enzymes), be used for structural 
purposes or be used for defence (immune system). Proteins can be used as drugs, but may be susceptible to 
digestion if taken by mouth. Research into proteins therefore often includes new methods of drug delivery 
across the skin or mucous membranes, as well as ways to isolate and purify proteins or part of proteins 
(peptides) from complex mixes.
The identiﬁcation and measurement of proteins in an organism is called proteomics. An important aspect of 
proteomics is; understanding how proteins interact and their function in gene regulation. There are many more 
proteins than there are genes as the product of a gene is a long chain of peptides that may be cut at diﬀerent 
points to make diﬀerent proteins. Hence, the 30,000 genes in humans can code for more than 100,000 proteins 
(Australian Academy of Science, 2007).
A better understanding of the interactions between proteins and the genes that produce them can help 
researchers to understand the link between genes and metabolism, feed conversion and an organism’s 
response to disease and infection. Much of the early work in proteomics has been conducted on ‘model’ 
organisms such as Arabidopsis spp (plants), rice (cereals) and mice (animals). The genomes of these model 
organisms are well-characterised and serve as reference species for most plants and animals (APAF, 2006).
Proteomics is complementary to DNA and RNA technologies and both technologies may be used for similar 
purposes. Thus, there is overlap in the application of proteomics and DNA technologies in areas such as 
breeding, and disease, variety and breed identiﬁcation (see section 3.2). 
3.2 
Where are protein technologies used
In Australia, protein proﬁling is used in several areas in the agriculture supply chain. The main applications are 
in growing and husbandry (pathogen identiﬁcation) and in logistics (purity or variety testing). As noted in the 
previous chapter, DNA and RNA technologies can also be used for these applications. Currently there is limited 
use of protein technologies in processing or in waste management.
The applications of protein technologies in each of the main areas along the supply chain are discussed in 
turn in the following sections. Comparisons between traditional approaches to applications are provided 
where relevant. 
3.2.1 Plant growing and animal husbandry
Protein analysis can help researchers identify and quantify disease organisms and to understand the responses 
of diﬀerent livestock species to bacteria and viral infections. This has implications for livestock and crop 
management as well as quarantine and biosecurity. 
The most common approach is the use of Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISA) tests. ELISA tests 
determine the presence of a protein in a sample through use of a speciﬁc antibody linked to an enzyme. 
A colour change (or ﬂuorescence) is induced when the antibody binds to the antigen. ELISA tests may be 
very sensitive, can be quantiﬁed and may measure the presence of as little as a nanogram of a protein.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
2 8
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
ELISA tests were used to conﬁrm the incidence in Australia of the wheat streak mosaic virus (Ellis et al., 2003). In 
2002, CSIRO’s Division of Plant Industry observed streaking on plants growing in their glass houses in Canberra. 
CSIRO used DNA technologies to identify the virus and then conﬁrmed this with an ELISA speciﬁc for the virus. 
ELISA tests can be conducted much faster than traditional methods such as faecal culture. For example, ELISA 
tests for Bovine Johne’s disease (Table 3-1) take 1 – 2 days. In contrast, it can take 21 weeks to conﬁrm a negative 
result from a faecal culture test in solid medium and 9 weeks from a bacterial culture test in liquid medium. 
Further, any species testing positive from bacterial liquid culture must be identiﬁed using a polymerase chain 
reaction (Eamens, 2007). Table 3-1 shows that ELISA tests are less sensitive than the culture tests, however the 
real value of the ELISA test is the ability to test large numbers of animals inexpensively and quickly, so diseased 
animals can be removed from the herd, thus limiting spread of disease. Calculations by the NSW Department of 
Primary Industries have shown that the traditional approach costs up to $21 per sample, whereas the ELISA test 
costs approximately $8.
Table 3-1: Summary of approaches to test for Bovine Johne’s Disease
Test
Lab cost
Time
False 
positives
Clinical 
sensitivity
Subclinical 
sensitivity
Faecal culture 
solid medium
$19-$22
21 weeks
0%
90%-100%
30%-50%
Bacterial culture 
liquid medium
$39 (+$82 for 
PCR if required)
9 weeks
0%
90%-100%
30%-50%
ELISA blood test
$6-$9
1-2 days
1%
90%
25%-30%
Source: Eamens, 2007. “Subclinical” refers to animals that are infected but show no outward signs of illness.  
Animals with clinical signs of BJD may shed 100 million bacteria per gram of dung.
A similar example is the testing of livestock for internal parasites such as liver ﬂuke. Faecal tests, based on a 
sample of between ﬁve and 10 animals, cost from $30 - $70 per sample, and can show the level of infestation as 
well as presence or absence of infection (Love, 2006). As the samples are pooled, the results apply to the herd 
as a whole and does not identify infected individuals. An ELISA test speciﬁc for liver ﬂuke is available at a cost 
of $19 per animal. The test uses an individual blood sample and can detect infected animals before they shed 
eggs in their faeces – this means that infected individuals can be identiﬁed much more quickly and separated 
from others in the herd.
There is also substantial research into proteins being undertaken to understand host-pathogen interactions 
in both plants and livestock. For example, a research group led by the University of Melbourne and CSIRO 
Livestock Industries is using proteomics to detect Johne’s Disease (JD), an intestinal disease aﬀecting cattle, 
sheep and other ruminants, and to understand how bacterial strains cause disease. The project aims to better 
understand virulent strains of bacteria and to identify useful protein markers able to indicate the presence or 
absence of JD infection. JD infection is diﬃcult to detect and the research is expected to lead to new methods 
of JD detection in infected animals (Dairy Food Safety Victoria, 2006). 
CSIRO by building a database of proteins in blood and tissue from healthy and poisoned animals is also 
using proteomics to examine plant toxins that cause staggers and annual ryegrass toxicity in grazing animals 
(Davidson, 2003). The Dairy CRC also commenced projects on proteomics in dairy cattle as part of a larger 
program to understand the genetics and control of lactation (CRC for Innovative Dairy Products, 2006b).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
2 9
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
3.2.2 Processing
Protein technologies are also used in processing where enzymes are often used to control or inﬂuence chemical 
reactions.
In wine making, a range of enzymes is used to improve processing, to promote clarity, to enhance extraction 
of colour from grapes, to assist ﬁltration and to reduce the activity of bacteria. The Australian Wine Research 
Institute, for example, has examined the addition of enzymes in conjunction with varying levels of the 
preservative sulphur dioxide, in order to reduce hazing of the ﬁnished wine (Pocock , et al 2003). 
Proteomics can also be used to identify the particular proteins which contribute to beneﬁcial processing 
characteristics of grains and other crops. Research led by the Australian Proteomics Analysis Facility and 
published in 2005 compared the proteins in two biscuit-making wheats with diﬀerent processing qualities 
(Skylas, et al., 2005). The analysis measured total wholemeal proteins, extracts of starch granule proteins and 
extracts of other storage proteins. The aim was to characterise, identify and catalogue cultivar-speciﬁc proteins 
that could be used for segregation. The research identiﬁed 23 proteins that could be used to distinguish 
between closely related cultivars and could explain the diﬀerences in their processing characteristics.
One commercial use of protein technologies in Australian processing is BioClip®, a natural wool harvesting 
system. Developed by CSIRO in research that spanned from the 1950s to the late 1990s, BioClip® was launched 
nationally in 2005 after several years of trials. A speciﬁc protein enzyme is injected into sheep when their ﬂeece 
has grown. The protein disrupts the structure in the wool so that it breaks and can be peeled oﬀ without 
needing shearing (see Figure 3-1). A specially-designed net is placed over the sheep after the injection of the 
enzyme. Several days later the wool is removed by simply pulling it oﬀ, leaving the sheep with a short, even 
coat. Wool harvesting using the system (Shepherd, 2003):
• 
provides a longer and more consistent staple length, up to 10-15 mm extra;
• 
is easier and safer on operators;
• 
avoids skin damage to the sheep – hence no skin pieces in the wool tops;
• 
reduces stress on the sheep; and 
• 
enables producers to harvest the wool 5-7 weeks earlier in spring than usual, and hence oﬀers better control 
of grass seed and ﬂy strike. Grass seeds can contaminate the clip and reduce its value and ﬂy strike can be a 
serious threat to animal welfare.
Uptake of the technology has been slow due to its relative expense (an extra $2 to $3 per head). In 2006 
BioClip® was used to harvest wool from about half a million sheep (FarmOnLine, 2007). The ﬁrst designated 
BioClip® wool sale was held in Melbourne on 8 March 2007 (Ballan News, 2007). FarmOnLine quoted potential 
Taiwanese buyers as saying that BioClip® produced high yields and fewer short or defective wool ﬁbres, 
meaning more proﬁt for the manufacturers.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
3 0
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
Figure 3-1: Protein-based technology and traditional approaches to sheep shearing 
Sheep with ﬂeece  
4 weeks prior to shearing
Sheep herded into pens
Injected with protein,  
ﬂeece net ﬁtted
Release to paddock
Sheep herded into pens
Wool removed and stored  
in net for immediate  
or later processing
Natural wool harvesting
Sheep herded into pens
Shearing
Release sheep to paddock
Shearing
Sheep with ﬂeece  
ready for shearing 
Release sheep  
to paddock

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
31
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
3.2.3 Logistics
Protein technologies applications in plants
Approximately 50 countries (including Australia) protect plant breeders’ rights, which are an exclusive 
commercial right to a registered variety. In Australia, owners of plant varieties have the right to produce or 
reproduce the material; condition the material for the purpose of propagation (conditioning includes cleaning, 
coating, sorting, packaging and grading); oﬀer the material for sale; sell the material; import or export the 
material; and stock the material for any of these purposes (IP Australia, 2006). 
In order to be protected, a variety must be new, measurably distinct from other varieties and must breed stably 
from generation to generation. The basis of distinctness is “an objective comparison of the variety with the 
most similar variety (ies) of common knowledge” (IP Australia, 2006). Quantitative and qualitative diﬀerences 
between the new and existing varieties must be established and recorded. 
The limitations of this approach are that it is based on visible and/or measurable physical characteristics. 
As some valuable varieties may be based on their processing characteristics there are limitations in the 
registration system. The advent of protein proﬁling and proteomics has enabled some of these limitations to be 
overcome and plant breeders’ rights systems now allow information on comparative DNA or protein proﬁles to 
be submitted as evidence of varietal characteristics (IP Australia, 2006). 
The ability to distinguish one variety from another is important for reasons other than being able to claim 
ownership. Diﬀerent plant varieties or their crops have diﬀerent commercial value and the ability to identify one 
variety from another means that a grower who produces a higher value seed crop can obtain higher payments 
for that seed. As many seeds look the same, it is easy to confuse the seeds of one variety over another and 
veriﬁcation testing is required. 
Purity testing using protein analysis has been available for some years, using electrophoresis. An electric current 
is passed through a medium containing the sample, and proteins travel through the medium at a diﬀerent rate, 
depending on its electrical charge and size. Separation is based on these diﬀerences. Electrophoresis is used 
to identify the presence or absence of particular proteins and to identify when diﬀerent groups of proteins 
have increased or decreased in a sample. However electrophoresis can only be used to certify samples to a 
20 per cent impurity level and is insuﬃcient to meet the demands of overseas customers. 
More recent protein-based technologies are used in assays to determine if protein proﬁles are characteristic of 
particular varieties and as the following case study highlights how protein technologies can be used to verify 
the quality or purity of a crop. Purity can be crucial to meet importing country requirements (see Box 3-1).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
32
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
Box 3-1: Case study 4 - Protein profiling of grains for purity testing
There are thousands of diﬀerent wheat varieties in the world and each has subtle genetic diﬀerences. 
Growers choose the speciﬁc varieties that best suit their farm conditions and market requirements. Market 
forces are increasingly demanding pure (or single) varieties of grains for speciﬁc purposes. Thus varietal 
testing has become standard practice in order to guarantee sale of grain.
Western Australia grows over 40 per cent of Australia’s wheat (www.cbh.com.au). Much of the crop is sold 
through Grain Pool Pty Ltd, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Co-operative Bulk Handling (CBH), Western 
Australia’s grain storage, handling and marketing organisation. Grain Pool sells Western Australian grain to 
a range of overseas markets, including Japanese Shochu markets (Shochu is a distilled spirit most often 
produced from barley) (Long and Washington, 2004). Varietal purity is a crucial requirement for barley 
exported to Japan for the manufacture of Shochu. 
Grain Pool operates a Quality Assurance program for barley in order to ensure grain meets the standards 
required by customers. Moisture, protein or oil content, weight, colour, adventitious presence of seed or 
foreign material, insect presence and levels of chemical residues may be measured. The requirements 
depend on the grain, the grade involved and market access conditions. 
Grain Pool uses a crop variety testing service marketed by Saturn Biotech Ltd. The crop variety and purity 
testing is based on protein proﬁling using mass spectrometry. Grain samples are analysed and the resulting 
data compared with the database to identify the grain variety and its purity. The company has protein 
proﬁles for all the main varieties of barley, wheat and oats grown in Australia and many varieties of potato, 
canola and olives. Saturn continually updates its database with introduced varieties of agricultural and 
horticultural crops because, to remain competitive, new varieties are constantly being introduced into 
commercial cultivation. Most varieties currently being grown in Australia were introduced in the last 
two years. 
The advantage of protein proﬁling for variety identiﬁcation is its speed (results available in 24 hours), 
low cost when compared to electrophoresis (about 25 per cent of the cost), and high accuracy. Protein 
proﬁling is very speciﬁc and the Saturn Biotech variety test is now the standard test country-wide. One of 
the signiﬁcant advantages of this test is that export claims of purity can now be substantiated at the 98 
per cent purity level (as required by the Shochu market) using a sample of only 150 grains. Protein proﬁling 
testing allows for routine high throughput testing to the 0.1 per cent impurity level (requires 300 grains for 
a 95 per cent conﬁdence level). The availability of this testing has enabled Australia to increase its position 
in global barley markets. 
Australia (DAFWA). DAFWA uses the technology to check the purity of seed stock for its seed certiﬁcation 
scheme. When DAFWA releases a new seed variety it requires purity certiﬁcation to the 10-5 level, meaning 
that no more than one in 10,000 seeds can be a diﬀerent variety. DAFWA also uses protein analysis to help 
farmers who may have confused their seeds in storage and therefore need varietal and purity tests to 
identify their stocks.
DAFWA reported that this proﬁling technology has the advantage of high accuracy. Protein proﬁling 
has increased the accuracy and reliability of protein analysis considerably, compared to previous  
electrophoresis methodologies.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
33
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
A further application of protein technologies in plants is the use of antibody-based tests to identify pre-harvest 
sprouting in wheat and barley. Pre-harvest sprouting occurs when there is signiﬁcant rain on ripe grain prior to 
harvest. If grain has sprouted, the price paid to the grower is usually signiﬁcantly reduced because sprouting 
lowers the market value of the grain. Grain with even mild sprouting cannot be used for bread or noodle 
manufacture. Hence, being able to identify what parts of a crop have sprouted prior to harvest means that this 
grain can be separately stored and handled, so the unaﬀected portion of the crop maintains its value. 
The CSIRO and the Value Added Wheat CRC developed the test to detect high levels of alpha amylase enzymes 
which are produced when wheat starts to sprout before harvest, because of late seasonal rain (Skerritt and 
Heywood, 2000). The test is reliable on a sample of 20 spikes from a ﬁeld of wheat and provides a colour 
indicator that is correlated with the level of alpha amylase present. The test is suited for rapid screening  
on-farm prior to harvest and for use at silos and elevators. Results are obtained in less than ﬁve minutes and 
the precision of the test is as good as, or better than, the traditional Falling Number test. The Falling Number 
test measures the time taken for a plunger to fall to the bottom of a glass tube ﬁlled with a standardised 
mixture of wheatmeal and water – the quicker the plunger falls, the more the wheat has sprouted. It must be 
conducted in a laboratory and hence is not as convenient or quick as the alpha amylase test. The new enzyme 
test has been commercialised through C-Qentec Pty Ltd and is sold as WheatRite®.
Protein technologies applications in animals
Commercial variety testing using protein technology in Australia currently appears to be concentrated on 
major commercial crops such as grains. However, applications relating to species or variety identiﬁcation are 
emerging in the ﬁsh and meat industries. For example, a survey by Food Standards Australia and New Zealand 
(FSANZ), found that approximately 14 per cent of ﬁsh sold as barramundi was actually other species, and over 
40 per cent of ﬁsh sold as Red Emperor was another species (FSANZ, 2003). Researchers at Murdoch University 
are working with WA company, Proteomics International Pty Ltd, to combine proteomics with bioinformatics to 
provide a method for on-the-spot testing of up to 450 ﬁsh species using a biometric card (Amalﬁ, 2005). This will 
help consumers ensure that when they pay a premium for particular varieties of ﬁsh that they are not receiving 
cheaper substitutes. The new system will replace current DNA-based laboratory-based techniques which take 
several days to provide a result and are more limited in their scope. The work is expected to save the industry 
tens of millions of dollars in mislabelled and substitute ﬁsh products.
3.2.4 Waste management
In waste management only one application of protein technology was identiﬁed in Australia. The research 
is investigating the understanding of the protein mix in bioﬁlms (these are ﬁlms such as those bacterial ﬁlms 
that line water pipes) and bacterial mixes. Studies of bioﬁlms, such as those underway at the University of 
NSW (www.babs.unsw.edu.au) can provide insights into signalling between bacteria and are thought to be 
important to their eﬀectiveness in bioremediation of waste including waste from agricultural operations. 
3.3 
Australia’s use of protein technologies  
compared to overseas countries
Workshop participants indicated Australia has had signiﬁcant involvement in proteomics. The government 
funded the Australian Proteomics Analysis Facility (APAF) in 1995 (O’Neill, 2004). Most of the applications 
of proteomics have been in human health e.g. the government of Canada has a major program funding 
proteomics in human health, investing CA$114 million in 14 projects (www.genome.canada.ca). On the other

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
3 4
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
hand, the use of proteomics in agriculture is in its infancy. This is because proteomics tests work best when 
the full genome sequence in known, however this information is not available for many agricultural species. 
There can also be technical diﬃculties such as the preparation of suitable protein from many plant species 
can be problematic (APAF, 2006).
Other governments are aggressively pursuing proteomics research and its resulting commercial applications. 
The increasing complexity of proteomics analysis has led to increasing automation of various analytical 
processes and development of information technologies including biochips (Siitar and Koivistoinen, 2004). 
The United States and Japan dominate this area in terms of equipment, with major corporations producing 
specialised laboratory machines for protein separation, protein identiﬁcation and high throughput screening. 
Such equipment is also needed for measuring the levels of proteins in particular cell or organ types (in animals). 
Japan’s National Institute for Agricultural Science has a major program on proteomics in rice. The program 
involves a number of other universities and research groups in Japan including the universities of Tsukuba, 
Tohoku and Niigita. CSIRO scientists have expressed concern that Japan will move ahead of Australia because 
Japan’s ﬁve-year US$88 million proteomics initiative (Davidson, 2003).
Canada established the Alberta Network for Proteomics Innovation in 2002, which includes the universities 
of Alberta, Calgary and Lethbridge. Funding was provided through a three year, CA$6.21 million grant by 
Western Economic Diversiﬁcation Canada and CA$10 million in funding from the Alberta Science and Research 
Authority. The Network provides funding and access arrangements for advanced proteomics research 
infrastructure in Canada. This initiative has enabled advances in a number of crop research programs which 
includes crops grown commercially in Australia. For example, Canadian work to diversify its pulse industry 
through adaptation of European varieties to produce food grade lupins may compete with Australia’s export 
success in food grade lupins (Blade, 2004). 
project which aims to, in part, enhance understanding of fertility, disease and metabolism in these species for 
agricultural applications (Coussens, 2005). While Australia is part of the International Bovine Genome Initiative, 
workshop participants reported that Australia was limiting its interest to improving the output of our beef 
industries and was not using the work to diversify into other applications.
New Zealand is applying proteomics in the processing of agricultural products. Researchers there, for example, 
have compared raw and treated hides to identify the proteins present in both and their impact on leather 
quality (Choudhury, 2006). Applications of proteomics in deer husbandry and the growth of deer antler (the 
latter for processing applications) are also a focus of proteomics research in New Zealand (Barling, 2004).
Although workshop participants indicated China is likely to be behind Australia in its proteomics research, 
proteomics has been part of the country’s National High Technology Research and Development Program since 
at least 1991 and has included the development of an on-line proteomics database (High Technology Research 
and Development Program of China, 2001). Chinese scientists have announced the results of a number of major 
research programs in proteomics recently, including:
• 
genomics and proteomics for silk worms, as part of the Silkworm Genome Project at the Beijing Proteomics 
Institute (Xia, 2004); 
• 
genomic and proteomic analysis of chickens by the Beijing Proteomics Institute (Wong, 2004); and
• 
animal nutrition, by the National Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition at the China Agricultural University 
in Beijing (Wang, 2006).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
35
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
3.4 
Further potential applications in Australia
The development of new applications of proteomics in Australia will rely heavily not only on proteomics itself 
but on bioinformatics, which provides a mechanism for interpretation of the vast amounts of data that are 
generated in genetic analysis. Early proteomics research concentrated on understanding changes in protein 
expression at diﬀerent stages of the life cycle or between healthy and diseased organisms. Hence the focus 
was on separation and characterisation of proteins. While this is still important, new trends in plant and animal 
proteomics include (Rampitsch and Srinivasan, 2006):
• 
the analysis of proteins in parts of the cell outside the nucleus (e.g. chloroplasts of plants,  
which have their own genome);
• 
analysis of protein changes in response to stress; and
• 
symbiotic plant-microbe and animal-microbe interactions.
3.4.1 Growing and husbandry
In growing and husbandry the main applications emerging are in understanding responses to environmental 
stresses, which is of increasing importance due to climate change. The University of Melbourne has research 
programs on drought tolerance in wheat using proteomics, as well as projects understanding the eﬀects of 
environmental factors (such as heat, cold and wind) in other cereal crops.
There are also use of protein technologies to improve the understanding of plant-microbe interactions, 
particularly the role of symbionts, and the interactions between bacteria and the species that they infect. 
The end point of this work is likely to be development of mechanisms for plants to resist pathogen attack, 
although commercial application is probably some years away. As an example, the Australian Centre for 
Necrotrophic Fungal Pathogens at Murdoch University in Perth is using a mix of genomics and proteomics to 
investigate an important pathogen of wheat. However, the genome map for this pathogen was only released 
in July 2006 so the work is at an early stage.
3.4.2 Processing
There may be a range of applications of proteomics in ﬁbre processing. This is of particular importance to 
the wool industry because of existing competition from synthetic ﬁbres. The application of proteomics in 
the analysis of wool has been hampered until relatively recently by diﬃculties in staining and electrophoresis 
(Plowman, Bryson and Jordan, 1999). The Wool Research Organisation of New Zealand (WRONZ), which 
has sponsored extensive research into this issue, has since used proteomic analysis of high sulfur proteins in 
wool ﬁbres to understand variations between sheep breeds and the impact of these proteins on ﬁbre crimp 
(Flanagan, Plowman and Bryson, 2002). WRONZ is currently funding research into the variability in protein 
composition in relation to other wool traits.
Emerging applications include the use of protease enzymes on wool to improve its washability and  
reducing its tendency to felt (developed in Finland and sold under the brand of Washwool®); and mould-
derived keratin-degrading enzymes which selectively break down wool ﬁbre cuticles and help to reduce 
felting (developed in Japan) (Ferguson, 2004). Researchers internationally are also developing methods to 
understand the changes in collagen that occur during the processing of skins with the aim of improving 
skin quality (Choudhury et al., 2006).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
3 6
p r o t e i n s a n d o t h e r m o l e c u l e s
3.4.3 Logistics
The main logistical commercial application of protein technology is currently related to variety and/or purity 
testing in cereal crops, a process which is being driven by the introduction of end-point royalties in the cereals 
industry (GRDC, 2006) and other sectors such as the stone fruit industry(Low Chill Australia Inc., 2005). Variety 
testing is particularly important where the variety of fruit or grain cannot easily be distinguished by visual 
inspection and a premium is being paid for a particular variety.
In animals, the introduction of the National Livestock Identiﬁcation System for tracking “paddock to plate” 
may generate demand for new techniques. While there are currently commercial applications being oﬀered 
based on DNA technologies (see previous chapter), proteomics-based applications are being developed, for 
example, to identify whether a ﬁsh sample is what it is claimed to be (see Section 3.2.3). The new methods 
provide a much more detailed analysis than do the existing DNA techniques, because there are many more 
proteins in an organism than there are genes and gene products can be changed after they have been 
transcribed from the DNA by the action of other molecules in the cell, including RNA (Proteomics International, 
nd). These applications are an important way of tracking produce as it moves down the supply chain and 
reaches the consumer. 
3.4.4 Waste management
Proteomics is being developed as an analytical tool in waste management. The main applications are in 
understanding the ways in which microbial populations change as they break down pollutants (Singh, 2006). 
However this research area is in its infancy and bioinformatics will play a major role in interpretation of the data 
so that an organism’s metabolism in contaminated environments can be predicted (Singh and Nagaraj, 2006).
3.5 
Conclusions
Protein biotechnology such as proteomics is a younger science than DNA technologies and as such there are 
fewer commercially available applications. The two technologies complement each other and are often used 
together to enhance and deepen the understanding of genetic changes in an organism. The main commercial 
applications in variety testing and purity testing are likely to become very important in Australian agriculture 
and need to be extended to crops other than grains. Further, with increased market competition and more 
stringent market access conditions, Australia’s ability to deliver the right product will depend heavily on 
enhanced use of proteomics tools in the future.
Australia’s competitors are at a similar stage of development but seem likely to be pursuing additional, more 
highly value added, opportunities in processing and medical applications of agriculture. As was noted in the 
previous chapter, commercial applications to date have relied on development of genome maps, and the 
development of these has not been cost eﬀective in some of Australia’s smaller crops (especially if Australian 
researchers work in isolation). It is important for Australia to continue to work in major international consortia to 
gain access to the information needed to develop agricultural applications speciﬁc to Australian conditions.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
37
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
4 
Ce ll and t issue cul t ure and e ngine e ring
Cell and tissue culture and engineering include techniques for growing living cells in laboratory conditions as 
well as related techniques for combining cell culture with engineering to build organs (tissue engineering). 
Cell and tissue culture also includes embryo manipulation including in-vitro fertilisation and the fusion of 
diﬀerent types of cells (cell fusion) to form new cell types including cells which are hybrids of two species, 
and development of vaccines and immune stimulants for prevention of disease. 
4.1 
Where are cell and tissue culture used?
In Australia, cell and tissue culture are used mainly in breeding (including artiﬁcial insemination) and in 
vaccine development. Both of these applications are classed under growing and husbandry. 
There are substantial complementary uses of DNA technologies in these applications and the general 
traditional approaches to plant breeding which are reviewed in Chapter 2 are relevant here.
4.1.1 Plant Growing and animal husbandry 
Plant breeding
Plant breeding through cloning (the taking of cuttings from parent plants and growing them by inducing 
the formation of roots) is a very traditional and long-established method of breeding plants. Many of our 
important horticultural crops, for example Cavendish bananas, have been grown by cloning for many years. 
This method has the advantage of maintaining the desirable characteristics of a particular plant line. However, 
as has happened with bananas, it also means that the entire domestic population could be of the same genetic 
background, and the industry is susceptible to devastation if a new disease emerges.
In the last 50 years, techniques developed for tissue culture of plant cells have enabled the grower to take only 
a few cells from plants rather than a whole stem or part of stem. The cells are grown in sterile conditions on 
agar-based cell culture media. Using various plant hormones, the cells can be stimulated to regenerate into 
plantlets, which can be grown-on in a glasshouse once they reach a certain stage of maturity. Tissue culture is 
very common in the production of ornamental species of plants because it is faster than growing by seed and it 
is possible to ensure that unusual colour or leaf forms are maintained (plants grown by seed are more variable). 
Animal breeding
Unlike plant breeding, animal breeding by cloning has been a relatively recent development in livestock 
industries, with the ﬁrst mammal cloned in 1996 (Dolly the sheep). Animal cloning is still rare and, in Australia, 
only occurs in a research environment. On the other hand, livestock breeding using artiﬁcial insemination 
technology is common. Animals are bred by using stored, frozen semen to impregnate a female of the same 
species. Artiﬁcial insemination enables breeders to easily bring together sires and dams with good pedigrees, 
even if the animals are physically distant. 
Traditional artiﬁcial insemination enables farmers to use a wider range of sires than would normally be available 
from natural mating and can help to increase conception rates because insemination occurs under controlled 
conditions at the most beneﬁcial time in the oestrous cycle. Artiﬁcial insemination can also help farmers to

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
3 8
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
selectively produce male or female oﬀspring and/or to meet market speciﬁcations for particular stock.  
However, reliance on traditional (non-DNA) pedigree information alone to select parents is often unreliable 
and does not take account of genetic variations including traits that may skip generations. 
As discussed in Chapter 2 the use of genetic markers adds further value to artiﬁcial insemination, because it 
provides the opportunity to select the preferred characteristics in the parents based on their individual genes, 
rather than appearance and bloodlines (Lucy, 2005). Marker-assisted selection has been coupled with further 
developments in the management of artiﬁcial insemination and embryo handling and storage, such as: 
• 
The development of hormonal treatments which can be applied to the mother to manage the process of 
egg maturation. This decreases the amount of handling required per animal and increases the frequency 
of fertilisation. Egg maturation and hence breeding of a whole herd of animals can be synchronised, thus 
reducing breeding costs further (see below);
• 
The ability to hold embryos in suspension after fertilisation. These embryos can then be brought to term in 
unrelated surrogates, which enables high value donor mother animals to produce many more oﬀspring than 
they would normally be able to do in their lifetime; 
• 
Ultrasound and/or blood tests for pregnancy-associated proteins, thus allowing pregnancy to be detected 
with greater certainty. 
Figure 4-1 illustrates the traditional and modern biotechnology approaches to artiﬁcial insemination. While the 
costs of synchronised artiﬁcial insemination are higher, the beneﬁts to producers are considerable and include 
(Johnson, 2005): 
• 
synchronisation of births – animals’ oestrous cycles can be coordinated so that all animals are ready for 
insemination at about the same time, all fall pregnant within a short time of each other and all give birth 
at about the same time. This approach reduces late-season oﬀspring which may be more likely to die and 
helps farmers to manage their breeding herds more eﬃciently; 
• 
improved management of maternal nutrition;
• 
improvements in pregnancy rates;
• 
quicker development of specialised herds; and
• 
the ability to breed out undesirable traits across the herd more quickly
Diagnosis and management of disease
Vaccines have long been used to provide protection against infectious disease for humans and animals. 
Biotechnology is being used to develop and deliver new vaccines which could be of value to Australian 
agriculture. 
Traditionally, vaccines have been developed using attenuated (weakened) bacteria or viruses which takes a long 
time to develop. To produce the attenuated vaccine, the disease organism is bred over successive generations 
in the laboratory and the weaker strains are selected for further breeding, eventually producing one which 
cannot cause sickness because it is too weak; however it can still induce natural immunity when used to infect a 
susceptible animal. Alternatively, the toxins produced by the disease organism may be used to form the vaccine. 
The value of vaccines to the poultry industry is detailed in Box 4-1.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
39
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
Figure 4-1: Traditional and modern biotechnology approaches to AI
Selection of sire from 
pedigree + biomarkers
Manipulation of eggs from 
dams with speciﬁc traits  
using hormones
Introduction of  
donor semen
Detect pregnancy  
using hormone tests
Potential Multiple Births from High Value Dams
Advanced AI
Detection of  
egg maturation
Introduction of  
donor semen
Detect pregnancy  
using hormone tests
Traditional AI
Selection of sire  
from pedigree
Single Birth
Continue pregnancy  
or re-inseminate  
if not pregnant
Finish pregnancy  
in surrogate
Flush out embryo

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
4 0
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
Box 4-1: Vaccines for the poultry industry
Vaccines are an important mechanism for limiting the spread of disease in intensive livestock operations 
such as the poultry industry where the animals are in close proximity all the time and diseases can spread 
through the group more easily than if they were spread out over a larger area. A range of vaccines has 
been available to the poultry industry for many decades with Australian vaccine companies researching, 
developing and supplying live vaccines to the livestock industry over that time. An attenuated vaccine is 
available for chronic bacterial (Mycoplasma) respiratory diseases in poultry. Live viral vaccines are available 
for Marek’s Disease (which causes US$1 - $2 billion economic loss globally p.a. – Morrow and Fehler, 
2004), infectious bronchitis, infectious bursal disease and Newcastle disease, all of which can cause severe 
production loss and, in some cases, high levels of mortality. 
Vaccine manufacturers must comply with good manufacturing practice and be licensed by the 
government. The Australian company Bioproperties Pty Ltd has been manufacturing domestic animal 
vaccines since 1989. The company conducts extensive research & development in Australian institutions 
and has in-house laboratories for further product development of live vaccines for poultry, swine, cattle 
and sheep. The company is a core member of the Australian Poultry CRC, together with the Rural Industries 
R&D Corporation, the University of Melbourne, the University of New England and the Australian Egg 
Corporation. This collaboration provides an avenue for commercialisation of CRC research so that it reaches 
and beneﬁts producers. Bioproperties Pty Ltd has seven further vaccines in late stage development and 
nine in the early R&D stage. The company expects to launch a live vaccine against salmonella in poultry 
and an additional Marek’s Disease vaccine in the next 12 months.
Source: www.bioproperties.com.au and www.poultrycrc.com.au
Many vaccines have been developed for diseases speciﬁc to Australia or for diseases which have major 
economic eﬀects in Australian agriculture (see examples in Table 4-1). 
Table 4-1: Selected vaccines for sheep and cattle industry in Australia
Disease
Common vaccine approach
Tick fever
Cattle
Live vaccine active against Anaplasmosis virus, carried by ticks
Ovine Johne’s 
disease
Sheep
Killed whole organisms vaccine active against  
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis
Calf scours
Cattle
Killed whole organism vaccine active against E. coli
Footrot
Sheep
Antigens (proteins) of Dichelobacter nodosus
Source: published sources
Ovine Johne’s Disease (OJD), for example, is a serious wasting disease of sheep and has a range of impacts including:
• 
impediments to the trade of live sheep;
• 
mortalities of up to 15 per cent p.a. in ﬂocks of adult sheep;
• 
decreased wool production;
• 
decreased viability of sheep producers; and
• 
decreased demand for sheep meat products due to consumer concern.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
41
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
It has been estimated that OJD infection costs about $17,000 per year for a typical ﬂock of 2,000 ewes and 
results in a reduction in gross margins of 6.4 per cent per farm (Meat and Livestock Australia, 2005b). It is caused 
by the bacterium Micobacterium paratuberculosis and vaccines against it have been shown to reduce deaths 
by 90 per cent and delay the onset of shedding of OJD bacteria in the dung by about 12 months (Meat and 
Livestock Australia 2005a). It 
4.1.2 Logistics
The transport and holding of stock provides opportunities for infection that may have a major impact on the 
ability of growers/handlers, for example, feedlotters, to obtain an economic return. As a result applications of 
tissue culture and engineering are an important adjunct to stock management and logistics. 
Bovine Herpes Virus-1 (BHV-1) is an example of a disease which is a signiﬁcant source of sickness and death in 
feedlot cattle. Development of a vaccine to protect against BHV-1 has contributed to reductions in incidence of 
this disease in cattle feedlots. A brief case study of this vaccine and beneﬁts it provides is discussed in Box 4-2.
Box 4-2: Case study 5 - Benefits of vaccinating cattle against Bovine Herpes Virus-1
Beef is one of Australia’s major industries. Beef cattle are sold by farmers to feedlotters, who feed them 
to maximize weight gain prior to sale. Feedlotters then sell to processors in Australia and overseas. 
The top 20 feedlotters control about 50 per cent of the Australian market. Large feedlots may hold up 
to 80,000 head of cattle. 
The animals come into these feedlots from many places and may carry a range of infections in with 
them. One of the most common diseases is bovine respiratory disease (BRD), a syndrome associated with 
infection from a range of diﬀerent viruses and bacteria. Bovine herpes virus-1 (BHV-1) is one of the viruses 
associated with BRD. While cattle can be infected with BRD on the farm, such infections usually result in 
only mild disease however, when cattle are brought into feedlots they experience a variety of stresses 
(from transport, mixing with unfamiliar animals and ﬁnding feed and water in unfamiliar places) which 
contributes to an increased susceptibility to disease. 
BRD is believed to be the cause of 50 to 90 per cent of sickness and death in Australian feedlot cattle, with a 
2001 survey of 72 feedlots reporting that 64 per cent of all illness and deaths were due to the disease (Meat 
and Livestock Australia, 2001). Annual cost to the industry due to deaths and slow weight gain is estimated 
at $60m a year (Pettiford and Gaden, 2005). 
There are two major sub-types of BHV-1 which contribute to BRD. These are designated Sub-type 1.1 and 
Sub-type 1.2. In most other parts of the world both sub-types exist, however in Australia only sub-type 
1.2 has been isolated. Overseas BHV live vaccines are all based on sub-type 1.1 and hence are not eﬀective 
against the BHV sub-type 1.2, which is prevalent in Australian cattle. 
In 2001, Q-Vax Pty Ltd, a private company situated in Queensland, launched Rhinogard, a new vaccine 
to protect cattle against BHV-1. Q-VAX was the ﬁrst company to sell a vaccine against BHV-1,  
sub-type 1.2, in Australia.
Rhinogard is a one-dose live attenuated intra-nasal vaccine. The decision to develop an intranasal vaccine 
was based on the need to develop immunity quickly. North American research previously showed that 
an intranasal vaccine provides some level of protection within 48 hours of administration. An intra-nasal 
vaccine is more diﬃcult (and therefore more expensive) to administer than an injection. However, it is 
eﬀective more quickly and is cheaper in the long run, because the alternative is a two-dose dead vaccine. 
The ﬁrst dose of this dead vaccine must ﬁrst be administered on-farm, and hence is an added cost to 
producers; the second dose is administered at the feedlot.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
42
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
Box 4-2: Case study 5 - Benefits of vaccinating cattle  
against Bovine Herpes Virus-1 (continued)
As it produces nasal mucosal immunity very quickly, Rhinogard can be used on feedlot entry, or prior to 
feedlot entry, if the operators are practised and suitable yards and handling facilities are available (Pettiford 
and Gaden, 2005). 
The beneﬁts to feedlotters of using Rhinogard are reduced losses from death of cattle due to BRD; 
reduced administration of antibiotics; reduced losses from delays in moving cattle through the feedlot 
due to weight loss or failure to thrive as a result of BRD; increased export prospects due to compliance 
with customer demands on weight proﬁle of animals and improved animal welfare through reduction of 
incidence of BHV-1.
There was no treatment for BHV-1 in Australia prior to the introduction of Rhinogard into the Australian 
market. The comparison is thus between unvaccinated and vaccinated cattle. Q-VAX’s pen and ﬁeld trial 
data reveal that the average daily gain in vaccinated cattle is 1.81kg compared to 1.52kg in cattle given a 
placebo (i.e. unvaccinated); and that feed conversion is 8.3kg of feed per kg liveweight gain in vaccinated 
cattle, compared to 9.9kg of feed per kg liveweight gain in cattle given a placebo (Q-VAX product brochure). 
The company has calculated that these beneﬁts provide an additional income of $20 per head, as against 
a cost of under $3 per head for the vaccine plus staﬀ time in managing vaccinations. However, cattle 
are routinely treated for a number of diseases on arrival at the feedlot hence the additional staﬀ time 
for Rhinogard vaccination is minimal. QVAX estimates a feedlot of 80,000 animals would incur costs of 
approximately $240,000 for vaccination and beneﬁts of $1.6 million. 
Q-VAX is also exploring potential for an injectable form of the vaccine (only one dose required because it is 
still a live vaccine). This is being developed in response to moves by the industry to vaccinate cattle on-farm, 
prior to arrival at the feedlot, and would overcome the diﬃculties of administering an intranasal vaccine.
Two other companies (Intervet and Pﬁzer) have subsequently oﬀered vaccines against other organisms 
which cause BRD to the Australian market: Intervet has an injectable two-dose dead vaccine (Bovillis MH) 
against Mannheimia haemolytica (one bacterial disease complication of BRD) and Pﬁzer sells Pestigard, a 
dead two-dose vaccine against bovine viral diarrhoea virus (Pettiford and Gaden, 2005) 
4.2 
Australia’s use of cell and tissue culture  
compared to use in overseas countries
Artiﬁcial insemination is well established in Australia and there are many commercial service providers who 
travel from farm to farm to provide insemination services. Use of artiﬁcial insemination has become the normal 
breeding method in some livestock sectors, particularly horse breeding and dairy cattle. Artiﬁcial insemination 
is supplemented by MAS as markers for particular traits become available. For example, in the Australian dairy 
industry the Australian Dairy Herd Improvement Scheme (ADHIS) maintains a national database of performance 
and pedigrees. This database is used by artiﬁcial breeding companies to help assist genetic improvements in 
the industry (Australian Dairy Farmers, 2006).
Most of Australia’s competitors are investing heavily in improvements to artiﬁcial insemination techniques. It is 
clear that it is necessary to marry these closely to livestock management and record keeping in order to maximise 
producer beneﬁts. Reﬂecting the importance of this information, in 2002 the United Kingdom Government 
awarded its largest ever agricultural development grant to a consortium comprising the BASCO joint venture 
(owned by the Limousin Cattle and Suﬀolk and Texel Sheep Societies) and MLC Signet. The BASCO online herd-
book database will provide a single source of pedigree and performance information and will provide a means of 
recording additional traits, including genotypes, to support breeding decisions (British Texel Sheep Society, 2005).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
4 3
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
Similarly in Japan, beef cattle breeding trends have shifted in the last 50 years from visual inspection in the 
1960s to genetic evaluation of progeny in test stations using carcass ﬁeld records in the 1980s (Sasaki, 2006). 
The latter has signiﬁcantly enhanced the speed of development of advantageous carcass traits such as marbling 
(the spread of fat in thin “veins” throughout the meat cut, a trait of high value in Japan). Finally, studies on the 
use of a combination of breeding values and animal management in South Africa have shown that the culling 
of inferior milk-producing cows and using bulls with high breeding values has produced an improvement of 
1200kg of milk per cow over 13 years from the mid-1980s (Muller, 2003).
New biotechnological approaches to vaccine development centre mainly on the development of sub-unit 
vaccines, peptide vaccines and DNA vaccines. These types of vaccines are being developed to elicit immune 
responses without the risk of using a whole virus. This technology can increase the range of diseases that can 
be targeted and can reduce unwanted side eﬀects. The vaccines have greater stability and hence a longer shelf 
life. Sub-unit vaccines and peptide vaccines are discussed further here. DNA vaccines are genetically modiﬁed 
and are not within the scope of this report as they are deﬁned as a GMO. 
Sub-unit vaccines contain puriﬁed proteins that cause an immune response. They are not infectious and cause 
fewer side eﬀects than live attenuated vaccines in the vaccinated animal. However, the immune response 
generated by a sub-unit vaccine may not be as eﬀective as that produced using a vaccine based on whole 
organisms, and the sub-unit vaccines are more expensive to manufacture because of the levels of purity of 
the active protein required. To increase eﬀectiveness, sub-unit vaccines are often administered with other 
molecules that are known to enhance the immune response, termed “adjuvants”. In vaccines for human use 
these molecules are likely to be common chemicals such as alum. In livestock vaccines, components of bacteria 
such as cell walls are sometimes used for this purpose. Sub-unit vaccines are also being developed for treating 
all types of diseases, not only infectious diseases. Figure 4-2 illustrates the paths used in the development of 
traditional and sub-unit vaccines.
Figure 4-2: Development of traditional vaccines and Sub-unit vaccines
Identify viral proteins that  
create immune response 
Innoculate tissue culture with  
virus, incubate, halt incubation  
before full viral replication
Extract viral antigen  
(immune-stimulating) components
Administer vaccine
Emerging vaccines
Develop into vaccine with additional 
immune stimulants if required
Traditional vaccines
Breed disease causing virus  
over several generations  
until it is less virulent
Collect antigens and combine  
with required immune stimulants
Source: MJ Biologics, 2006, www.mjbio.com

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
4 4
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
Peptide vaccines create immunity by exposing the organisms to parts of proteins of the disease-causing organism. 
Many major drug and animal health companies are involved in the development of vaccines for animal 
applications. International vaccine manufacturers are trialling a range of new-style vaccines for animal use (Table 
4-3). This research may be developing improved vaccines for diseases that are currently treated by traditional 
vaccines; or new vaccines for diseases that are currently untreated. 
Table 4-3: Selected emerging vaccines for sheep and cattle internationally
Disease
Emerging vaccine approach
Bovine 
diarrhoea
Cattle
Sub-unit vaccine to prevent transmission of bovine diarrhoea virus across 
the placenta from pregnant cows to their unborn calves (Bruschke, 1999)
Bovine 
herpes virus
Cattle
Sub-unit vaccine for bovine herpes virus  
(Wisconsin Alumni, Research Fdn, 1995)
Foot and 
mouth disease
Cattle
Peptide vaccine boosted with cholera toxin (Beignon, 2005)
Scrapie
Sheep
Peptide vaccine (Harmeyer, 1998) 
Source: published sources – see references for details. 
Improvements to existing vaccines may be targeted at a range of beneﬁts, including (Beard, 1998):
• 
longer shelf-life—vaccine vials can be held for longer and there is less wastage of out-of-date vials; 
• 
ability to vaccinate against more than one disease—animals need to be handled less often, thus 
reducing stress and improving animal welfare, and the cost of vaccination “per disease” is reduced; 
• 
greater eﬃcacy—vaccines are eﬀective against their target disease more quickly; 
• 
reduced risk of conversion of attenuated virus to a virulent form—there is a lower chance of 
unwanted resurgence of a disease in a population; and
• 
reduced viral shedding in animal droppings—there is less chance of animal-to-animal transmission. 
It is likely that Australia will continue to rely on vaccines developed overseas for global diseases but will need to 
develop vaccines for those diseases (or disease strains) which are endemic.
Australian research groups and private companies are improving vaccines against diseases which currently 
aﬀect Australian agricultural productivity, whether they be cosmopolitan or endemic. For example, the 
Australian Poultry CRC’s vaccine development programs draw on a range of biotechnologies to improve 
vaccines against a number of poultry diseased including Pasteurella (gene sequencing), chicken anaemia virus 
(RNA, molecular markers), Eimeria, (subunit vaccines) and Marek’s disease (gene sequencing) (www.poultrycrc.
com.au). The commercial application and success of these vaccines will depend not only on their eﬃcacy but 
on whether they are to be used in livestock for meat production (immediate immune protection required for a 
short time) or in breeding stock (long term immunity required).

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
4 5
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
4.3 
Further potential use of cell and tissue culture in Australia
4.3.1 Growing and husbandry
Breeding
The ability of livestock producers to beneﬁt from developments in cell and tissue culture probably depends 
more on the associated use of these technologies with farm management practices and database development 
than biotechnical developments alone. R&D corporations are aware of the need for integration of a range of 
biotechnology techniques with management practices and are funding several initiatives. For example:
• 
Rural Industries R&D Corporation (RIRDC) – development of the Crusader® program for farmed rabbits, 
which aims:
– to develop a disease identiﬁcation and control package for farmed rabbits, including identiﬁcation of 
genetic merit for resistance to bacterial infection; 
– to investigate environmental and genetic means of reducing pre-weaning mortality, including 
development of superior breeding stock with increased litter size; 
– to improve management practices to reduce disease and improve proﬁtability; and
– to make the information available to rabbit farmers through a central website (Eady, 2005).
• 
RIRDC – MOPLAN genetic improvement system for angora goats (Mohair Australia Ltd, 2000). The system 
records breeding performance and links performance of close relatives in assessing breed value for each 
individual – the systems enables high performance animals within ﬂocks to be identiﬁed and recorded.
• 
Southern Tree Breeding Association and the Animal Genetics and Breeding Unit – TREEPLAN® for Pinus radiata 
and Eucalyptus spp. Treeplan® estimates breeding and genetic values for tree species using pedigree data 
from close and distant relatives, diﬀerent sites, multiple genetic groups, and multiple traits. The system is web-
based and can produce single lists of genetic values for each trait given diﬀerent production environments. 
The system has produced cost and time savings while enhancing genetic gains (McRae, et al., 2004). 
There has been considerable interest in the development of immuno-castration methods to reduce the loss of 
carcass condition in males of many livestock species; however the early commercial attempts were unsuccessful 
due mainly to high costs of production and lack of eﬃcacy. For example, in the mid 1990s, CSIRO successfully 
developed a vaccine (Vaxstrate®) for vaccinating cattle against luteinising hormone. However, an analysis of the 
beneﬁts of immunological spaying compared to surgical spaying indicated that there was no net beneﬁt in 
either growth rates or the price received for the carcass, making the vaccine unsuccessful for economic reasons 
(Jeﬀery et al., 1997). 
More recently, another vaccine, Improvac®, has been successfully launched for treating boar taint in male pigs. 
The vaccine is active against Gonadotrophin-Releasing Factor (GnRF), a breeding hormone, and replaces 
castration as a treatment for maintaining weight gain and improving boar ﬂesh taste. The GnRF vaccination 
increases weight gain and fat deposition when compared to unvaccinated animals (McCauley, 2003). Launched 
by CSL Animal Health after funding from the Pig Industry Program, Improvac was found to provide a beneﬁt to 
cost ratio of 5.4 to one with a net present value (as at 2004-05) of $1.91 million against project outlay of $350,000 
(Gaﬀy, 2005). Improvac® is now distributed world-wide by Pﬁzer Animal Health.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
4 6
c e l l a n d t i s s u e c u l t u r e a n d e n g i n e e r i n g
Disease management and prevention
There are a number of research programs underway to explore further development of vaccines against 
livestock diseases, for example, farmers in South Australia are trialling vaccines against speciﬁc strains of Ovine 
Johne’s Disease, which as discussed previously, is a serious disease of sheep which causes major mortality 
and ﬂock losses (also see Section 4.2.10). MLA is sponsoring research to monitor the spread of the disease in 
vaccinated sheep ﬂocks (Meat and Livestock Australia, 2005b).
Many research groups internationally have been attempting to develop eﬀective vaccines against foot and 
mouth disease. Recently, researchers have demonstrated eﬀective vaccination against foot and mouth disease 
using a peptide vaccine approach (Wang, 2002). However, it may yet be several years before an eﬀective vaccine 
reaches the market, due to the need to carry out large scale trials and to develop cost eﬀective manufacturing 
and vaccine delivery methods.
4.3.2 Processing
While applications of cell and tissue culture in processing in Australia were not identiﬁed, there are some 
applications being developed overseas which may be relevant in Australia. The applications relate to the safety 
of processed meat for human consumption, and in particular to the threat posed to humans by particular strains 
of bacteria such as Escherichia coli. Research in Scotland found that E.coli colonises the lower portion of the gut 
in cattle and can be transferred to the meat during slaughter and processing (University of Edinburgh, 2004). 
The research suggested that development of vaccines to prevent colonisation of cattle by particular strains of  
E. coli may provide a method for reducing the potential food poisoning hazards of these bacteria to humans.
4.3.3 Logistics
Further applications of cell and tissue culture and engineering may be desirable in livestock industries where 
there are diseases which cannot yet be treated by vaccines and where the process of livestock collection and 
transport exposes animals to increased likelihood of disease. The application of new vaccine development 
methods will depend in part on the cost and the eﬃcacy of new products under development. 
4.4 
Conclusions
Cell and tissue culture have been used in agriculture for many years and the general approach for development 
of new varieties of plants (by tissue culture) and vaccines (by use of whole cells or parts of cells) is well 
established commercially. In terms of breeding, the main beneﬁts of adoption of newer technologies accrue in 
the data collection and management and the interplay with agronomy or husbandry. Australian producers and 
their overseas competitors all recognise that several technologies and practices are complementary and can be 
brought together to improve productivity in the short and longer term.
The main application in vaccines is also well established commercially. Australia has the skills to develop new 
sub-unit and peptide vaccines. However these technologies are not yet well established and there are few 
commercial products available. Success of these vaccines in Australia, for both animal husbandry and in logistics 
management, will depend more on eﬃcacy and cost than technical capacity.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
47
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
5 
Process biote c hnolog y ( B ioproce ssing)
5.1 
What is process biotechnology?
Process biotechnology (bioprocessing) is any large-scale operation involving the use of whole micro-organisms; 
animal or plant cells; or chemicals (such as enzymes) produced by animal or plant cells to transform a raw 
material (biological or non-biological) into a product. The use of whole micro-organisms to process chemicals 
is usually termed fermentation.
Bioprocessing using micro-organisms and enzymes is applied in a number of industries. For example, 
bioprocessing processes include:
• 
bioleaching—the removal of metals from ore using biological processes; 
• 
biobleaching or biopulping—treatment of paper, pulp or wood ﬁbres with enzymes;
• 
biodesulferisation—removal of sulfur from fuel oil;
• 
bioremediation and phytoremediation—the removal or break down of pollutants using  
micro-organisms, or plants respectively; and
• 
bioﬁltration—puriﬁcation of ﬂuids using micro-organisms.
The main applications of process biotechnology are in the manufacture of food, ﬁbres, certain chemicals 
(including drugs), the extraction of minerals from ore bodies and the conversion of wastes to useful products 
or to harmless chemicals. 
Modern process biotechnology (often termed bioprocessing) often involves use of genetically modiﬁed 
organisms. These GM applications are not within the scope of the report. 
5.2 
Where is process biotechnology used?
In researching Australian and overseas activity in this area of biotechnology, we found many process 
biotechnology applications in use overseas. As yet, applications in Australia are limited but include:
• 
functional food development; 
• 
biofuels; and 
• 
biotechnology-based ﬁbre processing. 
In Australian agriculture, process biotechnology is used mainly in agricultural processing and waste 
management. Twelve projects under process biotechnology were identiﬁed, of which seven were examples 
of process biotechnology in food and ﬁbre manufacture and ﬁve were applications in bioremediation. 
5.2.1 Growing and husbandry
Process biotechnology is not used in growing and husbandry, except perhaps in the production of animal 
feeds. However, no examples of such applications were identiﬁed in Australia. 
5.2.2 Processing
The main applications of process biotechnology in Australian agriculture were in processing of food for humans. 
The applications discussed here are processing aids and functional foods.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
4 8
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
Enzymes and manufacturing aids
Food manufacturing involves a range of technologies including methods for fragmenting, processing, ﬁltering, 
mixing, storing and maintaining food products so that they are safe, taste good and are attractive to consumers. 
Traditional food manufacture has relied on enzymes, around 60 of which are in common use. Traditionally, 
these enzymes are extracted from plants or animals. For example rennet, which is used in cheese making, was 
traditionally extracted from the stomachs of calves, lambs and goat kids.
The main modern applications in agriculture of process biotechnology appear to be in food manufacture. 
This includes the development of specialised yeasts for wine processing, starter cultures for foods which 
require microbial fermentation such as bread, yoghurts, cheese and beer, and use of specialty enzymes to 
improve food processing. Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) approves individual enzymes for 
particular applications and has to approve their inclusion in the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code 
before they can be used in food for human consumption (Table 5-1). Although used in Australia, many of these 
enzymes are imported.
Table 5-1: Recent selected enzymes considered for approval  
by Food Standards Australia and New Zealand
Enzyme
Source
Use
Triacylglycerol 
lipase 
Yeast Hansenula polymorpha
In bread making to improve dough stability, dough 
handling and crumb homogeneity
Phosholipase A1
Fungus Aspergillus orizae
Cheese manufacture – improves eﬃciency and yields
Triacylglycerol 
lipase 
Fungus Mucor javanicus
In cheese - breaks down fats to  
improve ﬂavours in cheese
Hexose oxidase
Yeast Hansecula polymorpha
In bread making - increases dough strength and bread 
volume; and in cheese and tofu aids curd formation
Alpha amylase
Bacterium Bacillus 
stearothermophilis
Greater thermal stability of the enzyme, and produces a 
diﬀerent chemical proﬁle when breaking down sugar
Source: draft assessment reports issued by FSANZ, 2005 and 2006
Functional foods and Nutraceuticals
In addition to enzymes and food additives there is growing interest in Australia in functional foods (foods which 
have additional health beneﬁts beyond the nutritional value of the food itself) and nutraceuticals. The main 
beneﬁts of functional foods to agriculture and food processing arise from capture of higher prices for raw 
materials as part of a higher value-added supply chain. However, these compounds need to be extracted, 
puriﬁed, formulated and included in ﬁnal products and value is added at each of these points. In many cases, 
the return to the original grower is the same as that grower would receive for the product for its use as “normal” 
food. The main beneﬁts accrue to others in the supply chain, who receive higher prices for the ﬁnal product, 
and consumers, who can enjoy health beneﬁts.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
4 9
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
By way of example, cartilage (e.g. trachea) is normally a waste product of meat processing. Chondroitin sulphate 
is derived from the trachea of cattle or pork, deer antlers and shark cartilage and is used as dietary supplement. 
Chondroitin sulphate has been shown to inﬂuence central nervous system development, wound repair, 
infection, cell growth and cell division (Trowbridge, 2002). When combined with glucosamine, (also a waste 
product from meat processing) and administered orally, chondroitin sulphate is claimed to play a role in the 
protection of joints, by inhibiting enzymes which degrade cartilage, while glucosamine is claimed to speed up 
collagen synthesis (Michel, et al 2005). Chondroitin sulphate is a component of many products aimed at easing 
joint and ligament injuries, arthritis and joint inﬂammation. It is estimated that up to 70 million people in the 
United States alone have some form of arthritis or joint inﬂammation (CDC, 2007) and the current US market for 
products containing chondroitin sulphate is up to $1 billion per annum. Chondroitin sulphate is also an active 
ingredient in veterinary products, and has a role in moisture retention in some cosmetics. Development of 
products containing chondroitin sulphate and glucosamine has required the use of biotechnology in extraction 
of the base molecule, formulation and testing of eﬀects in trials.
The amount of active ingredient in preparations containing chondroitin sulphate ranges from 250mg to 
1,200 mg and the ﬁnal retail prices range from hundreds to thousands of dollars per kg chondroitin sulphate in 
the ﬁnal product. The price to farmers for the raw ingredient is about $4 per kg. Ingredients suppliers sell the 
product for $65 to $150 per kg and the rest of the mark up is at the manufacture and distribution phases. Hence, 
while economic beneﬁts along the chain are high, many of the beneﬁts accrue to industry players beyond the 
farm gate. However, in the longer term an important beneﬁt to the economy and society of functional foods 
may be lower health costs and a healthier Australian community.
Functional foods containing a range of ingredients are marketed for their added value health beneﬁts. For 
example, the marketing of margarine with omega-3 fatty acids added to reduce absorption of cholesterol. 
Australia and many other countries have regulations which limit the range of depth of health claims that can be 
made in food products.
Only a few Australian companies manufacture functional ingredients or ﬁnished functional food products. 
Most of these companies manufacture or sell products which contain dairy or bovine ingredients as 
development of functional food or nutraceutical ingredients is an important way of adding value to particular 
agricultural product fractions (in the case of milk) or to waste streams (in the case of red meat and grains). 
Table 5-2 provides examples of ingredients from several sources. 
Table 5-2: Sample applications of functional food ingredients in Australia
Source
Molecule
Application
Milk
Growth factors
Wound repair and sports health
Milk
Lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase
Immune stimulation and enhancement
Milk
Peptides
Anti-hypertensives (lowering of blood pressure)
Bovine blood, soybeans
Ferritin
Bioavailable iron
Wheat bran
Phytate
Muscle growth supplement
Sources: Playne et al., , (2003)

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
5 0
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
8.2.3 Waste management
Waste has traditionally been either burned or chemically treated to reduce it to less harmful substances which 
can then be buried in landﬁll. However, many products of modern living cannot be treated this way because 
they are very toxic, last a long time in the environment or are not amenable to chemical treatment. Examples of 
such products are:
• 
pesticide residues including DDT (Dichloro-Diphenyl-Trichloroethane - soil half-life 150 years), 
organochlorines (several months up to 2 years), organophosphates (days to months); and
• 
petroleum based products.
While these products may eventually break down in the environment, they may be toxic to both humans and 
animals during the time that they remain active. 
Many of the more toxic or long-term residues are treated by burial. Burial sites have to be selected very carefully 
to ensure groundwater does not percolate through them, resulting in leaching of toxic residues. While burial 
removes toxic waste from the immediate local area, it may make the burial site unusable for some time. 
The main application of biotechnology in waste management is the use of enzymes (either naturally occurring 
or genetically modiﬁed) to break down intractable chemical wastes. Figure 5-1 summaries the general approach 
to traditional waste management and non-GM bioremediation. 
Figure 5-1: Bioprocessing approaches to toxic waste remediation
Source: Diagram derived from text in Dayet al., 1997.
Mix of clean ﬁll and  
contaminated soil – lower  
concentration of contaminants
Traditional waste management
Remove whole volume to landﬁll
Contaminated 
soil
Clean ﬁll
Remove soil to another area
Screen for contaminants
Inoculate with naturally  
occurring bacteria
Non-GM bioremediation
Ongoing sampling and testing,  
control of nutrients
Leachate stored  
or burned
Return to site  
as clean ﬁll

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
51
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
Waste remediation is a well-established application of biotechnology in Australia. It has been applied in 
decontamination of industrial sites, where it helps to remove intractable waste and to return sites to community 
use. It has also been used in water recycling, which is particularly important in farm applications given the 
regular occurrence of drought in Australia’s rural areas. The main research group active in the area is the 
Environmental Biotechnology CRC, which is currently developing remediation applications speciﬁcally for the 
meat processing industry (Box 5-1). 
Box 5-1: Using biotechnology to remediate and add value to waste from feedlots 
The Environmental Biotechnology CRC is working on recovery and re-use of resources and has a program 
dedicated to bioprocess engineering, including development of specialised biomass for processing of 
industrial waste (Environmental Biotechnology CRC, 2002).
Under a collaborative research agreement with MLA, the CRC is developing a demonstration processing 
plant to deal with excess nitrogen and phosphorus in heavily contaminated wastewater from abattoirs. The 
technique involves treating waste in batches and will replace existing chemical methods (McGlashan, 2005). 
Comparative costs of the two approaches are not yet known, however there are environmental beneﬁts 
from the biotechnology-based approach.
The new treatment method will help to remove 99 per cent of organic carbon, 98 per cent of nitrogen and 
99 per cent of phosphorus, all of which can cause toxic algal blooms if they enter waterways. It is expected 
that the nutrients removed will be developed into other products including ﬁsh food. Development of ﬁsh 
food will provide a value-added use for the waste and should also provide a valuable input to Australia’s 
growing aquaculture industry. 
Other applications of bioremediation to agricultural waste management are being introduced to help 
remediate persistent chemical residues (Box 5-2). These applications also have environmental and occupational 
health and safety beneﬁts.
Box 5-2: Case study 6 - Bioremediation of pesticide residues using biotechnology
To remain competitive and increase yield, Australian farmers use a range of pesticides, fungicides and 
herbicides to control insect pests, diseases and weeds. However, some of these chemicals break down 
slowly and some can have undesirable eﬀects on the environment. One such group of chemicals is 
organophosphates, which are broad spectrum, water soluble insecticides. Organophosphates are used in 
sheep dips as well as in many plant and crop insecticides. 
There are catchment management issues associated with the use of organophosphates and local 
councils test for residues in their waterways because of the potential impact on both ﬁsh and people. 
Organophosphate residues are also a public health issue in some residential areas – subdivisions built 
on land previously used for agriculture and contaminated by organophosphates can have impacts on 
residents’ health (Bowes, 2003).
In the 1990s CSIRO scientists identiﬁed an enzyme in fruit ﬂies which could break down organophosphates. 
Supported by Orica Watercare and Horticulture Australia Ltd this research was developed into a number of 
products which break down organophosphate insecticides, which would otherwise persist for a long time 
in the environment.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
52
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
Box 5-2: Case study 6 - Bioremediation of pesticide  
residues using biotechnology (continued)
The ﬁrst commercial product from this research is active against organophosphates and was launched 
in September 2004 as LandguardTM OPA. The enzymes in LandguardTM OPA are able to reduce pesticide 
concentration to very low levels in minutes unlike natural degradation where organophosphate 
breakdown takes up to six months. The LandguardTM enzymes split the organic part of the molecule from 
the phosphate and the breakdown products are two orders of magnitude less toxic than the original 
pesticide. The product is currently oﬀered as a powder that can be easily added to water to decontaminate 
waterways and water reservoirs. 
Prior to the launch of LandguardTM OPA no other product was available to address the organophosphate 
residue. Farmers waited several months for the organophosphates to break down naturally. 
These chemicals could therefore potentially end up in waterways and cause problems outside the 
farm boundary. Access to this new technology has potential to improve environmental outcomes and 
improve farm productivity. 
In addition LandguardTM OPA has also been trialled in a number of other agricultural situations including:
• 
remediation of sheep dip eﬄuent in a mobile sheep dip operation;
• 
breakdown of residues from spraying organophosphates on cotton;
• 
cleaning of equipment used to spray organophosphates on farms. In this case the rinse water contains 
LandguardTM OPA and because the LandguardTM is only active for 30 minutes after hydration, this same 
water can be held in the tank overnight and used to mix the insecticide for the next application the 
following day.
• 
remediation of organophosphate contaminated water in the horticulture industry. Field trials using 
LanguardTM OPA to clean a ground spray rig used to spray a pear orchard resulted in the rapid 
degradation of methyl parathion; 
• 
decontamination of soil to enable turf to be grown on land previously used to grow alfalfa, during 
which time it was treated with organophosphate insecticides; and
• 
remediation of tailwaters remaining after cotton irrigation with a 90% reduction in residue levels in 
10 minutes in 80,000 litres of tailwater.. 
Trials of LandguardTM OPA have shown that it succeeds in reducing organophosphate levels to below 
the NSW statutory minimum in half an hour. In 2005-2006 Orica Watercare and CSIRO won the DuPont 
Innovation Award in the category of Food, Agricultural Production and Marketing for LandguardTM OPA.
The LandguardTM series of products is expected to be applicable to many agricultural sectors in Australia 
such as cotton, which uses organophosphate insecticides as sprays or in irrigation waters. There are 
also potential applications in using the product as a wash on fruit to remove pesticide residues at the 
packing facility. There are export prospects in the United Kingdom and the United States, both of which 
have passed laws requiring more complete remediation of many insecticides and industrial chemicals. 
The strengthening of remediation regulation in Australia could see a substantial increase in demand for 
LandguardTM in this country.
A range of enzymes against organophosphates, triazines, pyrethroids, carbamates, phenyl urea and 
neonictinoids are now being developed, based on the same technology platform.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
53
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
5.3 
Australia’s use of process biotechnology  
compared to use in overseas countries
Australia appears to be behind several other countries in its use of process biotechnologies. To some extent 
Australian food processors’ slow uptake in these ﬁelds may be related to the more limited role of manufacturing 
in the Australian economy, compared to many economies overseas. As the use of enzyme technologies in food 
processing in Australia does not require any speciﬁc specialisation (unlike, for example, the need for specialised 
vaccines to treat unique Australian livestock diseases) it is more economic to import these technologies 
supporting value adding to agricultural materials and has funded the development of new, biotechnology-
derived, food ingredients. 
Internationally, there are several exciting areas where biotechnology is being applied in plant and animal 
bioprocessing, with downstream applications in human health or energy. As outlined below, there are major 
investments being made overseas by governments and the private sector. These areas provide opportunities 
for high levels of value adding to agricultural products, and could be major threats to Australian agricultural 
industries as overseas growers utilise bioprocessing to build valuable businesses. The major categories 
discussed here are, functional foods, bioethanol and ﬁbre processing.
5.3.1 Functional Foods and nutraceuticals
Functional foods are major segments of the food market in many developed countries. Global market size 
has been estimated to be in excess of US$100 billion per year and growth rates are estimated to be at around 
seven per cent p.a. depending on source and deﬁnitions (Datamonitor, 2004). Major product segments include 
probiotic drinks (in particular milk and sports drinks), cereals and bars, and confectionary (Datamonitor, 2004). 
Many ingredients, particularly milk bioactives and a number of anti-oxidants, are relatively mature in terms of 
market acceptance. Other new bioactives are emerging and are being developed (many as nutraceuticals) by 
Australia’s competitors, particularly New Zealand, (Table 5-3).
Table 5-3: Sample bioactives, source and applications
Extract
Bioactive role
Application
Pine bark 
(various spp)
Anti-oxidants 
Extracts from Pinus pinaster may relieve high blood pressure, reduce 
platelet aggregation and low-density lipoprotein (bad)-cholesterol 
and may enhance circulation. Extracts from Pinus radiata are sold as 
nutraceutical Enzogenol® by a New Zealand company. Extracts from 
Pinus sylvestris are thought to reduce inﬂammation through their 
antioxidant activity
Fucoidan 
(marine algae)
A polysaccharide 
occurring in algae 
(Fucus spp.) 
May play an important role in nerve transmission and long term 
memory storage. Sold as nutraceutical U-Fn by a US ﬁrm and as 
Modiﬁlan by a company in Russia.
Lycopene 
(tomatoes)
Carotenoid
Could play an important role in treating cancers, as well as helping to 
prevent cardiovascular disease. Sold as a nutraceutical Ly-co-mato® 
by a company in Israel
Lutein 
(ﬂowers)
Carotenoid
Eye health. Blackmores Australia imports a lutein-based nutraceutical 
called Lutein-Vision®

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
5 4
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
Extract
Bioactive role
Application
Cocoa 
ﬂavenols
Anti-oxidants 
from cocoa beans.
Have been associated with reducing cholesterol and improving blood 
vessel function. Mars Corporation (US) is investing heavily in research
Omega-3 (ﬁsh)
Essential  
fatty acid
Added to margarines, cereals and a range of other products and 
marketed as functional foods
Source: web searching. Company names provided as examples only
Research into functional foods is also being completed in Australia. For example, The National Centre of 
Excellence in Functional Foods is a consortium of scientists from organisations, including from CSIRO and Food 
Science Australia, who research, develop, substantiate and assist in commercialising functional foods. One 
example from this centre is Recaldent which is based on casein polypeptides that have the potential to prevent 
and repair tooth decay. The development of this product was based on the investigation of the bacteria that are 
responsible for dental caries and periodontitis, and the identiﬁcation of the molecular processes that allows the 
repair of early tooth decay without invasive processes. Recaldent is now included in a range of food products 
produced by Australian and international companies, including chewing gum and toothpastes.
5.3.2 Bioethanol
There has been substantial interest recently in biofuels because of pressures on existing oil supplies. 
Biofuels have come to prominence as the cost of traditional oil-based fuels and concerns about global 
warming have increased. 
There are two types of biofuels – bioethanol and biodiesel. Biodiesel is produced by chemical modiﬁcation 
of waste vegetable oil or from high density plant oils such palm or soybean. Production of biodiesel does not 
involve biotechnology and is not within the scope of this report. Bioethanol is a fuel produced by microbial 
fermentation of starchy plants (e.g. sugar beet, sugar cane, corn, cassava) and can be used in standard internal 
combustion engines. It can also be used to make ethyl-tertiary-butyl-ether, which is a fuel additive. 
Fermentation of biomass to produce ethanol is not a new technology; however recently many countries have 
developed extensive policies to build their biofuels capacity. In 2001, the European Commission adopted an 
action plan and two proposals for Directives to foster the use of alternative fuels for transport, starting with 
biofuels (European Commission, 2001). The action plan outlines a strategy to achieve a 20 per cent substitution 
of diesel and gasoline fuels by alternative fuels in the road transport sector by 2020. 
Brazil has also invested in developing biofuels, concentrating on generating bioethanol from sugar. More than 
20 per cent of cars sold in Brazil today are able to run on either petrol or ethanol (Luhnow, 2006). The Brazilian 
bioethanol program now uses over half of the country’s sugar cane crop. 
Worldwide, at least 22 countries have biofuel projects (Hamilton, 2004). The American Coalition for Ethanol 
estimates that in 2006 the US ethanol industry will provide 5 billion gallons of ethanol which equates to about 3 
per cent of national sales. 
Early bioethanol projects used feedstock such as agricultural residues, livestock waste, energy crops such as 
sugar and oilseeds such as canola, forestry waste, industrial waste and garden waste which were hydrolysed 
and fermented to produce ethanol (Nicolau, 2003). Emerging technologies are using biomass crops with high 
levels of cellulose which is the main energy source for bioethanol production. Hydrogen can also be produced 
as a result of this process (Biofuels Research Advisory Council, 2006). It has been estimated that between four 
per cent and 13 per cent of agricultural land in the European Union would be required to produce the amount 
of biofuel to reach targets set in 2003.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
55
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
The production of crops for biomass requires higher yields than when the same crops are produced for 
food. Research has been conducted into improving agronomic practices, breeding high biomass feedstock, 
improving harvesting methods and processing (including enzyme developments) (US Dept of Energy, 1999). 
The main focus of breeding studies is increasing cellulose accumulation. 
5.3.3 Fibre processing
Internationally, compared to Australia, there appears to be much greater emphasis on the use of biotechnology 
for ﬁbre processing, particularly the use of enzymes in softwood processing (Nutsubidze and Sarkanen, 1997). 
Enzymes such as xylanase help to break down the wood pulp more quickly so that it can be processed more 
eﬃciently and with less toxic waste than when stronger chemicals are used. The United States is leading in the 
application of protein technologies to ﬁbre manufacture.
While Australia has well-established wool, cotton and forestry industries and these are our main ﬁbre crops  
(for clothing and paper respectively), there has been little commercial interest in development of new 
ﬁbre crops. However, a recent example of new Australian work is Australian Papyrus Ltd, which is building a 
pilot plant to manufacture paper out of banana ﬁbre (Australian Papyrus Ltd, nd). Also, a workshop on the 
development of a bagasse-based ﬁbre industry (including consideration of the use of sugar bagasse as a 
source of paper ﬁbre) was conducted in Queensland in May 2007.
5.3.4 Phytoremediation
While the use of bioremediation is growing in Australia, a further development overseas is the use of whole 
plants, termed phytoremediation. According to workshop participants, development of both bioremediation 
and phytoremediation are being driven strongly overseas by the strengthening of regulatory frameworks which 
limit the amounts of harmful pesticide residues that can be associated with agricultural activities. In addition, 
land use pressures provide an incentive to quickly restore contaminated lands for agricultural or residential use. 
An example of the use of phytoremediation overseas is the use of crops such as globe yellowcress (Rorippa 
globosa) to absorb cadmium from contaminated soils (Wei, 2005). The phytoremediation crop is then harvested 
and removed and the cadmium, which is absorbed into the plant’s leaves, is treated oﬀ-site in a contained facility.
5.4 
Further potential applications of bioprocessing in Australia
The main areas where process biotechnologies have potential application in Australia are in the development 
of functional foods and bioethanol. These are discussed as types of processing in this section. Emerging 
applications in logistics and waste management are also reviewed.
5.4.1 Processing
Biofuels, in particular bioethanol, provide potential additional income to farmers for their crops and a number of 
bioethanol companies have recently been established in Australia. At present, the focus is on development of 
blends of ethanol and petrol blends, made from agricultural products including wheat and sugar cane biomass 
by-products. (Australian Farmers Fuel, nd). As with the examples overseas, developments are mainly based on 
existing technologies.
Despite signs of commercial activity in biofuels, most biofuel projects, both internationally and in Australia, are 
supported by government because they are not yet economically viable without this support. Biofuels tend to 
be promoted on their wider economic and environmental impacts, rather than direct commercial arguments. 
Arguments in favour of biofuels include that they (Hamilton, 2004):

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
5 6
p r o c e s s b i o t e c h n o l o g y ( b i o p r o c e s s i n g )
• 
improve energy eﬃciency by allowing higher octane ratios, reduce carbon monoxide emissions and 
support a cleaner combustion system;
• 
oﬀset demand for imported crude oil and reduce pressure on the balance of trade;
• 
encourage rural economic development and employment;
• 
improve the environment; and
• 
help Australia reduce CO2 emissions.
5.4.2 Logistics
There are additional applications for biotechnology emerging in logistics, mainly related to food preservation, 
with applications designed to have an impact on the storage and transport of fresh food. Researchers are 
developing methods of preserving meat using bacterial ﬁlms, which prevent spoilage organisms establishing 
on the surface of food, e.g. cuts of meat (Vermeiren, et al., 2004). Enzymes are also being used to break down 
spoilage organisms (Galperrin, 2006; Abdou, 2007). Such techniques enable meat processors and retailers 
to respond to emerging consumer preferences for “natural” and authentic foods while maintaining safety 
(Altieri, et al., 2005).
5.4.3 Waste management
The main trend in process biotechnology for waste management is the conversion of waste to valuable 
products rather than simply targeting the breakdown of waste into harmless by-products. Examples of these 
applications include the use of microbial fuel cells to create energy while at the same time remediating wastes 
such as sulphur (Angenent, 2006; Rabaey, 2006). 
5.5 
Conclusions 
Process biotechnology is probably one of the areas where Australia is furthest behind other countries in 
terms of the use of these technologies in agriculture. Australia appears to have relatively limited use of both 
established and emerging technologies, matters which may be linked to the role of manufacturing in the 
economy as a whole. The most common applications were found in bioremediation using whole organisms; 
and food manufacturing using imported enzymes. 
Australia has an emerging interest in biofuels. However, compared to many other nations such as Brazil and the 
United States, biofuel production in Australia is still well behind many other nations. Most biofuel projects, both 
internationally and in Australia, are supported by government because they are not yet economically viable by 
themselves. Environmental beneﬁts (reduced greenhouse emissions) and fuel security are cited as major drivers 
for government decisions to support biofuels.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
57
s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
6 
Summar y and conc lusions 
The report presents information on how non-GM biotechnology tools and techniques (excluding genetically 
modiﬁed organisms as ﬁnal product) are being applied in Australian primary industries and how they beneﬁt 
users down the supply chain. 
6.1 
Biotechnology’s current application in Australian agriculture
This report is based on a review of 213 agricultural biotechnology projects along the supply chain using 
biotechnology, including 119 relating to plants, 79 relating to livestock and 11 relating to micro-organisms. 
Use of biotechnology is more prevalent in the cattle, sheep and grains industries, possibly because there are 
greater resources to invest in biotechnology research and associated applications in the larger sectors. 
Many examples of the utilisation of biotechnology in agricultural research were identiﬁed; however, examples of 
commercial applications were less prevalent. Nevertheless, examples of commercial biotechnology applications 
along the supply chain were identiﬁed. Selected examples that highlight major uses on non-GM biotechnology 
in the agricultural supply chain are discussed below. 
Breeding 
The use of marker-assisted selection (MAS) has become widespread and helps to obtain genetic information on 
breeding stock and to speed up the development of new, more productive or higher value varieties of plants and 
breeding lines of livestock. MAS can halve the amount of time required to bring a new plant variety to market. 
MAS can also enable breeders to isolate livestock with unfavourable genetic make-ups so they can be excluded 
from breeding programs and to identify livestock with favourable characteristics for use in breeding programs. 
A limitation of genetic markers is that usually the genome of a species (identiﬁcation of gene sequences and 
their function) must be understood before MAS can be applied, This process is expensive and time-consuming, 
limiting the extension of this technology to less economically signiﬁcant crops. However, this limitation is 
being overcome through the development of new genome screening techniques such as that used in DArT 
technology (Case Study 2) that do not require pre-existing knowledge of a species’ genome sequence.
Other detailed examples identiﬁed in this report of the use of biotechnology for breeding include:
• 
use of MAS to develop strawberry varieties with superior ﬂavour and ﬂowering characteristics (Case Study 1); 
• 
use of genetic markers and other biotechnology techniques to improve the management of, and to add 
value to, artiﬁcial insemination and embryo-handling techniques.
Disease diagnosis and treatment
For disease diagnosis, biotechnology techniques are well established and Australia has the capacity to develop 
new diagnostics for emerging threats. The techniques are used in a range of plant and livestock sectors, and are 
often incorporated either into or are often based on research in Australia. Examples of the use of biotechnology 
for disease diagnosis in the report include:
• 
Use of DNA technologies to measure the genetic diversity of sugar cane smut leading to the identiﬁcation 
of six individual strains of smut worldwide. This information was used by the Bureau of Sugar Experiment 
Stations to identify smut-resistant sugarcane cultivars internationally. These sugarcane varieties were used in 
cross-breeding with Australian cultivars to produce smut-resistant Australian cultivars.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
5 8
s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
• 
Identiﬁcation of a range of fungi and nematodes in soil using the Predicta-B test, which helps to determine 
the best crop rotations in the South Australian wheat belt (Case Study 3). 
• 
Development of a vaccine for the Australian strain of bovine herpes virus-1 (BHV-1), which is believed to be 
a signiﬁcant cause of sickness and death in Australian feedlot cattle (Case Study 5). Vaccinated feedlot cattle 
are less likely to lose weight and it is estimated that vaccination of cattle on arrival at a feedlot of 20,000 
cattle would result in a net beneﬁt of $1.36 million. 
Logistics and support
In logistics, an increase in demand for food security and quality assurance is driving requirements for improved 
trace back and identiﬁcation systems for both domestic and export markets. Commercial applications of 
both protein and DNA techniques are being developed to meet these requirements. Examples of the use of 
biotechnology in logistics and support in the report include:
• 
The WheatRite® test used to identify pre-harvest sprouting in wheat and barley. As sprouted grain is of lower 
value because it cannot be used for bread or noodle manufacture, being able to identify sprouted crops 
allows the unaﬀected portion of the crop to be harvested separately and its value maintained.
• 
The GeneSTAR Feed Eﬃciency4 test, developed by Genetic Solutions Pty Ltd, screens livestock for four 
separate genetic markers that aﬀect feed eﬃciency. Test results can be utilised at the feedlot level to 
maximise eﬃciencies by allowing the cattle to be sorted into groups for diﬀerent feeding programs.
• 
Prevention of substitution in ﬁsh wholesale outlets, using protein technologies to “ﬁngerprint” ﬁsh 
species. Researchers at Murdoch University are working with Proteomics International Pty Ltd to develop a 
method for on-the-spot testing of up to 450 ﬁsh species using a biometric card. This card will help ensure 
consumers get the species that they pay for and is expected to save the industry tens of millions of dollars in 
mislabelled and substituted ﬁsh products.
Processing
Compared to some other countries there is relatively limited processing of agricultural products in Australia 
beyond traditional food manufacture. Internationally, use of biotechnology in agricultural and ﬁbre processing 
is much more advanced. These areas provide opportunities for high levels of value adding to agricultural 
products, and Australian agricultural industries could be missing out as overseas growers utilise bioprocessing 
of agricultural products to build valuable businesses. 
The main modern applications in agriculture of process biotechnology appear to be in bioremediation and in 
food manufacture, the latter including development of specialised yeasts and starter cultures. In Australia, most 
of these enzymes are imported from overseas.
Development of functional food or nutraceutical ingredients is an important way of adding value to particular 
agricultural product fractions or to waste streams. Only a few Australian companies, mainly those processing 
dairy or bovine ingredients, manufacture functional ingredients or ﬁnished functional food products. 
Australia‘s involvement in biofuels is recent and many other nations such as Brazil and the United States are 
more advanced in this technology. Environmental beneﬁts (reduced greenhouse emissions) and fuel security 
are cited as major drivers for government decisions to support biofuels.
Waste management 
Compared to some overseas countries, in Australia applications of biotechnology in waste remediation are 
limited. This may be because, compared to other countries which have stronger legislative requirements,

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
59
s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
in Australia there are few regulatory drivers regarding the management of agricultural waste. In the future, 
Australia may increase its use of biotechnology in this area due to an increased need to recycle water and to 
add value to waste streams. 
Examples of waste management using biotechnology in the report include:
• 
Development of Landguard™ OPA to speed remediation of organophosphate chemicals used on crops 
and in sheep dip (Case Study 6). Organophosphates generally break down slowly and some can have 
undesirable eﬀects on the environment. The enzymes in LandguardTM OPA are able to reduce pesticide 
concentration to very low levels in less than 30 minutes and have a number of applications, including  
use by mobile sheep dip operations. 
• 
The Environmental Biotechnology CRC in collaboration with MLA, is developing a demonstration 
processing plant which uses bacteria to remove excess nitrogen and phosphorus from heavily 
contaminated abattoir wastewater. 
6.2 
Biotechnology’s impact
While the economic beneﬁts of biotechnology for agriculture and the economy can not always be readily 
quantiﬁed, it seems clear that the existing beneﬁts are signiﬁcant and future beneﬁts could be large. 
For example:
• 
Marker-assisted selection of plants allows breeders to simultaneously select for more than one characteristic 
and importantly the technology can also speed up the development of new varieties. It has the potential 
to bring higher yielding and/or more water eﬃcient grains to market relatively cheaply in a much shorter 
period of time than more traditional breeding methods.
• 
DNA-based diagnostics by identifying productivity and product quality traits can improve quality and 
potentially increase returns to growers through price premiums and improving market access.
• 
Modern biotechnology can speed up the diagnosis and treatment of disease, vaccines can be developed 
more quickly and with improved speciﬁcity reducing disease associated losses.
• 
A range of biotechnology techniques are being used to develop functional foods, which can produce 
economic beneﬁts along the chain, although many of the beneﬁts may accrue to industry players beyond 
the farm gate. However, in the longer term an important beneﬁt to the economy and society of functional 
foods is likely to be lower health costs and a healthier Australian community.
Many of the technologies being developed are only relatively new, e.g. proteomics and new methods of 
developing vaccines. As result, their main use is still in public sector research. Over time, more of these will be 
developed into commercial products and are likely to be taken up in customer sectors including agriculture. 
Those likely to increase in usage include variety testing and purity testing in crops other than grains and in 
livestock other than cattle. The uptake of many of these technologies as commercial products will depend on 
cost and eﬃcacy rather than technical capacity.
6.3 
Conclusions
The examples presented in this report demonstrate that there have been beneﬁts from use of biotechnology 
(excluding GMOs as ﬁnal products) in Australian agriculture. These beneﬁts often accrue to producers through 
improved speed to market; reduced environmental damage; healthier and more valuable livestock and crops: 
and maintenance of or improvements in productivity. Where biotechnology contributes further down the 
supply chain, then the beneﬁts will usually accrue to those later in the chain. However the economy as a whole 
may also beneﬁts.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
6 0
s u m m a r y a n d c o n c l u s i o n s
There may be wider social reasons for using biotechnology, including healthier communities, reduced use of 
scarce resources, regional development and improved environment outcomes, including reduced greenhouse 
gas impacts.
While there are many examples of biotechnology being developed in the research setting, Australian 
agricultural industries appear to be using commercially available biotechnology-based tools and techniques in 
a limited manner (Table 6-1). There are two exceptions to this view. Firstly, the use of biotechnology to develop 
and release new varieties of plants and breeds of domestic animals is well established. Secondly, research 
institutions have a major role in using biotechnology to develop new diagnostic tests which if required can 
be developed relatively rapidly for commercial use. Both of these applications are listed under growing and 
husbandry in Table 6-1.
Table 6-1: Scale of use of technologies along supply chain
Technology 
Supply chain position
Growing & 
husbandry
Logistics 
& support
Processing
Waste 
management
DNA and RNA
Extensive
Limited 
Limited
Limited
Proteins and other 
molecules
Intermediate
Limited
Intermediate
Limited
Cell and tissue culture 
engineering
Intermediate
Not found
Limited
Limited
Process biotechnology
Not applicable
Limited
Limited
Limited
Sub-cellular organisms
Limited
Limited
Not found
Not found
Based on project reviews and comments from workshop participants
As noted above, Australian researchers are using biotechnology tools and techniques extensively and are 
developing new applications which could be applied by industry. However, given the limited number of 
commercial applications identiﬁed in many supply chain positions the uptake of existing biotechnology tools 
and techniques could be expanded signiﬁcantly and would have corresponding beneﬁts in those sectors into 
which it is introduced.
Many of Australia’s competitors are at a similar stage of development to Australia but seem to be pursuing 
additional, more valuable, opportunities in plant or animal processing with downstream applications in human 
medicine. Research and development is very expensive so Australia will need to continue working in major 
international consortia to remain fully informed and capture information required to develop biotechnology 
applications speciﬁc to Australian conditions.

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
61
r e f e r e n c e s
7 
Re fe re nces
Abdou, A, Higashiguchi, S, Aboueleinin, AM, Kim, M and Ibrahim, HR (2007): Antimicrobial peptides derived from 
hen egg lysozyme with inhibitory eﬀect against Bacillus species, Food Control, 18 (20): 173 – 178
AgGenomics Ltd (2004): AgGenomics has Achieved a Number of Signiﬁcant Milestones, press release,  
11 February 2004, www.aggenomics.com.au
Altieri, C. Speranza, B, Del Nobile, M and Sinigaglia, M, (2005): Suitability of biﬁdobacteria and thymol as 
preservatives in extending the shelf life of fresh packed plaice ﬁllets, Jnl Applied Microbiology 99: 1294-1302
Amalﬁ, C (2005): Fishy practice stopped by science, Western Australian Newspaper, 9 August 2006
Angenent, L (2004): Production of bioenergy and biochemicals from industrial and agricultural wastewater,  
Trends in Biotechnology 22 (9): 477 – 485
APAF (2006): Plant and Agricultural Proteomics, www.apaf.org.au, accessed 24 November 2006.
Australian Academy of Science (2007): Biology Meets Industry – Genomics, Proteomics, Phenomics,  
www.science.org.au
Australian Animal Health Laboratory, (2006): 21 years of achievement: Australia’s animal health laboratory,  
Livestock Horizons 2, pp.6-7.
Australian Cotton Shippers Association (2003): Presentation summaries from their conference on 3 September 
2003, www.austcottonshippers.com.au/news_item.asp?idnews=16, accessed 30 November 2006
Australian Dairy Farmers (2006), www.adﬀ.com.au, accessed December 2006.
Australian Farmers Fuel (SAFF) (nd), www.farmersfuel.com.au, accessed November 2006
Australian Papyrus Ltd (nd), www.papyrusaustralia.com.au, accessed November 2006
Australian Pork (2006): Australian Pork Traceability Audit, www.apl.au.com
Australian Wool Innovations (2007): Breeding Tools for the Future, and DNA Marker Technology,  
www.wool.com.au, accessed 5 January 2007
Backhouse, D, Abubakar, AA, Burgess, LW, Dennis, JI, Hollaway, GJ, Wildermuth, GB, Wallwork, H and Henry, FJ 
(2004): Survey of Fusarium species associated with crown rot of wheat and barley in eastern Australia, Australasian 
Plant Pathology 33(2) 255 – 261
Ballan News (2007): Promising Auction Debut for BioClip Wool, Ballan News 9 March 2007
Bancroft, I (2002): Insights into cereal genomes from two draft genome sequences in rice, Genome Biology, 3(6), 
online publication
Barling, P, Liu, H, Matich, J, Mount, J, Ka Wai Lai, A, Ma, L and Basford Nicholson, LF (2004): Expression of PTHrP 
and the PTH/PRHrP receptor in growing red deer antler, Cell Biology International, 28 (10): 661 – 673. PTH/PTHrP = 
parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptide receptor
Barr, A, Eglinton, J, Langridge, P, Warner, P and Chalmers, K (2001): Marker-assisted Selection – where to now? 
Proceedings of the 10th Australian Barley Technical Symposium, Canberra, ACT 16-20 September 2001,  
ISBN 1 920842 13 6

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
62
r e f e r e c e s
Barr, A and Langridge, P (2001): National Barley Molecular Marker Program – Achievements and Future Directions, 
10th Australian Barley Technical Symposium, 16 – 20 September 2001
Beard, C (1998): Out on the Farm with DNA Vaccines, Nature Biotechnology, 16: 1325 - 1328
Beignon, A (2005): A peptide vaccine administered transcutaneously together with cholera toxin elicits potent 
neutralising anti-FMDV antibody responses, Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology, 104 (3-4): 273 – 280
BIO (nd): Food Biotechnology www.bio.org/speeches/pubs/er/food.asp, accessed 30 November 2006
Biofuels Research Advisory Council (2006): BioFuels in the European Union – A Vision for 2030 and Beyond,  
14 March 2006
Blade, S, Lopetinsky, K, Olson, M, Laﬂamme, P and Phillips, C (2004): High protein lupins: diversifying the pulse 
industry in western Canada. New directions for a diverse planet: Proceedings of the 4th International Crop 
Science Congress, Brisbane, Australia, 26 September – 1 October 2004
Bowes, D (2003): Body Burden of POPS in Children, report on organophosphate and organochlorine residues in 
Coﬀs Harbour
British Texel Sheep Society (2005): Beef and Sheep Data – Future Secured in the UK, press release, 17 October 2005.
Braithwaite, K (2005): Final Report – SRDC Project BSS258 – Assessing the Impact that Plant Variation has on the 
Sugarcane Breeding Program, BSES Ltd, December 2005
Bruschke, C, van Oirschot, JT and van Rijn, PA (1999): An experimental multivalent bovine virus diarrhea virus E2 
subunit vaccine and two experimental conventionally inactivated vaccines induce partial fetal protection in sheep, 
Vaccine, 17 (15-16): 1983-1991
Bush, G (2004): Homeland Security Presidential Directive HSPD-9 - Defense of United States Agriculture and Food, 
30 January y2004
CDC (2007): Arthritis Surveillance, www.cdc.gov/arthritis/state_coordinators/faqs/case_deﬁnition.htm, 
accessed January 2007, US Centers for Disease Control
Choudhury, S, Allsop, T, Passman, A and Norris, G (2006): Use of a proteomics approach to identify favourable 
conditions for production of good quality lambskin leather, Analytical and BioAnalytical Chemistry 384(3): 723 – 735
Coussens, P (2005): Determining Gene Function for Agriculture and Using Domestic Species as Model Organisms. 
Panel session at the Bovine Genome Project – the Next Phase International Workshop, 29-31 March 2005, 
Houston, Texas. USDA Co-operative State Research, Education and Extension Service, www.csrees.usda.gov
CRC for Innovative Dairy Products (2006a): Fact Sheet – Using Genetic Markers in Dairy Cattle, January 2006
CRC for Innovative Dairy Products (2006b): Fact Sheet - Genomics and Proteomics, www.dairycrc.com/
www/163/1001127/displayarticle/1001764.html, accessed January 2007
Cregan, P and Noble, G (1996): Genetic Improvement – Plants and Livestock. Summary of proceedings,  
25th Riverina Outlook Conference, 1996, www.regional.org.au/au/roc/1996/roc1996055.htm
CSIRO (1998): Bug Puts the bite on Pesticide Problem, CSIRO Media Release 2 June 1998, 98/131
CSIRO (2001): Hairpin RNA beats plant viruses, CSIRO Media Release 2001/150
CSIRO (2006): New Wheat Has Healthy Potential, CSIRO Media Release 06/38

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
63
r e f e r e c e s
Dairy Food Safety Victoria (2006): Food Biosecurity for Victorian Dairy Products, MP1/016, www.dairysafe.vic.gov.
au/project016/project016.htm#Project1
Data Monitor (2004): Nutraceuticals – Global Industry Guide
Davidson, S (2003): Pioneering Proteins, Ecos, 114: 20 - 24, Jan – Mar 2003
Day, S, Morese, G and Lester, J (1997): The cost eﬀectiveness of contaminated land remediation strategies, 
The Science of the Total Environment, 201: 125-136.
de Nys, Rocky (2005): The development of yabby aquaculture in Australia, in Biotechnology and the future of 
Australian agriculture”, Proceedings of the High Flyers Think Tank held at the Shine Dome, Canberra, 26 July
Desai, K and Park, HJ (2005): Recent Developments in Microencapsulation of Food Ingredients, Drying Technology 
23 (7): 1361 – 1394
Donnelly, P (2006): Biotech Advances to deliver Next Generation Dairy Breeding, presentation to Bureau of Rural 
Science, 2006
Eady, S (2005): Crusader – a Production system for Farmed Rabbits, RIRDC Publication 05/038, April 2005. Project 
number CSA 23-A.
Eamens, G (2007): Testing for Bovine Johne’s Disease, PrimeFacts 461, February 2007,  
NSW Department of Primary Industries
Elbehri, A (2005): Biopharming and the Food System – Examining the potential beneﬁts and risks, AgBioForum, Jnl of 
Agrobiotechnology Management Economics, 8(1): article 3, www.agbioforum.org/v8n1/v8n1a03-elbehri.htm, 
accessed 14 December 2006
Ellis, M, Rebetzke, G, Mago, R and Chu, P (2003): First report of wheat streak mosaic virus in Australia, Australasian 
Plant Pathology, 32(4): 551-553
Environmental Biotechnology CRC (2006): Seven Year Business Plan, EBCRC Ltd, Sydney
European Commission (2003): Transport: Commission proposes to encourage alternative fuels, starting with biofuels, 
Press release, IP/01/1543, 7 November 2001
European Commission (2007): Innovation and technical developments in energy, Directorate General for Energy 
and Transport, http://ec.europa.eu/energy/res/sectors/bioenergy_en.htm, accessed March 2007
FarmOnLine (2007): Premiums Expected at BioClip Sale, FarmOnLine 27 February 2007
Ferguson, I (2004): Project Dolly – Impacts of New Technologies to 2029, Future Woolscapes Research Brief, Position 
Paper, June 2004, Ian Ferguson and Associates Pty Ltd
Flanagan, L, Plowman, J and Bryson, W (2002): The High Sulphur Proteins of Wool – Towards an Understanding of 
Sheep Breed Diversity, Proteomics, 2(9): 1240 – 1246
Food Standards Australia (2003): A Pilot Survey on The Identity of Fish Species as Sold Through Food Outlets 
in Australia, Food Standards Australia New Zealand, New South Wales, Northern Territory, South Australia, 
Queensland and Western Australia. 16pp
Foster, M (2003): GM Canola: ‘What are its economics under Australian conditions?’ Australian Grains Industry 2003, 
produced for the Grains Research and Development Corporation, www.grdc.com.au/bookshop/docs/
abare_gm_canola_2003.pdf

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
6 4
r e f e r e c e s
Gaﬀy, J (2005): Improvac Trials, in Islam, N (ed.): “Gains from DAWA’s R&D Investment - Beneﬁt Cost Analysis  
2004-05”, Miscellaneous Publication 28/2005, ISBN 0-9758096, August 2005
Galperin, M (2006): Protecting Sausages with Bacteria Instead of Salt, Environmental Microbiology 8(2): 185 – 192
Genetic Solutions Website: www.geneticsolutions.com.au, Accessed January 2007
Genetic Technologies Corporation (2003): Annual Report 2003, www.gtg.com.au
GRDC (2004a): Pre-harvest Sprouting, GroundCover Special Issue on Weather Damage, Issue
GRDC (2005a): Ground Cover, Issue 57, August/September, online www.grdc.com.au/growers/gc/gc57/
barley2.htm
GRDC (2005b): Pulse Disease: Environmental inﬂuence and management decisions, Research Update,  
www.grdc.com.au
GRDC (2006): EPR Debate Deﬁnes Crop Breeding Future, Ground Cover, Issue 63, August 2006
Hamill, S (2005): Biotechnology beneﬁts banana industry – a successful partnership
Hamilton, C (2004): Biofuels Made Easy, presentation to Australian Institute of Energy, Melbourne Branch, 
18 March 2004 
December 2000
Harmeyer, S, Pfaﬀ, E and Groschup, MH. (1998): Synthetic peptide vaccines yield monoclonal antibodies to cellular 
and pathological prion proteins of ruminants, Jnl of General Virology, 79: 937 – 945
Henry, R and Waters, D (2006): New Markers for Australian Rice Improvement, RIRDC report 06/123, November 2006
Higgin, TJ (2007): Crops of the Future, BioFutures-BioSolutions Forum, Parliament House, Canberra, 14 June 2007
High Technology Research and Development Program of China, Annual Report 2001,  
www.863.org.cn/english/annual_report/annual_repor_2001/200210100027.html
Holland, J (2004): Implementation of molecular markers for quantitative traits in breeding programs - challenges 
and opportunities, Paper presented at New directions for a diverse planet conference: Proceedings of the 4th 
International Crop Science Congress, Brisbane, 26 September – 1 October 2004, ISBN 1 920842 20 9
Horticulture Australia (2005): Summerfruit Industry Report 2004-05.
Ingram. K (2004): International Eucalyptus Genome Consortium, ABC Radio, 20 July 2004
IP Australia (2006): Plant Breeders Rights, www.ipaustralia.gov.au/pbr/about.shtml, accessed January 2007
Jeﬀery, M, Loxton, I, Van Der Mark, S, James, T, Shorthose, R, Bell, K and D’Occhio, M (1997): Liveweight gains, 
and carcass and meat characteristics of entire, surgically spayed or immunologically spayed beef heifers, Aust. Jnl 
Experimental Agriculture 37(7) 719 - 726
Johnson, SK (2005): Possibilities with today’s reproductive technologies, Theriogenology, 64(3): 639-656
Keniry, A, Hopkins, C, Jewell, E, Morrison, B, Spangenberg, G, Edwards, D and Batley, J (2006): Identiﬁcation and 
characterization of simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers from Fragaria× ananassa expressed sequences, Molecular 
Ecology Notes, 6(2): 319 – 322, June 2006

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
6 5
r e f e r e c e s
Langridge, P (2002): From Genome Structure to Breeding of Wheat and Barley, 10th Australian Barley Technical 
Symposium, 2001
Langridge, P and Barr, A (2003): Preface to special issue - Better Barley Faster: the Role of Marker-assisted Selection, 
Australian Journal of Agricultural Research, 54 (12) i – iv
Lawrence, L (2002): Crop Protection Genes – Building Pest and Disease Defences into plants, Australian Grain August-
September 2002, pp8 – 12
Long, N and Washington, J (2004): Premium Grains for Sochu, GRDC Research Update, February 2004
Love, S (2006): Laboratory Tests for Worms – Prices and Availability, Primefacts May 2006, NSW Department of 
Primary Industries.
Low Chill Australia Inc. (2005): Low Chill Stone, Fruit Grower Newsletter, No. 3/05, September 2005.
Lucy, M (2005): New Tools for Managing Reproduction, Animal Production in Australia 25: 363 – 372
Luhnow, D (2006): As Brazil Fills Up on Ethanol, It Weans oﬀ Energy Imports, The Wall St Journal, 16 January 2006 
Mallik, A, Pinkus, GS and Sheﬀer, S (2002): McKinsey Quarterly, Number 2
Martines-Filho J, Burnquist, H and Vian, C (2006): BioEnergy and the Rise of Sugarcane based bioethanol in Brazil, 
Choices magazine, 2nd quarter 2006, 21(2), www.choicesmagazine.org
McCauley, I, Oliver, WT, Harrell, RJ, Suster, D, Kerton, DJ and Dunshea, FR (2003): A GnRF vaccine (Improvac®) and 
porcine somatotropin (Reporcin®) have synergistic eﬀects upon growth performance in both boars and gilts, Aust. Jnl 
of Agricultural Research 54(1) 11 - 20
McGlashan, S (2005): Waste-water cleaning bacteria – brochure produced by Department of Education Science 
and Training
McRae, T, Dutkowski, GW, Pilbeam, DJ, Powell, MB and Tier, B (2004): Genetic Evaluation Using the Treeplan System. 
Presentation to IURFO Joint Conference Joint Conference of Division 2 Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding in the 
Age of Genomics – Progress and Future, Charleston, South Carolina, 1-5 November 2004.
Meat and Livestock Australia (2001): Controlling Bovine Respiratory Disease in Feedlot Cattle, On-Farm Tips and 
Tools Brochure, July 2001, www.mla.com.au
Meat and Livestock Australia (2005a): The role of vaccination in the control of Ovine Johne’s Disease, brochure
Meat and Livestock Australia (2005b): Ovine Johne’s Disease R&D Update, MLA, Sydney
Michel, B, Stucki, G, Frey, D, De Vathaire, F, Vignon, E, Bruehlmann, P and Uebelhart, D (2005): Chondroitin 4 and 6 
sulphate in osteoarthritis of the knee – a randomized, controlled trial. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 52(3): 779-786.
MJ Biologics (2006): Innovation in Animal Biologics, www.mjbio.com, accessed December 2006
Mohair Australia Ltd (2000): Breeding Angora Goats, www.acga.org.au
Morris, M, Dreher, K, Ribaut, JM and Khairallah, M (2003): Money matters (II): costs of maize inbred line conversion 
schemes at CIMMYT using conventional and marker-assisted selection. Molecular Breeding 11, 235-247
Morrision, B (2006): National strawberry breeding program developing better tasting strawberries in Victoria. 
Information supplied by Horticulture Australia Ltd to the Australian Agricultural and National Resources Online 
Database, September 2006

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
6 6
r e f e r e c e s
Morrow, and Fehler (2004) cited in Walkden-Brown, S, Islam, A, Cheetham, B, Groves, P, Burgess, S and Island, F 
(2005): Quantitative Measures of MDV and HVT in Poultry Dust – A new tool for Monitoring Marek’s Disease?  
www.jcu.edu.au, accessed 12 May 2007
Muller, C and Botha, J (2003): The response to selection during ﬁrst lactation on the phenotypic and genetic trends in 
the Elsenburg Holstein-Friesland herd. South African Jnl of Animal Science, 33(2): 111
Nikolau, A, Remrova, M and Jeliazkov, I (2003): Biomass availability in Europe, December 2003
Nutsubidze, N and Sarkanen, S (1997): Lignin Depolymerase Catalyzed Biobleaching of Softwood Kraft Pulp. 
Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Wood Pulp Chemistry. G6, 1-5, (University of Minnesota 
Department of Bio-based Products)
OECD (2005): A Framework for Biotechnology Statistics
O’Neill, G (2004): Paradigm Shift in Proteins, Australian Biotechnology News, 1 June 2004
O’Neill, G (2005): GM research heads to warmer climes, Australian Biotechnology News, 21 April 2005
Pettiford, S and Gaden, R (2005): New cattle vaccines boost feedlot performance and herd fertility,  
www.beef.crc.org.au
Playne, M, Bennett, L and Smithers, G (2003): Functional Dairy Foods and Ingredients, Aust. Jnl Dairy Technology 
58(3): 242-264
Plowman, J, Bryson, W and Jordan, T (1999)\: Application of proteomics for determining protein markers for wool 
quality traits, Electrophoresis 21(9): 1899 – 1906
Pocock, K, Adams, K, Kwiatkowski, M and Waters, E (2003): Combined heat and proteolytic treatment of white wines 
reduce haze forming protein content without detrimental eﬀect, Australian Journal of Grape and Wine Research 9 
(1): 56-63
Primary Industries and Resources SA (2007): Barley variety sowing guide 2007, Fact Sheet 37/86/07,  
www.sardi.sa.gov.au
Productivity Commission (2002): Impact of a Foot and Mouth Disease Outbreak on Australia, Research Report, 
AusInfo, Canberra
Proteomics International (nd), www.proteomics.com.au, accessed November 2006.
Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries (2006): Biotechnology and its application to ﬁeld crops 
research and development, www2.dpi.qld.gov.au/ﬁeldcrops/9020.html, accessed 1 December 2006.
Rabaey, K, van den Sompel, K, Maignien, L, Boon, N, Aelterman, P, Clauwaert, P, de Schamphelaire, L, Them Pham, 
H, Vermeulen, J, Verhaege, M, Verstraete, W (2006): Microbial Fuel Cells for Sulﬁde Removal, Environ. Sci. Technol. 
40: 5218-5224
Rampitsch, C and Srinivasan, M (2006): The application of proteomics to plant biology – a Review, Canadian Jnl of 
Botany, 84: 883-7892
Reifschneider, F (2006): Selected to Make Their Mark, CGIAR News, June 2006
RIRDC (2001): 2001 Annual Report. Summary of operational plan 2000-02: Essential Oils and Plant Extracts,  
www.rirdc.com.au

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re
67
r e f e r e c e s
Sasaki, Y, Miyake, T, Gaillard,C, Oguni,T, Matsumoto, M, Ito, M, Kurahara, T, Sasae, Y, Fujinaka, K, Ohtagaki, S and 
Dougo, T (2006): Comparison of genetic gains per year for carcass traits among breeding programs in the Japanese 
Brown and the Japanese Black cattle. Jnl Animal Science, 84(2): 317-323
Siddique, K (2006): From the Director, Beanstalk, Newsletter of the Centre for Legumes in Mediterranean 
Agriculture, 7(1): 2, September 2006
Siitar, H and Koivistoinen, H (2004): Proteomics – Challenges and Opportunities in Finland, TEKES Technology 
Review 157/2004, April 2004
Singh, OV (2006): Proteomics and metabolomics: The molecular make-up of toxic aromatic pollutant bioremediation, 
Proteomics 6(20), special issue “Proteomics Review”, pp5481-5492
Singh, OM and Nagaraj, NS (2006): Transcriptomics, proteomics and interactomics – unique approaches to track the 
insights of bioremediation, Brieﬁngs in Functional Genomics and Proteomics, 4(4): 355 – 362.
Skerritt, J and Heywood, R (2000): A Five-Minute Field Test for On-Farm Detection of Pre-Harvest Sprouting in Wheat, 
Crop Science, 40, May-June 2000, pp742-756
Skylas, D, Cordwell, S, Craft, G, McInerney, B, Wu, M, Chin, J, Wrigley C and, Sharp, P (2005): Proteome Analysis of 
Two Soft-Grained Wheats of Diﬀerent Processing Quality: Cultivar-Speciﬁc Proteins. Australian Journal of Agricultural 
Research, 56(2): 145 - 155 
Smith, M (1996): Antibody Production in Plants, Biotechnology Advances 14(3): 267-281 
Somerville, C (2004): Genetic Engineering of Cellulose Accumulation, Stanford University Global Climate and Energy 
Project, January 2004 – December 2006
South Australian Research & Development Institute (SARDI) (2006): www.sardi.sa.gov.au,  
Accessed November 2006
Taboga, O, Tami, C, Carrillo, E, Nunez, J, Rodriguez, A, Saiz, J, Blanco, E, Valero, M, Roig, X, Camarero, J, Andreu, D, 
Mateu, M, Giralt, E, Domingo, E, Sobrino, F and Palma, E (1997): A large scale evaluation of peptide vaccines against 
foot-and-mouth disease – lack of solid protection in cattle and isolation of escape mutants, Journal of Virology, 1997, 
pp2606 - 2614
Tammen, I (2006): Cattle Diseases – Are they Inherited? Presentation by University of Sydney Faculty of Veterinary 
Science at the Provet Partners in Veterinary Education Conference, Sydney, 6-7 July 2006,  
www.vetsci.usyd.edu.au/partners/conference06/, accessed December 2006
Triticarte (2004): Polymorphism Detection, www.triticarte.com.au/content/our-assay.html,  
accessed January 2007
University of Edinburgh (2004): New E. coli research oﬀers safer meat processing, press release dated 28 July 2004, 
reported in www.foodproductiondaily.com
US Dept of Energy (1999): Review of the Research Strategy for Biomass Derived Fuels
Value Added Wheat CRC Ltd (2005): Annual Report 2004-05
Van der Werd, J (2000): An Overview of Animal Breeding Programs in Kinghorn, B et al., (2000): “Animal Breeding 
– Use of New Technologies”, University of Sydney ISBN: 0 646 38713 8

T h e Va l u e o f B i ote c h n o l o g y A p p l i c at i o ns to Aus t r a l i a n A g r i c u l t u re 
6 8
r e f e r e c e s
Vanstone, V (2007): Root Lesion and Burrowing Nematodes in West Australian Cropping Systems, Department of 
Agriculture and Food, Western Australia, Bulletin 4698, February 2007
Vermeiren, L, Devlieghere, F and Debevere, J (2004): Evaluation of meat born lactic acid bacteria as protective 
cultures for the biopreservation of cooked meat products, Int. Jnl of Food Microbiology, 96(2): 149-164
Vettore, A, da Silva, F, Kemper, E and Arruda, P (2001): The Libraries that made SUCEST, Genetics and Molecular 
Biology, 24 (1-4), December 2001.
Wang, C-Y, Chang, TY, Walﬁeld, AM, Ye, J, Shen, M, Chen, SP, Li, MC, Lin, YL, Jong, MH, Yang, PC, Chyr, N, Kramer, 
E and Brown, F (2002): Eﬀective synthetic peptide vaccine for foot-and-mouth disease in swine. Vaccine. 20 
(19/20):2603-2611
Wang, J, Li, D, Dangott, LJ and Wu, G (2006): Proteomics and its Role in Nutrition Research, Journal of Nutrition,  
136: 1759 – 1762
Wei, S and Zhou, Q-X (2005): Phytoremediation of Cadmium-Contaminated Soils by Rorippa globosa Using  
Two-Phase Planting, Environmental Science and Pollution Research International, 13 (3): 151-155
Wenzl, P, Carling, J, Kudrna, D, Jaccoud, D, Huttner, E, Kleinhofs, A and Kilian, A (2004): Diversity Arrays Technology 
(DArT) for whole-genome proﬁling of barley. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 101: 9915-9920, 
11 June 2004 
Willadsen, Dr Peter (2005): ’Biotechnology: Livestock’, in Biotechnology and the future of Australian agriculture, 
Proceedings of the High Flyers Think Tank held at the Shine Dome, Canberra, 26 July. Page 62
Williamson, S (2005): Plants, Proteins and Proteomics, Australian Biotechnology News, 29 November 2005
Wolf, BW, Bauer, L and Fahey, G.C. (1999): Eﬀects of chemical modiﬁcation on in vitro rate and extent of food starch 
digestion: An attempt to discover a slowly digested starch, Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 47 (10): 
4178 – 4183
Wong, G K-S, Hillier, L, Brandstrom, M, Croojmans, R, Ovcharenko, I, Gordon, L, Stubbs, L, Lucas, S, Glavina, T, 
Kaiser, P, Gunnarsson, U; Webber, C and Overton, I (2004): A Genetic Variation Map for Chickens with 2.8 million 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms, Nature, 12 September 2004, 432 (7018): 717-722
Xia, Q et al. (2004): A Draft Sequence for the Genome of the Domesticated Silkworm (Bombyx mori), Science, 
306 (5703): 1937 - 1940