Parties to the National Drought Agreement                1 
National Drought Agreement 2024 
to 2029: Outcomes Reporting 
Framework 
 
The NDA is the intergovernmental agreement that guides Australia’s drought efforts, signed by first 
ministers from the Australian Government, states and territories. This shared approach to drought 
policy by the parties dates back to the early 1990s and continues to evolve. Regular reviews have 
focused on improving on achievements from previous agreements and learning over time. 
About the framework 
The framework describes how the NDA will be monitored and reported on by the parties, as an 
intergovernmental agreement, and how parties will share learnings.  
The framework: 
• 
outlines the ways that the parties will demonstrate how outcomes are achieved over the 
duration of the NDA  
• 
supports continuous improvement, and informs future priorities 
• 
ensures that the parties have a shared understanding of how outcomes will be monitored 
• 
provides transparency to non-party stakeholders. 
The reporting will inform: 
• 
to what extent the parties achieved the outcomes listed in the NDA, and why or why not 
• 
what, if any, unintended outcomes resulted 
• 
what future priorities and opportunities exist through trends identified, lessons learned, or 
outcomes achieved. 
Non-party stakeholders may also use this framework to understand the roles and responsibilities of 
the parties in reporting, and how the parties will demonstrate delivery of the NDA outcomes for the 
duration of the NDA. 
Scope inclusions 
• 
Roles and responsibilities between and across jurisdictions 
• 
Reporting schedule 
• 
Indicators and measures to determine whether the NDA outcomes have been delivered

National Drought Agreement 2024 to 2029: Outcomes Reporting Framework 
Parties to the National Drought Agreement 
2 
• 
Opportunities and challenges for improvement and learning 
Scope exclusions 
• 
Collective impact of drought initiatives, policies and programs 
• 
Individual government drought measures 
The 2022 NDA review recommended that future efforts should not seek to measure or evaluate the 
collective impact of drought initiatives, given it would be unlikely to realise the benefits of this 
complex work. Doing so would also not align with the intent of the NDA, which is primarily focused 
on parties working together.  
Responsibilities 
The joint responsibilities contained within the NDA note the requirement of all parties to monitor 
drought policy and programs, to share information, to draw learnings, and endeavour to make these 
lessons learned public, where relevant.  
The Commonwealth is responsible for coordinating monitoring, evaluation, learning and reporting 
efforts including the compilation and delivery of the NDA annual report, noting however that this 
requires input and involvement from all parties. 
All parties are responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of individual programs and policies, 
contributing data towards reporting, and actively sharing lessons learned to improve clarity, 
decisions, and policy and programs. 
What is needed to achieve the outcomes 
• 
Parties remain committed to working together for the timeframe of the NDA (2024 to 2029) and 
to make a positive difference towards management of drought in Australia. 
• 
Parties continue to share their policies and programs, and lessons learned with each other in the 
spirit of collaboration. 
• 
Parties provide adequate resourcing and funding to enable adherence to NDA principles. 
• 
Parties share replicable lessons. 
• 
Sufficient and accessible networks, forums, groups and platforms exist to enable effective 
sharing of information with non-party stakeholders. 
• 
Non-party stakeholders are motivated to access drought information, tools and lessons learned. 
Table 1 Reporting framework 
Outcomes 
Indicators 
Reporting measures 
Data sources a 
Outcome 1 
Government drought 
policies and programs 
are aligned nationally, 
and consistent with 
the NDA principles. 
• 
New and existing drought 
policies and programs in 
each jurisdiction are 
aligned and meet the 
NDA principles and 
responsibilities. 
Jurisdictional self-assessment 
and peer review, reported in 
the NDA annual report. 
• 
Jurisdictional drought-
related policy and 
program lists 
• 
Jurisdiction self-
assessment against 
principles matrix

National Drought Agreement 2024 to 2029: Outcomes Reporting Framework 
Parties to the National Drought Agreement 
3 
Outcomes 
Indicators 
Reporting measures 
Data sources a 
• 
AMM Working Group on 
Drought have an annual 
workplan to progress 
implementation of the 
NDA. 
• 
Case studies 
• 
AMM/AGSOC workplan 
and updates 
Outcome 2 
Government 
responses across the 
drought cycle 
(preparedness, 
response, and 
recovery) reflect a 
focus on 
preparedness and the 
ability to respond and 
recover quickly from 
drought. 
Government responses and 
actual spending is reflective 
of the NDA principles and 
conditions and impacts 
experienced over the 
reporting period. 
Jurisdictional self-assessment 
reported in the NDA Annual 
Report. 
• 
Jurisdictional expenditure 
for drought-related 
programs 
• 
Case studies 
Outcome 3 
Information, tools 
and lessons learned 
are actively shared to 
improve clarity, 
decisions, and policy 
and programs, for 
parties and non-party 
stakeholders. 
Opportunities are utilised and 
networks exist for 
information sharing between 
parties, and between parties 
and non-parties. 
• 
Number of AMM Working 
Group on Drought 
meetings and a summary 
of high-level agenda 
items, reported in the 
NDA annual report. 
• 
Number of National 
Drought Network 
meetings, number of 
participants and 
associated meeting 
notes. 
• 
Jurisdictional evaluations 
are shared, where 
undertaken. 
• 
Case studies 
• 
Meeting records 
• 
Meeting notes 
• 
AMM/AGSOC workplan 
and updates 
a Commonwealth to lead as Secretariat. All jurisdictions to contribute towards these data sources. AMM Agriculture 
Ministers’ Meeting. AGSOC Agriculture Senior Officials Committee. 
Reporting schedule 
As outlined in the NDA 2024 to 2029: 
• 
The parties will report against the outcomes of this agreement annually to the Agriculture Senior 
Officials Committee (AGSOC) and as agreed by all parties. 
• 
The AGSOC members, or their representatives, will discuss this agreement annually, or as 
agreed by all parties, to ensure effective and efficient execution of the agreement.  
• 
AGSOC will report annually to the Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) and as required, on 
progress against the outcomes of this agreement.  
• 
Parties will produce an annual update to be publicly released by AMM, in line with the 
Outcomes Reporting Framework. Reporting will focus on progress against the outcomes of this 
agreement.

National Drought Agreement 2024 to 2029: Outcomes Reporting Framework 
Parties to the National Drought Agreement 
4 
Table 2 Reporting schedule 
Reporting 
Purpose 
Timing 
Jurisdictional input 
Each jurisdiction provides input from their respective regions, 
enabling monitoring of progress and lessons learned. 
As required 
NDA annual report 
Jurisdictions provide input from their respective regions which 
provides detail on the collective progress and performance 
against the agreed indicators, and opportunity to summarise 
learnings and focus for future priorities. 
Published by December 
each year a 
2027 NDA review 
Building on NDA outcomes reporting, the review will include 
external consultation and provide recommendations to inform 
future agreements. 
Published December 
2027 
NDA Outcomes 
Reporting 
Framework review 
Informal internal review to be completed by the AMMWG to 
ensure Outcomes Reporting framework remains fit for 
purpose and incorporates improvements based on ongoing 
learning. 
February 2026 
following 2 NDA annual 
reporting cycles 
a ‘Each year’ means yearly for the duration of the NDA 2024 to 2029. AMMWG Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting Working 
Group. 
How learnings are shared and how they 
contribute to improvement  
The parties will use information derived from reporting activities to monitor and determine progress 
against achieving the outcomes. The parties will also use it to inform continuous improvement in a 
variety of ways, including: 
• 
through the AMM Working Group on Drought – reviewing jurisdictional evaluations (where 
performed), observing trends, and sharing examples of lessons learned to inform work on 
policies and programs being developed across the jurisdictions 
• 
making replicable learnings public, where appropriate and relevant – for example, through the 
National Drought Network, or publishing information on websites  
• 
through formal NDA reporting including the NDA annual reports and the 2027 NDA review. 
Acknowledgement of Country 
We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of Australia and their continuing connection to land and sea, waters, 
environment and community. We pay our respects to the Traditional Custodians of the lands we live and work on, their 
culture, and their Elders past and present. 
© Commonwealth of Australia 2024 
Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the 
Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth). 
All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content 
supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms. 
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has exercised due care 
and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for 
any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the 
information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.