Online content
guidelines to assist those wishing to export and manufacture non-prescribed goods.
This document establishes the audit policy for establishments producing non-prescribed goods for the
purpose of export.
Background
authority for the export of goods derived from animals, plants and food.
The department obtains a legal basis for export from the Export Control Act 2020 and subordinate
legislative instruments. As the central competent authority, the department can legally issue
government to government certification for the export of prescribed and non-prescribed goods.
In some instances, in order to be able to issue government certification for the export of non-prescribed
goods, the establishments producing these goods are required to be audited.
Required audits
Establishments producing non-prescribed goods only need to be audited by the department , or an
accredited/approved third-party body, when an importing country has requirements additional to
Australian Standards. This includes instances where an importing country requires establishments that
produce a particular non-prescribed product to be listed with the department (see Exporting non-
prescribed goods: becoming export listed), or where there is an importing country requirement that
must be verified at audit.
At present, establishments producing blood products, pet food products, skin/hide products, leather
products and rendered animal products are required to be audited (and listed with the department—see
Exporting non-prescribed goods: becoming export listed) for some markets. Establishments producing
other types of non-prescribed goods (for example, wool) are not currently required to be audited but the
exporter of a non-prescribed good is responsible for ensuring they have been manufactured in
accordance with importing country requirements.
Known importing country requirements are set out in the department’s Manual of Importing Country
Requirements (Micor).
Obligations and recognition
Australian manufacturing establishments have an obligation to comply with Australian laws and, in
some cases, national food standards or other appropriate Australian Standards. As a result, government

officials, third-party auditors or, in some cases, both will conduct regular audits of these domestic
schemes.
and accredited/approved third-party bodies as meeting all Australian domestic requirements. These
audits must be capable of fulfilling clear objectives in public and animal health arenas, meet Australian
or International Standards, or a CODEX Alimentarus publication (for example, CODEX HACCP).
Where there are specific importing country requirements in addition to Australian Standards, these
export specific elements may be covered during the routine audit of an establishment by a third-party
body approved by the department. This minimises the regulatory burden on manufacturing
establishments.
Auditor arrangements
Establishments producing pet food for export are encouraged to liaise with Pet Food Industry
Association of Australia (PFIAA) as they are an approved third-party body able to undertake audits
which cover export elements.
Establishments producing rendered products for the purpose of export are encouraged to liaise with 
Australian Renderers Association (ARA) as they are an approved third-party body able to undertake
audits which cover export elements.
Establishments producing hide, skin and leather products for the purpose of export are encouraged to
liaise with the Australian Hide Skin & Leather Exporters Association (AHSLEA) as they are an approved
third-party body able to undertake audits which cover export elements.
If an establishment is required to be audited and no third-party body is approved to do so,
departmental auditors will perform the audit to meet importing country requirements. This is currently
the case for establishments processing blood products destined for export (to particular markets), as an
example.
Audit scope
The audit scope for the purpose of export depends on importing country requirements. Only elements
that are a requirement of the importing country, and which are in addition to Australian Standards, will
be covered at audit for the purpose of export.
The department has created specific checklists for departmental auditors, and approved third-party
auditors, to ensure importing country requirements for specific non-prescribed goods are met.
For more information, contact the Non-Prescribed Goods Program.

Audits and frequency
Audits for any non-prescribed good establishment, for the purpose of export, should be conducted once
per calendar year or more frequently where required by an importing government authority.
These audits will verify that the policies and practices of the non-prescribed good establishment are
effective in satisfying importing country requirements (and other domestic requirements in cases where
the audit is undertaken by an approved third-party auditor). All elements of the establishment’s system,
from sourcing raw material through to processing and packing of the finished good, will be audited at
least once a year against the appropriate audit checklist (depending on particular product and
importing country).
If a non-prescribed good establishment is found to be non-compliant against an importing country
requirement (or a domestic requirement in cases where the audit is undertaken by an approved third-
party auditor), the government officer or independent third-party auditor will issue a corrective action
request.
The establishment must rectify all corrective action requests within a timeframe agreed between the
auditor and the establishment. Additional sanctions and/or audits may be conducted as a result of non-
compliance.
Table 1: Risk and audit frequencies for non-prescribed
good operations
Type of non-prescribed good operation
Potential
risk
Audit
frequency
Animal by-product rendering facility:
human consumption
High
Annual or greater
animal feed or ingredient
Annual or greater
non-human use
Low
Annual
Pet food (not including pet meat) manufacturing facility:
dried pet treats
Low
Annual or greater
canned pet food
Low
Annual or greater
semi-moist pet food
Low
Annual or greater
food for birds
Low
Annual or greater
pet milk
Low
Annual or greater
Animal by-product (skins and hides):
hides and skins (treated)
Low
Annual or greater
Animal by-product (blood and blood products)
serum (treated or untreated)
High
spray dried plasma or blood
Low
Annual or greater

blood (untreated)
Each part of the audit scope will be allocated an ‘acceptable’ or ‘unacceptable’ finding by a government
official or approved third-party auditor. Where a provision in the checklist does not apply, the auditor
will indicate ‘not applicable’ (N/A).
The non-prescribed good operation will be issued an audit report detailing findings, corrective actions
and any observations within 15 working days after the audit.
Additional audits
A non-prescribed good operation may be subject to additional audits, including unannounced audits:
to verify that corrective action has been taken to address non-compliance and that the action is
effective
to support an overseas government review or finding
as a result of sanctions levied under Australian laws by a government officer or by accredited/
approved third-party certifying body.
Sanctions
Sanctions will be applied depending on circumstances and evidence obtained. The severity of sanctions
depends on compliance history or potential impact to market access.
Sanctions imposed on a non-prescribed good establishment by a government official or independent
third-party body or auditor include:
issuing a ‘show cause’ letter asking the non-prescribed good establishment for explanation on
why they should be allowed to continue operating under an export scheme
suspending or revoking the export number assigned (if required)
suspending or withdrawing audit services
refusing to issue government to government certification for export shipments of non-prescribed
goods
notifying other government agencies including overseas competent authorities
increasing the number of audits (both announced or unannounced).
Useful links
Australian Food & Grocery Council
afgc.org.au
Australian Hide Skin & Leather Exporters Association Inc
ahslea.com.au
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Australian Renderers Association Inc
ausrenderers.com.au
Pet Food Industry Association of Australia Inc
pfiaa.com.au
Australian Honey Bee Industry Council
honeybee.org.au
Export Documentation system (EXDOC)
agriculture.gov.au/export/certification/exdoc
Export legislation
agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity/legislation
Non-prescribed goods fees and charges
agriculture.gov.au/fees/charging-guidelines
Manual of Importing Country Requirements (Micor)
agriculture.gov.au/micor
Regional departmental office contact details
agriculture.gov.au/about/contact/our-offices
Contact
Non-Prescribed Goods Program
Residues and Food Branch
Exports Division
Phone: 1800 900 090
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601
Email: NPG Program
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/non-prescribed-goods/export-listed-
establishments/audits