guideline to assist those wishing to export non-prescribed goods.
This guideline sets out what constitutes a non-prescribed good and how to determine if a particular
product is a prescribed or non-prescribed good for the purpose of exporting from Australia.
This guideline provides information and instructions for Australian businesses wanting to determine if
their product is deemed to be non-prescribed under export legislation. Exporters will need to read this
guideline to understand requirements for export. Exporters should also refer to the department’s 
Manual of Importing Country Requirements (Micor). Micor sets out the known requirements that
exporters and the department must meet for products and commodities to be accepted for import into
specific overseas countries
Legislative overview
laws support Australia’s reputation as a reliable, high-quality source of exports. This maintains and
improves export opportunities for Australian agricultural and food products.
Since March 2021, Australia’s agricultural, fishery and forestry exports have been regulated under the
Export Control Act 2020 (Act) and the Export Control Rules.
The Act defines prescribed goods. Prescribed goods are goods that are regulated by the Act and the
Rules. The Rules list which goods are prescribed goods. All other goods are non-prescribed goods (also
referred to as NPGs).
Examples of prescribed goods are:
milk and milk products
fish and fish products
plants and plant products
eggs and egg products
meat and meat products
wild game meat and wild game meat products
rabbit and ratite meat and rabbit and ratite meat products
poultry meat and poultry meat products
organic goods
live animals.
The Export Control Rules 2021 set out the list of legislative requirements that must be met by an
exporter before prescribed goods can be exported. A separate Export Control Rule exists for each type
of prescribed good (for example, the Export Control (Meat and Meat Products) Rules 2021). These
specific commodity Rules set out the specifications to be used when determining if a particular product
should be deemed as a prescribed good under each commodity type.

Products which do not meet the criteria under the Export Control Rules 2021 are classified by the
department as non-prescribed goods. There are no legislative requirements for non-prescribed products
to be exported from Australia. This means, among other things, they do not require an export permit
there may be requirements of the importing country which need to be met. Under each of the
commodity-specific Rules, detailed clauses are used to assess whether products which are very similar
to prescribed goods are deemed to be non-prescribed goods. More information is outlined in the
Commodity-specific details section of this guideline.
Non-prescribed goods are not subject to most of the regulatory controls in the Act. If an importing
country requires certification for non-prescribed goods, exporters may apply for a government
certificate. The main types of non-prescribed goods are:
processed foods
wool
animal feed and pet food
animal by-products
honey.
Milk and milk products
Milk and milk products derived from a bovine animal and are intended to be exported as food are
prescribed. However, many dairy products are considered as non-prescribed goods, for example:
ice cream
cheesecakes, Bavarian desserts and similar desserts
colostrum
milk or milk products encased in pastry or a fruit or vegetable product
milk products where milk or milk products are not the major component
milk or milk products obtained from an animal other than a bovine animal
milk or milk products that are animal food or pharmaceutical material
liquid milk products exported in a consignment of not more than 10 litres
milk or milk products exported in a consignment of not more than 10 kilograms
milk or milk products in the form of a tablet or capsule
milk or milk products for export to New Zealand.
Fish and fish products
Fish and fish products intended to be exported as food are prescribed where fish is the major
component by weight or volume. Fish includes aquatic vertebrates and aquatic invertebrates but
excludes mammals and birds.

Fish and fish products that are considered non-prescribed goods include:
empty shells
products where fish or fish products are not the major component, such as squid ink pasta, dips
containing fish or lobster infused oils
fish or fish products in the form of a tablet or capsule, such as fish oil capsules
fish or fish products that are for use as animal food or pharmaceutical material
liquid fish and liquid fish products exported in a consignment of not more than 10 litres
dried fish and dried fish products (other than dried abalone) exported in a consignment of not
more than 2 kilograms
fish or fish products of any other kind (other than dried abalone) exported in a consignment of
not more than 10 kilograms
fish or fish products for export to New Zealand.
Please note, seaweed is not considered a fish product.
Plants and plant products
Plants and plant products including: prescribed grain, hay, straw, and all fresh fruits and vegetables
(including mushrooms, herbs and sprouts) are prescribed. Prescribed grain includes barley, canola,
chickpeas, dried field peas, faba beans, lentils, lupins, mung beans, oats, sorghum, soybeans, wheat and
whole vetch. Additionally, any other plant or plant products that are intended for export and requiring a
phytosanitary certificate to meet an importing country requirement are also prescribed.
All other plant and processed plant products are non-prescribed goods.
Eggs and egg products
Eggs and egg products from the avian species Gallus gallus (chickens) that are intended for export are
prescribed. An egg product means the contents of an egg removed from its shell and in liquid, frozen or
dried form.
Eggs and egg products that are considered non-prescribed include:
eggs and egg products from an avian species other than Gallus gallus (such as emu or duck eggs)
eggs or egg products that are for use as animal food or pharmaceutical material
products where eggs are used as an ingredient in a food even if they are the major component,
such as omelettes, frittatas, mayonnaise and pavlova shells
liquid egg products exported in a consignment of not more than 10 litres
eggs and egg products of any other kind exported in a consignment of not more than 10 kilograms
egg products in the form of a tablet or capsule.

Meat and meat products
Meat and meat products derived from an animal of the bovine, bubaline, camelidae, caprine, cervidae,
ovine, porcine or soliped species and that are intended to be exported as food are prescribed. Animals in
these species include cattle and bison, water buffalo, camels, goats, deer, sheep, pigs, and horses and
donkeys.
Meat and meat products that are considered non-prescribed include:
soup, soup powder or soup concentrate derived from meat
meat extracts
tallow or gelatine derived from meat
regenerated collagen products derived from meat
meat or meat products that are animal food or pharmaceutical material
meat products containing less than 5% mass of meat
meat or meat products for export in a consignment of not more than 10 kilograms
meat or meat products that are animal food
meat or meat products that are pharmaceutical material
meat or meat products for export to New Zealand for consumption in New Zealand.
Wild Game Meat and Wild Game Meat Products
Wild game meat or wild game meat products derived from a wild game animal that are intended to be
exported as food are prescribed. Examples of wild game animals are kangaroos (macropod animals),
wild boar (porcine animals), feral goats (caprine animals), rabbits (lagomorph animals) and deer
(cervid animals).
Wild game meat or wild game meat products that are considered non-prescribed include:
soup, soup powder or soup concentrate derived from wild game meat
wild game meat extracts
tallow derived from wild game meat
gelatine derived from wild game meat
regenerated collagen products derived from wild game meat
wild game meat products containing less than 5% mass of wild game meat
wild game meat or wild game meat products for export in a consignment of not more than 10
kilograms
wild game meat or wild game meat products that are animal food
wild game meat or wild game meat products that are pharmaceutical material
wild game meat or wild game meat products for export to New Zealand for consumption in New
Zealand.

Rabbit and Ratite Meat and Rabbit and Ratite Meat
Products
Rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products that are intended to be exported
as food are prescribed.
Rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products that are considered non-
prescribed include:
soup, soup powder or soup concentrate derived from rabbit meat or ratite meat
rabbit meat extracts or ratite meat extracts
tallow derived from rabbit meat or ratite meat
gelatine derived from rabbit meat or ratite meat
regenerated collagen products derived from rabbit meat or ratite meat
rabbit meat products containing less than 5% mass of rabbit meat
ratite meat products containing less than 5% mass of ratite meat
rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products for export in a
consignment of not more than 10 kilograms
rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products that are animal food
rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products that are pharmaceutical
material
rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products that are animal food
rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products that are pharmaceutical
material
rabbit meat, ratite meat, rabbit meat products or ratite meat products for export to New Zealand
for consumption in New Zealand.
Poultry Meat and Poultry Meat Products
Poultry meat or poultry meat product that are intended to be exported as food are prescribed. Poultry
includes fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons, pheasants, quail, guinea fowl and other avian species
ordinarily consumed as food but does not include ratites (emu or ostrich).
Poultry meat or poultry meat products that are considered non-prescribed include:
soup, soup powder or soup concentrate derived from poultry meat
poultry meat extracts
tallow derived from poultry meat
gelatine derived from poultry meat
regenerated collagen products derived from poultry meat
poultry meat products containing less than 5% mass of poultry meat
poultry meat or poultry meat products for export in a consignment of not more than 10 kilograms
poultry meat or poultry meat products that are animal food

poultry meat or poultry meat products that are pharmaceutical material
poultry meat or poultry meat products for export to New Zealand for consumption in New
Zealand.
Organic goods
All food, fibre, or any other products that are described and/or labelled as organic, bio-dynamic,
ecological, or by any other word of similar indication, are prescribed goods. Organic produce which is
not also prescribed by commodity specific rules may be eligible for NPG export certification to meet
non-organic related importing country requirements.
Organic goods that are cosmetic products are non-prescribed unless the goods are intended for export
and need an organic goods certificate to meet an importing country requirement.
Other goods that are considered as non-prescribed for the purpose of export include:
animal by-products 
wool
feathers
goat hair
skins, hides and pelts
leather
trophies (such as those made of animal skins, hides and feathers)
inedible blood and blood products, such as serum and antisera
rendered meals
rendered fats and oils (of plant or animal origin)
rendered fish products
gelatine and gelatine products
deer antler velvet
hard antlers
animal placenta and placenta products
bones
collagen
processed foods, beverages, and ingredients 
all processed foods and grocery items that do not fall within the specifications of a
prescribed good
vitamins and nutritional supplements
honey and apiary products 
such as honey, honeycomb, beeswax, honeybee collected pollen, propolis, royal jelly and
bee venom
water
cosmetics and cosmetic materials
technical products (such as for laboratory use)
shells (such as abalone, scallop and trochus)
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 
◦ 

fertilisers (derived from plant or animal materials)Human and animal remains.
Animal vaccine and veterinary medicine
Any certification request for animal vaccine and veterinary medicine should be referred to the
Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), in the first instance. APVMA
issues export certification for registered and un-registered vaccine and veterinary medicines.
Human vaccine and human therapeutics
Human vaccine and therapeutic products requiring certification should be referred to the Therapeutic
Goods Administration (TGA), in the first instance. The TGA can issue export certification for a product
that is registered, listed, included or exempt from the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods.
Certification relating to the therapeutic nature of the product should be referred to the TGA whilst
matters relating to certification of animal health conditions should be referred to the department.
Australian wine
Certification requests for wine exports should be referred to Wine Australia.
Non-prescribed goods requiring a certificate of origin
issue Certificates of Origin for Australian businesses, both for ordinary trade and for Australia’s free
trade agreements.
Certain product types are not captured under export legislation. The department can only provide
certification for these goods in certain situations.
Contact the Non-prescribed Goods Export Program at NPGExports@aff.gov.au for further information.
Finding out whether the product you wish to export is a non-prescribed good is not always simple.
Where it is unclear, contact the department’s nearest regional office. Where a product has not been
exported from Australia before, or where a more thorough assessment is required to determine whether
the product is a non-prescribed good, contact the Non-prescribed Goods Export Program at 
NPGExports@aff.gov.au for an assessment.
If your product is a non-prescribed good, you will need to determine the import requirements of the
country you wish to export to. As explained above, Australia’s export legislation does not include
legislative requirements that must be met by an exporter before the goods can be exported. This means
non-prescribed goods only need to meet the importing country requirements.
Where known, the department outlines importing country requirements in the Manual of Importing
Country Requirements (Micor) database. Not all products to all markets can be found in Micor. An
importing country may have requirements to allow importation of these products but, unfortunately,
the department might not have the specific information on what these requirements are. It is the

exporter’s responsibility to check with their importer or customer the requirements and/or documents
stated by the importing country authorities in order to clear shipments of their products upon arrival.
This should be done well in advance of any planned shipments, as failing to meet importing country
requirements may result in products being detained or rejected at the exporter’s commercial risk.
If an importing country requires certification for non-prescribed goods, exporters may apply for a
government certificate. All applications for an export certificate for a non-prescribed good must be
made via NEXDOC, EXDOC (the department’s electronic export document systems) or on a manual
application form.
Note that non-prescribed goods do not require an export permit. Previously, under the Export Control
Act 1982 animal, food and pharmaceutical material were prescribed goods and as such required an
export permit. Under the Export Control Act 2020, as of 28 March 2021, animal food and
pharmaceutical material are non-prescribed goods and therefore do not require an export permit.
A letter of free sale may be required for registering non-prescribed goods with an importing country
authority prior to export. These can be obtained from a Chamber of Commerce. If the importing
country requires a letter of free sale to be issued by Australia’s competent authority (the department)
please contact the Non-prescribed Goods Export Program at NPGExports@aff.gov.au.
Useful links
Contact
Non-prescribed Goods Export Program
Residues and Food Branch
Exports and Veterinary Services Division
Phone: 1800 900 090
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601
Email: NPGExports@aff.gov.au
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/non-prescribed-goods/exporters/
determining-non-prescribed-good