Non-prescribed goods have no mandatory export conditions under Australian export laws. To export,

you must meet all conditions set by the importing country.

Export Assurance Reform

We are undertaking an ambitious project to modernise the regulatory assurance framework for goods

currently classed as non-prescribed goods under the Export Control Act 2020.

This work considers new approaches to regulating food and agricultural goods, strengthening the ways

we formally provide trading partners the assurance they require over Australian exports.

We are now engaging with industry to discuss options for managing existing, new, and emerging risks,

and how we can put the right controls in place to underpin Australian exports.

Our role

Your importing country may require:

certificates or other export documents issued by us

proof that your goods were sourced, prepared and stored in establishments listed with us.

We are only involved if it is a condition set by the importing country.

Importing country requirements

You must meet all importing country requirements for your goods. This applies to everyone involved in

the export supply chain.

Before you export:

check our Manual of Importing Country Requirements (Micor)

talk to your importer and importing country authority.

Exporters

Make sure you understand your responsibilities as an exporter. This includes meeting all importing

country requirements.

Export listed establishments

Some importing countries require producers of non-prescribed goods to be export listed. Goods

include:

bee products

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

blood and blood products

edible fats and oils

health foods

leather products

pet food products

rendered animal products

skin or hide products.

Read more about export listed establishments.

Stay informed

Check:

We use these to tell you about updates. This includes changes to market access and export

requirements.

Resources

Other government agencies and industry bodies can also help you get export ready.

Fees and charges

All export fees and charges are detailed in our charging guidelines.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/non-prescribed-goods

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•