We audit your activity conducted under a Food Import Compliance Agreement (FICA). Audits assess
We perform a pre-approval audit before entering into a FICA with you. We verify if your documented
food safety and compliance system complies with the imported food legislation and FICA requirements.
A condition of your FICA is to undergo an audit at least every year. We may increase your audit
Once you enter into a FICA, you will undergo 2 probation audits within 180 days. This is from the day
When you pass consecutive probation audits, we schedule an audit once a year. We may schedule more
If you fail an audit, the probationary audit rate starts from the date of the failed audit.
During the audit exit meeting, we provide details of all noncompliances and advisory findings.
Whether you pass or fail an audit depends on the number and type of noncompliances.

A noncompliance that results, or is likely to result, in releasing or distributing food that poses a risk to
If we detect any critical noncompliance, you will fail your audit. We may also consider suspending or
the failure to identify food that does not comply with the Australia New Zealand Food Standards
If we detect 3 or more major noncompliances, you will fail your audit. You will return to the probation
If we detect 7 or more minor noncompliances, you will fail your audit. You will return to the probation
During a pre-approval audit, we may identify things that could improve your documented food

what preventative measures you will put in place to stop it from happening again.
If you fail to correct your noncompliance within the agreed timeframes, we may take further action. We
Where noncompliance is detected outside of an audit, it will be brought to the attention of the FICA
importer in writing and will contain details of the detected noncompliance. This outcome may result in
All noncompliances and advisory findings will be provided. If you disagree with the reported detail, you
can contact us in writing (email preferred) to review your concerns, within 10 business days from your
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/how/fica/audits