Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Crustaceans and crustacean products that are cooked and
ready-to-eat are risk food
This includes, but is not limited to, cooked and ready-to-eat:
Crab
Crayfish
Prawn or shrimp
Exclusions
Crustaceans and crustacea products that are:
retorted and shelf stable
dried
from New Zealand.
Declaring certificates
When lodging a Full Import Declaration (FID), use the correct ICS document code and certificate
number for the food.
See lodging declarations and documentation.
Community Protection (CP) question
You will need to answer this CP question when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: Are the goods cooked crustaceans that require refrigeration (chilled or frozen) and do not require
further cooking before consumption? (Answer 'no' if the goods are crumbed or battered).

Inspection and testing
We refer consignments of cooked crustaceans and crustacea products that are ready-to-eat for
analytical testing. During inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment.
Testing for Listeria monocytogenes applies to cooked crustaceans that are ready-to-eat at a rate based
on the compliance history of the particular food.
Testing for Salmonella applies at the rate of 5%.
Additional requirements apply to specific seafood. See fish and crustaceans from aquaculture
production.
Table 1 shows the tests that will be applied and permitted results for each food type.
Table 1, Food type, test
applied and permitted
results
Food type
Test applied
Permitted result
Cooked crustaceans that are
Listeria monocytogenes
Note: An
IFIS Importer declaration can be lodged for this
food where it does not support the growth of
Listeria monocytogenes.
n=5, c=0, m= not
detected in 25 g
Cooked crustaceans that are
Salmonella
n=5, c=0, m= not
detected in 25 g
Prawns and shrimp
Vibrio cholerae
n=5, c=0, m= not
detected in 25 g
n = the number of samples to be analysed from a lot of food.
c = the maximum number of sample units that can be greater than ‘m’.
m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.
Food safety risks
Food Standard Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice about the risk of cooked
crustaceans that are ready-to-eat and support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes. These products
present a potential medium or high risk to public health and safety for Listeria monocytogenes.
FSANZ has also advised that ready-to-eat cooked prawns and shrimp present a potential medium or
high risk for Vibrio cholerae.

Voluntary foreign government certification arrangements
We have a voluntary certification arrangement in place with Canada and Thailand for cooked
crustaceans that are ready-to-eat. Consignments of these foods from Canada and Thailand with a
recognised government certificate have a reduced rate of inspection and testing.
Certificate requirements
Type of information
To include
National competent authority: Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Recognised certificate title
Certificate of Origin and Hygiene
ICS document code:
CI
Certificate requirements
Type of
information
To include
National competent
authority:
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives – Department of Fisheries
Recognised certificate
titles:
Additional
requirement:
The certificate must identify that the food has been sourced from an
establishment approved by the Department of Fisheries, Thailand.
ICS document code:
DOFHCTH
Glossary
Food is ready-to-eat if it is ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold.
To avoid doubt, food is not ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold if, before it
is consumed, it requires further processing (such as cooking) to reduce any pathogenic microorganisms
potentially present in the food to safe levels.
Retorted
Animal products are retorted if they are heated in a hermetically sealed container to a minimum core
temperature of 100°C, obtaining an F0 value of at least 2.8.

Shelf stable
Goods are shelf stable if the:
goods have been commercially manufactured
goods have been packaged by the manufacturer
goods are in that package
package has not been opened or broken
goods are able to be stored in the package at room or ambient temperature, and
goods do not require refrigeration or freezing before the package is opened.
Version history
Date
Amendment details
23/01/2025 Amend the detail in this webpage to support the splitting of fish and crustaceans from
aquaculture production.
23/05/2023 Amend the webpage to update link to IFIS Importer declaration.
12/04/2023 Amend the webpage to update the link to the list of fish processing establishments
approved by the Department of Fisheries, Thailand.
10/11/2020
Removed tests for coagulase-positive staphylococci and Standard Plate Count (SPC). Test
for Listeria monocytogenes increased to risk rate. Test for salmonella sp. reduced to
surveillance rate.
25/03/2019 Added tests for Listeria monocytogenes.
16/11/2018 Consolidates risk food webpage for cooked prawns and shrimp.
1/5/2014
Replaces Imported Food Notice 09/12 Tests applied to risk category foods.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/cooked-crustaceans