Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions and

imported food safety requirements.

All biosecurity import conditions must be met before imported food safety requirements apply.

We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.

All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.

Enoki mushrooms that are fresh are classified as risk food

This includes:

enoki (enokitake) mushrooms, also known as golden mushrooms or golden needle mushrooms

fresh packaged enoki mushrooms (including vacuum packed).

Exclusions

food from New Zealand

canned, dried or frozen enoki mushrooms

enoki mushrooms that are mixed with other mushrooms, or other foods.

Community Protection (CP) question

You will need to answer this CP question when lodging your full import declaration:

IFIS: Are the goods mushrooms of the Flammulina genus (also known as enoki / enokitake) that are

fresh packaged (including vacuum packed)?

Inspection and testing

We refer consignments of enoki mushrooms that are fresh for analytical testing.

During inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment. Consignments will be checked to

ensure appropriate directions for use are on the label, including statements to the effect that the

mushrooms:

must be cooked before consumption

must be refrigerated.

Details on analytical testing for enoki mushrooms can be found in the food safety requirements case in 

BICON for ‘Mushrooms, mushroom products and truffles’.

Testing applies at a rate based on the compliance history of the particular food.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•

Food safety risks

Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has published advice about the risk of enoki

(enokitake) mushrooms. These products present a potential medium or high risk to public health and

safety for Listeria monocytogenes.

Date

Amendment details

02/03/2026 First version of webpage published on website.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/enoki-mushrooms