Food importers can enter into a Food Import Compliance Agreement (FICA) with us. These agreements
Many food importers have documented food safety management systems for sourcing and importing
safe food. Under a FICA, we recognise these systems as an alternative to the inspection and testing of
You won’t have to book or pay for an imported food inspection under a FICA. Instead, we monitor your
compliance with requirements by regularly auditing your system. You can choose to have all the food
All goods imported into Australia must meet biosecurity requirements. This includes food imported
You must have a documented food safety compliance system to manage your food imports. We won’t
Your compliance system must clearly identify the measures you have in place to ensure imported food is
International Standard ISO 22000:2018 Food safety management systems - requirements for any
You will need to prepare your compliance system documentation and provide it with your FICA
Use the self-assessment checklist in the FICA application form. This ensures your system will cover all
requirements. You need to show us that you have a documented compliance system in place that:
provides adequate and effective measures to ensure the food you import is safe and compliant
ensures responsibilities are allocated to personnel that have appropriate authority, skills and

Your documented system should be clear and concise. Make sure you have an index of all documents
a suitability review to determine if you are trustworthy, able to comply with our requirements and
an assessment to check your history of compliance with the Imported Food Inspection Scheme
and with other department areas, such as approved arrangements and export registration
We then conduct a pre-approval audit of your compliance system at your head office and nominated
We expect that the assessment process will be completed within a 12-month period of receiving a
completed FICA application form. Delays in responding to requests from the department for further
documentation or information, that lead to the assessment exceeding 12-months from receipt of your
FICA application, will result in cancellation of the assessment process. You will need to reapply once
Complete the FICA application form. To ensure that your application reflects your current compliance
system, applications exceeding 12-months will require a new FICA application. Refer to our 
an application levy (only if you do not have an existing approved arrangement with the
An annual fee is payable once a FICA comes into effect. To find out more see our charging guidelines.

If you’re successful, you can enter into a compliance agreement with us. It starts when both parties sign
We audit FICA holders to ensure you continue to comply with your agreement. How often we audit you
Download the form to your computer, complete all required details and click on the Submit button in
the form to email it to us. To save a copy for your records or to complete later, click on the Save button
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/how/fica