Customs brokers and importers must complete full import declarations (FIDs) for imported food. FIDs
are lodged through the Department of Home Affairs' Integrated Cargo System (ICS).
We use this information when inspecting and testing food imports. This is part of our Imported Food
If we find incorrect information in a FID, we direct you to amend the FID. Until you fix it, the goods will
remain on hold and the FID will not be processed. You also won’t be able to book an inspection.
We will record your details and may take further action if we find that you have:
When you lodge a FID for imported food, you need to provide the name of the producer.
You may be asked IFIS CP profile questions when lodging a FID. Make sure you provide enough
information about the food to support your answer. For mixed or processed food, this includes a list

FIDs may be referred for biosecurity assessment as well as to food safety assessment under the IFIS.
All consignments of food referred to the IFIS must be accompanied by documentation and information
consistent with the Minimum Documentary and Import Declaration Requirements Policy.
To minimise delays in document assessment ensure you provide clear, complete and correct
For each FID referred to us, you must also lodge documents via the Cargo Online Lodgement System
You must provide a document that links each line in the FID to each type of food on the commercial
We can’t process your FID if you don’t provide a document, or it doesn’t provide clear linkages. You will
You must have a lot code list for each type of food (batch) in the FID. Provide us a lot code list when
we’re processing your FID and also during an inspection. We use it to estimate how long an inspection

The manufacturer uses marks or codes to identify each lot. 'Use-by' or packing dates can be used if it’s
A lot code list contains all lot codes within a consignment. It identifies the number of cartons or
Lot codes can be presented on a separate lot code list document or be included in other documents such
as an invoice, bill of lading or packing list. All documents containing lot codes must be endorsed, as per
As per the Minimum Documentary and Import Declaration Requirements Policy, an endorsement
be an acceptable signature, electronic signature or stamp as defined in the Definitions section of
We issue you with a Food Control Certificate that states if samples will be required for analytical testing.
You can submit a form to request exemption from an IFIS inspection for food that:
is not subject to requirements under section 7 of the Imported Food Control Act 1992
is being imported for use in food manufacturing and will undergo further processing involving a
These forms are not mandatory. However, using them may help improve the process for requesting an
exemption. They include all the information the department needs to assess an exemption request.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/lodge/fid