Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Fish and fish products of a particular kind are classified as
risk food
Fish of the families listed are considered histamine susceptible fish. This includes all fish in the
families:
Carangidae (for example, trevallies, jacks and pompanos)
Clupeidae (for example, herrings, sardines)
Coryphaenidae (for example, mahi-mahi)
Engraulidae (for example, anchovy)
Pomatomidae (for example, bluefish)
Scomberesocidae (for example, king gars and saury)
Scombridae (for example, tuna, mackerel and bonito).
Fish products that contain more than 300 g per kg of all or any of the fish in the families listed are also
Fish and fish products classified as risk food may be whole, fillets or in portions. This includes fish and
fish products that are:
raw (fresh, chilled or frozen)
processed (cooked, smoked, dried and pickled)
retorted and shelf stable.
Exclusions
Food from New Zealand.

Declaring certificates
When lodging a Full Import Declaration (FID), use the correct ICS document code and certificate
number for the food.
Community Protection (CP) question
You will need to answer this CP question when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: Are the goods or do the goods contain more than 300 g/kg (30%) of fish of the family Scombridae,
Coryphaenidae, Pomatomidae, Carangidae, Clupeidae, Engraulidae or Scomberesociadae? For more
information search ‘histamine susceptible fish’ at www.agriculture.gov.au.
Inspection and testing
We refer consignments of fish and fish products of the families listed for analytical testing. During
inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment. Additional testing may also apply for
certain ready-to-eat finfish.
Table 1 shows the test that will be applied and permitted results for each food type.
Table 1, Food type, test applied and permitted result
Food type
Test
applied
Permitted result
Fish in the family:
The Australian fish names standard AS SSA 5300 may be used
as a reference.
Histamine
Maximum level 200
mg/kg
Food safety risks
Food Standard Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice about the risk of fish and fish
products of the families listed are associated with histamine formation. These products present a
potential medium or high risk to public health for histamine poisoning.
Voluntary foreign government certification arrangements
We have a voluntary certification arrangement in place with Canada and Thailand for the fish and fish
products listed. Consignments of these foods from Canada and Thailand with a recognised government
certificate have a reduced rate of inspection and testing.

Type of information
To include
National competent authority: Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Recognised certificate title:
Certificate of Origin and Hygiene
ICS document code:
CI
Type of
information
To include
National competent
authority:
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives – Department of Fisheries
Recognised certificate
title:
Health Certificate for fishery and aquaculture products originating in Thailand
Additional
requirement:
The certificate must identify that the food has been sourced from an 
establishment approved by the Department of Fisheries, Thailand.
ICS document code:
DOFHCTH
Glossary
Retorted
Animal products are retorted if they are heated in a hermetically sealed container to a minimum core
temperature of 100°C, obtaining an F0 value of at least 2.8.
Shelf stable
Goods are shelf-stable if the:
goods have been commercially manufactured
goods have been packaged by the manufacturer
goods are in that package
package has not been opened or broken
goods are able to be stored in the package at room or ambient temperature, and
goods do not require refrigeration or freezing before the package is opened.
Version history
Date
Reference
number
Amendment details
13/02/2023 HIS 12/2016
Amend the webpage to update the link to the list of fish processing
establishments approved by the Department of Fisheries, Thailand.
11/10/2019 HIS 12/2016

Update to the webpage to include a link to the Fisheries Research and
Development Corporation’s fish names database.
08/08/2017 HIS 12/2016
Update to the webpage to provide additional detail about the sampling of
histamine susceptible fish and fish products.
21/12/2016 HIS 12/2016
Updates the webpage to reflect amendments to the Imported Food
Control Order 2001 to classify more species of fish and fish products as
01/05/2014 SCM 05/2014
Replaces Imported Food Notice 09/12 Tests applied to risk category
foods
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/histamine-susceptible-fish