You may need to submit an Imported Food Inspection Scheme importer declaration through Cargo
ready-to-eat cooked crustaceans and crustacean products that do not support the growth of
ready-to-eat processed finfish that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes
ready-to-eat, heat-treated bivalve molluscs and bivalve mollusc products that do not support the
ready-to-eat cooked poultry meat that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes
We use this information when referring and testing food imports. This is part of our Imported Food
Complete a separate form for each product. Each form must contain only one product from one
producer, and the product description must match the commercial invoice (not including pack size).
Do not submit a form unless you are able to provide supporting evidence upon request.
The declaration must include an accurate description of the specific food, including the:
If you do not provide an accurate description, we will consider the declaration as invalid.
Your IFIS Importer Declaration must also meet our Minimum documentary and import declaration
Giving false or misleading information is a serious offence. You must maintain records of the
information used to complete a declaration. We may ask you to present this information upon request
This declaration must be completed for all cheeses made from unpasteurised milk, except for certain
raw milk cheeses from France and the United Kingdom as these must be covered by a recognised

Raw milk cheese is made from unpasteurised milk that has not received an appropriate heat treatment
during production. It must not be imported unless it is covered by a recognised foreign government
Certain kinds of raw milk cheese imported from France and the United Kingdom do not need an IFIS
Importer Declaration. This is because we have negotiated a certification arrangement with France and
Only applies to cheese that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the cheese does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
Only applies to ready-to-eat cooked crustaceans that do not support the growth of Listeria
You must show why the cooked crustaceans do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
Only applies to ready-to-eat finfish that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
You must show why the finfish does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
Only applies to ready-to-eat, heat-treated bivalve molluscs that do not support the growth of Listeria
You must show why the bivalve molluscs do not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
Only applies to ready-to-eat, cooked poultry meat that does not support the growth of Listeria
You must show why the cooked poultry meat does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes.
See our criteria for cooked poultry meat where growth is not supported on the form.

Lodge the IFIS Importer Declaration and related import documents in the Cargo Online Lodgement
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/lodge/ifis-importer-declaration