Imported food intended for sale is inspected and tested under our Imported Food Inspection Scheme
Most food imported from New Zealand is not referred for inspection or testing. New Zealand and
Australia have joint food standards allowing food to be imported between the countries without border
We classify food as risk food in the Imported Food Control Order 2019. This is based on advice from
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) that the food poses a medium or high risk to public
To classify food as risk food, we make changes to the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
All consignments of risk food are referred to us for food inspection. The rate of inspection of these
consignments is based on the food’s history of compliance. A history of compliance is developed based
Certification assures us that food safety risks are being managed. We will check the validity of the
We inspect 5% of these consignments to check compliance with Australian food standards.
If the food fails inspection or testing, the rate is increased to 100% until 5 consecutive consignments

Food that is not risk food or compliance agreement food is classified as surveillance food.
Surveillance food is referred randomly to the IFIS using electronic profiles in the Integrated Cargo
System (ICS). We refer 5% of surveillance food consignments for inspection under the IFIS.
When a surveillance food fails inspection, we apply a holding order to target future consignments.
Future consignments will be referred at the rate of 100% until a history of compliance is established,
Food imported under a Food Import Compliance Agreement is classified as compliance agreement
Compliance agreement food is managed under a food importer’s own documented food safety
Food safety recognition agreements reduce the rate of inspection and analysis of a food covered by the
agreement imported from a particular country. In these agreements, we recognise a country’s food
Countries can export some foods which are classified as risk into Australia under a voluntary
certification arrangement. This assures us that food safety risks are being managed.
All food consignments inspected under the IFIS have a visual and label assessment. Samples of food
may be taken for analytical tests depending on the type of food. Check the relevant BICON food safety
We issue a Food Control Certificate to notify food importers that their food will be inspected.

If food fails inspection, it cannot be released. The importer will need to either:
We issue an Imported Food Inspection Advice (IFIA) to let the importer know if a food has failed and
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/inspection-testing/ifis