All biosecurity import conditions must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions and food
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
Melons are currently classified as a surveillance food. We refer consignments for inspection and testing.
not of the genus Cucumis or Citrullus (e.g. bitter melon, bitter gourd, winter melon, wax gourd,
From March 2027, consignments of whole melons and ready-to-eat cut melons that are either fresh or
frozen, must be lodged with a recognised food safety management certificate. To ensure you can meet
this requirement by March 2027 you will need to check that you can source melons from overseas

The certificate must show that the producer has a Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP)
based food safety management system in place. This system must identify and control food safety
hazards, such as Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes. The certificate must cover primary
See our determination section to find out what food safety management certificates we will recognise.
You may wish to provide us with the certificate in advance so that we can verify that it meets our
From 2 March 2027 you will need to answer this CP question when lodging your Full Import
IFIS: Are the goods melons that are either fresh, chilled or frozen? For melons that are fresh, chilled or
We refer consignments of melons for analytical testing at the rate of 5%. During inspection we will also
conduct a visual and label assessment. Details on current analytical testing for melons can be found in
Details on changes to the food safety requirements for melons can be found in the food safety
Food Standards Australia New Zealand has published advice that whole and cut ready-to-eat melons
(fresh and frozen) present a potential high risk to public health for Salmonella and Listeria
To make sure there are food safety controls in place to manage these hazards during production and
processing we will be requiring food safety management certificates for imports of fresh or frozen
We have identified what food safety management certificates we will recognise in this determination.

Food is ready-to-eat if it is ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold.
To avoid doubt, food is not ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold if, before it
is consumed, it requires further processing (such as cooking) to reduce any pathogenic microorganisms
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/melons