Improving access to imported food safety requirements
Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system
(BICON).
See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.
All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements
apply.
Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.
We classify imported food that presents a potential medium or high risk to public health as risk food.
All risk food is listed in the Imported Food Control Order 2019.
Finfish that is ready-to-eat is a risk food
This includes finfish that is cooked, cured or smoked and is ready-to-eat.
Exclusions
Ready-to-eat finfish that is dried, pickled, salted or fermented.
Ready-to-eat finfish that are retorted and shelf stable.
Food from New Zealand.
Declaring certificates
When lodging a Full Import Declaration (FID), use the correct ICS document code and certificate
number for the food.
See lodging declarations and documentation.
Community Protection (CP) question
You will need to answer this CP question when lodging your full import declaration:
IFIS: Are the goods cooked, cured or smoked finfish that require refrigeration (frozen or chilled) and do
not require further cooking before consumption?

Inspection and testing
We refer consignments of finfish that is ready-to-eat for analytical testing based on whether it supports
the growth or Listeria monocytogenes or not.
Finfish that supports the growth of Listeria monocytogenes is a risk food and referred for testing
at the initial rate of 100% of consignments until compliance is demonstrated.
Finfish that does not support the growth of Listeria monocytogenes is referred for testing at the
rate of 5% of consignments.
During inspection, we will also conduct a visual and label assessment.
Additional requirements apply to specific seafood. See the webpages for:
Table 1 shows the tests that will be applied and permitted results for each food type.
Table 1: Food type, test
applied and permitted
result
Food type
Test applied
Permitted
result
Finfish that supports the
growth of Listeria
monocytogenes (risk food)
Listeria monocytogenes
n=5, c=0,
m=not detected
in 25 g
Finfish that does not
support the growth of
Listeria monocytogenes
(risk food)
Listeria monocytogenes
Note: An
IFIS Importer declaration needs to be lodged to provide
evidence that the finfish does not support the growth of
Listeria monocytogenes, or the finfish will be referred as
finfish that supports the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes.
n=5, c=0,
m=100 cfu/g
n = the number of samples to be analysed from a lot of food.
c = the maximum number of sample units that can be greater than ‘m’.
m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.
Food safety risks
Food Standard Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) has given us advice about the risk of processed ready-
to-eat finfish. These products present a potential medium or high risk to public health and safety for
Listeria monocytogenes.

Voluntary foreign government certification arrangements
We have a voluntary certification arrangement in place with Canada and Thailand for finfish that is
ready-to-eat.
Consignments of these foods from Canada and Thailand with a recognised government certificate have
a reduced rate of inspection and testing.
Certificate requirements
Type of information
To include
National competent authority: Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Recognised certificate title:
Certificate of Origin and Hygiene
ICS document code:
CI
Certificate requirements
Type of
information
To include
National competent
authority:
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives – Department of Fisheries
Recognised certificate
title:
Health Certificate for fishery and aquaculture products originating in Thailand
Additional
requirement:
The certificate must identify that the food has been sourced from an 
establishment approved by the Department of Fisheries, Thailand.
ICS document code:
DOFHCTH
Glossary
Ready-to-eat
Food is ready-to-eat if it is ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold.
To avoid doubt, food is not ordinarily consumed in the same state as that in which it is sold if, before it
is consumed, it requires further processing (such as cooking) to reduce any pathogenic microorganisms
potentially present in the food to safe levels.
Retorted
Animal products are retorted if they are heated in a hermetically sealed container to a minimum core
temperature of 100°C, obtaining an F0 value of at least 2.8.

Shelf stable
Goods are shelf stable if the:
goods have been commercially manufactured
goods have been packaged by the manufacturer
goods are in that package
package has not been opened or broken
goods are able to be stored in the package at room or ambient temperature, and
goods do not require refrigeration or freezing before the package is opened.
Version history
Date
Amendment details
23/01/2025 Amend the detail in this webpage to support the splitting of fish and crustaceans from
aquaculture production.
14/06/2024 Amend the webpage to advise that finfish that does not support the growth of Listeria
monocytogenes is still subject to testing.
12/04/2023 Amend the webpage to update the link to the list of fish processing establishments
approved by the Department of Fisheries, Thailand.
10/07/2018 Updated to reflect introduction of a voluntary importer declaration.
12/10/2016 Updated requirements following risk advice provided to the department by FSANZ
1/5/2014
Replaces Imported Food Notice 09/12 Tests applied to risk category foods
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/ready-to-eat-finfish