Improving access to imported food safety requirements

Imported food safety requirements are now included in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system

(BICON).

See more about the Inclusion of food safety requirements in BICON.

All biosecurity requirements must be met before Imported Food Inspection Scheme requirements

apply.

Check our Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for biosecurity import conditions.

Food type

Includes fresh, chilled, frozen, preserved and processed soy bean curds made from soy milk or soybean.

Exclusions

Tofu, soy bean curd or soy milk curd that is retorted and shelf stable, or dried.

Food from New Zealand.

Inspection and testing

This food is classified as a surveillance food.

We refer consignments for analytical testing at the rate of 5%. During inspection, we will also conduct a

visual and label assessment.

Table 1 shows the test that will be applied and permitted result.

Table 1, Tests applied and permitted result

Test applied Permitted result

Bacillus cereus n=5, c=1, m=1000, M=10,000 cfu/g

n = the number of sample units that must be examined from a lot of food.

c = the maximum allowable number of defective sample units, that have counts between ‘m’ and ‘M’.

m = the acceptable microbiological level in a sample unit.

M = the level, which when exceeded (the level is greater than M), in one or more samples would cause

the lot to be rejected.

• 

•

Glossary

Retorted

Goods (other than animal products) heated in a hermetically sealed container for a time, and to a

temperature, sufficient to make the contents commercially sterile.

Shelf stable

Goods are shelf stable if the:

goods have been commercially manufactured

goods have been packaged by the manufacturer

goods are in that package

package has not been opened or broken

goods are able to be stored in the package at room or ambient temperature, and

goods do not require refrigeration or freezing before the package is opened.

Version history

Date

Amendment details

28/01/2022 First version of the webpage published on website

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/import/goods/food/type/tofu

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

•