On 7 February 2019, the department engaged ACIL Allen Consulting Pty Ltd to undertake the
independent review of the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment Act 2013 (the
Act).
Section 4 of the Act requires the Minister to cause a review of the operation of the amendments made
by the Act, and table a written report before the parliament. The Act also requires at least one person
conducting the review to be independent of the Commonwealth, and that the review consider public
submissions.
The report from the review was tabled in parliament on 29 July 2019. This review has now concluded.
Review process
To commence the review, ACIL Allen published a discussion paper on its website on
18 February 2019.
Stakeholders were then invited to provide comments on the paper, or on any related matter, by
29 March 2019.
ACIL Allen received 14 written submissions by the closing date and published all of them on its
website, except one that was confidential.
The discussion paper, final report and copies of the public submissions received during ACIL
Allen’s consultations are available below for downloading.
Review outcome
ACIL Allen found that the Agricultural and Veterinary Chemicals Legislation Amendment Act
implemented a wide range of reforms designed to simplify, modernise and improve the
effectiveness of agricultural and veterinary (agvet) chemical regulatory arrangements.
The review also found that the public submissions that were received generally supported the
operation of amendments in the Act and identified no major concerns. The report notes that
some of the changes resulted in tangible improvements to the regulatory system, such as greater
efficiency, transparency and predictability in the agvet chemical review process.
Another key finding of this review was that a comprehensive examination of the entire agvet
regulatory framework in the near future could be beneficial due to its complexity and long history
of piecemeal reform.
ACIL Allen was unable to review the operation of every amendment made by the Act because
certain changes have not yet been implemented (and are therefore not in operation), the need to
implement them has not yet arisen or insufficient time has elapsed to assess their full effect.
Finally, the report notes that a number of submissions also raised other matters outside the
statutory scope of this review. The Department of Agriculture will continue to consider these
matters as appropriate through its policy processes.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Review documents
Download
The above document(s) was not prepared by the department and may not meet accessibility
requirements. If you have difficulty accessing this file, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Public submissions
Download
Document
Pages File size
Aerial Application Association of Australia PDF
13
167 KB
Andrew Johnston and Robyn Wood PDF
2
87 KB
Animal Medicines Australia PDF
2
143 KB
Australian Food Sovereignty Alliance PDF
17
756 KB
Cotton Australia PDF
2
705 KB
Croplife Australia PDF
15
667 KB
Dairy Australia / Aglign Ag Pty Ltd PDF PDF
3
432 KB
Grain Producers Australia PDF
18
1.9 MB
Grains Research & Development Corporation PDF
5
189 KB
Infopest (Growcom) PDF
2
167 KB
Name withheld by ACIL Allen PDF
1
52 KB
Name withheld by ACIL Allen PDF
2
192 KB
Veterinary Manufacturers and Distributors Association Ltd PDF
2
102 KB
The above document(s) was not prepared by the department and may not meet accessibility
requirements. If you have difficulty accessing this file, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/ag-vet-chemicals/better-regulation-of-ag-vet-
chemicals/review-agvet-amendment-act