National Farmers’ Federation 
Water and the Environment on the review of 
the Farm Management Deposit Scheme 
Prepared by Mr Ash Salardini 
30 April 2021

NFF Member Organisations

The National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) is the voice of Australian farmers.  
The NFF was established in 1979 as the national peak body representing farmers and 
more broadly, agriculture across Australia. The NFF’s membership comprises all of 
Australia’s major agricultural commodities across the breadth and the length of the 
supply chain. 
Operating under a federated structure, individual farmers join their respective state 
farm organisation and/or national commodity council. These organisations form the 
NFF.  
The NFF represents Australian agriculture on national and foreign policy issues 
including workplace relations, trade and natural resource management. Our members 
complement this work through the delivery of direct 'grass roots' member services as 
well as state-based policy and commodity-specific interests.

Statistics on Australian Agriculture 
Australian agriculture makes an important contribution to Australia’s social, economic 
and environmental fabric.  
Social > 
There are approximately 85,000 farm businesses in Australia, 99 per cent of which are 
wholly Australian owned and operated.  
Economic > 
In 2018-19, the agricultural sector, at farm-gate, contributed 1.9 per cent to Australia’s 
total Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The gross value of Australian farm production in 
2018-19 is estimated to have reached $62.2 billion.  
Workplace > 
The agriculture, forestry and fishing sector employs approximately 318,600 people, 
including full time (239,100) and part time employees (79,500). 
Seasonal conditions affect the sector’s capacity to employ. Permanent employment is 
the main form of employment in the sector, but more than 26 per cent of the employed 
workforce is casual.  
Environmental > 
Australian farmers are environmental stewards, owning, managing and caring for 51 per 
cent of Australia’s land mass. Farmers are at the frontline of delivering environmental 
outcomes on behalf of the Australian community, with 7.4 million hectares of 
agricultural land set aside by Australian farmers purely for conservation/protection 
purposes. 
In 1989, the National Farmers’ Federation together with the Australian Conservation 
Foundation was pivotal in ensuring that the emerging Landcare movement became a 
national programme with bipartisan support.

Page | 5 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
Content 
NFF Member Organisations .......................................................................................... ii 
Statistics on Australian Agriculture ......................................................................... iv 
Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 6 
FMDS an essential risk management tool .............................................................. 6 
The review process ......................................................................................................... 7 
Recommended improvements to the FMDS ........................................................... 9

Page | 6 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
Introduction 
The National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) welcomes the opportunity to provide 
review of the Farm Management Deposit Scheme (FMDS).  The NFF and its members 
believe that the FMDS has made significant contribution to improving farm business 
resilience and preparedness and recommend that the scheme continue and be 
expanded. 
In reviewing the FMDS, the NFF seeks that the review provide: 
- 
greater analysis and availability of data and metrics on FMDS by commodity 
and geography; 
- 
analysis on the interplay between the effectiveness of FMDS and utilisation 
by farmers; and 
- 
analysis of the effectiveness of the FMDS as part of the portfolio of drought 
measures available to farmers at a federal and state government level. 
More public analysis and reporting on the FMDS is required to ensure adequate 
engagement with the review of the scheme. 
With respect to substantive issues, the NFF seeks that: 
- 
FMDS eligibility be explicitly extended to other business structures, such as 
trusts and partnerships; 
- 
limits on off-farm income be reviewed; 
- 
the FMDS allow the drawdown of FMD accounts over three years for 
unforeseen circumstances, such as death; 
- 
the cap on deposits be regularly reviewed every three years for its 
appropriateness given climate and market conditions;  
- 
increased education and awareness on the benefits and implications of 
various drought measures, including the FMDS; and 
- 
ensuring other government settings promote the use of FMDS, such as 
prudential regulations. 
FMDS an essential risk management tool 
The NFF believes that the FMDS has significantly aided primary producers in 
becoming more financially self-reliant and resilient. Recent drawdown trends show 
that the scheme is being used by primary producers to get through tough times 
caused by drought and other perils, and to fund farm businesses through the 
recovery phase.  
It should be noted that aggregate deposit and drawdowns of FMD accounts do not 
track weather conditions with absolute fidelity, noting that the on-farm and 
financial impact of drought do not always coincide. As an example, livestock at a 
beginning of a severe drought are sold off, potentially increasing balances with an 
FMD account. Conversely, the first years of better conditions could see a drawdown 
of FMD accounts, as farmers restock. 
The NFF refutes suggestions that stated reasons for the utilisation of the FMDS by 
farmers, other than for risk management, invalidates the effectiveness of the

Page | 7 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
scheme. A 2018 ABARES survey suggests that 63% of farmers use the scheme as a 
tax management strategy.  The 2019 Auditor-General’s audit of the FMDS responds 
to this assertion: 
“the relatively high reported use of FMDs for tax management purposes is 
consistent with the objectives of the scheme… the tax concession encourages a 
change in behaviour and results in improved self-reliance…” 
Recent changes to the FMDS scheme including increasing the deposit cap to 
$800,000, the ability to withdraw a deposit within twelve-months in severe drought 
conditions without losing tax concession benefits, and the ability to use FMD 
accounts as an offset to a loan are most welcome.  
Of the changes outlined, the increasing of the deposit cap has been most 
scrutinised The Auditor General review notes little policy reason for the increase of 
the cap, noting the minimal number of primary producers having deposits exceeding 
the original $400,000 cap.  This should not be an argument to limit or reduce the 
cap but remove caps altogether.  Farmers have clearly demonstrated the 
appropriate use of the FMDS that is tailored to their business and are not simply 
‘maxing’ out caps for tax concession reasons.    
The agriculture industry and farmers view the FMDS as a key tool in preparedness 
and resilience and recommend that the program continue and be expanded. 
The review process 
The NFF would welcome further analysis to be made publicly available by the DAWE 
as a part of any review of the Farm Management Deposit Scheme and its 
effectiveness.  Specifically, the NFF seeks: 
- 
greater analysis and availability of data and metrics on FMDS by commodity 
and geography; and 
- 
analysis on the interplay between the effectiveness of FMDS and utilisation 
by farmers. 
Similarly discrete reviews of drought measures, including the FMDS, does not 
provide industry with an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of drought 
measures as a portfolio of solutions, and shape each measure to work in 
conjunction to provide optimal resilience and preparedness outcomes.  
This further analysis would allow industry and the public to engage with the 
question of effectiveness in a more informed manner.  
Availability of data and analysis on the FMDS 
The 2021 Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation does not provide enough 
data and analysis for industry to provide a considered view on the effectiveness of 
the FMDS.  While data made available on the DAWE website on FMDS provides 
aggregated details on accounts and amounts held by commodity and geography, it 
does not provide sufficient granularity to assess overall FMDS performance. Data 
and analysis required, include (but not limited to):

Page | 8 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
- 
Utilisation of FMD accounts as a % of total farmers eligible by state 
jurisdiction, commodity type, and turnover; 
- 
Changes in number of farmers eligible to make deposits into an FMD account 
over time; and 
- 
The variation in the account balance of FMD holders within each commodity 
stream and any correlation with turnover (not just averages). 
Without further analysis it is very hard to provide a considered position on the 
overall effectiveness of the FMDS, the relative effectiveness within commodity 
groups or in farm businesses of differing sizes. 
The last holistic review and analysis of the FMDS was in October 2012 by the 
National Rural Advisory Council (NARC), while the 2019 review by the Auditor 
General only focussed on establishing whether the FMDS as a tax measure was 
being effectively administered.        
Utilisation v effectiveness 
The terms of reference for the 2021 FMDS review notes that there are some 49,000 
FMD accounts held by farmers, well short of the total number of farmers who are 
eligible to hold an FMD account.  The NFF cautions equating utilisation and 
effectiveness of the FMDS without making further analysis and information 
available on the matter.  
The FMDS is one risk management tool available to farmers, with a myriad of risk 
management tools available to farmers including insurances, financial derivatives, 
securing of high security water rights, on-farm infrastructure, debt, and income 
diversification through off-farm income. The FMDS may not be the most appropriate 
or cost-effective risk management tool for all farmers. 
As an example, a farm-business in its start-up phase would likely reinvest all profits 
into investments on-farm and secure more access to finance, instead of locking 
away financial capital in an FMD account.    
Similarly, different farming businesses have differing access and costs for risk 
management tools available.  Intensive horticulture and dairy farming are likely to 
rely less heavily on FMDS as extensive farming operations, given that irrigation and 
the purchasing of high security water rights is more readily available to them. In the 
absence of publicly available information on utilisation numbers by commodity, the 
2018 ABARES survey on FMD accounts suggests balances held by dairy farmers are 
significantly lower than those held by extensive farming enterprises. 
There has not been the required analysis provided to draw conclusions on the 
FMDS’ effectiveness based on utilisation, or what an appropriate rate of utilisation 
may or may not be.    
Review of FMDS in the context of the portfolio of drought measures 
The NFF seeks that the review of drought measures, such as the FMDS, not be held 
discretely in isolation of the portfolio of drought measures provide by the Federal 
Government and by the state jurisdictions.

Page | 9 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
The efficacy of the FMDS must be assessed with reference to its interaction with 
other measures such as state and federal government including other tax 
incentives, concessional loan schemes, the Future Drought Fund, grants for on-
farm infrastructure, and hardship payments.  Discretely optimising individual 
drought measures leads to a situation akin to a Nash equilibrium, where individual 
optimisation leads to a sub-optimal portfolio outcome.   
The FMDS and its review suffer from this tunnel vision. As an example, eligibility 
criteria around off-farm income disincentivises farmers from utilising off-farm 
income as a risk management tool. At the same time governments are attempting 
to incentivise farmers to provide environmental services (carbon and biodiversity 
offsets etc.) as income that is uncorrelated to climatic conditions, which would 
significantly increase off-farm income.    
Recommended improvements to the FMDS 
Exclusion of various business structures from the FMDS 
The NFF and its members oppose the effective exclusion of business structures, 
such as partnerships and trusts from the FMDS, noting that the main purpose of 
the FMDS is to create resilient and prepared farm businesses regardless of their 
structure. FMD accounts should be vested in the business operation not the 
individual. 
There is an inconsistency with the vesting of FMD accounts with the individual. The 
FMDS purports to build resilient primary production businesses and excludes 
individuals who might derive too much of their income from off-farm sources, on 
the basis that they are no longer predominantly in primary production.  At the same 
time business structures that are set up for the sole purpose of advancing a primary 
production endeavour is excluded. This could explain the limited utilisation of the 
FMDS. 
The exclusion of these business structures is counterproductive to building 
resilience and preparedness, and is based on antiquated notions of unsophisticated 
family farmers with little business acumen. The establishment of these business 
structures are often to improve the risk management capabilities of the farm 
business, to then exclude these farm businesses from measures that will improve 
resilience and preparedness is illogical.  
There are practical implications for resilience and preparedness.  The untimely 
death of an individual holding an FMD account, and the tax liability that drawing 
down the account in one year creates, can severely dent the viability of a farm 
business.    
Non-primary production income limits a barrier to the effective use of FMDS 
The FMDS eligibility criteria limiting off-farm income to $100,000 p.a. is at odds with 
incentivising farmer to use all risk management tools to promote resilience and 
preparedness. Off-farm income is a key risk management measure for farmers in 
dealing with the cyclical nature of primary production income, and penalising

Page | 10 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
farmers who utilise off-farm income by restricting their use of the FMDS does not 
promote good resilience and preparedness outcomes. 
The interplay of off-farm income and the FMDS will become even more critical as 
other industry and government measures promote the expansion of off-farm 
income opportunities. The creation of markets for environmental services, such as 
carbon and biodiversity offsets, and the increased incidence of farmers hosting 
renewable energy generation will likely make more farmers ineligible for the FMDS 
due to off-farm income exceeding the $100,000 limit.  
While the NFF understands the Government’s intent on limiting the FMDS to those 
individuals who predominantly derive income from primary production, this 
eligibility criterion is a blunt instrument that creates more cost than benefit in 
terms of preparedness and resilience. 
This selection criterion implicitly suggests that excluding farmers who would 
otherwise be eligible for the FMDS is justified from the benefit of excluding those 
who are not predominantly primary producers. The NFF does not believe that these 
farmers should be treated as collateral damage because there is an absence of 
more appropriate eligibility criteria.  
The NFF recommends this criterion is changed in recognition of the significant 
benefits of off-farm income as a risk management tool.  Further analysis is required 
as to how this change would be made (whether it be changes to off-farm income 
limits, changes to definitions of primary production, or other measures).  
Triggers for the enforced withdrawal of FMDS 
The NFF believes that requirement to withdraw the balance of an FMD account 
within twelve-months due to unforeseen circumstances, such as death, is 
counterintuitive to improving farm business resilience, creating a significant tax 
liability for the farm business in that year. In these circumstances, the farm 
business is being penalised by paying more tax (at a higher marginal rate) than had 
they not participated in the FMDS.  This is a counterintuitive outcome.  
The NFF recommends that in these circumstances accounts be allowed to be drawn 
down over three years to ensure a more appropriate and just tax liability.    
Regular review of FMDS cap 
The NFF recommends that the FMD account cap be reviewed on regular basis to 
ascertain its appropriateness in promoting resilience and preparedness in farm 
businesses.   
Changes in climate, financial and trade conditions may or may not necessitate 
changes to the cap. A myriad of factors beyond climate volatility need to be taken 
into account in determining the appropriateness of the cap, noting that the impact 
and severity of drought is a combination of weather and climatic events and market 
conditions leading up to a drought, and condition thereafter.

Page | 11 
Submission to the Department of Agirculture, Water and the Evironment on the Farm 
Drought measures, policies and eligibility criteria should not be an exercise in 
‘setting and forgetting’.   A review could be held every three years to determine the 
appropriateness of the cap.  
Increased education and awareness 
NFF members, including those with accounting and financial planning expertise, 
have suggested that farm advisor (accountants, financial planners etc.) education 
would benefit from a holistic overview of drought measures (including the FMDS), 
their operation and their typical use.  
The NFF has highlighted the need for the development of a national curriculum on 
risk management for the network of farm advisors and is awaiting response from 
the Future Drought Fund. 
Other policy and regulatory settings comprising the efficacy of the FMDS 
The review must look outside drought policy to identify and tackle barriers to the 
more effective operation of the FMDS. As an example, banks are not incentivised to 
promote the use and expansion of FMD accounts as funds held are not recognised 
as tier-1 capital that would go towards fulfilling their capital adequacy 
requirements.  
The recognition by APRA of FMD funds as tier-1 capital would increase the utility 
for banks of funds held in FMDs, and banks would actively promote their use and 
benefits to customers.  
Should you have any questions regarding this submission, please contact Mr Ash 
Salardini, Chief Economist and General Manager Trade on 0490 785 390 or at 
asalardini@nff.org.au. 
Yours sincerely 
TONY MAHAR 
Chief Executive Officer