Pastoralists & Graziers Association of Western Australia (Inc) 

Ground Floor, 28-42 Ventnor Avenue, West Perth WA 6005    PO Box 889, West Perth WA 6872 

Ph:  (08) 9212 6900     Fax: (08) 9485 0299   Email:  pga@pgaofwa.org.au 

30th of April 2021 

FMDS Evaluation Secretariat 

Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation 2021 

The Pastoralists and Graziers Association of WA (Inc) (PGA) is a non-profit industry 

organisation established in 1907, which represents primary producers in both the 

pastoral and agricultural regions of Western Australia. 

The PGA is a firm supporter of the Farm Management Deposit (FMD) Scheme 

(FMDS). 

The PGA objects to the suggestion in the Evaluation’s Terms of Reference that the 

FMDS is used as a form of tax planning.  As a form of income averaging, the FMDS 

must perforce have this kind of element embedded within it.  It does not mean that 

it is the primary reason farmers use them. 

The PGA was disappointed to read that the Evaluation’s Terms of Reference pointed 

out that the government provided $215 million in tax relief in 2019-20 to primary 

producers through the FMDS.  This is nothing unusual.  The Commonwealth 

Government provides tax relief to other parts of Australian society, such as the 

Family Tax Benefit, not to mention last year’s October media release by the Prime 

Minister, where he announced his Government’s tax relief package, for both 

individuals and business.  Further, the estimated $215 million in tax would be 

reclaimed when the FMD is withdrawn. 

The PGA is also disappointed that the scope of the Evaluation ruled out many other 

possible changes to the operation of the Scheme.  The PGA believes that some 

changes to the operation of the Scheme would incentivise its use. 

The PGA notes that small businesses in rural towns are impacted by drought just 

as much as drought affected farm businesses when those latter businesses reduce 

their spending.  Yet the expansion of the FMDS to non-primary production 

businesses was ruled out.

Pastoralists & Graziers Association of Western Australia (Inc) 

Ground Floor, 28-42 Ventnor Avenue, West Perth WA 6005    PO Box 889, West Perth WA 6872 

Ph:  (08) 9212 6900     Fax: (08) 9485 0299   Email:  pga@pgaofwa.org.au 

The PGA also believes that FMDs should have the ability to be converted into 

superannuation, as part of farm succession planning.  Such a conversion would not 

be a concessional transfer of wealth, if it has robust rules such that a retiring farmer 

cannot re-enter the workforce, and tax is paid in a similar way to when an individual 

withdraws their superannuation before its preservation age. 

Increases to the $800,000 FMD deposit threshold was also ruled out yet the 

average balance is only $139,000.  In the PGA’s view, the cap is not achieved and 

does not achieve anything, so therefore should be removed. 

The PGA also believes that the average balance does not signify anything.  As the 

FMDS is designed to be used by individuals, it cannot therefore be representative 

of the most common farm business structure, such as trusts and partnerships 

between related individuals, which then distribute income to those individuals, who 

may or may not have an FMD. 

In discussions with its members whilst preparing for this consultation the PGA 

became aware that any rent received from leasing out a farm is not considered as 

primary production income for the reason of income averaging for tax purposes.  

Consequently, the lessor cannot avail themselves of the FMDS despite that income 

being subject to all the same economic or climatic influences that their on-farm 

income may also be subject to. 

Yours Faithfully 

Tony Seabrook 

President