QUEENSLAND FARMERS’ FEDERATION 
Primary Producers House, Level 3, 183 North Quay, Brisbane QLD 4000 
PO Box 12009 George Street, Brisbane QLD 4003 
qfarmers@qff.org.au | 07 3837 4720 
ABN 44 055 764 488 
The united voice of intensive and irrigated agriculture 
Submission 
26 April 2021 
FMDS Evaluation Team 
18 Marcus Clarke Street 
Canberra  
ACT 2601 
Via email: fmds.evaluation@agriculture.gov.au  
Dear Sir/Madam 
Re: Farm Management Deposits Scheme Evaluation 2021 
The Queensland Farmers’ Federation (QFF) is the united voice of intensive and irrigated agriculture in 
Queensland. It is a federation that represents the interests of 21 peak state and national agriculture 
industry organisations and engages in a broad range of economic, social, environmental and regional 
issues of strategic importance to the productivity, sustainability and growth of the agricultural sector. 
QFF’s mission is to secure a strong and sustainable future for Queensland farmers by representing the 
common interests of our member organisations: 
• 
CANEGROWERS 
• 
Cotton Australia 
• 
Growcom 
• 
Nursery & Garden Industry Queensland (NGIQ) 
• 
Queensland Chicken Growers Association (QCGA) 
• 
Queensland Dairyfarmers’ Organisation (QDO) 
• 
Australian Cane Farmers Association (ACFA) 
• 
Queensland United Egg Producers (QUEP) 
• 
Turf Queensland 
• 
Queensland Chicken Meat Council (QCMC) 
• 
Bundaberg Regional Irrigators Group (BRIG) 
• 
Burdekin River Irrigation Area Irrigators Ltd (BRIA) 
• 
Central Downs Irrigators Ltd (CDIL) 
• 
Fairbairn Irrigation Network Ltd 
• 
Mallawa Irrigation Ltd 
• 
Pioneer Valley Water Cooperative Ltd (PV Water) 
• 
Theodore Water Pty Ltd 
• 
Eton Irrigation Scheme Ltd 
• 
Pork Queensland Inc 
• 
Tropical Carbon Farming Innovation Hub 
• 
Lockyer Water Users Forum (LWUF)

2 of 5 
QFF welcomes the opportunity to provide comment on the Farm Management Deposits Scheme 
Evaluation and we provide this submission without prejudice to any additional submissions from our 
members or individual farmers.   
QFF notes the limited scope of the current evaluation. There is also a lack of transparency around farm 
debt, cash flow and its complex relationship to other matters such as succession planning, rising 
agricultural land values and the current low interest rate environment which makes quantifying 
feedback and assessing on-farm decision-making processes problematic.   
Scope of the Review 
The evaluation into the operation of the Farm Management Deposits Scheme (FMDS) by the 
FMDS is delivering the outcomes as intended, and the efficiency of its administration.  
Response, Resilience and Preparedness Plan, which details the Government’s commitment to undertake 
an evaluation of the FMDS, as well as recommendations of the recent Australian National Audit Office 
(ANAO) audit and the Joint Committee on Public Affairs and Audit (JCPAA) inquiry.  While the aim is to 
also inform ongoing policy and program design, support better decision making and accountability.  
The FMDS was designed to encourage increased financial self-reliance among primary producers. It is a 
tax-linked financial management tool that aims to improve the capacity of primary producers to manage 
financial fluctuations caused by environmental and market conditions. Eligible primary producers are 
able to set aside up to $800,000 in pre-tax income to draw in future years when needed. As at June 
2020, the total holdings in the FMDS were $6.5 billion, held in over 49,000 accounts. As the FMDS is 
both a deferral and foregone revenue measure, it is not possible to give precise costings for the forward 
estimates. Though, in 2019-20 the government provided $215 million in tax relief in net terms to 
primary producers through the FMDS. 
The FMDS is one of several tax concessions and measures to assist primary producers improve cash flow 
and provide an incentive for improved risk management. The FMDS also aligns with the Australian 
Government’s drought reform agenda of the last decade, which aims at transitioning from crisis 
management to long-term resilience and preparedness. The FMDS is a key Commonwealth commitment 
Resilience and Preparedness Plan. The FMDS is jointly administered by DAWE, the Australian Taxation 
Office (ATO) and the Department of Treasury 
The guiding principle of this evaluation involves the DAWE to provide advice on:  
1. 
The extent to which FMDS meets its policy objective by assisting primary producers to become 
more financially self-reliant, as opposed to being utilised for other purposes, such as tax planning;  
2. 
What elements of FMDS are working well, and what could be improved; and  
3. 
providing financial support to primary producers.

3 of 5 
There are some matters specific to FMDS that are indicated as being outside the scope of the 
evaluation.  It is the view of QFF that it is difficult to appropriately evaluate the scheme based on the 
above guiding principles, without also considering some of the matters that have been specified out of 
scope as a number of these are directly relevant to issues such as what could be improved and the 
extent to which FMDS meets its policy objective.  
Queensland Context 
The Farm Management Deposits Scheme (FMDS) commenced in 1999 with an aim to promote financial 
self-reliance of Australian farmers by providing them with an opportunity to manage financial risk 
associated with climate conditions, particularly drought and other market fluctuations by depositing 
funds in higher income years as reserve to be available for low-income years.  
Income deposited in an FMD account is tax deductible in the year in which the deposit is made. 
It becomes taxable income in the year in which it is withdrawn.  QFF understands that the scheme has 
been popular amongst primary producers as a measure for forward planning of cash flow in primary 
production business, but there are impediments which are discussed in this submission.   
As at 1 February 2021, there are a total of 41 councils and four-part council areas drought declared. 
These declarations represent 67.4% of the land area of Queensland. There are also 31 Individual 
Droughted Properties (IDP) in a further 12 Local Government Areas1.  Despite recent sporadic rainfall to 
some areas, many water storages (both on-farm and off-farm) are still critically low, and the drought 
declarations are expected to continue into the foreseeable future.  Some properties and areas have now 
experienced over a decade of drought conditions.      
The 2019 Queensland Rural Debt Survey2 indicated that as at 31 December (2019), there was $19.10 
billion of rural debt in Queensland, an increase of $1.85 billion on 2017 figures.  QFF notes that this 
survey does not capture debt held outside the ‘banking world’ including, but not limited to, unpaid 
utility bills, lines of credit at local stores and suppliers or debt held by other businesses allied to the 
farm.   
The report notes that as of December 2019, ‘there were 9,154 FMD accounts in Queensland at a value of 
$1,213 million. Comparatively, in December 2017, there were 10,095 accounts with a total value of FMD 
accounts at $1,188 million. The total value of deposits has only marginally increased (2.03 per cent 
increase), and the number of accounts has decreased by over 900. It is observed that March 2019 saw 
the lowest deposit value at $1,167 million.   
The beef industry had the greatest number of FMD accounts (3,073) with a value of $460 million. The 
sugar industry had the second highest deposit accounts with 1,319 at a total of $138 million. In 2017, 
these two industries also had the highest number of accounts, reflecting the significant industries that 
they are in Queensland. Whilst drought has significantly reduced production for both industries in 
Queensland, the high returns from 2016 likely assisted in the number of accounts’ (pp22-23). 
Policy Objectives  
QFF is of the view that FMDS have generally met the policy objectives of the scheme since its 
introduction by promoting some forward planning of cash flows in high income years amongst primary 
production business that are eligible to access the scheme.    
1 See https://www.longpaddock.qld.gov.au/drought/drought-declarations/  
2 See https://www.qrida.qld.gov.au/queensland-rural-debt-survey Survey conducted by the Queensland Rural and Industry 
Development Authority (QRIDA).

4 of 5 
As many areas of Australia, and particularly Queensland and New South Wales, have suffered extended 
periods of drought, it is timely to analyse access to the reserves held in the scheme.    QFF supports a 
review of the pattern of FMD withdrawals to help inform whether the policy objectives of the scheme 
are being met in areas where drought conditions are improving.  This is due to the fact that it has been 
previously noted that FMD withdrawals often lag drought conditions by a season or more in some 
agricultural industries.3   
An analysis of withdrawals will help inform the value of the scheme in difficult times and is likely to also 
inform the need for improvements to the scheme, particular in respect of eligibility and increases in the 
use of non-primary production income, discussed further below.  
Elements of FMDS are working well, and what could be improved  
QFF understands anecdotally that there is widespread understanding of the availability of FMDS 
amongst primary producers.   QFF supports an analysis of the trend in use of FMDS over the past 10 
years, in particular with a view to assessing the use of FMDS during periods of extreme drought.  QFF 
understands that many family farming businesses have progressed to being conducted in companies 
and trusts for multiple reasons including, but not limited to, asset protection and succession planning.    
As companies and trusts are not eligible to hold FMDS a review that focuses on whether access to FMDS 
has decreased in the last ten years may be timely, as it corresponds to the rising use of companies and 
trusts in family farming business.   
Longer periods of drought are likely to also have led to an increase in farming business utilising sources 
of non-primary production income, with that income used primarily to support the farming business. 
QFF supports a review of the amount of non-primary production income being held in FMDS to assess 
whether this has increased in recent years, particularly in areas suffering the effects of long periods of 
drought.   
As a farm business must be profitable to have the cash flow to hold an FMD, the protracted periods of 
drought may have led to decreased use of FMDS during periods of higher non-primary production 
income to support farming business.   This is worthy of analysis in order to assess if FMDS are currently 
achieving the policy aims of improving cash flow planning, and thereby financial self-reliance for primary 
producers, particularly during periods of extended drought.  As the scheme’s objective is to enable 
famers to better manage income for the purposes of being self-reliant, it seems counter-intuitive to 
limit the ability for farming enterprises to build reserves from non-primary production income to 
support the business, particularly during periods of drought.   
QFF also considers that FMDs being held by individuals can inhibit appropriate succession planning 
where the transition of the business to the next generation during lifetime may already face significant 
hurdles such as capital gains tax and increased debt to facilitate retirement of the controlling 
generation.  In these circumstances a consideration of the ability to transfer funds held in FMDS to 
superannuation (subject to the relevant contribution thresholds) may help facilitate the transition of a 
more viable (and therefore more financially self-reliant) farming enterprise to a future generation.   In 
addition, a review of eligibility for companies and trusts could also facilitate a more viable transition in 
some circumstances and should be considered, particularly for inter-generational primary production 
businesses.  
3 National Rural Advisory Council Report on the effectiveness of the Farm Management Deposit Scheme October 2012 at p11

5 of 5 
financial support to primary producers 
There are a broad range of programs available to support primary, particularly during periods of 
drought.  However, all of these policies and programs have different eligibility requirements and may be 
more easily accessible by some businesses but not by others.   The advantage of the FMDS is that it can 
provide a very useful tool for promoting cash flow management and building cash flow reserves to be 
accessible in more difficult income years for a broad range of primary production businesses, subject to 
the eligibility requirements.   However, impacts on retirement and eligibility for businesses that, for 
asset protection or succession reasons are not structured so as to allow access to FMDS, may be 
creating a decrease in take up of FMDS that should also be reviewed.      
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any questions regarding this submission.  
Yours sincerely 
Dr Georgina Davis 
Chief Executive Officer