Landcare Awards recognise passionate and committed Australians who make an outstanding
contribution to natural resource management and the Landcare movement. Award recipients strive for
a healthier, sustainable, resilient and more productive landscape.
The Australian Government supports the:
National Landcare Awards
Bob Hawke Landcare Award
State and Territory Landcare Awards.
National Landcare Awards
The National Landcare Awards are held every 2 years. They celebrate and promote the achievements of
Australia’s Landcare community. Winners of the 2022 National Landcare Awards were announced on
Wednesday 24 August 2022 in Sydney.
Around 1200 landcarers engaged both in person and online to celebrate the successes of the inspiring
finalists and winners.
Bob Hawke Landcare Award
The Bob Hawke Landcare Award acknowledges an individual with a remarkable commitment to caring
for the land. The recipient is a champion for better practices and donates their time to share knowledge
with others so that they too can prosper.
The prestigious award is presented every two years. It celebrates individual excellence in the promotion
and adoption of Landcare and sustainable agricultural practices.
An amount of $50 000 is awarded to the winner which provides an outstanding opportunity to further
develop and champion their knowledge and skills in sustainable land management and Landcare.
The 2022 Bob Hawke Landcare Award was announced on 24 August 2022 as part of the National
Landcare Awards, and was awarded to Narromine farmer, grazier and innovator: Bruce Maynard.
See more information on Bruce, as well as the inspiring work of all finalists.
State and Territory Landcare Awards
State and territory Landcare Awards recognise the valued efforts of landcarers across Australia. These
awards are presented biennially in partnership with state and territory landcare bodies. Winners
become finalists for their respective categories at the next National Landcare Awards.
Read about the Winners of the 2022 State & Territory Landcare Awards for each state and territory.
• 
• 
•

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/natural-resources/landcare/national-landcare-
program/landcare-awards