1 
2021 to 2024 Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) Program— 
Program Logic  
Context: Fiscal environment, climatic events, industry events (disease outbreaks, trade events, global 
market impacts), new government programs, referring bodies. 
1. Issue 
Australian primary producers operate in volatile market and environmental conditions. Many 
small-medium sized enterprises are more susceptible to risks, which can be compounded by lower 
financial capability, delayed decision-making, a lack of information and attitudinal factors. This can 
limit strategic business management and lead to financial difficulty. 
2. Need  
The new program identifies a need for free, independent financial counselling that empowers clients 
to engage in strategic business and financial decision-making to improve their financial situation. 
3. Vision 
The vision for the new RFCS program is financially capable agricultural, fishing and forestry sectors 
that are profitable, financially self-reliant and resilient. 
4. Objectives 
There are three objectives under the new RFCS program logic: 
Transition clients out of financial crisis. 
Improve profitability or facilitate a dignified exit. 
Improve financial wellbeing and resilience. 
5. Assumptions 
Assumptions for the new RFCS program include: 
intervention is appropriate 
effective, efficient and high quality service 
robust governance 
there is service demand and good client engagement (includes program awareness and 
clients who are willing to engage in a counselling process) 
appropriate counsellor training and development 
client should be serviced within 3 years, unless on Farm Household Allowance.

2 
6. Inputs 
Inputs into the new RFCS program include: 
Funding 
Program governance (including funding contracts and data collection systems) 
Human resources 
Clients. 
7. Clients 
RFCS clients are farmers, fishers, foresters and related small businesses experiencing, or at risk of, 
financial hardship.  
Examples of small related businesses are, shearers, fencing contractors, harvesters and others 
directly involved in the production of primary industry products. 
All clients need to be able to tell their story and should be encouraged to engage 
with case management. 
8. 
Client engagement 
Client engagement under the new RFCS program should: 
Promote the service strategically. 
Triage clients based on their needs. 
Include dynamic service delivery to manage demand and capacity. 
9. Activities 
There are two main activities that counsellors can undertake with clients.  
Counsellors can provide support to access government programs and other assistance. 
understanding the client’s issue 
discussing options 
assisting with documentation (e.g. to receive Farm Household Allowance) 
encouraging clients to engage in case management. 
NOTE: Clients solely seeking support to access government programs and other assistance 
(transactional assistance) may not be ready to engage in a more holistic assessment of their business 
and possibilities. As a result, they will only be able to address their immediate financial issues unless 
they transition into case management. Counsellors should talk to clients about whether 
transactional support will result in adverse outcomes.                         
Counsellors can also undertake structured case management of clients.

3 
helping clients to understand their business situation and underlying problems 
supporting clients to come to terms with their situation and feel in control of their future 
 discussing possibilities and longer term goals 
developing knowledge, skills, confidence 
developing business plans/strategies 
supporting clients to access government programs and other assistance 
representation and client advocacy (i.e. negotiations or mediation with banks and creditors) 
referrals to other professional services 
implementing plans/strategies and monitoring progress. 
NOTE: Clients should be encouraged to engage in case management, including where they are 
seeking transactional assistance, and counsellor resources should be focused on clients who are 
willing to fully engage in case management. 
10. Outcomes 
The program logic outlines client outcomes separated into four groups. 
The first three stages are outcomes we expect clients to achieve while participating in the program. 
The last stage (post-exit outcomes) reflect outcomes we expect clients to achieve after exiting the 
program, as a result of successfully achieving the earlier outcomes. 
While these stages look rigid and simple, in reality, this is a complex process that depends on 
individual circumstances, capability levels and personalities. Some clients may move through these 
outcomes faster and some clients may not achieve the outcomes in a linear fashion—for example, 
some clients may go back and revise their longer-term goals as they get a better understanding of 
their position over time.  
The logic to the sequence of these stages is that: 
In Stage 1, a client must develop a conducive mindset to engage in a longer-term change 
process. This could include addressing some immediate financial concerns and coming to 
terms with the need to reconsider their longer-term business strategy and goals. The client 
then builds a better understanding of their business position and options to improve their 
financial situation. This process could include identifying new opportunities that they have 
failed to see before.  
In Stage 2, the client then increases their financial and business planning skills to develop 
more appropriate longer-term business goals and strategies.  
In Stage 3, the client starts to implement these strategies to take steps toward the three 
pathways—either to improve their business’s profitability and viability, to pass their 
business onto a successor, or to sell their business.

4 
Stage 1 Outcomes 
Conducive mindset and motivation: 
- financial support is accessed 
- clients become mentally ready and willing to consider longer-term business changes. 
Increased knowledge: 
- improved understanding of financial position 
- better understanding of options to improve position. 
Stage 2 Outcomes 
Increased skills, knowledge and competence: 
- improved financial and business skills and competence 
- developed medium-long term business goals 
- developed strategies to achieve medium-long term business goals and manage risk. 
Stage 3 Outcomes   
Behavioural changes and decision-making options to reach self-sufficiency: 
- implementing business changes to improve business profitability and viability, and 
progress towards financial self-sufficiency 
- implementing business changes to pass the business onto a successor and progress 
towards financial self-sufficiency 
- implementing business changes to sell the business and progress towards financial self-
sufficiency. 
Post Exit Outcomes 
Sustaining behavioural change: 
- financially self-sufficient farm businesses with improved profitability. 
Executing decisions: 
- businesses successfully transitioned to successors 
- businesses sold. 
11. Impact 
Individuals who are financially self-reliant and businesses that are better prepared to deal with risks 
so they don’t need to re-enter the service.