By accessing the information presented in this media, each user waives and releases the Commonwealth of Australia to the full extent permitted by law from all liability for loss or damage arising from the use of, or reliance on, material or information made available through the system, whether or not caused by any negligence on the part of the Commonwealth of Australia or its agents. In no event shall the Commonwealth of Australia be liable for any incidental or consequential damages resulting from use of or reliance on the material.
In particular and without limit to the generality of the above:
- the Australian Government does not guarantee uninterrupted access to this website or that the website and files obtained from or through this website are free from viruses
- information provided in publications of the Australian Government is considered to be true and correct at the time of publication. Changes in circumstances after time of publication may impact on the accuracy of this information and the Australian Government gives no assurance as to the accuracy of any information or advice contained.
In addition to locally mounted information, links are provided to external Internet sites. These external information sources are outside our control. It is the responsibility of the Internet user to make their own decisions about the accuracy, currency, reliability and correctness of information found.
There is the risk that information sent to or from this website, or any departmental email account (X@aff.gov.au), may be viewed, intercepted, corrupted or modified by, or otherwise disclosed to third parties. The Commonwealth cannot guarantee or otherwise warrant the security or integrity of any information transmitted in this manner, and is not liable in connection with the transmission of any such information (including as a result of negligence).
References to the Quarantine Act 1908
The Quarantine Act 1908 was repealed on 16 June 2016 and replaced by the Biosecurity Act 2015. The department has endeavoured to ensure that legislative references are current on the website. However, due to administrative and technical constraints, material on this site may still contain references to the Quarantine Act 1908. Any references to the Quarantine Act 1908 and its subordinate legislation are outdated, and the department and its officers are now undertaking functions and duties and exercising powers pursuant to the Biosecurity Act 2015.
Export Service guidance tool
We make the Export Service guidance tool (Tool) available for the benefit of the public. We also make this Tool available on the understanding that you will exercise your own skill, care and judgment concerning its use. For example, you should carefully evaluate the accuracy, currency, completeness and relevance of the information obtained from this Tool and draw your own conclusions for your specific circumstances and purposes.
We have sought to include relevant information from applicable legislation, including the Export Control Act 2020 (Cth). Changes in circumstances after publication may impact the accuracy of this information, and we give no assurance of the accuracy of any information or advice contained. The purpose of this Tool is to simplify the user experience and provide efficiencies for users engaging with the export process. You should treat all information available in this Tool as a guide only and make further independent investigations before relying on any information made available through this Tool.
In addition to other relevant disclaimers, we make no warranty or representation that the material contained in this Tool (including information provided by third parties or information produced by the Tool) or the website or platform it is embedded in will be complete or free from error, or if used will ensure compliance with applicable laws or requirements.
This Tool is not a substitute for receiving legal or export brokering advice. Users should consult a professional directly for specific advice.
Linking to our websites
We are happy for you to link to pages on our websites, but please observe the following conditions:
- links must be presented in a way which fairly represents our role and our site(s)
- the context in which you insert the link must not give your visitors the impression that your site, or your company, is sponsored or endorsed by us
- the context of the link must not suggest that we have created any of your content i.e. the source of the material must be clear.