Details
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 2022.
We’re an Australian Government agency. Our decisions must be transparent. Our policies credible. Our practices fair and ethical.
We strive to deliver efficient and accountable services to the public.
We must meet certain reporting requirements. This includes obligations under the:
- Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
- Public Service Act 1999
- Freedom of Information Act 1982
- Government Procurement (Judicial Review) Act 2018
Annual report
Our annual reports show our activities, achievements and performance for each financial year.
Budgets
Our budget statements detail how we will use our allocated funds each financial year.
Corporate plan
Our corporate plan sets out our goals and how we will measure our performance.
Data strategy
Our Enterprise Data Strategy outlines our plans to manage the increasingly complex, data rich environment in which we operate.
Evaluation strategy
Our Enterprise Evaluation Strategy delivers better outcomes for stakeholders through stronger, evidence based evaluation ensures continuous improvement and better outcomes for our stakeholders.
Freedom of information (FOI)
You can request some types of information from us under FOI laws.
Information Publication Scheme
The Information Publication Scheme sets out what we must publish on our website.
Public Interest Certificates
The department publishes Public Interest Certificates under the Government Procurement (Judicial Review) Act 2018.
Reporting obligations
We have other reporting commitments.
This includes information released:
- by Senate order
- by agreement of department Secretaries
- under direction of the Australian Public Service Commission
Audit and Risk Committee
The Audit and Risk Committee was established by the accountable authority of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry in compliance with section 45 of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act) and section 17 of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Rule 2014 (PGPA Rule).
This committee provides independent advice to the secretary (as the accountable authority) on the department's risk, finance, control and compliance frameworks and its external accountability responsibilities.
The accountable authority must, by written charter, determine the functions of the audit committee that is established for the entity as required by subsection 45(1) of the Act.