Over the next decade, we’ll continue to face complex biosecurity control challenges. We need to innovate to prepare for this future. This is how we’ll work together to improve and transform our biosecurity system.
Do you have a bright or innovative idea that could improve our Biosecurity system? With our support, your idea could soon be a reality! Contact us or share your idea through our Bright Idea platform
Making ideas reality
We can work with you to innovate your idea and make it a reality. This is how we do it.
Identification
We help identify high potential ideas through stakeholder engagement. We scan for new technologies and models.
Filtration
We filter ideas and assess their viability to create the right projects. We ensure our investment is optimised.
Design
We design and stand-up innovation and research projects. We secure the funding and support needed to move from idea to execution.
Delivery
We deliver transformations, large and small, to make innovation a reality.
Evaluation
We evaluate innovations to understand their performance and lessons learnt. We look for opportunities to scale and adapt to deepen their value.
How we help
We offer services to help capture your ideas and take them forward. We support you in your research projects or pilots. We help evaluate and communicate your success and lessons learnt.
Idea
We put out calls for new ideas. We work with you to capture your idea and we’ll consider it along with other potential projects.
Engagement Hub
We engage with stakeholders from industry and the research sector to find challenges that need solving. Then we’ll connect them to suitable stakeholder areas.
Technology Scanning
We scan for emerging technologies and assess their potential to enhance or transform our performance.
Project
We assess ideas to identify those that should turn into funded pilots or projects.
Technology Adoption
We connect emerging technologies and supplier capabilities to our current and future needs and priorities.
Design
We help scope your innovation project or pilot and identify business areas to collaborate with. We work with you to pitch and get authorised to proceed.
Project and Pilot Management Support
We provide procurement, project management communications, stakeholder management and staff support to enable your project or pilot.
We work with you to develop your proposal, deliver and track your project, manage issues and benefits. We advise on how implementation could work in practice.
Delivery
We support your post-project implementation management to ensure smooth administration and outcomes.
Adoption and Translation Support
We help implement your project to make a positive change to our biosecurity system.
Evaluation
We help collate feedback, develop an evaluation report, and determine the next steps.