The Environmental Biosecurity Office is committed to meaningful connections with First Nations people to achieve better policy outcomes.
Championing First Nations perspectives
The Environmental Biosecurity Office establishes strong partnerships with First Nations organisations. We do this by:
- prioritising policy and projects that support First Nations-led land management
- employing First Nations people, including in technical positions
- establishing and maintaining relationships to create meaningful engagement and stronger connections.
These strong partnerships ensure effective delivery of our programs and better outcomes for First Nations people.
We are committed to listening to First Nations voices. The Environmental Biosecurity Office is also committed to delivering priorities that align with the department’s First Nations Commitment. This commitment aspires to embed First Nations voices in all areas of our work.
Indigenous rangers
Indigenous rangers play a key role in Australia’s environmental biosecurity particularly in Northern Australia.
Australia’s northern coastline is sparsely populated and often difficult to access. It is also a high-risk pathway for environmental pests. The Indigenous Ranger Biosecurity Program provides vital surveillance for the early detection of biosecurity threats along the northern Australian border.
Roots of Resilience
Roots of Resilience tells a story of the importance of environmental biosecurity, and what is at risk of being lost due to the threats posed by Myrtle rust. The film gives voice to First Nations’ perspectives, connections and concerns around forests and forest health.
First Nations people have lived in harmony with this country for thousands of years. This video describes our need to share knowledge and walk together to protect what we love. It highlights the importance of forests to people, culture and ecosystems both here and abroad.
The film was produced in collaboration with the department’s Environmental Biosecurity Office through the Environmental Biosecurity Project Fund, the Queensland and NSW governments, Aboriginal communities and partners in Aotearoa, New Zealand.
It was filmed and produced by ThunderBox films across various locations including Coffs Harbour, Bunya Mountains and Cairns.