Environmental biosecurity requires collaboration between governments, industry, and the community. We work with a wide variety of people across Australia for good environmental biosecurity outcomes.
We aim to develop strong, vibrant environmental biosecurity networks. The Australian Chief Environmental Biosecurity Officer (ACEBO) leads this collaboration.
International engagement
The ACEBO supports Australia’s membership of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). This international engagement allows us to understand and respond to global pressures, like climate change, that impact our biosecurity system.
First Nations engagement
The Environmental Biosecurity Office establishes strong partnerships with First Nations organisations. These strong partnerships ensure effective delivery of our programs and better outcomes for First Nations people. Read more about our First Nations environmental biosecurity.
National engagement
The ACEBO works closely with Australian government colleagues, including the Threatened Species Commissioner. The ACEBO is a member of the Environment and Invasives Committee which provides policy leadership on environmental biosecurity.
The ACEBO also works across all areas of biosecurity, liaising with operational as well as policy areas for better environmental outcomes.
Environmental Biosecurity Advisory Group
We work with national environmental biosecurity leaders through the Environmental Biosecurity Advisory Group (EBAG). This is a sub-group of the Environment and Invasives Committee (EIC).
EBAG provides an opportunity for non-government and community representatives to discuss environmental biosecurity issues. It provides advice to the EIC on environmental biosecurity policy and strategy.
Member organisations include the Invasive Species Council, National Farmers’ Federation and Wildlife Health Australia.
Environmental Biosecurity Interdepartmental Group
The Environmental Biosecurity Interdepartmental Group (EBIG) supports ongoing collaboration between the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. This ensures a unified federal government approach to environmental biosecurity.
EBIG helps strengthen the Intergovernmental Agreement on Biosecurity.
Environmental Biosecurity Interdepartmental Group (EBIG) – Annual Report 2025
The EBIG delivered significant results across key initiatives in 2025.
Environmental Biosecurity Interdepartmental Group (EBIG) – Annual Report 2024
The EBIG delivered significant results across key initiatives in 2024.
Environmental Biosecurity Roundtables
National Environmental Biosecurity Roundtables provide a unique opportunity for stakeholders from across Australia to collaborate in person on key environmental biosecurity topics. Summaries of previous Environmental Biosecurity Roundtables can be found in the reports below.
Roundtable events were paused between 2020 and 2024 due to COVID. They were replaced with a series of webinars. See below for more information on these webinars.
The 2025 Environmental Biosecurity Roundtable took place on 11 September in Melbourne, with the theme “Facing the Future Together.”
Environmental Biosecurity Roundtable 2025 – Melbourne
Environmental Biosecurity Roundtable 1 – Canberra
Environmental Biosecurity Roundtable 2 – Melbourne
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Environmental Biosecurity Roundtable 1 – Canberra
If you have difficulty accessing these files, contact us for help.
Environmental biosecurity webinars
The Environmental Biosecurity Webinar series supports knowledge sharing and networking. Webinars cover a variety of topics. They attract a wide variety of participants from:
- all levels of government
- land and natural resources organisations
- researcher organisations
- community conservation groups
- plant and animal health bodies.