Renewed Australian  
Animal Welfare Strategy 
The Australian Government has committed to develop a renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy that was 
last active in 2014. A renewed strategy will provide a contemporary framework for ensuring animal welfare in 
Australia. 
The strategy will cement a national approach to animal welfare and signal to our international trading partners 
and Australian consumers that animal welfare is a priority for our nation.   
It will also confirm Australia’s commitment to a modern, sustainable and science-based approach to animal 
welfare. 
What’s in this year’s Budget 
The government is strengthening our national approach to animal welfare by investing $5 million over 4 years 
to renew the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy, restoring much needed national leadership on our nation’s 
approach to animal welfare. 
Why this is important 
Animal welfare is a priority for the community, the agriculture industry and the Australian Government. 
Renewing the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy reflects the community’s desire for joint leadership from all 
Australian governments on animal welfare.   
The strategy delivers on the government’s election commitment to strengthen animal welfare transparency 
and assurance, and complements the October Budget measure to create an Inspector-General of Animal 
Welfare and Live Animal Exports. 
A renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy re-establishes a national framework for priority setting and 
associated national standards and measures of improvement for animal welfare outcomes. 
Demonstrating Australia’s strong animal welfare standards will support increased access to overseas markets, 
while strengthening the reputation of our animal and agricultural industries with trading partners.  
The renewal of the Australian Animal Welfare Strategy will be undertaken in collaboration with state and 
territory governments and in consultation with non-government and industry bodies, animal welfare groups, 
First Nations peoples and the Australian community.   
 
$5 million

agriculture.gov.au 
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry 
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy 
 
How much this will cost 
 
2023-24 
$m 
2024-25 
$m 
2025-26 
$m 
2026-27 
$m 
TOTAL 
$m 
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy  
1.172 
1.194 
1.348 
1.285 
4.999 
Subtotal 
1.172 
1.194 
1.348 
1.285 
4.999 
 
More information 
For more information about our renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy visit agriculture.gov.au 
For more information about the 2023–24 Budget visit budget.gov.au