Measures that reduce infestation rates, if there is a risk that pests are present in a consignment.
Reduce pests in consignment
Summary
Measures that kill, inactivate, or directly remove pests from the commodity in a consignment.
Depending on the pest and commodity, this can be achieved by applying a treatment, physical processing and disturbance, surface cleaning or removing contaminants.
These measures are commonly commercial practices that can be considered during risk assessment. For example, surface cleaning requirements or extended cold storage that results in pest mortality. Some are used as phytosanitary measures to address general phytosanitary risks (e.g. removal of contaminants) whereas others, such as treatments, can be targeted against high-risk pests.
Measures
Remove infested commodity units
Summary
Measures that inspect individual commodity units and remove any that show evidence of being infested.
All commodity units are inspected when conducting symptom grading, but only those identified as being high-risk are inspected when conducting risk-based grading.
Can be a common commercial practice (e.g. quality assurance schemes) that may be considered during risk assessment. These can also be applied as a phytosanitary measure, most commonly during post-production.
Measures
Remove infested consignments or high-risk pathways
Summary
Measures that inspect a representative sample of a consignment, with remedial action applied to the consignment or pathway if pests are detected.
Quarantine with remedial action differs from inspection with remedial action in that the consignment is held in quarantine for diagnostic testing or until the symptoms of a potential infestation are detectable.
These measures can be used as phytosanitary measures, most commonly after production.
Inspection with remedial action is also often required of the exporting jurisdiction, with oversight by the National Plant Protection Organisation (NPPO) or relevant authority, to provide assurance that entry conditions are working as intended. Importing jurisdictions are generally responsible for quarantine with remedial action and can also choose to undertake an inspection with remedial action.