What is a declaration of compliance?
A declaration of compliance is a statement made by the manufacturer regarding the eligibility of the
prescribed milk and milk products being exported.
The declaration must state the specific dairy products being exported meets all the requirements of
the Export Control (Milk and Milk Products) Rules 2021, and any specific importing country
requirement. This shows the product is:
eligible for export
fit for human consumption
meets any specific importing country requirements.
A declaration of compliance is required for every export shipment and must cover all milk and milk
products being exported (either directly or by a third party).
If the goods have been manufactured by the one manufacturer, one declaration will cover all products.
If the goods are produced by several manufacturers, then a declaration from each manufacturer is
needed.
Approved arrangements (AA)
Documented procedures need to be included in the company’s approved arrangement (AA). As a
minimum, procedures will need to ensure:
a declaration will be issued for each export shipment
the declaration must only be signed by a person nominated in the company’s approved
arrangement as a person eligible to make such a declaration (electronic signatures are acceptable)
—they do not need to be listed on the registration certificate, only in the approved arrangements
staff signing these documents understand on what basis the declaration is issued
records are kept of the relevant testing and information to support export eligibility
triggers for corrective action when requirements have not been met
declarations of compliance and transfer documents will include a statement about country
eligibility (if applicable)
this statement is mandatory for some countries including China (liquid milk only). and the
European Union (EU)
how non eligible product is identified in the system and identifies the circumstances when a
declaration cannot be issued
the minimum details to be included in the declaration.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

Importing country requirements
If you are exporting product to a country that your establishment has gained specific approval to export
to (for example the EU), you will need to state that the product is eligible to be sent to that country on
your declaration of compliance and transfer documents. This is particularly important when you sell
your product to a third-party manufacturer who may use the product for further processing before
exporting.
As the manufacturer you may not be aware of where the product is being exported to, however, as a
manufacturer you will know if the product meets specific importing country requirements.
If a product has been made for any other particular market, then those country details should be
included on the declaration of compliance.
See our Manual of Importing Country Requirements (Micor).
Contract manufacturer responsibilities
If you are a contract manufacturer (ingredients and packaging are provided by a third party), you are
responsible for issuing the declaration of compliance, regardless of who provides the raw material.
To support issuing a declaration of compliance you need to obtain evidence from approved suppliers
indicating dairy ingredients used in the production of your products comply with any specific importing
country requirements.
If you cannot obtain or verify this information, the products you produce are not eligible for export to
that market and must be reflected on the declaration of compliance.
If during the course of an audit it is found you are not complying with requirements for declarations of
compliance or there are no records available to verify your export eligibility, your eligibility to export to
a specific importing country may be suspended or cancelled.
Minimum requirements for declarations of compliance
There are certain requirements which must be met in your declaration of compliance, as a minimum.
Details are to include:
your company name, address and contact details)
your registered establishment number
full description for each good being exported including:
product description
manufacturing establishment number
batch number or product code
date of manufacture
number of units (packages)
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

total weight
if the product is eligible for a specific importing country
You must also make a statement declaring that:
the information is true and complete for the manufacturing establishment
you understand that the processed food was manufactured in accordance with:
all the conditions and restrictions specified in the Export Control (Milk and Milk Products) Rules
2021
the applicable approved arrangements and the conditions of that arrangement
importing country requirements.
If no specific country has been nominated in the declaration, then the product identified has been
manufactured to the general export standards and not in accordance with any specific importing
country requirement. Exporters should confirm with the manufacturer that a product is eligible with a
specific importing country’s requirements.
Example of a declaration of compliance showing the minimum details required
Company name
Address
Phone: (0X) XXXX XXXX
Registered establishment number: XXXX
Product description
Manufacturing
establishment
number
Batch/
product
code
Manufacture
date
Number
of units
Total
weight
Declaration by manufacturing establishment.
At the date that I, the undersigned make this
declaration, the processed dairy product
described above was manufactured in
accordance with:
If no specific country has been nominated
above, then the product identified in this
declaration has been manufactured to the
general export standard and not in
accordance with any specific importing
country requirement. Further information
regarding importing country eligibility should
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•

be confirmed by contacting (name of
manufacturing company).
I further declare the information contained in
this declaration is true and complete.
Printed Name:
…………………………………………..
Position:
…………………………………………..
Signed:
…………………………………………..
Dated
………../………../………..
Find out more about exporting dairy and dairy products.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/export/controlled-goods/dairy/registered-establishment/
declaration-compliance