Phase 1 Report

Publication Details

ISBN 978-1-76003-387-3

Prepared for the department by Novus Res

Download

Virtual reality to support FMD training - 67 pages (PDF 1.9 MB)

Virtual reality to support FMD training - 67 pages (DOCX 8.5 MB)

Phase 2 Report

Publication Details

Download

Report on phase 2 of virtual reality (VR) to support foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) preparedness (PDF

197 KB)

Report on phase 2 of virtual reality (VR) to support foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) preparedness

(DOCX 235 KB)

Summary

Phase 1

a review of virtual reality (VR) and how the technology could be implemented in support of foot-and-

mouth disease (FMD) training.

The primary objective of the Phase 1 report is to describe how VR could be used to create cost-effective

and expandable training applications for the animal handling and biosecurity sectors. It focusses on

how the technology can be used for training in the early-stage detection and investigation of suspected

FMD cases. The findings of the report are supported by a demonstration of VR application.

Phase 2

The second phase of the ‘VR to support FMD training’ project has been completed. Phase 2 involved

trialling an updated VR experience that operates on the Meta Quest 2 headset (formerly known as the

Oculus Quest 2).

The key points from these trials are as follows:

Users unfamiliar with VR technology may experience more challenges with the experience.

In general, the department’s role should be to work with training providers to incorporate VR

technology into relevant training modules where appropriate.

In general VR should be used to augment other training modalities, rather than as the sole

delivery method.

VR technology is most useful for giving people a sense of novel environments, examining 3D

objects, and coarse hands-on motor skills.

There are challenges with distribution of the experience, and also due to the rapid pace of

development of the technology. These need to be overcome to make widespread use of this

technology for training.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/health/virtual-reality

• 

• 

• 

• 

•