Our department has around 4,000 employees. We are committed to protecting the health of plants and animals in our region and improving trade and the biosecurity systems between Pacific Island countries and Australia.
To help you get a better idea of how we work we invite you to take a peek inside. Discover more about the teams that play a critical role in strengthening our biosecurity system and supporting our Pacific partnerships.
Plant
Australian Chief Plant Protection and Environmental Biosecurity Office - (ACPPEBO)
ACPPEBO is led by the Australian Chief Plant Protection Officer (ACPPO). ACPPO is the primary representative of, and advisor to, the Australian Government on plant health. ACPPO works collaboratively with Pacific Island countries and territories to improve awareness and strengthen biosecurity capabilities.
Pacific Engagement and International Plant Health - (PEIPH)
PEIPH manages our plant Pacific Engagement program and coordinates Australia’s participation in the fora of the IPPC (International Plant Protection Convention). They also coordinate and manage the International Plant Health Surveillance Program.
Plant Health Policy – (PHP)
PHP promote, lead and implement Australian Government’s plant health policies and programs. PHP’s work involves identifying and mitigating emerging risks to plant health through surveillance activities in Australia and near-neighbour countries
International Capacity Development Section - (ICDS)
Partnering with DFAT, ICDS manages the Pacific Biosecurity Partnership Program. ICDS supports the engagement and delivery of international capacity development activities within the Pacific which includes training to improve the safe trade between Pacific Island countries and Territories and Australia.
Plant Sciences & Risk Assessment - (PSARA)
PSARA assess changing biosecurity risk associated with new and emerging pests and prepare Market Risk Assessment when countries request market access to new commodities.
Plant Import Operations – (PIO)
PIO develop and implement science-based biosecurity import conditions. PIO is one of the key players in facilitating the safe import of plant and plant material into Australia. They achieve this through developing biosecurity import conditions, conduct assurance activities, issue and assess import permits and promote compliance with import conditions through education.