Innovation Challenges Pilot Program Grantees Announced

Selected grantees for the Innovation Challenges Pilot Program have been announced, with over $19.3 million to be delivered to 13 projects.

This will connect farmers, producers and regional and rural communities to evidence-based innovation, technology and tools that will help improve climate and drought resilience.

Strengthening Drought Resilience on Country Grantees Announced

Selected grantees for the Strengthening Drought Resilience on Country Program have been announced, with over $11.4 million to be shared across 5 projects.

Delivery partners will work with Indigenous communities in their regions to identify local priorities, co-design projects and build local capability.

Applications open

Applications are now open for the Future Drought Fund Drought Resilience Hubs Program.

The Drought Resilience Hubs Program supports farmers and communities to build drought and climate resilience through regionally focused hubs.

Funding of up to $86.7 million up to June 2032 is available.

Drought is an enduring feature of the Australian landscape. Managing drought will become more challenging as our climate continues to change.

The Future Drought Fund (FDF) aims to boost drought and climate resilience.

The FDF helps:

- farmers and producers to plan, access climate tools, and share resilient farming practices

- communities to plan, and fosters rural and regional leaders and networks.

Drought, disaster and rural support

For information on rural support, including help in hard times, visit Drought, disaster and rural support.

How the Fund works

Each year, funding is made available for FDF grants and programs.

Watch

See how the FDF is helping farmers and regional communities prepare for drought and other climate impacts.

Transcript

If you have difficulty accessing this file, contact us for help.

Fund objectives

Programs delivered from 2024-25 will focus on:

Partnering for local solutions

We work with regions and communities to help them manage their own drought and climate risks.

Building knowledge, skills and capability

To support farmers and communities to make informed decisions about drought.

Innovating for transformation

To trial innovative solutions and drive transformational change. This will build on the sector’s long-term drought resilience.

First Nations initiatives

We recognise First Nations peoples' connection to Country. We will partner with First Nations communities to manage drought and climate risks.

Measuring progress and sharing knowledge

To fund activities to show how, and to what extent, the Fund contributes to its priorities.

See more

Programs

We work with our delivery partners to implement many of the FDF programs and initiatives. We bring local ideas to life and share drought resilience skills, information and technology.

We also encourage collaboration and co-investment in larger projects.

Explore our programs.

Building drought resilient communities

Building drought resilient farms and landscapes

Measuring success

Previous programs

Drought Resilience Funding Plan

The Drought Resilience Funding Plan ensures that FDF funding is consistent across programs. It provides a guide for decision-making under the Future Drought Fund Act 2019.

We review the funding plan every 4 years to capture emerging priorities and lessons learned. Stakeholder feedback helps to inform the future direction of FDF investments and activities.

The review process includes 2 stages:

- Productivity Commission inquiry, including stakeholder feedback, with a report tabled in Parliament.

- National stakeholder consultation over a minimum 6-week period.

Other independent reviews may also take place.

Insights from these processes inform each new Funding Plan.

Drought Resilience Funding Plan

The plan came into effect in February 2024. It provides a decision-making framework for the FDF. The plan ensures that funding is a spent in a consistent way.

Supporting documents to help delivery partners interpret and apply the Funding Plan and its principles:

Future Drought Fund Investment Strategy

The Strategy supports the Funding Plan. It shows how we will achieve the FDF objectives. It also tells stakeholders when they can engage with drought resilience programs and activities.

Productivity Commission Inquiry Report: Review of Part 3 of the Future Drought Act

This report examines the effectiveness, efficiency and appropriateness of Part 3 of the Future Drought Fund Act 2019.

Governance

Consultative Committee

The FDF Consultative Committee is an independent advisory group. They advise the Minister for on the Drought Resilience Funding Plan. The Committee ensures FDF programs are consistent with the Plan.

The Committee comprises experts in:

- sustainability

- drought resilience

- economics

- climate change

- innovation

- rural and regional development.

Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) Board

The RIC Board advises the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. The Board ensures that before grants and agreements are entered into, they align with the Drought Resilience Funding Plan.

First Nations Advisory Group

The FDF First Nations Advisory Group members are engaged for their individual skills and expertise including:

- environmental, economic, social resilience development and reform

- First Nations engagement

- drought and climate resilience

- water and land management

- agriculture, fisheries and forestry.

The group will advise on First Nations perspectives on drought and climate resilience in the design and delivery of FDF activities.

Find more information about the role and membership of the First Nations Advisory Group.

- FDF First Nations Advisory Group factsheet (DOCX 1.3 MB)

- Terms of Reference for the FDF First Nations Advisory Group

FDF annual reports

Stay informed

Subscribe to stay up-to-date on FDF developments and grant opportunities.

The FDF is part of a broader range of programs for farmers and rural communities. These programs help to prepare for, navigate and recover from drought.

Contact us

We’d love to hear from you, email droughtresilience@aff.gov.au.