- farm businesses

- drought-affected, farm-related small businesses

The purpose of the loans is to improve the long-term resilience and profitability of eligible businesses.

The RIC is a corporate Commonwealth entity. Its enabling legislation, including the Regional Investment Corporation Act 2018 (the RIC Act), is available on the Federal Register of Legislation website. The RIC has an independent Board whose role is to ensure the proper, efficient and effective performance of the RIC’s functions.

More information on the RIC and its loan products is available on the Regional Investment Corporation website.

Announcement of new loans

Marine Recovery Loan – applications now open

The Marine Recovery Loan is now available. This loan, delivered by the RIC, provides support to wild-catch fishing and aquaculture businesses affected by the harmful algal bloom off the coast of South Australia.

Find more about eligibility requirements and how to apply

Drought Hardship Loan - applications now open

The RIC Drought Hardship Loan is now available. This loan provides financial relief for farmers experiencing severe and prolonged drought.

Find out more about eligibility requirements and how to apply.

Media release: Supporting farmers and producers facing drought.

For more information about all RIC loan products.

Additional funding and broadening the RIC’s scope

On 29 August 2025, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry announced an additional $1 billion in new loan funding through the RIC.

Media release: $1 billion funding boost for Regional Investment Corporation

Review of the operation of the Regional Investment Corporation Act 2018 – July 2024

The RIC Act required a review of the operation of the Act to be undertaken and finalised on or before 1 July 2024. The review considered:

- the scope of the RIC’s activities after 30 June 2026; and

- the appropriate governance arrangements for the RIC after that date.

The Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry appointed Dr Wendy Craik AM to undertake the review.

The Review report was provided to the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry on 1 July 2024 and subsequently tabled in Parliament.

Submissions to the review of the operation of the RIC Act for which we have received permission to make public can be found on the RIC Act Review Have Your Say project page.

Independent review of the RIC - February 2021

The RIC commenced operation in July 2018. In late 2020 the government commissioned Mr David Tune AO PSM to do an independent review of the RIC to make sure the initial settings and governance were appropriate in light of its initial operating experience.

The review, which was completed in February 2021, considered the:

- suitability and effectiveness of its loan products

- suitability of the current funding model

- overall risk profile of the RIC, with a focus on financial risk.