Eradication success story–Australia is free of Brucella abortus 
 
Department of Agriculture 
1 
 
Eradication success story–Australia is 
free of brucella abortus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
Australia has been free from brucella abortus (B. abortus), in both domesticated and wild 
animals for two decades. 
Australia’s favourable animal health status is largely a result of our relatively recent history of 
ruminants on the continent, our geographical isolation and strict biosecurity arrangements. It is 
also due to several excellent disease eradication programs. Australia successfully eradicated 
contagious bovine pleuropneumonia in 1973, bovine brucellosis in 1989 and bovine tuberculosis 
in 1997. 
Achievement of country freedom from B. abortus followed a joint industry, Australian 
government and state and territory government program of eradication that started in 1970. 
The Brucellosis and Tuberculosis Eradication Campaign (BTEC) included Australia’s entire 
cattle population–180 000 herds at that time. 
No case of bovine brucellosis has been detected in any species in Australia for 20 years. 
Introduction 
Bovine brucellosis is caused by the bacterium brucella abortus. Infection causes abortion in 
cattle, the birth of weak or dead calves and infertility. B. abortus is also a human pathogen, 
causing undulant fever. 
B. abortus is transmitted mainly via contact with the placenta, fetus, fetal fluids, urine or vaginal 
discharges of infected animals, particularly after calving. It is also found in milk, urine, semen, 
faeces and joint fluid. Human infection with B. abortus usually occurs through occupational

Eradication success story–Australia is free of Brucella abortus 
 
Department of Agriculture 
2 
 
contact with discharges from infected animals, particularly through calving, but also through 
slaughtering or ingestion of unpasteurised dairy products. 
B. abortus is thought to have entered Australia in the late 1800s via imported dairy cattle. It 
became the most common cause of abortion in cattle and also a human health risk. 
Why did Australia eradicate bovine brucellosis? 
1) To eliminate associated abortions and low production in cattle. 
2) To prevent an important zoonosis.  
3) To protect and enhance export of cattle, genetics and dairy products. 
How did Australia achieve freedom? 
Australia’s freedom from B. abortus was achieved progressively, with each individual state and 
territory first achieving freedom through independent brucellosis control programs. In 1970 
industry, state, territory and the Australian government united to form the national Brucellosis 
and Tuberculosis Eradication Campaign (BTEC). The state of Tasmania was the first to declare 
B. abortus freedom in 1975. Individual state freedom continued until the last state declared 
freedom in 1989, and national freedom was achieved. 
Australia has been free from B. abortus for 27 years. During this time, no cases of Brucellosis 
have occurred in Australia. 
Vaccination 
The first step in the eradication of B. abortus was compulsory vaccination of all heifer calves 
aged between three and nine months with strain 19. This reduced the prevalence of B. abortus 
prior to introducing a broad test and slaughter program. Strain 19 was later used for reduced 
dose vaccination of adult cattle to reduce disease spread after prevalence had been decreased. 
In areas where more extensive grazing was common, strain 45/20 was used as a preventative 
vaccination. Vaccination was progressively prohibited in each state and territory in the later 
stages of eradication. On the 30 June 1985, the use of B. abortus vaccination officially ceased in 
Australia and has not been used since. 
Test and slaughter program 
After decreasing the prevalence of brucellosis through vaccination, Australia began a 
compulsory test and slaughter program. This included abattoir monitoring and serum and milk 
testing. 
Traceback 
During BTEC compulsory tail tagging of cattle was introduced. Each property was allocated a 
Property Identification Code (PIC), allowing individuals to be traced back to their property of 
origin. It was a legal requirement that all cattle were identified by tail tags (imprinted with PIC 
of their property of origin) before sale or inspection at abattoirs. Trace-back and trace-forward 
of test positive cattle was integral to the success of brucellosis monitoring. 
Milk Ring testing 
Because of its efficiency and low cost, the milk ring test was selected for long-term surveillance 
of brucellosis in dairy herds. All states and territories conducted milk ring tests on dairy herds 
at least three times a year throughout the eradication phase, and for five years after becoming 
brucellosis free. The last infected herd detected by this method was in January 1987.

Eradication success story–Australia is free of Brucella abortus 
 
Department of Agriculture 
3 
 
Herd monitoring 
BTEC incorporated strict movement controls for cattle based on testing to prevent infection of 
free herds.  
All infected herds were quarantined and appropriate management strategies adopted to 
minimise the within herd spread of B. abortus. Infected herds were tested at six-month intervals 
and all reactors were removed for slaughter. Herds then required three negative tests six 
months apart before being considered free of bovine brucellosis (or confirmed free). Finally, 
herds were required to undergo a negative test three years after being confirmed free or within 
two years of declaring a free area. 
What does Australia do to maintain brucellosis freedom? 
After Australia declared freedom from bovine brucellosis in 1989, various methods of ongoing 
surveillance were employed to demonstrate ongoing freedom. The effectiveness of these 
methods is demonstrated by the fact that there has been no case of B. abortus infection in any 
species in Australia for 20 years. 
Abattoir monitoring 
Abattoir monitoring was used as a surveillance method for B. abortus in Australia until 1993. 
During this abattoir monitoring phase, mature breeding cattle that were sent to abattoirs for 
slaughter were sampled and tested. 
Abortion investigations 
All suspicious cases of bovine abortions are reported to authorities and investigated to dismiss 
the possibility of B. abortus infection. 
National Livestock Identification System (NLIS) 
Australia uses mandatory NLIS to identify and trace cattle throughout Australia. It is a 
permanent, whole of life system that allows individual animals to be identified electronically 
and traced from property of birth to slaughter. This helps ensures food safety, product integrity 
and market access. 
Data collection 
Data on bovine brucellosis surveillance and results of laboratory investigations are obtained on a 
quarterly basis from each state and territory under the obligations outlined in the Standard 
Definitions & Rules (SRDs). SDRs are the national standards used by states, territories and 
industry in eradicating bovine brucellosis. 
National Animal Health Information System 
Data for bovine brucellosis is displayed on a national website to meet international obligations 
for animal health monitoring and compliance (www.aahc.com.au). This data is sourced from the 
National Animal Health Information System (NAHIS). 
Border security 
Border security plays a large role in helping maintain Australia’s brucellosis free status. 
Australia’s freedom from bovine brucellosis is maintained by appropriate biosecurity measures 
for imported live cattle, embryos and semen. These are consistent with the OIE Terrestrial 
Animal Health Code and enforced by biosecurity officers.

Eradication success story–Australia is free of Brucella abortus 
 
Department of Agriculture 
4 
 
Australian Veterinary Plan Emergency (AUSVETPLAN) 
AUSVETPLAN is the national contingency planning framework for the management of animal 
disease emergencies in Australia. In the unlikely event of a B. abortus incursion, Australia would 
follow the detailed instructions laid out in AUSVETPLAN Bovine Brucellosis disease manual. 
 
Legal responsibilities 
Legislation in each state and territory in Australia requires: 
 
Notification of suspected cases of bovine brucellosis 
 
Investigation of suspected clinical cases 
 
Prohibition of brucellosis vaccination and treatment 
 
Compliance with agreed Standard Definitions and Rules to ensure free country status for 
Australia, and 
 
All surveillance data to be supplied to NAHIS. 
Australian Laboratory Capabilities 
All Australian Government animal health laboratories are accredited to international standards 
(ISO/IEC 17025:2005) and use diagnostic techniques according to Australian and New Zealand 
Standard Diagnostic Procedures, in line with the OIE recommended procedures.  
As well as culture and identification of B. abortus, the following serological tests are used to 
detect suspects: Brucella milk ring test, Rose Bengal plate test, complement fixation test, and the 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).  
 
State and territory laboratories remain responsible for: 
 Initial bacterial culture, serology and histopathology on samples 
 Routine quality assurance for diagnostic capability and competency (especially through 
participating in the Australian National Quality Assurance Program and maintaining 
relevant accreditation against ISO/IEC 17025:2005 through the National Association of 
Testing Authorities or NATA). 
 
The Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) in Geelong is the National Brucellosis 
Reference Laboratory responsible for confirming identification and typing of suspect 
Brucella organisms.  
 
Only AAHL, the maximum (PC4) biocontainment laboratory in Australia, is approved to 
hold the B. abortus material. 
Bovine brucellosis – Australia meets OIE standards 
Australia is able to ensure that all cattle for export originate from a bovine brucellosis-free 
country as defined in Article 11.3.2 of the OIE Code. This provides greater bovine brucellosis 
freedom assurance than testing individual animals for export. Additional testing of animals is 
therefore not useful or necessary.