2025 National Drought Forum Video

About the Event

(Duration 3 minutes 28 seconds)

17 December 2025

Introduction

The 2025 National Drought Forum was held on 8–9 September in Gawler, South Australia.

This event was jointly hosted by the Department and the National Farmers Federation.

The Forum brought together stakeholders from across the drought policy space to talk about key issues, including the Future Drought Fund, at a national level.

To find out more about drought policy and support visit drought.gov.au

Transcript

[video begins 0:00]

[Recording begins 0:09 Julie Collins MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry]

It's terrific to be here in Gawler in South Australia at the National Drought Forum. It's particularly important because we have three tiers of government here. We have farmers here, and we have farming industry representatives, as well as people from the financial services sector to talk about how we respond to drought in this country. This is a forum that's held every two years.

[Recording begins at 0:28 Matt Lowe, Deputy Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry]

It's been fantastic. It's been high energy and we've got what we came for. We got honest conversations with people reflecting really clearly on the challenges of drought, but also the opportunities as well.

[Recording begins at 0:43 David Jochinke, President, National Farmers Federation]

The National Drought Forum is about understanding what's currently working, what needs to be changed, and what we have to do more about.

[Recording begins at 0:50 Alex Zimmerman, Commissioner for Drought Support, South Australia]

It's a fantastic initiative whereby it brings all the key stakeholders, the decision makers together, to look at how we can all best support drought impacted farmers going forward.

[Recording begins at 1:02 Jennifer Lynch, CEO for Regional Development Australia, Barossa, Gawler Light and Adelaide Plains]

I was inspired to attend because drought is absolutely happening in South Australia and is affecting all parts of our communities and businesses statewide.

[Recording begins at 1:11 Julie Collins MP, Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry]

We do know that South Australia has been severely impacted by drought, for some farmers not just for one season, but for 2 or 3 in some cases. So we do know that people are doing it particularly tough, which is why we wanted to have the Drought forum here in South Australia, particularly in Gawler.

[Recording begins at 1:26 Andrew Jones, General Manager of Agriculture and Water, Bureau of Meteorology]

From our perspective, it's listening… being here, listening and really building those networks so we can help them going forward.

[Recording begins at 1:33 Brent Finley, Chair of the Consultative Committee for the Future Drought Fund]

It's bringing the stakeholders that are dealing with this issue on behalf of farmers, for farmers and government all into the same room.

[Recording begins at 1:42 Stephen Lee, Director, South Australian Drought Resilience, Adoption and Innovation Hub]

The range of people that are attending the forums just outstanding. So to get to hear from groups from right across Australia and from commercial sector, banking sector, Landcare and landscape outcomes, as well as policy and program and delivery outcomes. It's a really good melting pot of ideas about what can we do better and how to make that happen sooner.

[Recording begins at 2:00 Tanya Lehmann, Coach, Consultant & Facilitator, Aurora Meliora]

The opportunities that forums like this create is for stakeholders voices to be heard. And what I love to do is to create the conditions for everyone's voices to be heard.

[Recording begins at 2:10 Carissa Buckland, Director of Corporate Affairs & Marketing, Nutrien Ag Solutions]

The thing that I've really noticed is how committed everyone is. Everyone in this room wants it to work, wants policy settings to be helpful, wants farmers to thrive and be really successful.

[Recording begins at 2:22 Chris Warrick, Chair, Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) Victoria West]

It's a great opportunity to have a conversation, right across from policymakers and government, through to industry, through to farmers on how we can do drought better

[Recording begins at 2:31 Courtney Bryant, Assistant Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry]

It's really important to bring all different groups together, to hear all different views and ideas, so that we can make the best policy and programs to support our farmers and rural communities in drought, to prepare for drought, and also to recover from drought as well.

[Recording begins at 2:44 Jason Law, CEO, Farm Angels]

For me it’s… really the most valuable takeaway is the networking component. Meeting other organisations and listening to their stories.

[Recording begins at 2:52 Tanya Lehmann, Coach, Consultant & Facilitator, Aurora Meliora]

I think it's a really important event to create the conditions for people with those diverse perspectives to come together, to hear each other, to understand that they don't necessarily have the same experience, but they all want a prosperous, rural and regional remote Australia. And to have the opportunity to shape national policy and state policy in that area from the coalface, I think is really important.

[Recording begins at 3:15 Matt Lowe, Deputy Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry]

Attend the next drought forum. Be part of the conversation. Make your voice heard and have some fun as well.

[Recording ends 3:21]

[Video ends 3:28]

Acknowledgement of Country

We acknowledge the Traditional Custodians of Australia and their continuing connection to land and sea, waters, environment and community. We pay our respects to the Traditional Custodians of the lands we live and work on, their culture, and their Elders past and present.

© Commonwealth of Australia 2023

Unless otherwise noted, copyright (and any other intellectual property rights) in this publication is owned by the Commonwealth of Australia (referred to as the Commonwealth).

All material in this publication is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence except content supplied by third parties, logos and the Commonwealth Coat of Arms.

The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has exercised due care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data in this publication. Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data in this publication to the maximum extent permitted by law.