The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences is the research arm of the Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
Our mission is to provide professionally independent data, research, analysis and advice that informs public and private decisions affecting Australian agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
ABARES has a unique function: we work at the interface between research and policy, with strengths across agricultural and natural resource economics and sciences.
Data and analysis: ABARES has access to data unavailable to most researchers, through our relationships with national and state organisations and industry bodies, and by conducting our own surveys.
Using this data, we examine the barriers and drivers to tell the story of the agriculture, fish and forestry sectors and publish official statistics nationally and internationally.
Research: We undertake independent, rigorous, and objective research with a focus on directly addressing public policy issues.
Policy advice: We provide the evidence-base for good policy. We engage with policy teams within our department and other government agencies to help them understand the drivers and trends in the agriculture, fisheries, forestry and water industries.
Industry engagement: ABARES is the home of the annual Outlook conference. We also participate in a wide range of expert workshops, technical committees and conferences in Australia and overseas.
Our work centres around our mission to provide professionally independent data, research, analysis and advice that informs public and private decisions affecting Australian agriculture, fisheries and forestry.
Before setting our research priorities for the year ahead, we consult with stakeholders within and beyond the department to identify current and emerging issues over the next three-to-five years. We use this process to shape and focus our near-term research and other activities, including the development of new research and analytical capacity where required. This also helps identify opportunities for collaboration with our stakeholders and other research organisations.
The ABARES Work Plan summarises our priorities and project themes.
ABARES was established in 1945 as the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, with a focus on understanding the economic structure and performance of primary industries.
In the 1950s, the bureau began its farm surveys programme, which is still providing a rich source of information on the performance of the farm sector today. It also began regular assessments and forecasts of a range of commodity markets.
The popular Outlook conferences, began in 1971 providing opportunities for delegates to hear about the latest agricultural trends and issues from bureau economists and external speakers. Today the conference draws together subject matter experts from Australia and around the globe as well.
ABARES has hosted more than 50 national Outlook conferences— and many more regional conferences throughout Australia. Our Outlook conference is the Australian governments leading agricultural forum bringing research, policy and industry together.
In 1988, the bureau combined with related research agencies to become the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics—ABARE. This broadened the bureau’s research focus to include energy and minerals markets and major issues such as climate change.
Today’s organisation, the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences, was formed following a merger with the Bureau of Rural Sciences (BRS) in 2010.
This strengthened our expertise and knowledge base, allowing us to conduct integrated and complex economic, scientific and social research.
ABARES is home to subject matter experts and passionate, innovative teams who enjoy working collaboratively in a relaxed, safe and inclusive environment.
Learn more about what it’s like to work at ABARES.
Meet the ABARES Leadership team.
We have a diverse range of clients encompassing the agriculture, food, forest, fisheries, productivity and water sectors. They include federal and state government department's and agencies, portfolio-related companies and agencies, research and development corporations, and industry groups.
Contact us if you would like to discuss how we can help your organisation.
- The Hon Julie Collins MP - Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
- Senator the Hon Anthony Chisholm - Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
How to contact us
Contact
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences
Postal address
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601 Australia
Location
Agriculture House
70 Northbourne Avenue, Canberra 2601, Australia
Switchboard 
+61 2 6272 2000