Australia has helped shape a range of new and updated international food standards, including over 300 new and updated standards, at the 49th Session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC49) in Geneva.
A total of 188 Countries adopted standards and guidance covering food labelling, food hygiene, food additives, veterinary drug residues, and fish and fishery products.
Australia played a leading role in key outcomes adopted at the meeting:
- Australia co-led new guidance to make precautionary allergen warnings, such as ‘may contain’, clearer and more consistent. This will make it easier for people with food allergies to make informed choices.
- Australia also co-led food hygiene guidance on controlling Campylobacter and Salmonella in chicken meat, supporting practical, science-based approaches to managing food safety risks.
Tom Black, First Assistant Secretary, Exports and Veterinary Services Division, led Australia’s delegation to CAC49 and attended in his role as Chair of the Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CCFICS). Mr Black said the outcome highlighted Australia’s leading role in the development of risk-based international food standards that protect the health of consumers and support global food trade.
"These outcomes demonstrate the value of Australia's long-standing contribution to international food standards," Mr Black said.
"From clearer allergen information for consumers to updated food hygiene guidance that supports safer food production, the standards adopted at CAC49 will help protect consumer health and support fair practices in international food trade.”
Codex Alimentarius is the United Nations food standards program run by FAO and WHO. Its Commission brings countries together to adopt and update international food standards that support food safety and fair practices in international food trade.
The adoption of the standards comes as Australia takes part in two major Codex meetings in Geneva. At the 90th Session of the Codex Executive Committee (CCEXEC90), Australia represented the South-West Pacific region, contributing to discussions about Codex’s future priorities and work program.
Australia will continue its contribution to international food standards by hosting the 28th session of the Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems (CCFICS) in Perth from 12–17 October 2026. More information about Australia’s role in international food standards is available on the DAFF Codex - International Food Standards webpage.