Good leadership will take us out of our comfort zone
After 37 years in various roles, Phil Kuhne knows a thing or two about emergency and disaster management. The Longreach resident currently works with QLD Fire and Emergency Services (QFES) as an Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC).
“My main role is to provide disaster management training, advice and support to Local Govt. State agencies, Non-Govt. Organisations and the community.”
Phil is a participant of the Future Drought Fund’s Drought Resilience Leaders program in Central West Queensland and joined the program to expand his perspective of resilience.
“In my work there is resilience to a whole range of disasters and events that may impact a community. In the beginning (of the program), I thought the term ‘drought resilient’ was focussed on the agricultural industry in the area. As the program developed it became apparent it was more about drought resilient communities not just one part it.
The program challenges participants to develop skills and mindsets to allow them to integrate deeper into their community in a leadership capability.
“It has provided me with more people to engage with whether it be for work or just social interaction in a small community. This leadership opportunity enables me to assist the community with the skills I have and raise awareness of disaster management.”
Phil explains that leadership within a regional community involves identifying new ideas and providing the encouragement, coaching and mentoring for those willing to have a go at something new, sharing knowledge and experience from the journey.
“It (building resilience) is looking at a community and identifying the ways they respond to and manage an event and finding pathways back to a life where they can function freely without the hindrance of drought or other disasters”
Since completing the program, Phil and many others are now prepared to go back to their communities equipped to grow its capacity to adapt to future challenges.
Want to know more? Want to get to know other drought resilience leaders or future opportunities in your areas?