Prominent national landmarks will be illuminated blue to launch National Biosecurity Week 2026, shining a spotlight on our shared responsibility to protect Australia from biosecurity threats.
National Biosecurity Week runs from Monday 24 to Sunday 30 August under the theme ‘Protecting what we value’, recognising the importance of Australia’s biosecurity system in protecting our environment, economy, industries, communities, and way of life.
To launch National Biosecurity Week 2026, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry is partnering with the National Capital Authority to illuminate several national landmarks in blue on Monday, 24 August.
The one-night-only display will provide a striking reminder that biosecurity is everyone’s responsibility.
Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, and Director of Biosecurity, Victoria Anderson, encouraged Canberrans to visit the illuminated landmarks and learn more about the role we each play in our biosecurity system.
“Biosecurity protects so much of what Australians value, from our unique environment, the food we eat, our economy and industries, to the jobs and communities that rely on them,” Ms Anderson said.
“Australia has a strong biosecurity system, but keeping it strong requires all of us to play our part.
“Lighting some of our national landmarks blue is a powerful and visible reminder of that shared responsibility and a wonderful way to mark National Biosecurity Week here in the nation’s capital.
Deputy Secretary of the department’s Biosecurity, Operations and Compliance Group, Justine Saunders, said biosecurity was part of everyday life, even if many Australians did not always realise it.
“Biosecurity helps protect our $101.4 billion agriculture industry, and supports around 1.6 million jobs, while also protecting our environment and way of life,” Ms Saunders said.
“Our biosecurity system stretches well beyond our airports and borders. We work before, at, and beyond the border to identify risks, prevent harmful pests and diseases from entering Australia and prepare for and respond to emerging threats.
“But government cannot do this alone. Whether you’re travelling overseas, buying products online, spending time outdoors or growing vegetables in your backyard, simple actions can make a real difference.
“Following Australia’s biosecurity rules, declaring goods when you travel and reporting anything unusual are small actions that can have a big impact.
The illumination activity forms part of a coordinated national campaign showcasing Australia’s biosecurity system, the people and partnerships behind it, and the actions Australians can take to help manage biosecurity risks.
National Biosecurity Week is a chance to share stories about the biosecurity risks Australia faces, how the system works and a little about the people across government, industry, science and the community working every day to protect Australia.
National Biosecurity Week runs from 24–30 August 2026.