Millions of travellers are soon to experience a faster, more streamlined arrival process thanks to the continued expansion of the Australia Travel Declaration across Australia’s airports.
This initiative is a partnership between the department, the Australian Border Force and Qantas and forms part of broader efforts to modernise Australia's border processes while maintaining strong biosecurity protections.
The Australia Travel Declaration trial first introduced the digital alternative to the Incoming Passenger Card in 2024 on selected Qantas flights to Brisbane International Airport. Following the success of the first phase, the trial was expanded to Sydney International Airport and most recently to Melbourne International Airport.
On 13 July 2026 the government announced an investment of $56.1 million over 4 years to modernise Australia’s traveller processing systems. The funding will support ongoing improvements to the traveller experience, including the continued nationwide rollout of the Australia Travel Declaration with Perth and Adelaide next to implement the technology.
The Australia Travel Declaration allows travellers to complete their biosecurity declaration through the Qantas app up to 72 hours before departure to Australia. Once submitted, the traveller receives a digital pass containing a QR code that can be presented to Australian Border Force and our biosecurity officers on arrival. As the Australia Travel Declaration continues to evolve, additional ways to access the declaration will be developed in partnership with industry.
Completing the digital declaration before travelling encourages travellers to think about what they are bringing into Australia before departure. This provides the opportunity to leave behind items that may pose a biosecurity risk, helping avoid delays or compliance issues on arrival. Travellers can also update their declaration at any time before arriving in Australia.
By improving the accuracy and timeliness of traveller information, the digital declaration helps strengthen Australia’s ability to identify and manage biosecurity risks. It supports Australia’s protection against exotic pests, diseases and other threats that could impact agriculture, the environment and the economy.
Under the current trial arrangements, to be eligible travellers must:
- Be a user of the Qantas App
- Be able to complete the declaration in English
- Be traveling on a supported route or flight.
Travellers who are not eligible or prefer paper, can continue to use the Incoming Passenger Card.
The Australia Travel Declaration marks an important step towards a modern, digital border experience that benefits travellers, supports frontline officers and strengthens Australia's world-leading biosecurity system.
For information about traveling to Australia and the trial visit: Travelling to Australia.