As Australia marks National Biosecurity Week, businesses are being encouraged to play their part in protecting the nation from pests, diseases and invasive species.
Biosecurity is a shared responsibility. Strong partnerships between government, industry, communities and businesses are essential to keeping Australia safe from emerging threats.
The Biosecurity Business Pledge Australia recognises the important role businesses play in protecting Australia's industries, economy, environment and way of life. Inspired by New Zealand's successful Biosecurity Business Pledge and developed with industry, it promotes collaboration, awareness and practical action across Australia and the Tasman.
As global trade and travel increase biosecurity risks, businesses are uniquely positioned to help prevent, identify and respond to threats through their operations, supply chains, workforces and networks.
The pledge supports businesses with practical tools, resources and education to build biosecurity awareness, strengthen preparedness and encourage action across their organisation.
Video
As part of National Biosecurity Week 2026, we're celebrating the partnerships that help make biosecurity everyone's business. In this video, Executive Director of New Zealand's Biosecurity Business Pledge, Debbie Teale, shares insights on the power of industry leadership, collaboration and proactive biosecurity practices.
Debbie highlights how collaboration across industries, communities and borders strengthens biosecurity outcomes, and why every organisation has an important role to play in protecting businesses, industries and communities from emerging threats.
Speaker: Debbie Teale, Executive Director, Biosecurity Business Pledge (NZ)
Australia and New Zealand can no longer rely on isolation from other markets as a form of defence when it comes to biosecurity risks.
So, it’s really important as both economies are built on primary sectors and very reliant on those industries – that we work together and learn from one another as we strengthen the biosecurity systems across both nations.
We have a saying here at the Biosecurity Business Pledge in New Zealand that we’re only as strong as our neighbour.
So, working in partnership to us means working with our supply chains, working with our neighbours right next door to our business.
That working in partnership also means working with our fellows across the Tasman.
Business leaders often ask me what they can do to improve their biosecurity approach and risk management within their businesses.
And, you can’t work out all the answers yourself. You need to work with others. And a great way to do it would be to join the Biosecurity Business Pledge Australia, and help build that pledge to strengthen your practices so that therefore, you strengthen Australia’s ability to respond when something comes in.
If you want to make a meaningful contribution, just start.
Take a look at what you have to do for compliance, your basic compliance, and try and go beyond that.
Keep introducing new awareness posters or quizzes or anything to keep it alive in the culture.
But just get going. Just do something.
Take the pledge
Protecting Australia's biosecurity starts with all of us. By joining the Biosecurity Business Pledge Australia, your business can demonstrate its commitment to safeguarding the industries, environment, economy and communities we depend on. You'll also gain access to practical tools, resources and education to help your organisation and employees take meaningful action against biosecurity risks.
Join a growing network of businesses helping to protect what we value most, today and for future generations.
Learn more about the Biosecurity Business Pledge Australia or take the pledge by visiting www.biosecurity.gov.au/pledge.