They may be new to the job, but Australia’s newest biosecurity detector dogs are already making their mark.
The 4 new detector dogs graduated in June and are now undertaking their operational transition at airports, seaports and mail centres across the country.
Their arrival comes as detector dog teams continue to play a critical role in protecting Australia’s borders.
Between 1 January and 31 July 2026, the department’s detector dogs detected and stopped more than 23,384 high-risk biosecurity goods from entering Australia. In 2025, biosecurity detector dogs intercepted over 45,500 biosecurity risk items arriving at international airports and mail gateway facilities.
The newest dogs are already adding to this capability, recording significant detections during their operational transition.
Brisbane-based detector dogs Astra and Misty have hit the ground running since graduating.
During their first 6 weeks of operational transition, Astra and her handler Melissa intercepted 72 biosecurity risk items, including woven pandas made from fresh leaves, pork pudding, ghee, sheep milk, jerky and fruit.
Misty and her handler Alaysia made a further 57 interceptions, including beef jerky and cut flowers.
Detector dogs are trained to identify nine target odour groups representing more than 200 biosecurity risk commodities. This includes common items such as meat, fruit and seeds, as well as less obvious risks that people may not realise can pose a threat to Australia.
Their ability to detect small traces of biosecurity risk material makes detector dogs particularly valuable in busy and unpredictable border environments.
The early results from the department’s newest detector dogs demonstrate the value of their intensive training. Despite being new to frontline operations, these detector dogs are already confidently applying their training in real operational environments. Their early detections show they are adapting quickly to the demands of operational work.
Detector dogs are one part of Australia’s layered biosecurity system, working alongside biosecurity officers, x-ray technology, intelligence, and other border measures to identify and manage these risks.
This International Dog Day, during National Biosecurity Week, we’re celebrating the extraordinary capability of these four-legged frontline defenders, and the important job they do every day protecting what we value most.
For the love of Australia.
More information on the department’s detector dog program.