A partnership between the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and a cooperative research centre will help Australian producers stay competitive in a low emissions future.
Zero Net Emissions Agriculture Cooperative Research Centre (ZNE-Ag CRC) will receive $3 million over 10 years to partner with the department on important work to help future proof the sector.
Deputy Secretary Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry Policy Matt Lowe said the partnership would better connect national policy making with cutting-edge research and science.
“Farmers and producers will benefit over the next decade as the partnership maximises outcomes from research and development (R&D), accelerates on-farm solutions and helps producers remain competitive," Mr Lowe said.
“The arrangements will increase coordination and collaboration on low emissions agriculture R&D in Australia, increasing the likelihood of achieving important outcomes, and at a faster rate.
“Australian farmers and landholders will benefit through access to technologies and practices that will allow them to reduce emissions while remaining productive and competitive in an ever-changing environment.
“The global net zero trajectory is a time of great change and opportunity across agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries, as economies around the world pursue their own net zero commitments.”
ZNE-Ag CRC Chief Executive Officer Richard Heath said he looked forward to working with DAFF towards a low emissions future for agriculture.
“While many land managers are already taking steps to reduce emissions, addressing this challenge requires a coordinated and outcome-focused approach that spans the entire agricultural supply chain. ZNE-Ag CRC will address this challenge by investing in industry-led research projects that test a diverse range of emissions reduction technologies at scale, on Australian farms.”
In collaboration with industry and leading researchers, ZNE-Ag CRC conducts large scale, long-term research to enable the implementation of emissions reduction innovation on Australian farms.
It aims to unite industry, community and government to achieve zero net emission from agriculture from 2040, and lower by 2050.
Its work program has been co-designed with industry and is underpinned by 4 research programs:
•    Low-emissions plant solutions
•    Towards methane-free cattle and sheep
•    Whole-farm and mixed-enterprise systems analysis
•    Delivering value from net zero, such as circular economy opportunities, on-farm and processing options, international markets, climate credential and trade.
Education, training and adoption programs will also be developed to support the effective uptake of technologies.
The partnership builds on $87 million announced to establish the ZNE-Ag CRC by Minister for Industry and Science Ed Husic in December 2023 under Round 24 of the CRC Program, and contributions from other partners.