This month, from 7-10 July, I attended LambEx26, in Adelaide and I can understand why it is seen as the world’s premier sheep and lamb conference!
LambEx26 was the largest event in its history, attracting over 1,400 delegates and setting new records for producer participation (51% of delegates), young delegate attendance (46%), international representation (101 delegates from 9 countries).
Highlights for me included the strong representation (and passion) of young producers and their discussions on succession planning and innovation. It was also great to see leading WA producers like Hillcroft Farms showcasing their production systems, and a processor panel discussion on value and data that included WAMMCo.
There was plenty of interest around new paddock technology, virtual fencing and artificial intelligence and what this could mean for production, efficiency and value capture.
The Future Flock consultation paper was also released by Sheep Producers Australia as the first industry-wide national strategy for Australia’s sheepmeat and wool industries.
I had the opportunity to meet many growers and industry representatives from across Australia, as well as bumping into a few familiar WA faces as well!
New grant program – now open
The Farm System Productivity Program is open for applications between 22 July - 3 September 2026.
This program provides funding to assist priority actions and activities identified in the WA Roadmap to 2028 as part of the $5 million WA Roadmap Implementation Fund.
The program enables a broad range of project ideas that align with the WA Roadmap to 2028 and deliver benefits across the broader WA sheep industry that improve productivity, profitability and industry collaboration.
Grants of $50,000 to $750,000 (GST exclusive), are available. The program is competitive, does not require co-contributions, and is open for both not-for-profit and commercial entities.
If you have a project idea that could benefit the sector, I encourage you to apply.
For more information, including guidelines and how to apply, visit GrantConnect.
Further Grant updates
It’s pleasing to see many Round 1 grant agreements under the Supply Chain Capacity Program, Farm Business Transition Program and Livestock Transport Industry Transition program have now been executed and projects commencing across the sector.
Round 2 of the Livestock Transport Industry Transition and Farm Business Transition programs have closed and applications are currently being assessed. Successful applicants will be announced following assessment and published on the Transition assistance package website in September/October.
Successful applicants for Round 2 of the Supply Chain Capacity Program will be announced in August.
Dowerin Downtown Lunch, 24 July
I also attended the Bringing Dowerin Downtown Lunch in Perth, which brought together industry leaders, agribusiness professionals and regional stakeholders to discuss opportunities and challenges facing Western Australian agriculture.
There was a lot of optimism in the room, balanced by discussion of how the sector can prepare for an increasingly volatile and uncertain world. While demand for our agricultural products remains strong, building trusted partnerships that help capture value at all points was seen as a keyway to help future-proof the sector.
I’m looking forward to attending Dowerin Machinery Field Days in August.
Markets and Trade update: Bharat Tex, India, 14-17 July 2026
Australian Merino wool was showcased at Bharat Tex 2026, India’s premier textile and apparel event, where The Woolmark Company, Austrade and industry partners highlighted growing collaboration between Australia and India’s textile sector.
A key outcome was the signing of strategic agreements with the South India Textile Research Association and the Technological Institute of Textile & Sciences. These partnerships aim to strengthen research, education, innovation and market growth for Australian Merino wool across the wool value chain.
With demand for sustainable, traceable and high-performance natural fibres continuing to grow globally, India remains a key market for Australian wool across apparel, activewear and technical textile applications.
As always, please don’t hesitate to reach out if you have any questions either directly to me or via transition.advocate@aff.gov.au