Options for the Development of National Standards and
Guidelines for Animal Welfare
AWTG 24-04 noted an update from the secretariat that a subgroup meeting is being scheduled to
discuss the incorporation of feedback from targeted stakeholder engagement into the draft standards
development framework.
Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at
Processing Facilities and Establishments
AWTG 24-04 noted an update from Queensland that feedback from key stakeholders on the second
draft standards is being addressed. A revised draft is being prepared for public consultation.
Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for
Land Transport of Livestock - horses
AWTG 24-04 noted a joint update from Queensland and Victoria that discussions with the National
Horse Traceability Taskforce are underway to consider record keeping requirements in the two projects
prior to the land transport horse standards being considered by agriculture senior officials.
Virtual Fencing Technology
AWTG 24-04 noted an update from the Commonwealth that a series of meetings with the stakeholder
reference group have been completed. Drafting of the Australian animal welfare guide for virtual
fencing continues.
Implementation of the Australian Animal Welfare
Standards and Guidelines for Poultry into state and
territory legislation
AWTG 24-04 noted that a subgroup of the AWTG has been established to discuss issues around the
implementation of the poultry standards into state and territory legislation. Victoria agreed to chair the
subgroup.
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS)
AWTG 24-04 noted an update from the Commonwealth that the first tranche of stakeholder
engagement to support development of the renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) is now
complete. A consultation summary is being developed. In March 2024 AMM agreed to developing a

National Statement for Animal Welfare (view the announcement). To support development of the
national statement, a series of facilitated workshops is being planned. The DAFF project team will
continue to work closely with AWTG members in the development of the national statement and the
AAWS more broadly. Engagement with non-agriculture portfolios with responsibility for animal welfare
also continues, including the Department of Health and Aged Care and the Department of Climate
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water. The first meeting of the Strategy Advisory Group for
AAWS is planned for mid-August.
Further Information
If you would like further information on current AWTG projects or to engage with the AWTG on
projects from the work plan, please contact the secretariat: awtg@aff.gov.au
Post: AWTG c/- Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/awtg/communique-august-2024