Options for the Development of National Standards and
Guidelines for Animal Welfare
The AWTG are continuing discussions on the staged approach to improvements to the standards
development process.
Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at
Processing Facilities and Establishments
AWTG 25-03 noted an update from Queensland that jurisdictions continue to work collaboratively on
the third draft of the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock at Processing
Facilities and Establishments.
Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for
Land Transport of Livestock – horses
AWTG 25-03 noted an update from Queensland that ministers continue to work towards national
endorsement of amendments to the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines – Land
Transport of Livestock to improve the welfare of horses.
Pig Welfare
The AWTG discussed a proposal from Australian Pork Limited regarding an industry funded project on
improving animal welfare for pigs.
Virtual Fencing Technology
AWTG 25-03 noted an update from the Commonwealth that feedback from the stakeholder reference
group on the draft Australian Animal Welfare Guide for Virtual Fencing (guide) has been considered
and incorporated where practical. This concludes the development process. The finalised guide will be
circulated to AWTG members for endorsement.
Implementation of the Australian Animal Welfare
Standards and Guidelines for Poultry into state and
territory legislation
AWTG 25-03 noted an update from jurisdictions on their progress towards implementation.

Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS)
AWTG 25-03 noted an update from the Commonwealth on consultation for the first two chapters of the
renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS) – Aquatic Animals, and Livestock and Production
– which has included a public Have Your Say survey, a stakeholder Roundtable and a series of
workshops commencing in May to commence chapter development. The AWTG continues its
governance role.
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/awtg/communique-may-2025