Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for
Land Transport of Livestock – horses
AWTG 26-02 discussed updates regarding the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for
Land Transport of Livestock, and that ministers continue to consider national endorsement of
amendments to improve the welfare of horses.
Delivery of the AWTG workplan
AWTG discussed informing state and territory senior officials on progress to deliver the AWTG
workplan, including the status of the Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Livestock
at Processing Establishments.
APL Presentation
AWTG 26-02 included a presentation by Australian Pork Limited, updating members on progress of
their independent project to develop industry pig welfare standards. AWTG noted that engagement
with APL on this project does not indicate endorsement of the industry standards or commit
jurisdictions to their adoption into state and territory legislation. The development of the Australian
Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Pigs remains on the AWTG workplan.
Virtual Fencing Technology
AWTG agreed that the virtual fencing project has delivered on its intended purpose and discussed the
finalisation of the project.
Implementation of the Australian Animal Welfare
Standards and Guidelines for Poultry into state and
territory legislation
AWTG 26-02 noted an update from jurisdictions on their progress towards implementation.
Renewed Australian Animal Welfare Strategy (AAWS)
AWTG 26-02 noted an update from the Commonwealth on progress to develop the Australian Animal
Welfare Strategy, including recent stakeholder engagement activities. The Commonwealth noted
progress to develop the six animal group chapters and overarching strategy. The AWTG will continue to
receive draft AAWS content for their review and feedback as the overarching strategy and animal group
chapters continue to be drafted.

Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/animal/welfare/awtg/communique-april-2026