Xylella fastidiosa is a pest of worldwide significance and has been identified as Australia’s number one 
National Priority Plant Pest. These plant pests and diseases are not present or established in Australia
In May 2017, the department hosted an International Symposium on Xylella fastidiosa in Brisbane,
Australia. The symposium was highly successful with 102 international delegates and speakers coming
together over two days to share their experience and knowledge on how Australia can better prepare for
The symposium was funded by the department under the Stronger Biosecurity and Quarantine
Initiative and the Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper to support national plant preparedness,
The International Symposium on Xylella fastidiosa covered four themes through 17 presentations:
This theme provided an overview on the epidemiology, biology, and genetics of Xylella subspecies. This
included the complex associations of the pathogen with its hosts and vectors as modified by climate,
particularly temperature and rain, and environmental factors including irrigation, proximity of
Speakers from overseas shared their knowledge on the practices their countries and regions use where
the pathogen is present. They also spoke about the diagnostic capabilities they are developing to
The speakers in this theme discussed the challenges of controlling and managing Xylella and its vectors
from a practical and policy perspective. They also spoke about the disease’s impacts on industry and
The presentations under this theme covered the research development and extension programs
underway in California, and now in Italy following their recent Xylella outbreak. The symposium also
presented an opportunity for collaboration on these programs across Australia and internationally.

A report on the symposium has been published by the department. The report also provides key
scientific information underpinning Xylella preparedness activities, its subspecies and genetic strains,
and the management of the pathogen and its insect vectors overseas. The report also summarises the
key learnings that emerged during the moderated conversations with participants, and from the
If you missed the symposium, you can watch 15 video presentations across the four symposium themes.
Watch the videos here, or go to our YouTube playlist. Click on the CC icon in the video frame to turn on
1. Ecology of Xylella fastidiosa; the basis for its prevention and control, Professor Emeritus Alexander
3. Xylella fastidiosa, an emerging plant pathogen in Europe that threatens agriculture, Dr Marie-Agnès
4. Leaf scorch diseases of grape and pear in Taiwan, Associate Professor Wen-Ling Deng, 20:50
5. Xylella fastidiosa in the outbreak area of Italy: present situation of the infection and innovative tools
6. Diagnostic preparedness for a Xylella invasion: A New Zealand perspective, Mr Robert Taylor, 21:32

7. Invasion pathways of the glassy-winged sharpshooter (Homalodisca vitripennis) across the Pacific
Ocean and activities for the spread of biological control agents, Dr Leigh Pilkington, 16:31 minutes
8. Re-emergence of Xylella fastidiosa: The ongoing epidemics in southern Italy and European Union
10. The Glassy-winged Sharpshooter and Pierce’s Disease (Xylella fastidiosa) in California – state-wide
activities and the area-wide management of the vector and disease, Ms Beth Stone-Smith, 29:31
11. Potential economic impacts of Xylella fastidiosa on the Australian wine grape and wine industries,
12. Collaborative research and extension programs to address Xylella diseases in California, Dr Jim
13. Research activities and research gaps in the European Union, Dr Donato Boscia, 26:51 minutes
14. Research co-ordination as an answer to global plant health threats: the case of Xylella fastidiosa, Dr
15. Towards preparedness of Australian Industries – activities, coordination, challenges, Dr Peter
Source: https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-trade/pests-diseases-weeds/plant/identify/Xylella/international-