The proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy and Charge (Biosecurity Protection Levy) was intended to be a new levy and charge payable by primary producers. It was one component of the larger 2023-24 Budget measure ‘Strengthened and Sustainably Funded Biosecurity System’, which is delivering increased, broad based, long-term sustainable funding for Australia’s biosecurity system.
The bills to introduce the Biosecurity Protection Levy framework were discharged from the Senate Notice Paper on 12 February 2025.
With the exception of the Biosecurity Protection Levy, all elements of the Sustainable Biosecurity Funding package have been implemented.
The department will continue engaging with key industry stakeholders, including producers, in considering all options for a broad-based funding model to ensure a sustainably funded biosecurity system into the future.
Primary producers and the proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy
Primary producers, whether growing for the domestic market or exporting into premium overseas markets, benefit considerably from our strong biosecurity status. This is reflected in the high returns being secured from our export markets, with over 70 per cent of all Australian agricultural production being exported, estimated at $73.1 billion for 2024-25 (ABARES).
The Government recognises that many primary producers already invest in biosecurity through on-farm biosecurity activities. Producers also support Australia’s biosecurity system through investment in research and development, membership fees for Animal Health Australia and Plant Health Australia, and contributions to emergency responses under deed arrangements.
While these investments are important, they do not directly fund the cost of biosecurity activities undertaken at the border that prevent pest and disease incursions into Australia.
Proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy Legislation
The bills that would have provided for the imposition, collection and administration of the Biosecurity Protection Levy were introduced to Parliament on 28 February 2024:
- Agriculture (Biosecurity Protection) Levies Bill 2024
- Agriculture (Biosecurity Protection) Charges Bill 2024
- Agriculture (Biosecurity Protection) Levies and Charges Collection Bill 2024.
These bills were discharged from the Senate Notice Paper on 12 February 2025.
Consultation process and levy design
The development of the bills was informed by extensive and targeted consultation with a wide range of stakeholders including peak farming bodies, state farming organisations, industry representative bodies, research and development corporations, current agricultural levy payers and their collection agents, software providers to primary industries, and members of the general public. Public consultation was held through the department’s online engagement platform between 22 August to 13 October 2023 in conjunction with meetings, presentations and forums.
The consultation paper provided a summary of the issues raised and an overview of how the government would address them. The department published written responses received through the public consultation, where it had permission to do so, on its online engagement platform.
The Government listened to industry feedback and addressed key concerns with the proposed design regarding:
- equity and fairness of levy and charge rates
- whether implementation of the BPL would be in the existing agricultural levies system
- multiple imposition points for some commodities across the supply chain.
Changes to the design of the levy took these issues into account. Rates would have been set using a common and equitable basis for all industry sector products and goods, and not by reference to 2020-21 agricultural levy rates. The levy was intended to be tailored to individual products and goods to remove multiple imposition points across a product’s supply chain, subject to further consultation with relevant industries. The policy intent, key policy parameters and contribution to Commonwealth funding remained the same as announced in the Budget package.
The Biosecurity Protection Levy was intended to:
- be payable in relation to agriculture, fisheries and forestry products or goods whether for domestic or overseas markets
- be imposed in the most effective and efficient way for each individual product, taking into account any relevant collection and remittance arrangements under primary industries legislation
- have rates set on the basis of each industry sector’s proportional share of total GVP;
- apply to certain agriculture, fisheries and forestry products and goods, whether or not they are currently levied under the existing agricultural levy system
- be imposed only once for each product across the supply chain, where possible
- be subject to review by the department every three years in relation to rates and a review of the operation of the Bills after three years.
Gross value of production (GVP) data and industry sector contributions
The department published industry sector GVP proportions and proposed contributions to the Biosecurity Protection Levy. These are available for download from the Gross value of production (GVP) section below. Proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy rates for a number of commodities were also published.
Further information
Fact sheets
Download
Biosecurity Protection Levy design fact sheet - February 2024 (PDF 178 KB)
Biosecurity Protection Levy design fact sheet - February 2024 (DOCX 217 KB)
Fact sheet on proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy design - August 2023 (PDF 203 KB)
Fact sheet on proposed Biosecurity Protection Levy design - August 2023 (DOCX 210 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Consultation paper
Download
Biosecurity Protection Levy public consultation summary paper - February 2024 (PDF 334 KB)
Biosecurity Protection Levy public consultation summary paper - February 2024 (DOCX 757 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Gross value of production (GVP)
Download
Gross value of production (PDF 303 KB)
Gross value of production (DOCX 268 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Biosecurity Protection Levy Proposed Rates
Download
Proposed Rates (PDF 303 KB)
Proposed Rates (DOCX 268 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Contact us
To find out more about the Biosecurity Protection Levy or Sustainable Biosecurity Funding, email: secretariatbsf@aff.gov.au