The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry registers facilities as approved offshore treatment providers for irradiation treatments.
Treatment providers that have demonstrated their capacity to meet the minimum registration and compliance requirements under the scheme will be listed as approved on the List of Treatment Providers.
The scheme provides details relating to treatment provider registration and compliance requirements. It is applicable only to high dose treatments of 5kGy or higher and not applicable to low dose irradiation treatments that require a phytosanitary certificate.
Download
Offshore Irradiation Treatment Providers Scheme (PDF 371 KB)
Offshore Irradiation Treatment Providers Scheme (DOCX 852 KB)
If you have difficulty accessing these files, visit web accessibility for assistance.
Warnings about gamma irradiation
Irradiation is used as a sterilising agent for many products. In Australia, gamma irradiation is not accepted as a treatment for foodstuffs other than herbs and spices, herbal teas and some fresh fruit and vegetables. More information is available from Food Standards Australia New Zealand.
This treatment may cause damage to:
- some glass, white porcelain and coloured sands (may be discoloured)
- some plastics, such as polyurethane packaging (may be discoloured)
- mirrors (turn black)
- animal hides with hair (often lose the hair).
Check the Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) and your import permit conditions (if relevant) to determine all import requirements prior to importing and to confirm that offshore irradiation treatment is an acceptable treatment option for your commodity.
Under the Offshore Irradiation Treatment Provider Scheme, the department accepts valid pre-shipment treatment certificates from the following treatment providers as evidence that a treatment has been performed to Australian biosecurity requirements.
Treatment providers
Treatment providers who meet the scheme requirements will be listed as approved on the List of Treatment Providers.
Treatment providers wishing to join the offshore irradiation treatment providers scheme should contact the Offshore Treatments Team.
Treatment requirements
Treatments conducted by registered treatment providers must comply with our import conditions and the requirements of the scheme.
Useful information and links
Contact us
For further information, please contact the Offshore Treatments Team.