Registered Treatment Providers located outside of Australia
Treatment providers listed on the ‘List of Treatment Providers’ are registered under one of the department’s pre-border biosecurity treatment assurance schemes. These treatment providers have met minimum registration and compliance requirements.
If a registered treatment provider is listed as ‘under review’, ‘withdrawn’, or ‘suspended’ this applies to all treatment assurance schemes and treatment types.
Approved
A treatment provider registered with the department under a government-government scheme or government-industry scheme that has met the minimum registration requirements for the treatment types they wish to conduct.
Under review
Indicators of non-compliance have been identified and biosecurity risk must be managed whilst a review into the treatment provider takes place.
In response to a treatment provider being placed under review, the department may direct any consignments treated by the treatment provider, including those in transit, for any action considered reasonable to manage the biosecurity risk posed.
Treatment certificates will not be accepted from under review treatment providers as of the date they are listed as ‘under review’.
Suspended
A treatment provider has failed to comply with our import conditions, scheme requirements, or the relevant treatment methodology and biosecurity risk must be managed.
Circumstances where non-compliance warrants suspension include:
- identification of a live pest or disease detection on a consignment treated by the treatment provider,
- indicators of falsified or fraudulent documents (including treatment records),
- failing to provide documentation or evidence as requested by the department,
- any other indicators of non-compliance.
Treatment certificates will not be accepted from suspended treatment providers as of the date they are listed as ‘suspended’.
In response to a treatment provider being suspended, the department may direct any consignments treated by the treatment provider, including those in transit, for any action considered reasonable to manage the biosecurity risk posed.
Withdrawn
Registered treatment providers that voluntarily withdraw from our schemes.
Where relevant to the import conditions, treatment certificates will not be accepted if issued on or after the date of withdrawal.
In response to a treatment provider withdrawing, the department may direct any consignments treated by the treatment provider, including those in transit, for any action considered reasonable to manage the biosecurity risk posed.
This list is referenced in section 56 of the Biosecurity (Conditionally Non-prohibited Goods) Determination 2021, section 43 of the Biosecurity (Prohibited and Conditionally Non-prohibited Goods—Christmas Island) Determination 2016, section 44 of the Biosecurity (Prohibited and Conditionally Non-prohibited Goods—Cocos (Keeling) Islands) Determination 2016, and section 43 of the Biosecurity (Prohibited and Conditionally Non-prohibited Goods—Norfolk Island) Determination 2016.
Consignments or goods are classified as ‘in transit’ when they have left the country of origin but have not yet been cleared through the border in Australia.
A treatment provider’s status may be changed in response to non-compliance or suspected non-compliance, this will be reflected on the List of Treatment Providers and in the summary of recent changes.
Please refer to Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for onshore outcomes.
Each treatment provider registered under an offshore scheme will be assigned an AEI. Further information for custom brokers on the use of AEIs in the Integrated Cargo System is provided on the AEI webpage.
List of treatment providers
Unregistered Treatment Providers
Offshore treatment providers listed under ‘Unregistered Treatment Providers’ have not applied or been assessed under a pre-border biosecurity treatment assurance scheme managed by the department.
Where import conditions permit, unregistered treatment providers can conduct treatments. Treatments must be conducted in accordance with import conditions and the relevant treatment methodology. Treatment certificates from unregistered treatment providers listed as ‘under review’ or ‘unacceptable’ will not be accepted for all treatment types.
Permit holders (importers and brokers) are responsible for completing their own due diligence on unregistered treatment providers before they are used for treatments on goods imported into Australia, this includes determining if the treatment type is available in the country where the treatment occurs. Further information on the use of AEIs for unregistered treatment providers in the Integrated Cargo System is provided on the AEI webpage.
Generic
This status is provided for all unregistered treatment providers that are not already listed as ‘unacceptable’ or ‘under review’. The generic AEI’s are utilised on arrival for reporting and assessment purposes when treatment certificates have been provided by a treatment provider that is unknown or unregistered. These AEI’s are specific to treatment types to ensure that a correct assessment can be made of the risk posed by the particular consignment.
Under review
Where indicators of non-compliance have been identified and biosecurity risk must be managed whilst a review into the unregistered treatment provider takes place.
Treatment certificates will not be accepted from under review unregistered treatment providers as of the date they are listed as ‘under review’.
In response to an unregistered treatment provider being placed under review, the department may direct any consignments treated by the treatment provider, including those in transit, for any action considered reasonable to manage the biosecurity risk posed.
Unacceptable
Unregistered treatment providers that have been found non-compliant with our import conditions or the relevant treatment methodology and pose an unacceptable biosecurity risk.
Circumstances where non-compliance warrants being made ‘unacceptable’ include:
- live pest detections that indicate the treatment failed,
- falsified or suspected falsification of documents,
- treatment provider review identifies non-compliance that we determine poses an unacceptable biosecurity risk
- failure to participate in under review compliance management activities.
Treatment certificates will not be accepted from an unacceptable treatment provider as of the date it is listed as ‘unacceptable’ and there is no allowance for goods in transit.
Where we have identified non-compliance or indicators of non-compliance through our assurance controls, we may list an unregistered treatment provider as ‘under review’ or ‘unacceptable’ on the list of unregistered treatment providers to ensure biosecurity risk is managed. In these cases, we will follow this procedure:
- Unregistered treatment provider is listed as ‘under review’ or ‘unacceptable’ on the unregistered treatment provider list.
- The treatment provider will be notified of the non-compliance and advised of the requirements to have their treatment certificates accepted.
- The relevant overseas regulatory agency will be advised of the non-compliance and our requirements for the treatment providers certificates to be accepted.
Both the treatment provider and overseas regulatory agency will be advised of the information required and the timelines for response. If no correspondence is received within those timelines, the treatment provider will be listed as unacceptable until they are able to demonstrate their ability to meet our requirements.
Consignments or goods are classified as in transit when they have left the country of origin but have not yet been cleared through the border in Australia. Please refer to Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON) for onshore outcomes.
List of unregistered providers
Useful information and links
Treatment Certificates
Treatment certificates must contain all the details outlined in the Minimum documentary and import declaration requirements policy and the relevant treatment methodology. This includes their AEI (where relevant) or AFAS identification number.
The department has created certificate templates to assist treatment providers. These certificates are on the Methodologies and documents for biosecurity treatments website.
Accurate treatment certification details are important to ensure that departmental officers in Australia can assess consignments for compliance without the need for further intervention or re-treatment upon arrival.
Australian Biosecurity Import Requirements
Import conditions are the requirements that must be met before goods can be imported into Australia. They can include commodity treatments, manufacturing requirements, proof of origin or commodity testing requirements.
Australia’s biosecurity import conditions can be found in the Biosecurity Import Conditions system (BICON). BICON provides details, through import scenarios, for commodities that are being imported into Australia. It also includes details on commodity treatment requirements.
Search BICON for the goods you wish to import into Australia. For example, for timber furniture or wooden handicrafts, searching ‘timber’ leads you multiple ‘cases’, with the ‘wooden manufactured articles’ case being the most appropriate. This case then provides you with the import conditions, treatment options and requirements, such as fumigation dose rate and duration.
Treatment Requirements
All treatments conducted on goods being imported into Australia must comply with the relevant treatment methodology and biosecurity import conditions.
Contact us
For further information regarding pre-border biosecurity treatment providers, please contact the Offshore Treatments Team.
The Australian Government acting through the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has exercised due care and skill in preparing and compiling the information and data on this website. Notwithstanding, the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, its employees and advisers disclaim all liability, including liability for negligence and for any loss, damage, injury, expense or cost incurred by any person as a result of accessing, using or relying on any of the information or data on this website to the maximum extent permitted by law.