Australia's National Strategic Plan for Aquatic Animal Health

Mid-term review

December 2025

Executive summary

Purpose: A mid-term review of AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 has been completed by aquatic animal industries and governments. Implementation progress was reviewed and clear recommendations for the remainder of the plan agreed.

Overall Progress: Seven of 28 projects have been completed and a further 19 activities are in progress. Eight of nine key performance indicators (KPI) for the Implementation Plan are being met, eight of nine KPIs of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan are being met, and seven of ten KPIs of the Communication and Engagement Plan are being met. AQUAPLAN owners (i.e., aquatic animal industries and governments) are confident in AQUAPLAN’s ability to achieve meaningful outcomes and in the cross-sectoral collaboration required to achieve this.

Key Achievements:

Collaboration and shared leadership – AQUAPLAN activities demonstrate strong co-design and ownership between industry and government, contributing to successful delivery. Of the 30 industry and government stakeholders who participated in the mid-term review workshop, 87% agreed/strongly agreed that there is willingness for collaboration across sectors to implement AQUAPLAN effectively.

Implementation success – Most activities are progressing well, with completed and ongoing projects collectively driving progress toward AQUAPLAN’s strategic objectives. Of the 30 industry and government stakeholders who participated in the mid-term review workshop, 100% agreed/strongly agreed that they are confident in AQUAPLAN achieving meaningful outcomes.

Communication led by webinar series – The webinar series has become a central mechanism for engagement, extension, and adoption, supporting implementation and stakeholder connection.

Priority Actions for 2025-2027:

Leverage and strengthen communication and engagement – Build on the success of the webinar series as a central platform for engagement, extension, and adoption. Broaden AQUAPLAN’s reach by utilising existing communication channels through Fisheries Research and Development Corporation (FRDC), Seafood Industry Australia (SIA), and industry newsletters, and assess whether any gaps remain in current communication and engagement efforts to ensure all stakeholder groups are effectively reached.  Develop AQUAPLAN communication templates that can be used by activity leads.

Reconsider enterprise and regional biosecurity priorities – Engage with end-users on Objective 2 activities (2.1–2.3) to ensure alignment with current sector needs and available resources, and determine approaches for targeted implementation. Prioritise continuous improvement (activity 2.3) and defer activities 2.1–2.2 until lead sectors can be identified.

Enhance extension and adoption mechanisms – Strengthen approaches to ensure AQUAPLAN outcomes are well understood and applied by end-users (including at the operational level), particularly through Activity 7.2 and broader communication and engagement efforts.

Introduction

This is the fourth of Australia’s national strategic plans for aquatic animal health, and the first to incorporate a mid-term review. The inclusion of this review reflects AQUAPLAN’s strong emphasis on shared ownership, measurable impact, and demonstrating return on investment.

The mid-term review is designed to be efficient and purposeful, providing a timely opportunity to reflect on progress and ensure AQUAPLAN remains responsive and effective for the remainder of its implementation period.

Purpose and objectives

The mid-term review brings together aquatic animal industries and governments to:

Assess implementation progress of AQUAPLAN 2022-2027, and

Agree on clear, actionable recommendations for the remainder of the plan.

Objectives

Evaluate progress across AQUAPLAN activities and identify areas requiring further attention.

Review implementation of supporting plans, including:

The Implementation Plan,

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, and

The Communication Plan.

Based on findings from Objectives 1 and 2, develop practical recommendations to guide implementation through to 2027.

Reinforce shared ownership and build momentum for the remainder of the plan.

Review method

Desktop review of AQUAPLAN implementation progress.

Stakeholder workshop (11 November 2025) to discuss findings and agree on recommendations. The workshop included:

Current industry and government context

Updates on AQUAPLAN activity progress

Mid-term review initial findings & recommendations (discussion and Mentimeter feedback)

Of stakeholders who participated in Mentimeter (10 government, 15 industry, 5 other), 69% agreed/strongly agreed that workshop objectives were met, 100% agreed/strongly agreed that they are confident in AQUAPLAN achieving meaningful outcomes and 87% agreed/strongly agreed that there is strong willingness for collaboration across sectors to implement AQUAPLAN effectively (13% neutral).

Mid-term review report (this report) to document progress and capture agreed recommendations. The report has been informed by the desktop review and stakeholder workshop and was prepared by the AQUAPLAN executive office at DAFF (Katie Scutt, Ingo Ernst, Ben Crowe). A draft of the report was reviewed by the stakeholder workshop facilitators, Tracey Bradley (DEECA) and Julie Petty (Seafood Industry Australia). The report has been revised based on stakeholder comments prior to finalisation.

Progress against objectives

Legend:  Complete |  In-progress |  Yet to commence

Implementation performance

1. Implementation plan

2. Monitoring and Evaluation plan

3. Communication and engagement plan

Key Findings of the review

What’s working well

Collaboration and shared leadership: AQUAPLAN activities that are complete or underway demonstrate strong co-design and shared ownership between industry and government partners.

Mid-term review workshop participants emphasised collaboration and partnership between industry and government as the primary strength of AQUAPLAN implementation, including co-design and shared responsibility to lead activities. Several participants noted that engagement and shared responsibility has led to genuine needs being addressed. Progress on translocation, emergency simulation exercises and the actions arising from simulation exercises were noted as important outcomes.

Webinar series: The webinar series has emerged as a central mechanism for communication, engagement, extension, and adoption of AQUAPLAN activities. It covers a broad range of topics directly linked to AQUAPLAN activities and objectives, and plays a key role in supporting implementation. The series provides a consistent and accessible platform for sharing activity outcomes with end-users, enabling routine extension and adoption. It also fosters ongoing dialogue between stakeholders, helping to build awareness, understanding, and momentum across the aquatic animal health sector.

Mid-term review workshop participants noted that webinars were an effective communication strategy for sharing information and engaging stakeholders.

Impact survey: The stakeholder impact survey provides valuable insights into how AQUAPLAN is perceived and the outcomes it is delivering. It serves as a key tool for measuring overall success from the perspective of those involved in or affected by AQUAPLAN activities. As surveys are conducted over time, the ability to compare results will offer a meaningful view of progress, trends, and areas for improvement, helping to inform future planning and decision-making.

Implementation plan KPIs: Most key performance indicators across the implementation plans are being met, contributing to the successful delivery of AQUAPLAN. This is the first time in-kind funding contributions have been estimated. It is recommended to continue refining this approach to more accurately estimate the true co-investment in AQUAPLAN.

Activity delivery: Of the 28 AQUAPLAN activities, seven have been completed and a further 19 are currently underway, leaving two yet to commence. While each activity is delivering outcomes at the individual level, their collective contribution is what drives progress toward AQUAPLAN’s broader objectives.

Mid-term review workshop participants noted progress on translocation and actions arising from simulation exercises as important outcomes.

Challenges and opportunities

Communication plan: While some activities (e.g., webinar series) are performing well, three of the 10 KPIs are not being met. There may be scope to optimise communication and engagement efforts to better meet the plan’s objectives.

Mid-term review workshop participants indicated that they actively promote webinars, share AQUAPLAN information, and present updates at conferences and meetings. The key ways mid-term review participants report supporting AQUAPLAN are through communication pathways—attending webinars and sharing updates to extend reach—demonstrating shared ownership of communication and extension of AQUAPLAN activities.

There is potential to extend AQUAPLAN’s reach by using established communication channels (e.g., FRDC, SIA, and industry newsletters). Workshop suggestions to leverage communication efforts and extend reach emphasised the need for targeted and accessible communication materials such as one-page infographics and social media posts. Other suggestions include podcasts or short videos however these would require use of existing communications capability and channels as they would be more resource intensive. An AQUAPLAN newsletter was not identified as a priority and it is recommended that this not be pursued.

Objective 2: Enterprise & Regional Biosecurity: Activities under Objective 2.1–2.3 have either not commenced or progressed slowly. Industry consultation indicates that needs may have changed for some sectors. The relative priority of these activities were rated as average, or slightly above average when compared to the priority of other AQUAPLAN activities (3 equals average priority). Training for continual improvement (activity 2.3) was the highest relative priority based on current industry sector needs (e.g., with many sectors already having developed sector-specific biosecurity plans).

Activity 2.1: Sector-specific biosecurity plan writing workshops = 2.9 / 5

Activity 2.2: On-farm biosecurity support program 		    = 3.0 / 5

Activity 2.3: Continual improvement training program 		    = 3.4 / 5

Participants noted that continual training is the foundation of effective biosecurity, on-farm support turns training into tangible outcomes and higher-quality plans, and plan-writing workshops must produce auditable outputs that deliver a clear advantage. It was noted that there are differences in the level of sector advancement in adoption of biosecurity, so sector needs will differ. There is a need for management buy-in through a strong value proposition, and ongoing engagement and updates to sustain adoption.

Enhancing extension and adoption: Activity 7.2 presents an opportunity to strengthen approaches to extension and adoption, ensuring AQUAPLAN outcomes are well understood and applied across sectors.

Workshop participants identified the key ingredients to ensure AQUAPLAN activities have impact. Relevance to stakeholder needs was the primary response, with related factors including practical implementation, buy-in, collaboration and communication of outcomes.

Recommended strategic priorities for 2025-2027 (mid-term review objective 3)

Reconsider enterprise and regional biosecurity priorities (mid-term review objective 1)
Review the relevance and priority of Objective 2 activities (2.1–2.3) to ensure alignment with current sector needs and available resources and determine whether adjustments are needed to support progress.

Action 1. Activity leads (peak industry bodies) and collaborators (state, territory and Commonwealth governments) to tailor all enterprise biosecurity activities by sector needs to develop meaningful projects for activities 2.1–2.3.

Action 2. Explore commencing with Activity 2.3 (continuous improvement) as a higher priority, acknowledging this can provide a foundation for other activities, underpinned by industry management buy-in.

Action 3. Defer activities 2.1 and 2.2 until an activity lead (peak industry body) can be identified.

Leverage and strengthen communication and engagement (mid-term review objective 2)
Optimise communication and engagement efforts to ensure all stakeholder groups are effectively reached, noting a particular pathway of communication won’t be suitable for all engagements. Build on the success of the webinar series as a central platform for engagement, extension, and adoption. Broaden AQUAPLAN’s reach by utilising existing communication channels through FRDC, SIA, and industry newsletters.

Action 4. Activity leads to prepare concise communications materials that can be used to leverage existing communication channels (e.g., FRDC and SIA newsletters, social media channels) and increase engagement in AQUAPLAN webinars. Consider innovative communication formats such as short videos and including images of people. AQUAPLAN Executive Office to provide support.

Action 5. AQUAPLAN Executive Office to continue to refine systems for efficient and meaningful implementation of the communication, engagement, and implementation and monitoring and evaluation plans. For example, biannual activity updates, in-kind contribution estimation.

Enhance extension and adoption mechanisms (mid-term review objective 1 & 2)
Strengthen approaches to ensure AQUAPLAN outcomes are well understood and applied by end-users, particularly through Activity 7.2 and broader communication and engagement efforts. Communication with end-users from project inception to completion with a foundation of addressing a true need is a core element of success.

Action 6. Activity leads and collaborators to embed within projects extension and adoption strategies identified as part of AQUAPLAN activity 7.2 (pending), ensuring opportunities for output adoption and maximising return on investment.

Conclusion

AQUAPLAN is making strong progress toward its 2027 targets, with most activities either underway or completed. Twenty three of 28 key performance indicators within the implementation, monitoring and evaluation and communication and engagement plans are being met. Continued success will depend on refining enterprise and regional biosecurity priorities, optimising communication and engagement strategies, and strengthening extension and adoption mechanisms to ensure all stakeholder groups are effectively reached and outcomes are broadly adopted. With these targeted adjustments, AQUAPLAN owners report confidence in cross-sectoral collaboration and 100% confidence that AQUAPLAN 2022-2027 is on track to achieving its objectives by 2027 (mid-term review objective 4).

Next Steps:

Review and endorsement of this mid-term review document by AQUAPLAN owners.

Finalise mid-term review document and publish on the DAFF website.

Circulate a mid-term review summary that can be shared more broadly.

Contact: aquaplan@aff.gov.au

_____________________

This report includes information drafted using generative Microsoft 365 Copilot to streamline content creation. All outputs have been critically reviewed to ensure accuracy and relevance during 2025.